

Socially useful design
Dr Mike Cooley Visiting Professor, IFA Copenhagen, Denmark; Senior Research Fellow, Design, Open University, UK; Voluntary Director, CAITS, NE London Polytechnic, UK
Design reflects the predominant values of the society which gives rise to it.
Thus with profit maximisation as its central concern, emphasis is placed upon the notion of an ever — increasing rate of production and consumption based on disposable products with significant wastage of energy and materials.
Examples of such products are given and counterposed with socially useful ones which in their design, manufacture and use enhance human skill and ingenuity, conserve energy and materials and help human beings rather than control, de-skill or maim them.
Practical examples are also provided of design for production equipment including NC machine tools which are human centred.
There is now growing concern, even alarm, at the multiplier effects of what we call scientific and technological "progress" .
This concern displays a deeper understanding of the contradictions in science and technology than that which was articulated by the anti-science movement of the 1970s whose antecedents lay in the anti-culture movement of the 1960s.
It was broadly the premise of those movements that science and technology were evil, totalitarian and devoid of the attributes which could make them amenable to the "human spirit" .
These rather sweeping generalisations are now giving way to a more mature analysis of the contradictions of science and technology.
There is a growing realisation that science and technology have embodied within them many of the ideological assumptions of the society which has given rise to them.
This has resulted in the questioning of the neutrality of science and technology as they are at present practised in our society.
The debate on this issue is likely to be one of major political and philosophical significance.
The questioning extends far beyond that of a "use/abuse model" of science and technology to deeper considerations of the scientific and technological process itself.
Science and technology performed within a particular social order reflect the norms and ideology of that order.
Science and technology thus ceases to be seen as autonomous but rather as part of an interesting system in which the internalised ideological assumptions help to determine the actual experimental designs and theories of the scientists and technologists themselves.
Arising from this it is held that if we are to have forms of science and technology which will be human-enhancing and liberating, make products that are ecologically desirable, conserve energy and materials in the long term, and help human beings rather than maim them, then we will require forms of science and technology which differ radically from those which predominate at the moment.
Given that two of the major components in the motor of the present technological progress are profit maximisation and the consolidation of power (based on the notion of an ever-increasing rate of production and consumption) it is not surprising that the contradictions manifest themselves so obviously on all sides.
Urban dwellers exist in an environment which is choked with traffic and smog, while the very heart of their city declines into slums.
Rural dwellers witness the destruction of the countryside through piecemeal industrialisation and urbanisation and the unthinking use of chemicals.
Ecologists view with dismay the pollution of our air, rivers and seas.
Fossil fuel reserves are depleted at a frantic rate and materials are squandered to manufacture throw-away products for the short-term profit maximisation of a rapacious economic system.
The human being as "producer" is forced to perform grotesque alienated tasks at work to provide products which exploit and dominate the very same human being as "consumer" .
So the dual role of any human being as a producer and consumer is torn apart, with one set against the other.
Producer and consumer
As a producer the worker, whether by hand or brain, in Western society (and in the so-called socialist countries) is required to undertake highly specialised fragmented alienated tasks performed in the capital-intensive environment of large corporations.
With few exceptions these capital-intensive industries are also highly energy-intensive.
There is as yet only an embryonic realisation of the social and economic costs of the "efficient factory" in terms of structural unemployment, frantic energy consumption, loss of job satisfaction and the squandering of some of society's most precious assets, which are the skill, ingenuity, creativity and enthusiasm of ordinary people.
Socially useful design not merely exposes, criticises and challenges this process, but also presents constructive alternatives.
Perhaps one of the most creative and imaginative responses has been that of the Lucas Workers with their corporate plan for socially useful production.
Faced with the prospect of growing structural unemployment and reflecting an analysis that structural unemployment would be a growing feature of industrial society, the work-force at Lucas Aerospace proposed 150 socially useful products which they could design and manufacture as an alternative to facing degradation and suffering in the dole queue.
The plan has received widespread international support and projects of a similar kind are being instigated in Australia, the United States and throughout Europe.
Indeed, recently the French Government suggested that in addition to its measure to reduce the working week, establish early retirement and other features to deal with some of the multiplier  effects of growing structural unemployment, it will also engage in a campaign of socially useful production similar to that advocated by the Lucas workers.
Socially useful design
The plan is essentially in two parts.
On the one hand it proposes a range of socially useful products, and on the other, new forms of technology which would provide for a human-enhancing and liberating means of making the socially useful products.
The product range includes equipment for medical uses: eg a vehicle for children with spina bifida and portable kidney machines.
Indeed the Lucas workers were alarmed to learn that whilst they were facing structural unemployment 3000 people were dying each year for want of a lightweight portable dialysis machine which uses carbon filters and a small microprocessor for patient monitoring.
With this equipment the patient will enjoy the dignity of doing an active job until a more long term solution is found for his or her medical problem.
The design staff and manual workers at Lucas jointly felt that there was something seriously wrong about forms of technology which could make product systems as complex as Concorde while in the same society old people were dying of hypothermia.
So they have designed, in conjunction with some colleagues at the Energy Research Unit of the Open University a heat pump using natural gas, which produces a COP of 2.8 when the outdoor temperature falls to zero degrees and a COP of 4 in outdoor temperatures of 10 degrees.
They have also involved a number of postgraduate architectural students who were engaged in designing a factory to manufacture the heat pumps, which would differ radically from factories in the past.
It is possible for example to vary the internal geometry of the factory and thereby alter the nature of the labour process and provide for rotation of job functions.
They have questioned the whole underlying design assumption of the private car as a throw-away product.
In the case of the powerpack they have been greatly influenced by the work of Professor Thring and his colleagues, and have proposed a hybrid powerpack which would make the best use of an internal combustion engine and electric motor and would reduce fuel consumption by some 50% and toxic emissions by 80%.
They have suggested that the powerpack would be so designed that it could readily be repaired and with suitable maintenance would be capable of running for some 20 years.
Initially there was a response from some critics asserting that this would lead to structural unemployment.
It will be argued subsequently that the present forms of science and technology will in any case give rise to structural unemployment.
But these workers had a "guts feeling" that if things were designed to last much longer and an infrastructure was set up to repair them, at least as much work would be created in doing so as was available in the capital-intensive mass production lines producing the throw-away goods.
This has since been supported by an important report from the Battelle Institute in Geneva which broadly suggests that if products such as cars or powerpacks were designed to last for 20 years not only would energy and materials be conserved, but about 65 per cent more work would be created and the jobs would be the interesting, fiddling, diagnostic type jobs that human beings love doing.
The Lucas workers also collaborated with Richard Fletcher and his colleagues at the North East London Polytechnic in producing a unique road/rail vehicle which is capable of running through cities as a coach and running on branch railway lines.
It could provide the basis for a cheap, ecologically desirable, integrated transport system.
It would also have many applications in Third World countries since it uses rubber tyres in both modes and thereby has an incline capability of ⅙ This means that in Third World countries instead of flattening the mountains and filling the valleys to make them level to one could follow the contours of the countryside and enormously reduce civil engineering costs.
The design and development of many of these products was undertaken by large groups of workers and not limited to a small technocratic elite.
The tacit knowledge (in the Polanyi sense of the word) of the wide range of workers was used to the full.
Thus no virtue was made of complexity, and the sense of touch and feel and shape and form of the workers was utilised to the full and resulted in a process in which it was possible to democratise decision-making processes in design involving masses of people.
The concept of socially useful design extends from products of this kind to the very forefront of new technology.
For example, when the Lucas workers were asked if there were ways in which it would be possible to protect workers on the North Sea oil pipelines from the hazards experienced there, they were conscious that their initial reaction was typical of the existing forms of science and technology: they thought of designing a robotic device which would eliminate the human being altogether.
The more they reflected upon this the more they realised what a massive amount of fixed capital is necessary to eliminate human intelligence and how incredibly intelligent human beings really are.
Indeed, in the labour process the most complicated systems have units of intelligence of about 10, whereas a human being could bring to bear equivalent switching circuits of about 10.
A human being brings in addition the qualities of "consciousness" , "will" , "ideology" , "humour" , "political aspirations" — precisely all the things which systems designers regard as uncertainties and therefore seek to eliminate.
Yet on the other hand these are precisely the attributes which make human beings creative and imaginative.
Thus the Lucas workers proposed a range of "telecheric devices" which would react to human intelligence  rather than absorb it.
Such devices could also be used for coal mining so that the skill of the coal miner could be retained; for fire-fighting in which the skill of the fire-fighter would be retained; and there could be a wide range of medical applications including microsurgery.
What was perhaps most significant about this product range was that it opened a debate about ways of using new technology which would enhance human intelligence rather than diminish it.
Two examples are given here to illustrate how socially useful design could make a fuller and more creative use of new technologies.
Technological change may be viewed variously as a process in which human energy and intelligence is replaced by machine intelligence in systems which become capital and energy intensive, or as a process in which systems become active and human beings become more passive and in which there is a shift from the analogical to the digital.
Two examples will be cited — one from the field of manual work and one from the field of intellectual work to show how socially useful design would result in quite different systems.
These relate to the writer's current research in the Design Discipline at the Open University.
New technology
Over the past 200 years turning has been one of the most highly skilled jobs to be found in engineering workshops.
Toolroom turning is one of the most highly skilled jobs of all.
The historical tendency, certainly since the end of the war, has been to de-skill this function by using NC machines.
Noble has suggested that this represents a vivid example of social choice in machine design.
The de-skilling takes place as a result of part programming, the process by which the desired NC motions are converted to finished tapes.
Conventional (symbolic) part programming languages require that a part programmer, upon deciding how a something is to be machined, describes the desired tool motion by a series of symbolic commands.
These commands are used to define geometric entities, that is points, lines and surfaces which may be given symbolic names.
In practice the part programming languages require the operator to synthesise desired tool motions from a restricted available vocabulary of symbolic commands.
However, all this is doing is attempting to build into the machines the intelligence that would have been exercised by a skilled worker in going through the labour process.
It is possible, by using computerised equipment in a symbiotic way, to link it to the skill of a human being and define the tool motions without a symbolic description.
Such a method is called analogic part programming.
In this type of part programming tool motion information is conveyed in an analogic form by turning a crank or moving a joystick or some other hand/eye co-ordination task using read-out with a degree of precision appropriate to the machining process.
Using a dynamic visual display of the entire working area of the machine tools including the workpieces, the fixtures, the cutting tool and its position, the skilled craftsmen can directly in-put the desired tool motions to machine the workpiece in the display.
Such a system may be described as "part programming by doing" and would represent a sharp contrast to the main historical tendencies towards symbolic part programming.
It would require no knowledge of conventional part programming languages because the necessity to describe symbolically the desired tool motions would be eliminated.
This is achieved by providing a system whereby the information regarding the cut is conveyed in a manner closely resembling the conventional process of the skilled machinist.
Thus it would be necessary to maintain and enhance the skill and ability of a range of craftspeople who would work in parallel with the system.
Significant research has been carried out in this field.
Yet in spite of its obvious advantages it has not been received with any enthusiasm by the large corporations or indeed funding bodies of any description.
That this is so would appear to be an entirely "political" judgement rather than a technological one.
In the field of intellectual work Rosenbrock has questioned the underlying assumptions of the manner in which we are developing computer-aided design systems.
He charges firstly that the present techniques fail to exploit the opportunity which interactive computing can offer.
The computer and the human mind have different but complementary abilities.
If these different abilities can be combined then they represent something more powerful and effective than anything we have ever had before.
Rosenbrock objects to the "automated manual" type of system since it represents as he says "loss of nerve, a loss of belief in human ability and a further unthinking application of the doctrine of the" division of labour".
As in the case of turning described above, Rosenbrock sees two paths open in respect of design.
The first is to accept the skill and knowledge of the designer, and to try to give designers improved techniques and improved facilities for exercising this skill and knowledge.
Such a system would demand a truly interactive use of computers in a way that allows the very different capabilities of the computer and the human mind to be used to the full.
The alternative to this, he suggests, is, "to subdivide and codify the design process incorporating the knowledge of the existing designers so that it is reduced to a sequence of simple choices" .
This, he points out, would lead to de-skIing such that the job could be done by a person with less training and less experience.
Rosenbrock has demonstrated his human enhancing alternative by developing a CAD system with graphic output to develop displays from which the designer can assess stability, state of response, sensitivity to disturbance and other properties of a controlled system.
If, having looked at the display, the performance of the system is not satisfactory, the display will suggest how it can be improved.
In this respect the displays carry a long tradition of early "pencil and paper" methods but, of course, they bring with them much greater computing power.
So, as with lathes and the skilled turner, so also with the CAD system and the designer, possibilities do exist for a symbiotic relationship between the worker and the equipment.
In both cases tacit knowledge and experience is accepted as valid and enhanced and developed.
Socially useful designs of advanced systems would develop these techniques further.
This is in glaring contrast to the process in which de-skilling is now so widespread, but it has been suggested in the case of numerically controlled machine tools that the ideal workers are mentally retarded people and a mental age of 12 is advocated.
I have described elsewhere how these Tayloristic techniques have resulted in a situation where factory models are being imposed even on non-alienated work such as that of university professors, whose performance may be assessed by the well-known Frank-Wolfe algorithm.
Similar problems are likely to arise in respect of artificial intelligence systems, or heuristic systems as applied to medical diagnosis where again two paths are open but the possibilities which socially useful design make possible would appear to have been ignored.
Indeed, the desire to eliminate uncertainty and human judgement is now so extensive that as Noble pointed out recently: "Designing for idiots is the highest expression of the engineering art" .
This process of de-skilling all types of work is supercharged by computer scientists who were described by Weizenbaum as "being like children with a hammer who view the whole world as a nail." 
Those technologists and designers who question these processes and challenge the long term viability of the present approach to systems design are written off as being unrealistic or even senile.
Socially useful design provides a way out of this cul-de-sac.
Not merely does one criticise the forms of science and technology but one proposes positive human enhancing alternatives.
To assert those alternatives and to insist upon them we mean that a designer should cease to be the industrial Eichmann of a large corporation.
Above all else designers should become involved with the millions of people who are now experiencing these problems and to demonstrate that the community at large increasingly understands that science and technology are not given.
They are made by human beings and if they are not doing what we want then we have a right and a responsibility to change them.
The technological future is not out there in the sense that America was out there before Columbus went to discover it.
The technological future does not have any predetermined shape or forms or contours.
It is waiting to be built by people like us and socially useful design highlights one of the alternative choices.
Design, new technology and trade unions: a case study
Robin Williams Technology Policy Unit, University of Aston, UK Brian Pearce HUSAT Research Group, Loughborough University, UK
The widespread introduction of microelectronics based technology could transform the techniques and organisation of work.
The Trades Union Congress therefore argues that workers' representatives need to influence the design and selection of systems of production.
Negotiations on these matters are still at an early stage, and involve unions in areas beyond their traditional expertise.
Though there is little experience of overall trade union influence over change, the health and welfare aspects of "new technology" have frequently been covered by written technology agreements, in particular the design and operation of visual display units.
This paper examines and discusses the effectiveness of union endeavours in this field.
The rapid introduction of microelectronics-based technologies has been widely predicted to bring about profound changes in many areas of life.
Whatever the outcome of this process, it is in the workplace that its impact will initially be experienced most directly.
The implications of this change have been the subject of intense debate since 1978.
At first, the major focus of concern was over the possibility of technological unemployment.
Latterly attention has shifted to the potential of changes in products and processes to alter dramatically the conditions, content and organisation of work.
This brings to the fore questions of the planning and design of production systems, and poses the question of whether in a democratic society, the people who will be most affected by technological change will be able to influence its conception and implementation.
Union involvement in decision making over change
The trade unions are by far the largest body representing people who will be affected by the introduction of new technologies, and in Britain they have played a prominent part in the debate about information technology.
In 1978 for example the Trades Union Congress (TUC) passed a resolution calling for government action to promote technological change while at the same time ameliorating the impact of such change on existing employment.
In the following two years most of the major unions, and the TUC itself, set up working parties and produced a range of discussion documents and policy statements.
One of the most influential union documents was the TUC report produced after consultation with constituent unions and accepted and published by the Trades Union Congress in September 1979.
It is instructive to compare this document with the statement on Automation and Technical Change adopted by the 1965 Trades Union Congress.
While there are striking similarities between the two documents regarding the need to promote change while smoothing the process of adaptation, the 1979 report goes beyond its predecessor when it argues for trade union involvement in the decision making over technological change at an early stage through collective bargaining.
This represents a significant development in union policy towards technology.
Recognising the inherent flexibility of microelectronics-based technologies it seeks to influence not only the rate of change but also the choice and design of new technology and associated systems of working.
To this end the TUC calls for the negotiation of technology agreements (TAs) which would establish new procedures for discussing technological change and a comprehensive framework for bargaining over the effects of change on working conditions.
The specific concerns of this bargaining cover the following areas: 1 Concern that the productivity gains from new technology are equitably distributed by improving wage and other benefits, and, as an alternative to job losses, by increasing/diversifying output and reduced working time.
2 Concern over the effects of new technology in increasing managerial control over work, through machine surveillance, the pacing of work and the dilution of skills.
3 Concern over the quality of working life, especially job satisfaction, anti-social hours, health and safety.
Despite differences of emphasis between different unions, union policies have been overwhelmingly in favour of technological change, while at the same time seeking increased involvement in the process of change to "maximise the benefits and minimise the costs" of such changes.
This will involve trade union negotiations in areas that may be far removed from their traditional expertise.
Union policies for new technology represent an ambitious project and negotiation of technology agreements is still at an early stage.
We shall examine the experience of signing TAs, to pick out some of the practical problems that have arisen to lay the basis for a discussion of future directions.
One of the authors has conducted an analysis of a comprehensive sample of collective agreements dealing with technological change.
100 agreements were examined, mainly signed between 1979 and 1981.
The overwhelming majority of these agreements covered office workers reflecting the potential of information technology to transform dramatically the nature of information-processing work.
Change for manual workers seems to have been handled mainly through pre-existing negotiation procedures, modified to deal with the introduction of new productive equipment on a more continuous basis.
Individual union policy seems to have been a major factor behind signing technology agreements, most of  which derive from four white collar unions: APEX (general clerical union), ASTMS (general technical and supervisory union), NALGO (local government staff) and TASS (technical staff in engineering).
Whilst the agreements typically laid down a period of discussion between management and union representatives prior to the introduction of change, there were weaknesses in the terms dealing with provision of information, and early union involvement in decision making, which would have to be altered for effective union influence on the process of change.
As well as procedures, the agreements dealt with a very wide range of substantive issues including terms of employment, health and safety, task allocation and training, and union facilities.
Given this wide range it is inevitable that some issues are overlooked in individual agreements.
However there was a much more consistent union response in reaction to immediate concerns (eg protection of wage levels and job security, health and safety) than to issues involving a longer term perspective (eg union involvement in decision making, job design).
This uneven set of responses reflects the tension between the need for union negotiators to defend their members' interests against perceived threats and their ability to generate and implement a long term strategy.
At the beginning of a period of technological change, the long term implications may appear remote.
In addition, the current recession may have diverted the union response towards a defensive approach, while undermining the ability of unions to gain substantial increases in their involvement in decision making over new technology areas which managers may defend as their own prerogative.
In Britain, to date, there has been little experience of union influence over selection amongst the technical and social options for information technology.
The overview of agreements does not give a direct picture of this process, but rather the framework within which such influence may take place.
However, many agreements included provision covering the possible effects of technological change on working conditions and the quality of working life.
This paper will examine these as an indicator of some of the issues that may predominate in union attempts to deal with the complex problems of technological change at work.
In the next section we will examine union policies on this issue and the ways they have been interpreted in signed agreements.
Larger establishments will have used mainframe computers for 20 years or more.
A key characteristic of information technology is the decentralisation of   computer operations — computer terminals have moved from specialist data processing departments into the rest of the establishment.
The visual display unit (VDU) has appeared in offices and workshops as part of normal office equipment.
Not surprisingly, the VDU has served as the focus of discussion of the changes information technology will bring to working life.
Union policy and practice to maintain the quality of working life with information technology
In Britain, it has been trade unions, rather than manufacturers, purchasers and governments, who have taken the initiative in discussing the ergonomic design and installation of VDUs.
Many white collar unions have produced guidelines on this subject.
These have been analysed by one of the authors, and the results are reproduced in Figure 1.
As can be seen, the issue of software design has been virtually ignored.
However, if badly designed, this can be a major source of stress at work.
Examples of this include displaying too much information on a screen, poor layout of data, meaningless code words, frustrating "error messages" and unpredictable response times between entering a command and getting a response.
In contrast, it is the ergonomics of the hardware and the physical environment that have received most attention.
Within this, there has been great emphasis on attaining detailed (often numerical) standards.
This reflects the pressures that caused the documents to be produced in the first place.
One white collar union safety officer has attributed this emphasis to the poor design of early equipment and its installation into an environment that was often "badly lit and badly ventilated and ergonomically disastrous" .
Union representatives sought concrete standards because employers were often unwilling to discuss seriously the implications of operators' complaints of fatigue and strain.
This "minimum standards" approach leads to a number of problems when applied to a complex and rapidly changing area of technology.
For example, the requirements for keyboard operating pressure are so broad as to be meaningless.
Conversely, warnings against red and blue screens, while appropriate for monochrome displays, restrict the helpful use of these in multicolour screens as markers.
More fundamentally, this preoccupation with numerical aspects may draw attention away from important issues that are more difficult to quantify.
More recent trade union publications and communications have attempted to deal with these pitfalls and have placed greater emphasis on aspects such as job satisfaction and stress at work, rather than the physical environment and equipment specifications.
However, union policies on job design are not well developed.
An international comparison of union attitudes to work organisation found that British unions adopted a neutral position on this subject.8 Many of the experiments in work organisation in this country have been conducted without the involvement of workers' trade union representatives.
To investigate the translation of such policies into collective bargaining practice, 105 agreements dealing with technological change were analysed.
Their provisions for a number of aspects of the quality of working life were analysed and the results of the analysis are presented in Figure 2 which deals with: health and environmental standards for VDUs, rest periods for operating VDUs, machine monitoring of worker performance, extension of shiftwork, allocation of tasks, and job satisfaction.
Of all these aspects, the issue for which agreement has been reached most frequently was the use of VDUs — both in their design and installation, and the duration of operation.
In addition many of the other TAs included a commitment to discuss such standards in future.
Task allocation was mentioned in over a third of agreements, its relative frequency indicating the importance of such matters to trade union activity.
However, this included a number of agreements which ceded flexibility of task allocation to management, which must be seen as a step away from union involvement in safeguarding the quality of working life.
Overall, job satisfaction received negligible attention.
Two of the agreements even noted that the job satisfaction of a minority of employees might be impaired by new technology but accepted this in order to maintain the security of employment of the majority.
Three agreements stipulated joint union and management discussions to ensure meaningful and satisfying jobs and minimal monitoring.
One local government agreement endorsed criteria for satisfying jobs that had been produced by the Tavistock Institute.
There was some indication of a contradiction between provision for job enrichment and the potential of new technology to produce de-skilled and downgraded work.
One agreement stipulated that provision of enhanced responsibility and autonomy with a view to job enrichment "would not constitute a basis for job upgrading" .
Our sample appears to confirm that collective bargaining practice has followed the initial approach of union policy in giving little weight to the less quantifiable changes in working conditions from application of new technology and systems, especially in job design and its effects on the quality of working life.
In contrast the physical environment and equipment specifications have received considerable attention.
A typical example of VDU specifications is given in Figure 3.
The fact that most of the codes and standards incorporated in VDU safety clauses seem frequently to have been taken wholesale from various union guidance documents, raises questions as to how meaningful the discussions on VDUs have been.
In one pioneering agreement, a "refresh rate" for VDU screens of 57 hertz was agreed which was a compromise between management requests for 50 hz (which most VDUs conform to) and the union policy of 60 hz.
No equipment in existence has a refresh rate of 57 hz.
However, this standard was borrowed by other negotiators and inserted into agreements at a number of workplaces.
This highlights the importance of union access to information and expertise and the ability to disseminate it to their members.
Our experience to date is that union representatives are frequently better  informed than local management on these matters.
This raises the question of how and whether agreed standards are implemented.
It may be very difficult to determine whether equipment conforms to certain of the numerical standards either by making measurements, or approaching the manufacturer.
Though some suppliers have made a point of stressing the ergonomic aspects of their products, many supply inadequate information on their equipment.
In this situation agreed standards may be impossible to enforce.
In some circumstances, commonsense, verbal standards, despite their apparent subjectivity might be far more appropriate.
For example a maximum glare index of 16 is frequently cited.
However, many ergonomists would deal with this problem by identifying and minimising the source of a glare without thinking of measuring the glare index.
Notwithstanding problems of this kind there has been undoubted improvement in VDU design and it has been speculated that trade union pressure for high design standards has been a major stimulus to companies marketing their products on the basis of user acceptability."
The union achievement in establishing and applying standards for design and safe use of VDUs is more striking when one considers that these policies had already been formulated before the Government Health and Safety Executive had to issue information and advice on the subject.
The unions had been successful in using the information and skills of researchers in this field.
Continued success in this area will obviously depend in part on the unions' continued ability to stay abreast of developments, and contribute to any agreement or trade and legal standards that are produced.
The problems of negotiating on standards of this type, particularly in the context of rapidly developing technologies, suggest a different form of agreement; this was apparent in some of the agreements in our sample.
A set of agreed objectives was laid down, supplemented by a code of practice laying down acceptable technical performance specifications, which could be updated in the light of future developments.
It should not perhaps surprise us that trade unions appear to have made less bargaining headway on the issues of job design than on the question of equipment design.
The former is an area over which systematic knowledge is much less precise.
Indeed the specifications of a stress-free and satisfying job can only be made in relation to the tasks being undertaken.
It would not be appropriate for unions to issue guidelines for a range of applications (eg design, data processing, text processing).
Such issues can only be resolved at local level.
Clearly, national union resources on their own will not be sufficient to deal with this problem.
We shall refer to this in our final section.
In contrast, ergonomic specifications can be defined centrally.
Moreover, there are well established structures for dealing with work hazards, following the 1974 Health and Safety at Work Act and the 1978 Safety Representatives and Safety Committees Regulations.
These give representatives rights of access to information from employers, and rights to trade union training in safety.
Many unions have established research and education departments, bulletins and forums for discussion and dissemination of information.
To sum up, a number of interlocking factors have operated to shift the focus of concern about the impact of technological change on the quality of working life towards physical hazard from using the equipment (eg radiation and eye damage from VDUs, equipment design) and away from the ways that software, job design and work organisation could produce jobs that workers experienced as stressful, fatiguing and dehumanising.
These are summarised in Figure 4.
Lack of union impact on questions of job design is paradoxical.
Since this area is one in which worker experience is paramount it could be argued that the trade unions would be in the best position to evaluate different options in work organisation, without deferring to "the experts" .
It would be wrong to assume that trade unions have had no effect on these matters.
The long tradition of trade union/worker resistance to "scientific management" of production may exert its influence informally over implementation of the new systems of "the information society" .
Some of the terms of the existing agreements indirectly touch on the quality of working life.
For instance the relatively frequent clauses stipulating rest periods from VDU operation, which were signed with the overt aim of minimising eyestrain and exposure to VDU physical hazards, will have the effect of enforcing at least some degree of job rotation between work at and away from terminals.
(Job rotation and task diversity were also stipulated in a number of agreements).
This will go some way towards the goal of eliminating the full-time VDU operator, which has been seen as an undesirable form of work organisation.
However, we would argue that a more positive union input on questions of job design is needed.
A major constraint on union policy formation and workplace practice in the field of design of work systems with information technology lies in the nature of knowledge on this topic and the consequent need for substantial resources to be made available to workers representatives, particularly at local level.
The future
Britain lags behind other European countries in this respect.
For example in Germany, works councils have long had access to resources to investigate design of work systems under the Quality of Working Life.
In Denmark a variety of projects have been set up to deal specifically with the introduction of electronic data processing known as DUE (an acronym for the Danish translation of Democracy Development and EDP).
The latter project has involved re-examining the relationship between "users" and "experts" .
Instead of acting as some source of "alternative expertise" , projects have been run by union committees and have involved releasing both workers representatives and specialists to produce specifications for new technology and associated systems.
This project has concluded that methods of systems design need to be transformed.
Traditionally the conception and design of these systems have been conducted in a hierarchised way, separated from users and the place of work.
Where users have been involved, this has usually been limited to the implementation phase of a programme of change.
It has been suggested that this linear design process should be replaced by a cyclical process, whereby at each stage of development of the system there would be opportunity for feedback and influence from the users and their representatives.
The main aim of the DUE project was to improve the effectiveness of union involvement in systems design.
However, remarkably similar proposals have been developed by British researchers operating from within a different perspective.
Their prime concern was the need to utilise the skills and experience of current "systems users" to design information technology-based systems that would be effective and flexible (ie they would be determined by the organisational needs of the enterprise, rather than by the technology and systems already determined by technologists).
The earlier that users were involved in systems design, the greater the opportunity to introduce systems in a flexible manner.
Ultimately systems should be designed with user involvement at every stage, on a continuous and evolutionary basis.
This method was held to offer substantial benefits for organisations implementing change, in particular in ensuring that systems were appropriate to the current needs of the organisation and flexible to future requirements.
The introduction of information technology on this basis will clearly require a number of changes in how organisations operate.
It raises questions about the adequacy of our "adversarial" industrial relations system — particularly in the light of the current economic situation in which enforced redundancies and rationalisations in many enterprises have weakened moves towards consensual models of problem solving.
However when the "recession" ends these questions will be in even more urgent need of solution if the full benefits of information technology are to be achieved in a harmonious manner.
We feel that the experience of technology agreements offers important precedents and lessons in this respect.
The resources required for such a project should not be underestimated.
This would include: Expansion of union research and educational activities in this field.
Increased allocation of government research and industrial development funds for projects in this field; union involvement in research allocation.
Increased co-operation between researchers/ consultants and union organisations.
There may be a need for legislation in this field, possibly by an extension of the Health and Safety at Work Act.
The Act puts a duty on designers and suppliers to consider the health, safety and welfare implications of the equipment and processes they create.
This could be expanded to include issues of job design.
It might be possible to utilise some of the legislative approaches adopted in Germany, Norway and Sweden.
One avenue for provision of such resources may be through collective bargaining.
In Sweden employers have agreed to pay the fees of union orientated researchers/consultants on charge.
Clearly such change would require designers to reevaluate their role, and their relationship with systems users and their trade union representatives.
Controlling social consequences of information technology by improved design methods and policy decisions
Dr George Rzevski Kingston Polytechnic, Kingston-upon-Thames, UK
It has been predicted that present technology based on the processing of materials and energy is going to be gradually replaced as a major economic force by technology based on the processing of information.
There are clear signs that the process is already well advanced.
Accelerated by the current economic recession, old manufacturing industries are disappearing while the new information technology based industries are developing at a high rate.
The paper explains the fundamental concepts of information technology and outlines the important trends.
It examines recent developments which make this technological change inevitable and reviews political, economic and social consequences of the rapid development of information technology.
It also considers the factors which cause undesirable consequences and suggests policy decisions and design methods for controlling these factors.
Central to any intelligent activity is the process of decision making, ie selecting an action from a set of possible actions in accordance with given criteria.
Fundamental concepts of information technology
The decision maker is, in general, faced with a variety of possible actions and an uncertainty about the possible consequences of each action.
The uncertainty may be reduced or even completely removed by obtaining relevant information.
It follows that information is a resource by means of which the uncertainty about outcomes of decisions may be reduced.
Decisions of major importance are those concerned with the policy making as well as those that are part of the design and control of large systems.
The term system is used here to denote any set of related elements where elements may be physical objects, abstract entities or human beings.
Large systems are those that affect, in one way or another, a considerable section of a population.
Examples of such systems include: defence systems, satellite communication systems, transportation systems, manufacturing systems and economic systems.
Systems are constructed, as a rule, with a view to carrying out certain processes which are perceived by clients (ie those who sponsor system constructions) to be desirable.
Examples of processes include: defending the country, transmitting messages, transporting goods and people, manufacturing goods and exchanging products and services.
In general, clients are known not to be able to articulate all their requirements and expectations.
Therefore, at the planning stage, there always exists a considerable uncertainty about many aspects of the future process (or system behaviour).
Systems do not exist in isolation.
Each operates within a certain environment.
In general, there exists a considerable variety of ways in which a system may interact with its environment.
And there is an uncertainty about how and when any interaction will take place.
In other words,"it is not known in advance how the environment will act upon the system and react upon system actions.
Any given process (behaviour) may be achieved by many different configurations of many different elements.
Hence, there always exists a variety of possible systems which can exhibit any given behaviour and there is an uncertainty about the relative merits (such as: cost, weight, social values) of alternative possibilities.
It follows that whenever a large system is about to be built there always exists a considerable uncertainty about many aspects of its required behaviour, the interaction with its environment, its constituent components and their interrelationships.
A large quantity of information is needed in order to reduce this uncertainty to an acceptable level.
Unavailability of the required information may lead to a deficient design with unacceptable economic, ecological, social, political or cultural consequences.
For large systems, as a rule, a part of the required information on the behaviour of system environment becomes available only after the system has been constructed and has begun to operate.
For this reason there is a need for the function of control to be incorporated into the system.
The role of control is to make decisions on certain aspects of system behaviour at the time when the relevant information becomes available.
To make design and control of large systems effective, there is a need for means of collecting, storing, retrieving, processing, transmitting and distributing relevant information to decision makers in time and at an acceptable cost.
The body of knowledge, methods and established practices related to the handling of information will be called in this paper information technology (IT).
Systems of artefacts whose purpose is to handle information will be called here information systems, or IT systems.
And the engineering discipline concerned with the design, production, installation, operation and maintenance of IT systems will be called information engineering.
Information may exist in one of two forms: implicit or explicit.
Implicit information, or "know-how" , is that information which is an integral part of a skill and can be acquired only by apprenticeship from an expert.
The term expert is used here to denote a person who knows how to perform an activity without necessarily understanding why his methods work.
In contrast, explicit information or "know-that" , exists independently from any skill.
It can be readily made available for general use.
Until very recently IT systems could handle only explicit information.
All those decision making activities for which relevant information existed only in implicit form were carried out exclusively by experts.
IT systems are available now which can be trained by experts to perform decision making activities based on implicit information as well as, or even better than, the experts who have trained them.
Such systems are called expert systems.
IT systems that can solve problems as effectively as experts, can learn by analogy or by pattern recognition and those that can understand natural languages, such as English, are known by the collective name of artificial intelligence systems, or AI systems.
There exists considerable evidence that in highly industrialised countries the emphasis is shifting away from the development of new systems for handling materials and energy, which is a preserve of conventional engineering disciplines, towards the development of a wide variety of information systems and processes.
Trends
Two relatively recent developments have effectively created information technology.
Firstly, we began to construct very large systems (eg technological, commercial, agricultural, urban, economic).
Early design and control decisions based on inadequate information have often had catastrophic consequences (eg large-scale pollution of the environment, large-scale unemployment, large-scale urban decay).
With some hindsight we began to realise that the design and control of large systems cannot be successfully accomplished without exceedingly large quantities of information.
So an unprecedented demand for information and, consequently, for information technology has developed.
Secondly, we have learned how to construct artefacts able to store, retrieve, process and communicate large quantities of information and also artefacts that can take over from humans some design and control decision making (eg computer-aided design systems, computer control systems, robots).
The coincidence of a demand for IT and of availability of IT artefacts has created a new growth industry, namely, the IT industry.
One of the most important trends which can be readily observed in Japan, the USA and Western Europe is the automation of the manufacturing industry.
Also, large investments directed by many leading IT manufacturers towards the development of systems for the so-called "office of the future" indicate that the next wave of automation will be directed towards service industries (eg banking, insurance, shipping) and administration (eg civil service, local authorities).
We can then expect that in the foreseeable future most routine tasks related to the handling of materials, energy and information will be performed by artefacts.
However, it is most likely that many expert tasks are also soon to be taken over by machines.
A number of successful applications of expert systems in medicine, oil exploration and in computer engineering underline this trend.
We can expect with certainty that there will be in the near future an unprecedented worldwide demand for the development of IT systems such as those listed below: Robots, manufacturing cells, driverless tractors, computer-based controllers, computers, computer terminals.
Interactive computer-based workstations for managers, administrators, office workers, designers of all kinds (including engineering designers), test engineers, production engineers, accountants, lawyers.
Completely automated systems: factories, process industries, warehouses, transportation systems, environment control systems.
Regional, national and worldwide networks of information systems, such as: computer networks, networks of data bases, viewdata systems, distributed CAD/CAM systems, banking transaction networks, hotel/transportation/holiday reservation systems.
Intelligent processes, such as: pattern recognition, image reconstruction, learning, reasoning by deduction, expert problem solving.
Various design and control systems which incorporate intelligent processes.
The author's conjecture is that in the near future the best selling products on world markets will be automated design, testing and manufacturing systems rather than goods produced by such systems.
Only countries with considerable expertise in information technology (and, in particular, in software engineering) will be able to achieve economic gains due to this demand.
Information technology is an extremely powerful tool.
It opens up opportunities to supply a wide variety of users with information which is timely, accurate, significant and relevant.
It enables information to be delivered over any distance, in an appropriate format, and at an acceptable cost.
Possible consequences of the widespread introduction of information technology
The range of very important applications for which such information may be usefully employed is truly astonishing.
It covers fields such as politics, education, public administration, commerce, industry, defence, law and order, health care, arts, sciences, technology, home and leisure.
If properly used it could improve the quality of life by a considerable degree.
For example, information technology may be utilised in the following ways.
To improve the effectiveness of democratic processes.
To decentralise and geographically disperse political and economic power.
To raise significantly the general level of education.
To improve the processes of law and order.
To facilitate the exchange of goods and services both externally, among nations and internally, within a nation.
To optimise the allocation of available resources and thus reduce the usage of scarce resources such as energy.
To improve productivity.
To enable small businesses to compete on equal terms with large organisations.
To establish a balance between the demand and availability of skills by timely retraining.
To eliminate unnecessary or undesirable travel.
To enable a large section of the population to work from their homes.
To reduce working hours without loss of income.
To plan and control the effective exploitation of oceans.
To plan and control the development of the next generation of technologies, such as bioengineering.
The major economic power of IT is the capability to increase productivity of manufacturing and of certain service industries.
Goods manufactured in automated factories are, as a rule, cheaper and more reliable.
And so are certain services when provided with the aid of IT.
Revenue from increased sales achieved in this manner may be invested in further development of IT and as soon as a new generation of IT systems is developed the previous generation may be offered for sale on world markets.
It is important to note, though, that only a small number of industrially advanced countries may be able to gain economically in this manner.
On the other hand, it is quite possible that through misjudgments and errors committed by policy makers and IT systems designers, not many of the above opportunities will ever be exploited.
It may well be that instead of wellbeing, IT will bring about
Massive unemployment.
Concentration of political and economic power in the hands of a small number of institutions and/or individuals.
An increase in economic inequality between rich and poor countries.
Intrusions into the privacy of citizens.
A police state, or corporate state or a state run by IT experts.
An abundance of unreliable information and consequent loss of user-confidence.
Alienation of population unable to understand advanced technology and large, complex, unfriendly systems supported by IT.
An increase in so-called computer crime.
For the management of change to be effective it is of paramount importance to identify the factors which, unless properly controlled, tend to create adverse effects such as those enumerated in the preceding section.
Factors which may cause adverse consequences
From my observations of the initial stages of the current process of change, the major factors appear to be as follows: Resistance to change by those committed to the status quo.
Propensity to take an unfair advantage of available opportunities by individuals or small groups who lead the change.
Scarcity of appropriate IT expertise.
Innocence of policy makers.
Let us consider them one by one.
Resistance to change by those committed to the status quo.
No change is painless.
The importance, status and earning capabilities of many occupations are being threatened.
Skills and lifestyles of many will have to be changed.
It is not surprising, therefore, that considerable resistance to the introduction of IT exists, especially by those who are well adapted to  the conditions of equilibrium which are to disappear.
Unless controlled, this resistance imposes delays on the replacement of old industries by new.
Old providers of employment are artificially kept alive until a point is reached when it becomes obvious that support must be switched off.
A vacuum is then created because new employers have not been given a chance to develop sufficiently for an orderly takeover and employees have not been given opportunities for retraining.
I have had an opportunity to study in some detail how this resistance to change has nearly ruined the Swiss watch industry.
The Swiss arrogantly ignored the advent of new electronic watch technology until it became obvious that markets for their mechanical products, believed to be the best in the world, had all but disappeared.
This inertia in accepting the need for change was, however, amply compensated for by an extremely effective programme of design, the setting up of new manufacturing facilities and by the retraining of assembly workers to handle the new electronic technology.
Propensity to take an unfair advantage of available opportunities by those who lead the change.
In any transient situation there are always institutions and individuals that are able to anticipate the need for change and are sufficiently flexible to be able to accomplish the transition early and in an orderly fashion.
A great many opportunities to accumulate wealth or power are available to these institutions and individuals and they may take an unfair advantage of the situation.
This can, of course, create very undesirable consequences: social stability may be endangered by concentration of too much power and/ or wealth in too few hands; the privacy of citizens may be abused under the excuse of maintaining law and order, or for commercial gains; the state may take a "big brother" role; the business community may acquire too much political power; or, although very unlikely, IT experts may decide that they should take over the running of the country, since it is only they who can understand the unnecessary complexity of IT systems.
There seems to be no example yet available of this type of development anywhere in the world.
The reason for this may well be the fact that IT, like almost all innovations, has emerged and has been developed to the highest standard in countries with strong democratic forces which are able to counterbalance any propensity for excessive power concentration.
Scarcity of appropriate IT expertise.
It is only to be expected that there are not too many IT experts around who could effectively advise policy makers and managers, and design IT systems.
What is perhaps more disturbing is that many existing IT specialists do not appear to be aware of some fundamental principles involved in designing reliable, "user-friendly" and "environment-friendly" information systems.
Far too many IT systems are reported to be hardly used, or even not used at all, because of their unreliability or irrelevance to the needs of clients.
Innocence of policymakers.
There are still many policy makers who do not seem to realise that a fundamental change is in progress, a change which is bound to affect every individual and every social group.
Hopes are still expressed that old manufacturing industries will re-employ all those previously made redundant as soon as the economic recession is over.
Not many seem to be aware of the fact that current massive unemployment comes mainly from delays in transferring funds from old to new industries.
In this country there seems to be no generally agreed policy on the management of change: on circumnavigating the resistance, on controlling excessive propensity, on educating IT experts, on retraining labour.
Many adverse consequences of the rapid and widespread introduction of IT into industry, commerce, politics, education, professional activities, home, etc, may be avoided by competent design of IT systems.
The importance of appropriate design methods cannot be overemphasised.
Some principles underlying the author's work in this area will be summarised in this section of the paper.
System design methods
1 Conventional ways of measuring the performance of information systems are not satisfactory.
To ensure that the benefits of IT are maximised it is necessary to specify, at the beginning of each project, the quality of the information system in terms of parameters such as: social acceptability relevance to the needs of clients friendliness to the user reliability modifiability robustness efficiency.
For a comprehensive discussion of quality parameters, see reference at the end of this paper.
Factors which affect some quality parameters, eg, reliability, are considered in reference.
2 There exists considerable evidence that clients are not able to articulate all their needs and expectations at the system specification stage.
It is also quite clear that neither clients nor designers can predict precisely how system environment will be affected by the new system.under these circumstances the best strategy appears to be one which provides opportunities for all those involved to learn from  experience as the system development and operation progresses.
The evolutionary design methodology provides such a strategy.
It comprises methods for the partitioning of large IT systems into units which may be designed, constructed and used one by one, so enabling both users and designers to review system requirements at discrete stages of the development.
Adverse social consequences are less likely to occur under conditions of evolution.
3 The user-system interface is the most critical component of an IT system.
It should be designed to provide optimal conditions for the man rather than the machine.
A simulator has been developed which enables system designers to create several alternative man-machine dialogues before the actual construction of the system even begins.
Users can then evaluate the alternatives and participate in the selection of the dialogue which will be eventually incorporated into the IT system.
The simulator may be used also for research into the factors which affect the user-friendliness of man-machine systems.
4 The complexity of IT systems is one of the major factors which causes the occurrence of human errors during the system specification, design, production, operation and maintenance; 3,6,7 it affects, consequently, quality parameters such as relevance, reliability, modifiability and user friendliness.
The complexity, however, is not an inherent property of a system.
Methods for controlling complexity have been developed 1,2,6,7 and successfully used.
Keeping complexity within prescribed limits ensures that the purpose and function of IT systems can be perceived by clients and users (which eliminates frustration and alienation) and that their internal structure is perceivable to those involved with their design, production and maintenance (which, for example, increases reliability and modifiability).
Methods for controlling complexity lead naturally to decentralised, distributed systems.
5 Ambiguous and incomplete statements of requirements, specifications, design documentation and user manuals have also been found to affect the relevance, reliability, modifiability and user friendliness.
To ensure unambiguity and completeness design methods should include formal languages which facilitate verification.
However, communication with users and clients is not necessarily helped by the use of formalism.
Initial requirements, specifications and user-system interfaces are best composed in terms of English-like languages.
6 The quality of design, production and maintenance work depends critically on a number of factors which are under direct control of project managers.
Research 2.3 shows that these factors may be put into four broad categories: task factors, ie factors related to the complexity and rigour of task definition; environmental factors, ie factors related to the physical, psychological and social environment within which personnel are expected to work; tools factors, ie factors related to the quality of tools available for performing tasks and, finally, personnel factors, ie factors related to skills, knowledge and attitudes of personnel.
It follows that any IT system development methodology must include project management considerations.
There may be policy decisions which must be made in order to ensure that we obtain all the benefits of IT.
Control of factors such as resistance to change and propensity to take more than a fair share of the spoils must be exercised at national and international levels.
Policy decisions
A relatively small number of industrially advanced countries appear to have the basic technological and managerial skills required to respond to the IT challenge in an orderly fashion with a view to achieving the accompanying advantages.
Whether they.will actually do so, or allow the change to occur in an uncontrolled manner, bringing about many or some of the adverse outcomes, will mainly depend on the competence of their policy makers.
Considerable skills are required for the management of change — skills which are not necessarily transferable from one environment to another.
For each country will have specific problems related to its own social, political and economic structure.
The priorities are to achieve a national consensus on the need for change, to establish a programme for dealing with factors which may cause adverse effects and to select criteria for the allocation of available resources.
The principles for effective policy making are almost the same as those for design.
Concepts of evolution, control of complexity, user participation, and so on, all have an important role to play.
Energy conservation in non-domestic premises: the politics of technological innovation
Dr Ian Cooper Department of Architecture, Cambridge University,.
UK
The British Government has expressed a commitment to reducing the fuel consumption of organisations and institutions occupying non-domestic premises.
To this end, it has encouraged the appointment of specific individuals, called energy managers with responsibility for regulating the consumption of energy.
And the Government's preferred method by which this responsibility should be discharged is the introduction of "energy management systems" microprocessor-based products which allow fuel consumption (and control over environmental conditions) within buildings to be centralised and automated.
These systems are claimed both to save fuel and to improve the environmental conditions experienced within buildings.
Their installation, ho we veT results in a redistribution of power: a removal from occupants of taken-for-granted freedoms to alter their own immediate environment and an extension of the span of managerial control.
This paper is addressed to examining the implications of this technological innovation.
Design can be considered as a particular kind of decision making concerned, inter alia, with relating a society to its technology.
When viewed from this vantage point, designing can be seen as more than just a means of creating and applying technologies: it is also revealed as a means of shaping relations between people.
Decisions about design, especially where these involve the introduction of technological innovations, can then be interpreted both as reflecting priorities within a society and as influencing the ways in which technological developments will affect that society.
In this paper I will present a specific example of this function of design by scrutinising the present British Government's preferred approach to the conservation of energy in non-domestic buildings.
Over the last decade, increased attention has been paid to the consumption of energy, in the management of the use of existing premises as well as in the design of new buildings.
The present Government, like its predecessor, has urged organisations and institutions occupying non-domestic buildings to reduce their fuel consumption.
This should be achieved, it has been argued, first, by the appointment of "energy managers" as specific individuals with responsibility for the consumption of energy within such buildings and, second, by the adoption of technological innovations designed to save energy, as and when these become available or cost-effective.
Introduction
Prime among the innovations favoured by the British Government stand "energy management systems" , microprocessor-based products which allow fuel consumption (and environmental conditions within buildings) to be monitored and controlled centrally and automatically.
The priorities revealed by this governmental advice, and the effects which the introduction of this technological development may have on relations between those who use non-domestic premises, are discussed here by means of a comparison.
The latter is drawn between the Government's current approval of "energy management systems" and Jeremy Bentham's proposals for eliminating waste and encouraging economy in non-domestic buildings, originally offered almost two centuries ago.
Bentham, who is now most commonly known for his work as a Utilitarian social reformer, first set out his design solution for relating a social organisation to its physical setting in 1791.
This solution, which he regarded as amongst the most valuable and characteristic of all his works (Hume 1981 p 165) and which had originally been suggested to him by his brother as the plan for a large house to be occupied by workmen (Stephen, 1900 p 201), he published in pamphlets entitled Panopticon or the Inspection House and Panopticon Postscripts Parts 1 and 11.
His purpose in these pamphlets was to describe in detail his proposals for the layout of buildings in which, with a minimum of formal rules and supervisory staff, large numbers of people could be kept under constant surveillance (Hume, 1973 p 706).
And his Panopticon design was intended as a model not only for prisons but as suitable for any establishment in which a number of people had to be supervised: establishments, he suggested, such as "…workhouses, manufactories, or mad-houses, or hospitals, or schools" (Works, IV p 70).
Bentham's universally applicable form for these buildings was circular with an inspector's lodge housed in a tower in the centre and positioned so as to afford an uninterrupted view into the remainder of the accommodation.
The plan form of his Panopticon was designed so as to combine "…the apparent omnipresence of the inspector…with the extreme facility of his real presence" (Bentham, Works, IV p 45).
And Bentham made explicit claims as to the benefits which could be expected to accrue to those who employed the principles on which his "inspection-houses" were founded.
These benefits included, he proposed: "Morals reformed, health preserved, industry invigorated, instruction diffused, public burthens lightened, Economy seated, as it were upon a rock…all by a simple idea in Architecture!" 
Bentham's Panopticon
In short, the Panopticon was planned, as its designer made clear (Works, X p 226), to be a "mill for grinding rogues honest, and idle men industrious!" And its significance lay in Bentham's demonstration that the very design of an organisation's physical setting could be made to function as one of its instruments of social control.
In addressing this issue, Bentham foreshadowed, inter alia, both the work on orthodox organisation and management theory which was developed in the first three decades of this century (Hume, 1981 p 6) and that on space planning which has followed (Lipman et al , 1978).
Bentham's proposals were intended to promote both discipline and economic production.
In pursuit of the latter, he sought "…the full exploitation of resources, both human and non-human, in the interests of productivity and economy" (Hume, 1981 p 143)."
And, since he took as starting points the avoidance of waste and of idleness, he argued: let care be taken not to leave in the instance of any individual whatever the smallest fragment of ability unemployed."
Bentham also gave consideration to the notion of an optimum size for establishments which, in the case of the Panopticon, he set at 2000 "hands" (Hume, 1981 p 142).
He pursued not only economies of scale but also reductions in the time occupied by movements which occurred within establishments so that labour could be used efficiently.
And, to this end, he stressed the importance of the internal arrangement and design of buildings, of features such as the size of rooms, the location of doors, passages and staircases, and the availability of lighting.
The date at which Bentham published the proposals for his Panopticon is significant.
At the close of the eighteenth century, the growing momentum of the industrial revolution and the accompanying development of the factory system as a means of production meant, as Foucault (1979 p 150) noted, the gradual extension of a wage-earning class in Britain for whom time was money.
Consequently, Foucault remarked (p 151-152): "Time measured and paid must also be time without impurities or defects; a time of good quality throughout which the body is constantly applied to its exercise…
In the correct use of time, nothing must remain idle or useless: everything must be called upon to form the support of the act required."
The design of the Panopticon represents Bentham's contribution to contemporary attempts to assure the quality of time used.
This is expressed in his use of constant surveillance and in his drive to eliminate waste and distractions.
His design solution achieved its ends through its spatial ordering of relationships, and through its emphasis on unimpeded and unrestricted communications, both as aids to good management and as counters to misconduct.
Through his arrangement of spaces, and his location of individuals within them, Bentham used the plan form of the Panopticon to facilitate the flow of information to supervisory staff, so placing them in a position, as Hume (1981 p 5) explained: "to detect and punish disobedience and to adapt their policies and decisions to changing circumstances and varying performances." 
In this sense, the Panopticon was, as Foucault (1979 p 149) identified, a building whose design was simultaneously architectural, functional and hierarchical, and whose purposes were (p 143): "to establish presences and absences, to know where and how to locate individuals, to set up useful communications, to interrupt others, to be able at each moment to supervise the conduct of each individual, to assess it, to judge it, to calculate its qualities or merits.
It was…aimed at knowing, mastering and using."
In other words, Bentham's Panopticon can be taken as an example of the use of architectural design as a means of social control, as an example of a building dedicated to perfecting the exercise of power.
And this it sought to achieve by minimising the number of people required to exercise control while maximising the number over whom it could be exercised.
The architectural and organisational structure of the Panopticon embodied both a system of communications and of discipline based on an asymmetrical distribution of power.
For the layout of the building was intended to afford not simply close control over the movement of personnel, stocks and materials: it was also designed to curtail the initiative and discretion of individual occupants by centralising information and control at the top (Hume, 1981 p 6).
The Panopticon achieved this by facilitating the potential for, but not necessarily the practice of, constant surveillance by allowing supervisory staff to see without being seen.
Accordingly, as for example in Bentham's design for a prison, Fine (1979 p 85) observed: "…inmates were to be subjected to a perpetual supervision in the isolation of their cells by an" inspector ", whose presence was always visible in the shape of the central guard tower, but whose particular focus and conclusions were neither within the vision, knowledge or control of the suspected." 
Because of this characteristic, the design of the Panopticon was, as Foucault (1979 p 201) suggested, "a machinery that assures dissymmetry, disequilibrium, difference" since it enabled surveillance that could not be reciprocated.
Bentham's intention here was explicit, for as he remarked (Works, IV p 70): "It is obvious that the more the persons to be inspected are under the eyes of the persons who should inspect them, the more perfectly will the purpose of the establishment have been attained.
Ideal perfection, if that were the object, would require that each person should actually be in that predicament, during every instant of the time.
This being impossible, the next thing to be wished for is that, at every instant, seeing reason to believe as much, and not being able to satisfy himself to the contrary, he should conceive himself to be so"(emphasis in original).
Bentham was also clear what the Panopticon would mean for those who had to occupy it, subjected as they would be to "…an authority so much exceeding anything that has hitherto signified as despotic" (Works, IV p 63, emphasis in original).
But, Himmelfarb (1968 p 78) argued, its designer was not concerned by the building's intrinsic potential for despotic control: "To Bentham…if it was in the interest of society to confine them in a Panopticon, to subject them to an absolute master, to exploit their labor…[then]it was necessary and proper that all this be done.
And, although aware that the design of the Panopticon could be accused of violating its occupants' liberty, Bentham remained unmoved: foreseeing this criticism, he replied: "Objection — liberty infringed.
Answer — liberty of doing mischief.
As security is increased, liberty is diminished."
Nor, Himmelfarb (1968 p 77) argued, was he concerned about transgressing occupants' rights since, as a Utilitarian, he believed that "there was no such thing as right at all" .
Instead, for Bentham, there were only interests and, because the interests of the majority had to prevail, Himmelfarb noted: "The principle of the greatest happiness was as inimical to the idea of liberty as it was to the idea of rights." 
In the light of these beliefs, he concluded (1970 p 117) that Bentham's Panopticon far from being progressive could justly be characterised as regressive"since he used its design to vaunt the merits of security over those of liberty.
And the potency of that design resides, Foucault (1979 p 205) claimed, in that: "…[it]is a diagram of a mechanism of power reduced to its ideal form; its functioning, abstracted from any obstacle, resistance or friction must be represented as a pure architectural or optical system: it is in fact a figure of political technology that" may and must be detached from any specific use.
For him, the "Panopticon principle" (p 216) should be regarded as more than just a particular example of ingenuity in architectural design; rather: "…it was an event in the" history of the human mind".
In appearance, it is merely the solution of a technical problem; but through it, a whole type of society emerges.
It was, he remarked (p 209), a design of subtle coercion for a society to come.
The parallels (and the signal differences) between Bentham's proposals for his inspection-houses and the present British Government's advice for reducing and regulating the consumption of fuel in non-domestic buildings are striking.
Like Bentham's own reasons for designing the Panopticon, the Government has suggested that managerial staff should install microelectronics technology on their premises for financial reasons, in the pursuit of profit or to safeguard continued economic viability, rather than out of a perceived need to save energy per se.
Energy management systems are collections of equipment constructed from sensors, controllers, relays, actuators and other microprocessor-based products: they can be used to monitor conditions at particular points within a building (or group of buildings) and employed to regulate or reduce fuel consumption as required.
Their function, which corresponds to that of the Panopticon's plan form, is to enable managerial staff to adapt their actions and decisions to changing circumstances and varying performances.
A system's explicit purpose is the exploitation of resources — in this case, energy — in the interests of productivity and economy.
Mirroring the part played by layout in Bentham's inspection-houses, it is intended to provide constant monitoring (surveillance) as a means of avoiding and eliminating waste.
And, again matching Bentham's proposals, it is designed to control, to promote discipline as well as economy.
And the introduction of such a system reflects that same lack of trust which was the defining characteristic of the internal arrangement of the Panopticon.
Energy management systems: beyond Panopticon?
The basis of this lack of trust is clearly discernible in government literature on energy conservation, see, for example, Cooper, 1982 p 36.
Up to now, it has been argued, many who have been able to influence the consumption of fuel in non-domestic buildings (by altering the heating, lighting or ventilation in their own immediate environments) have not been responsible for paying for the fuel which they consume.
So, governmental reasoning runs, because they lack an economic interest in saving energy, such occupants cannot be trusted to conserve it.
Consequently, the present Government has endorsed the introduction of energy management systems because, inter alia, they enable consumption to be centralised and automated.
Their installation accords with the principles of the Panopticon both by facilitating the flow of information to supervisory staff and by curtailing the initiative and discretion of individual building occupants.
This is achieved by centralising control over fuel consumption, through extending managerial control by withdrawing from individuals customary freedoms to vary the environmental conditions they experience as, when and if they deem fit.
As a corollary of this emphasis on managerial control, installation of this microelectronics technology reveals a lack of concern over the liberties and rights of building occupants which is similar to that displayed by Bentham in the design of his Panopticon.
And the logic used to justify infringements against these matches his own.
Because occupants cannot be trusted to conserve fuel, liberties of theirs which may be infringed against by centralisation of control are dismissible since they are liberties to do mischief.
Instead of being concerned with rights and liberties, energy management systems are designed to protect interests.
But the interests they are being called upon to safeguard are not even those of Bentham's questionable Utilitarian objective: it is not to champion the interests of the majority — the greatest happiness of the greatest number — that this new technology is being summoned.
On the contrary, such systems are specifically being promoted by product manufacturers as a means of protecting sectional interests, as a means of furthering the interests of those with responsibility for managing the consumption of energy in non-domestic premises.
And, in order to accomplish this, energy management systems, like the internal arrangement of the Panopticon, vaunt the merits of security over those of liberty.
And, as in Bentham's circular buildings, managerial security is advanced at the expense of liberty, of the freedom of action of those whom managerial staff seek to supervise.
In the Panopticon, the flow of information was dependent on a special architectural configuration: it arose from a specific spatial ordering of the relationship between watcher and watched.
Now, due to developments in microelectronics, this same objective can be achieved regardless of such architectural considerations.
Once again, with a minimum of formal rules and supervisory staff, the behaviour — the fuel consumption — of large numbers of people can be kept under surveillance.
And the use of this technology also allows surveillance which is non-reciprocal, which can be conducted without supervisory staff being seen.
In other words, this approach to reducing and regulating the consumption of fuel also leads, like Bentham's inspection-houses, to a system of communications and of discipline which is based on an asymmetrical distribution of power.
And, in the sense which Foucault applied to the design of the Panopticon, this use of microelectronics represents a technology innovation dedicated to perfecting the exercise of power.
For the design of energy management systems offers a new diagram of a mechanism of power reduced to an ideal form: like the Panopticon, the design of their microelectronic circuitry represents the functioning of control abstracted from any obstacle, resistance or friction and detached from any specific use.
Seen from this vantage point, those microprocessor-based products whose introduction into non-domestic premises the British Government is currently endorsing appear as more than a simple technical solution to a particular economic problem — the conservation of energy.
Through them, it is possible to argue, as Foucault concluded from the design of the Panopticon, a whole type of society may emerge, a society based on the protection of sectional interests through subtle coercion, whose technology is used to preempt what people can and cannot do in buildings that they use or occupy.
Throughout this paper 1 have stressed similarities between Bentham's Panopticon proposals and current governmental advice on energy conservation.
But this endorsement by the British Government sets energy management systems apart from Bentham's inspection-houses for the latter never received governmental approval.
Yet, despite its despotic potential, Bentham's design solution was seen by contemporaries as progressive: Lafayette and the French National Assembly even commissioned special translations of his pamphlets on the subject.
The application of microelectronics to regulate the use of energy is, likewise, being depicted by this country's government as a manifestation of progress since it involves harnessing advanced technology to promote efficient consumption.
But, as Foucault remarked (1977 p 15), the exercise of power also has to be efficient not just financially but in terms of its social and political repercussions.
Faced with economic problems caused by rising fuel prices, the managerial staff of organisations and institutions housed in non-domestic buildings may welcome the possibility of gaining control over energy consumption which seems to be offered by technological developments that are comparatively cheap.
But energy management systems also represent a move towards the increased subordination of other building occupants.
The technology employed is not simply a neutral manifestation of progress: it both reflects and helps to reinforce the social relations which exist between managers and those who occupy their buildings.
Energy management systems may represent a major attempt to rationalise fuel consumption in non-domestic environments, but it remains to be seen how they will be received by such buildings' occupants.
They may prove, in Foucault's use of the word, to be an "efficient" means of  exercising power.
If the internal environments they create are acceptable, their subtle coercion may pass unheeded.
Alternatively, and like another important example of advanced technology — the word processor — they may induce defensive responses (see Barker and Downing, 1980): responses designed to maintain or regain occupants' previous levels of control over their environmental conditions.
Concluding comment
Design and the community: alternative energy technologies as a case study
Dr David Elliott and Carol Barac Technology Policy Group, Open University, UK
The past few years have seen increased interest in the various alternative energy technologies based on solar, wind, wave, and tidal energy.
There are, for example, already more than 300 local authority solar/ low energy council house schemes in the UK and the CEGB is embarking on a programme of windmill construction and assessment — with a 3MW unit being erected on the Orkneys and ten smaller machines being deployed in East Anglia, as well as test units at Carmarthen Bay in Wales.
There are also plans for a major tidal power system on the Severn Estuary and research is continuing into wave power systems.
According to Dr Dawson at the Department of Energy's Energy Technology support unit at Harwell, in the 1990s the various "renewable" energy sources might contribute up to ten million tons of coal equivalent per annum, while the ultimate technical potential is put at 200 metce per annum about the same as UK gets from oil and gas at present .
AT in the UK
Obviously there is a difference between "ultimate potentials" and practical economically viable systems, but considerable progress has been made, despite the low level of government funding (only £9m for all "renewable" r&d in 1980/81).
Private firms are moving into the field — there are two windpower consortia and a tidal power consortium (involving DEC, McAlpines and Taylor Woodrow amongst others — along with the CEGB and British Aerospace) and many smaller firms in the solar field: some 20,000 solar collector units have been installed in the UK so far.
In addition there are a number of private developers building new architect-designed active and passive solar houses witness the 1981 Homeworld exhibition in Milton Keynes.
Boeing's Mod 2 windmill (2.5 MW) is expected, on mass production, to generate electricity at 1 .5p/kWh.
The Severn Barrage is expected to produce power at around 3p/kWh (cheaper than coal or oil fired power stations) while the estimates for wave power unit costs range down to 3.5p/kWh.
It seems likely then that at least some of the renewable energy options will be pursued over the next few years.
Clearly the introduction of these new technologies will have a range of social and environmental implications.
Some comparative studies have already been made of environmental impact and safety although much more needs to be done.
However, there has as yet been very little work on the public acceptability of the various technologies beyond generalisations concerning, for example, likely responses to the visual intrusion of windmills.
Social and environmental implications
The CEGB and other official agencies have regularly pointed out that the public may not be happy to have giant structures in areas of scenic beauty.
Indeed a mill design developed during the 1950s was turned down by a local planning enquiry: one of the aims of the CEGB's current wind programme is to gain some feedback on public attitudes to modern designs.
Some studies are being made (by the Department of Energy amongst others) of user responses to solar heating systems in private houses; these are chiefly in order to iron out operating problems, since to obtain maximum benefit the home owner or tenant must pay a little more attention to energy use patterns with active solar collector systems and avoid leaving doors and windows open with passive systems.
The proposal for a Severn barrage has also led to some public debate, chiefly on environment issues.
Similarly for wave power.
But so far the public debate has in general been shrouded by the classic paradigm of totally opposed viewpoints, ie in terms of enthusiasts, supportative of AT overall, and opponents, usually favouring nuclear power or other conventional schemes.
As yet there has been little public debate on the specifics of the options or the associated design choices.
Clearly, those responsible for the development of the various systems are faced with design choices.
The criteria used will be the conventional ones — cost, technical and material constraints, together with safety considerations and planning constraints.
But social and environmental considerations are also being considered.
In the solar field, there is already a BSI standard on solar collector construction, and a "code of practice" has been developed by the UK Solar Trade Association.
In March 1979 the UK wind power consortium produced a report on the"Development of large Wind Turbine Generators which amongst other things discussed social, environmental and aesthetic aspects.
The Department of Energy study of wave power did likewise, as did the report of Government tidal power study group.
The development of large scale wind, tidal and wave power systems will clearly have considerable implications for the community in general and for local residents in particular.
The existing provisions for public enquiries prior to construction offers some opportunity for the public to respond, but this feedback is likely to have only minimal impact on the chosen design, unless new procedures are introduced.
It might, for example, be helpful to offer several rival designs as well as siting alternatives for public discussion — as well , of course , as offering a "not at all " option.
Consultative arrangements of this  sort have been attempted in relation to a number of planning decisions in recent years.
Community involvement
However, there are major limitations to this approach — it can be time consuming and expensive for the promoters, while the exercise can also degenerate into a public relations exercise as far as the public is concerned.
One way in which some at least of the problems might be reduced would be if the technology concerned were not promoted and managed by a national agency (eg the CEGB or electricity board) but rather by the local authority.
Local authorities are increasingly becoming involved with energy management activities — eg building insulation programmes, solar housing, waste incineration and the development of local combined heat, power and district heating programmes.
Municipal energy supply systems could possibly bring the focus of control and debate closer to the local community; and of course, at the smaller scale still, there is the possibility of self-help local community initiated and managed energy supply schemes.
In general the scale of the technology may be an important determinant of the degree of community participation in both design and operation that is feasible.
Of course, there are technical and economic trade-offs associated with scale.
In the case of wind machines, for example, larger machines are more cost-effective in terms of wind energy collection but mass production of smaller units may offer substantial economies of manufacturing scale.
In the case of wave and tidal power, large units, linked to the grid, seem inevitable; but the possibility of smaller units has also been discussed offering more scope for local or at least regional management.
Solar power on the other hand is best exploited on the small, decentralised scale.
In general, it seems likely that what will emerge over the next few decades will be two parallel systems: one with large offshore windmills, wave power generators and tidal barrages providing electricity for the grid; the other more decentralised, with solar and biomas providing heat on a small scale local basis, coupled with small windmills, water mills and turbines in rivers and streams providing electricity in certain mainly rural areas.
Community involvement is obviously more likely in the latter case, but it is equally vital for large scale systems.
It is interesting in this context to look at the large (2 MW) windmill built largely by students at a college complex in Tvind, Denmark.
The design is somewhat different from that of similarly sized machines such as the UK Orkney's machine or the Boeing Mod 2, and many people find it far more attractive.
As has been noted above, up until now there appears to have been comparatively little research to test public responses to the various new technologies, both large and small scale, or to involve the wider public in the debate about energy policy and the choices to be made from a range of techniques.
Public attitudes research
NATTA, The Network for Alternative Technology and Technology Assessment, in conjunction with the Open University Technology Policy Group, has initiated such a study aimed at establishing how aware people are of alternative and renewable sources of energy, in general.
It focuses on the Severn Barrage proposal and the CEGB wind power programme, in particular.
The aim of the project is three-fold: 1 To survey public attitudes and assess the general pattern of opinion about alternative energy sources, and to locate opinion on the specific projects within this spectrum; 2 To stimulate discussion, formal and informal, on the role of renewable resources, locally and nationally, within the context of a range of options available to form an energy policy; and 3 To promote local discussion about the pros and cons of proposed technological innovations, which will have a local economic, social and (or) visual effect on the local environment.
Previous research aimed at investigating public attitudes to alternative energy technologies and the relative acceptability of various energy-conscious products includes a survey carried out recently by Robin Sadler and Liz Spencer, entitled Consumer Attitudes Towards Future Energy Sources and Products (March 1982).
This study was carried out in a range of locations and tenures, and tested people's awareness of energy saving products, conservation measures, and novel types of energy technology using ambient energy (eg solar collectors), all rated against their costs of installation, running and maintenance.
The study highlighted the themes of the high cost of energy as a major problem for consumers; their ignorance of the true effect of existing and potential energy saving measures, and available (but unpublicised) credit facilities; and their belief that any energy savings achieved will lead to high fuel prices.
Consumers also seemed confused by conflicting messages to use more energy, and to "save it" .
The Sadler/Spencer report came to the conclusion that "people need help to resolve their dilemmas" , by way of education, personalised advice and financial assistance.
Nevertheless, their study revealed a high level of interest in the subject of energy and its generation, an informed curiosity about "natural energy" and "independent sources of energy" — and distrust of nuclear power.
Studies previous to the Sadler/Spencer survey have concentrated, for the most part, on attitudes to domestic energy conservation, in an attempt to discover why programmes aimed at promoting conservation have not been taken up as widely as expected and hoped.
A major study in this area isA Review of Social Research on the Individual Energy Consumer by Peter Ellis and George Gaskell (Sept 1978).
The conclusions of this, and similar studies, were that research and other work relating to energy systems needs to take into account people's behaviour and their learning processes.
For example, they have found that "there is considerable evidence that attitudes to comfort are important in estimating the user's contribution to conservation…yet these have rarely been explored by research on the effects of feedback" .
Most of the studies reviewed so far focus on people's attitudes to domestic energy use and equipment, an aspect of their immediate daily life.
Their attitudes are clearly a significant factor in whether the technical innovation is successful.
However, when it comes to larger scale public energy supply systems, eg large wind turbines, tidal barrages etc, people's attitudes and behaviour might seem initially to be less significant, at least as far as the operation of the system is concerned.
In the extreme, of course, local people may object strongly to a project (eg on environmental grounds), and force a design change or even the abandonment of the project, so that public attitudes may become an important issue.
In this context it is worth looking at a recent study carried out in California by Harbicht Research Inc for Southern California Edison, a local utility company who investigated how local residents felt about a proposed "wind-farm" project.
It was found that there was a general enthusiasm for wind turbines, and that people felt that they would not be obtrusive, or unpleasant, neighbours.
However, the survey also established that there were some contradictions: the favourable attitudes to wind turbines were not based on firsthand experience of windmills, and to a certain extent their positive response was based on the belief that wind power would be much cheaper than other sources (since the fuel is free!), a belief which in fact might not be the case at the current stage of development.
Nonetheless, when asked about other aspects of the wind turbines, such as their advantages in terms of pollution reduction and fuel conservation over other energy sources, their attitudes were fairly well developed and they were well informed.
This bears out the results found by Rob Sadler and Liz Spencer in their survey: that people would like more information on, and are enthusiastic about, the advantages of renewable energy.
The findings of a pilot study carried out by NATTA on attitudes to the Severn Barrage develop this last point further.
A questionnaire was administered after a public meeting on the Barrage in Newport, Wales in April 1982.
The results indicated that people benefited from being given more information, which enabled them to develop and in some cases revise their opinions.
Of the 29 responses, 65 per cent had started off the evening unsure, doubtful or undecided, and during the evening had become informed and therefore more sure of their point of view (whether pro or anti).
Sixty per cent said that their opinion had been changed during the course of the evening; this is certainly an indication that people respond to being involved in informed public discussion.
The audience was also asked if they thought that people should be involved in making their views known in schemes such as the Barrage, which have a large local effect.
The fact that local people had not been informed of the exploratory work as it proceeded, or asked what they thought, had been discussed at some length during the evening, and there seemed to be little doubt that people who are to be "invaded" by a major installation for which they will bear much incidental, site-specific cost, would like to be party to discussions about the project.
In this case, almost all present thought that members of the public should be informed and have an opportunity to make their views known.
Our work so far has obviously only been of a preliminary nature, but even so it is clear that there are many strands in the concept of participation and public involvement in decision-making related to novel energy systems.
It is apparent that there is considerable latent public interest in "renewable" energy systems and a desire for more information.
Some conclusions
Although it seems unlikely that lay people could get involved with the detailed engineering design of major projects, given proposals for a specific local project their general interest can sometimes expand to include not only a concern for the siting, appearance and general design of the system but also an interest in the more general policy issues: for example, is the proposed project the best investment option; what are the alternatives?
This, of course, is one of the ancillary justifications for participation — that it educates the public in wider concerns, thus promoting more informed and democratic discussion.
It is not, however, necessarily the case that they will be able to influence policy decisions or even specific proposals; that, as we have said, depends on the institutional and political arrangements and access.
In some cases participation can degenerate into pseudo-participation and manipulation.
Yet even in such cases, it is possible that public involvement on specific issues will stimulate a more critical evaluation of such proposals in the future and generate a wider concern in other aspects of their environment, including the nature of the existing mechanisms for decision making.
Green dreams: biotechnology and Ecotopia
Harry Rothman Technology Policy Unit, University of Aston, Birmingham, UK
Biotechnology is "the integrated use of biochemistry, microbiology and engineering sciences in order to achieve the technological (industrial) application of the capabilities of micro-organisms, cultured tissue cells, and parts thereof" .
Like microelectronics, biotechnology is one of those unique, so called generic, technologies which cut across traditional boundaries between industrial sectors.
Generic technologies are characterised by a breadth of long term potential applications and impacts which require that they be recognised as fundamental elements in thinking about and planning the long term socioeconomic future.
Biotechnology should be a part of any strategy to resolve our contemporary world problem areas, eg chemical industrial feedstocks, processes and products, as well as energy resources, health care, land use, food production and the environment.
Several feasible technological scenarios, which have emerged from the EEC FAST Biosociety programme, are compared and contrasted with a Utopian scenario which we term Ecotopia.
Utopia is the myth of an ideal state.
The term was coined by Thomas More in his Utopia (1516) and is compounded from the Greek for not and place — literally "noplace" .
Utopian myths predate.
More by at least two millennia and although the historical development of the Utopian myth is highly significant it cannot be examined here.
But a distinction between the myths of Utopias and of heavens is worth making.
A Utopia is an idealised state of this world, unlike a heaven which is an idealised other world; neither exists in a material form.
Utopian thought has often been denigrated for its idealism, yet I would argue that, unlike religion, "the sigh of the oppressed creature, the heart of a heartless world…the spirit of a spiritless situation…the opium of the people" (Marx, Contribution to the Critique of Hegel's philosophy of Right)— Utopian thinking represents a conscious attempt to pose historical goals for human action and is a stimulant for action and change "the amphetamine of the people" .
Utopian myths
One strain of Utopian thought has stressed scientific and technical progress.
Counterposed to this has been an anti-scientific trend which, disturbed by the alienation and military disasters of industrialism, has dreamed either of a pastoral world of decent craftsmen in harmony with nature or posed the nightmare of dystopias.
William Morris' A Dream of John Ball and News from Nowhere are good examples of the former and Aldous Huxley's Brave New World and George Orwell's 1984 of the latter.
Utopias are goals to be reached and dystopias goals to be avoided.
Science and technology all too often seemed to overtake the wildest fantasies of Utopian thinkers, plagues of infectious diseases were conquered, people flew not only into air but out into space and landed on the moon; instant communications brought a "global village" and so on, yet all this progress of science and technology did not bring Utopia.
People still starved, died of neglect and war, sought love and beauty only to be choked by hatred and ugliness.
For scientific and technological progress released forces of destruction in equal measure to forces of production.
Good did not overcome evil simply because we knew more — technological progress merely raised that struggle to a higher and potentially more devastating level.
During the period since Francis Bacon in New Atlantis (1627) first postulated a Utopian state based on the achievements of science, the social relations and relationship between science and technology have progressively changed.
Scientists have been increasingly professionalised within universities, research institutes and industrial enterprises, the magi have been replaced by managers of research.
Technology too has changed, the heroic inventor has been replaced by corporate r&d.
Objectivity of the scientific and economic ilk has progressively driven out the Utopianism which had previously permeated science and technology.
The Utopian light that illuminated science at the time of Bacon now seems brightest at the margins of science and dimmest — if not completely extinguished — at the centres of scientific and technological power.
This change has not necessarily been one for the better.
Indeed it is my theme that Utopian "dreams" still have a valuable role to play by bringing the potentials of scientific and technological change into the arena of social and political action.
For they remain an integral part of that greatest of all our struggles — the advancement of human freedom in its Hegelian sense of "knowledge of necessity" .
Industrial capitalism released productive forces in an exponential curve: that much was clear to Engels before the end of the nineteenth century.
Half-way through the twentieth century it was becoming clear to the more perceptive analysts that, whatever the political limitations might or might not be to that form of growth, there were ecological limitations looming on the horizon.
Revolution might be staved off by "trickle-down" economics, in Europe and North America, on the basis of ever greater economic growth; however, it was increasingly clear that not every family in the world could run a private car, or even own their own home.
Ecological limits and Ecotopia
Socialists had of course always argued that there was something fundamentally wrong with capitalist progress (and for this reason I shall concentrate on their attitudes).
Initially they had devised Utopian  states and communes in which brotherly (and sisterly) love triumphed over capitalist avarice.
Marx sought to replace, as a basis for action, Utopian dreams by scientific analysis.
Progress he argued was held back or deformed by the contradictions between the social relations of production and the forces of production.
The key to a better world was to be found in the common ownership of the means of production.
But where this occurred it took the form of state control and the resulting technologies and forms of industrialisation differed little from their capitalist counterparts.
Furthermore the resulting "socialist man" seemed to have the same needs as his capitalist counterpart for material goods, especially those based on energy and materially intensive technologies.
 "Scientific socialists" had for the most part ignored the contradictions between the growth of"the productive forces and the structure of nature.
That strand of thought in Marx and Engels which stressed the dialectical unity of man and nature was left undeveloped, except in the neglected work of people like William Morris, generally dismissed as "Utopian" and not worthy of the attention of serious revolutionaries.
Or, in the case of J.D. Bernal (The World, the Flesh and the Devil) and J.B.S. Haldane (Daedalus or Science and the Future) quietly buried by the day to day routine of political activism and filed for an undefined future.
So, socialist as well as capitalist thinking was dominated by an "ecological voluntarism" (Novik 1979) which was unable to recognise ecological limits and constraints to industrial growth and "technological progress" .
As a result, neither industrial capitalism nor its "improved" form, state socialism, proved able to coordinate the development of their productive forces with the possibilities and potential of the biosphere.
The consequences of such ecological voluntarism are now clear and are encapsulated by such terms as "population explosion" , "pollution"  "limits to growth" , and so forth.
The ecological problem forced itself on to our consciousness.
Insulted nature began to reply in kind and a growing audience emerged, particularly in the most industrialised societies of the USA and Europe, for dystopias such as Rachel Carson's Silent Spring (1962).
Over the last decade and a half strong ecological conservationist movements have emerged and yet there is still no clear idea of how to deal with the ecological problems, nor of what goals we should set.
Some environmentalists have concentrated on single issue campaigns, eg "no nukes" .
Others have adopted a more holistic approach but in the form of an ecological reductionism which turns its back on science and technology, stressing traditional craft means of production and prescientific knowledges, such as astrology and alchemy (which are imbued with a deeply humanistic Utopianism — noticeably  absent from contemporary science and technology).
It is not possible to give a fair criticism of their case here.
Suffice to say that I do not believe that human activity can be explained from or reduced to the ecological level.
Humans are unique in the living world in that they have evolved a production system within which surpluses are consciously created; further, these surpluses of food and other products are not necessarily utilised for increasing the population, as would be the case in other species.
Their utilisation and redistribution occurs at another organisational level than the ecosystematic, the economic level.
This level was described by Marx as "the mode of production" and it rests upon, or rather within, nature.
This concept is shown in schematic form in Figure 1.
The socialists had concentrated — in their aim for a better world — on the contradiction points between the social relations of production and the productive forces and ignored those between human production and the natural world.
The environmentalists in their attempt to come to grips with ecological problems have focused on the latter contradiction points to the detriment of those between the social relations of production and the productive forces.
Both  approaches are in my view incomplete.
We need an approach that can come to grips with both the ecological and economic levels.
Perhaps we do not yet have the tools for a scientific resolution of this task and this is where Utopian thinking may aid us in identifying our political goals.
That done, we can begin to address ourselves to identifying the right technical and political means for achieving them.
It is not surprising that in this period of increased sensitivity to the emerging ecological problem we find the first Utopia based upon ecological as well as social ideals.
Ernest Callenbach's novel Ecotopia (1979) describes an ecological Utopia.
Ecotopia
A civil war in the United States in the final decade of this century leads to the formation of a breakaway group.
Oregon, Washington State, and Northern California unite to form a new state called Ecotopia.
Ecotopia combines the Greek words for "home" and "place" (ie "homely place" ), and is counterposed to the idea of modern alienating, threatening State.
Ecotopia turns its back on the capitalist treadmill of material progress-not by a return to pre-industrial forms and back to nature "but by developing a" high-tech"society that is designed to be compatible with the biosphere.
Major changes occur in the mode of production, superstructure and their relationship to nature.
Ecotopians develop steady state systems and technologies.
In their processes and products they seek reliability and non-destructiveness.
They stress recycling, and reduce the use of non-renewable resources, develop low energy systems, and novel public transport to link their "mini-cities" .
Government is decentralised, factories tend to be small and cooperative, and so on.
To cut a long story short, Ecotopia describes a society geared to the needs of Twentieth century people which is nevertheless ecologically sustainable.
Putting to one side the various crucially important economic and political problems, we can ask if such a goal is technically feasible.
A number of contemporary technological trends would lead us to think that the Ecotopian goal is feasible — these are trends in information technology and biotechnology.
I shall only deal with the latter trend.
Biotechnology has attracted the greatest attention in the last 3-4 years, despite its very ancient origins, and its potential impact on social life and the economy has been compared with that of the microelectronic processor chip.
In a recent book (Rothman et al, 1980) we defined biotechnology as"the catchword for the new forms of chemical engineering concerned with the industrial utilisation of cellular, microbial and enzyme processes (in particular those attempts to develop artificial or genetic engineering processes).
It is this attempt to redesign the genetic instructions of living organisms and utilise them on an industrial scale that is creating so much excitement and concern".
Biotechnology
Figure 2 summarises the main areas of application of biotechnology (Smith, 1981).
At this point I want to contrast Callenbach's Utopian approach to an ecologically-based society with an official contemporary study of biotechnology's potential.
I have for the last two years been closely involved with an EEC forecasting study — The Forecasting and Assessment in Science and Technology (FAST) Biosociety subprogramme.
This programme, now nearing completion, provides a long-term (three decades) forecast for biotechnology.
It involved about a dozen groups and a network of experts throughout Europe and is the largest future study of biotechnology that I am aware of.
FAST assumed that   the attainment of a "biosociety" by the early decades of next century was crucial.
A "biosociety" says Professor A. Behrens, a prominent member of the project, "is one that should be fully aware of the problems of life in all its forms and of a balanced" input/output "in energy and materials…[and]is using biotechnology to an optimal extent in order to guarantee a proper balance between human needs (partially represented by industrial needs), natural resources, and the environment" (Oberursal, 1982).
The FAST Biosociety programme
I can only briefly touch upon the FAST Biosociety findings.
Here are some of the issues that were raised: 1 Land use in Europe and related policies.
This dealt with two fundamental questions: how Europe feeds its people, and what is the role of the land?
They note that politics and technology are interrelated, eg the Common Agricultural Policy has encouraged the production of expensive agricultural surpluses: milk, wine, some grains, butter, olives, and so on.
This  represents an inappropriate use of land which might otherwise grow needed crops and so save imports, particularly animal feedstuffs, forest products, chemical feedstuffs and fuels.
Improvements (eg cloning of trees) in forestry are seen as an excellent means of increasing European biomass production, especially on marginal lands.
Forestry could be incorporated into novel integrated land management systems involving the use of treated forest waste for animal feed and anaerobic digesters for energy and fertiliser production.
There is a wide range of activities and processes that can use biomass as a starting point.
Figure 3 shows a series of options for producing energy from biomass.
2 New potentials and alternative bases for the European chemical industry.
A substitute for oil is an obvious future need and biotechnology provides many technical alternatives for oil as a chemical feedstock, as well as an energy source.
See Figures 4 and 5.
Figure 6 summarises the conclusions of the FAST study on this topic.
From this we can see that for Europe coal is regarded by FAST as the major future alternative to oil.
However, FAST noted that a possible future biotechnological development might be to use chemoautotrophic micro-organisms able to utilise mixtures of carbon dioxide and hydrogen (which could be obtained from coal by reaction with steam) to provide a wide range of organic compounds.
Should coal run out, it was argued that as long as hydrogen could be obtained (eg from solar or nuclear sources) plus carbon dioxide (from chalk or air) such processes would still be viable.
FAST thought that "economics" would determine which biotechnological substitutions take place in the chemical industry.
Where fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals with high added value can be produced by biotechnology there will be rapid developments.
But these will, because of the necessary investment structure for developing new pharmaceuticals, probably be dominated by existing large companies.
For low or medium value organic chemicals the extent to which penetration by biotechnology is possible will depend firstly on substrate costs and secondly on the economics of downstream processing.
3 Energy from biotechnology.
The possible options have already been summarised by Figure 3.
However, it is interesting to note that some of the most serious programmes in this field have been carried out in Third World countries.
The biogas projects of India and China are now well known: sewage animal waste is fermented to give a combustible gas (methane diluted with carbon dioxide).
There is a tremendous amount of potential improvement in this field to be gained from biotechnological research on reactor designs, materials, cultures and so on.
The production of alcohol (especially ethanol) by fermentation from vegetable matter- (eg sugar cane and maize) and its use as a vehicle fuel, is already growing.
Alcohol is usually added to petrol to form a mixture called gasohol.
Brazil, through its Proalcool Programme, now leads the world in this field, at least in terms of its scale and commitment.
We have recently analysed this programme (Rothman et al, 1982).
In 1980 about 4 X 1 litres of ethanol were produced and the 1985 target is around 10.7 x 10to9 litres.
(This will replace the equivalent of 170,000 barrels of oil per day).
Brazil has for political reasons pushed Proalcool despite the fact that in narrow economic terms gasohol is still inferior to petrol.
But it keeps the cars of its urban elites running, reduces the balance of payments (Brazil has the world's largest foreign loans debt) and creates jobs in the rural areas (Brazil needs two million new jobs a year; Proalcool is said to have already created more than 50,000 jobs; one job is created for every 20,000 litres of alcohol produced [Mendonca, 1980]).
4 Health care.
This is an area where rapid and big gains are expected in several fields: diagnosing by cheap and standard reagents based upon immunological methods (eg monoclonal antibodies) for viral and malignant diseases; new methods of vaccine production; the production of genetically engineered organisms to produce human hormones and interferon.
Further, the direct utilisation of genetic engineering on people to eliminate genetic defects is now contemplated seriously (eg the Kline affair).
5 Environmental protection and waste treatment.
The widely ignored "Global 2000" report is but the latest in a growing list of official and quasi-official studies showing how the present forces of production conflict with ecological processes in a way likely to create major structural changes in the biosphere: desertification; acid rain; soil destruction by loss of fertility and build-up of toxins; carbon dioxide build-up in the atmosphere; reduction of the world's genetic resources and variety.
FAST expect that biotechnology will contribute to resolving or reducing such problems.
They note that "food production implies utilisation of renewable resources and enhancing productivities; while preserving the plant varieties, improving pathogen resistance, protection of ecological balances and microclimates, and utilising symbiotic potentials" .
By way of example, Figure 7 shows a system that I have been helping to develop for some ten years now   (Smith and Rothman, 1980).
This system will sterilise and detoxify contaminated urban sewage sludge so that it is a suitable product for use as a fertiliser (a large percentage of British sludge is too contaminated to be put safely on the land as a fertiliser) or for use as a proteinaceous supplement for animal feed.
Figure 8 illustrates the differences between a natural ecosystem and an urban-industrial ecosystem.
The natural ecosystem is relatively closed and comprises self-regulating cycles, however the urban-industrial ecosystem is open to large imports of foreign material and toxins and unless we add detoxification and recycling processes it creates a disturbing influence on the biosphere.
The system shown in Figure 7 is an illustration of the sort of system that needs to be designed to regulate ecologically urban-industrial systems.
It is able to recycle material which is now being expensively destroyed in incinerators or dumped into the sea, where it may act as a source of marine pollution.
I think that I have said sufficient to indicate, if not prove, that there are no major technical obstacles to realising Ecotopia.
We know that there is an ecological problem.
We do not know all the scientific nuances of   the problem.
However, we do know the general direction of scientific and technological action necessary to deal with it.
Green dreams and hard economic reality
Much — if not all — of the technology necessary for Ecotopia to function has already been developed or is in the process of being developed.
The chief obstacles to Ecotopia lie in the economic, political, cultural and ideological levels.
For example, the industrial giants who dominate the chemical industry have large capital investments in petrochemicals.
These cannot and will not be liquidated in a short transition to a "green" chemical industry.
Left to themselves they will appropriate biotechnology as and when they need to.
Another source of obstacle stems from the fact that the innovation and diffusion of biotechnological processes often requires major institutional changes in the industrial infrastructure.
For example the sludge recycling system described earlier will need major realignments between rate payers, water authorities, animal feed manufacturers and farmers; the necessary re-arrangements may well not emerge on the basis of market forces.
To take an even more difficult example; to obtain a more ecologically sound agriculture would require enormous changes in the agribusiness infrastructure.
Likewise the integrated forestry systems envisaged by FAST will require a novel institutional and industrial infrastructure.
FAST has also argued that the Community's Common Agricultural Policy will need radical changes if biotechnology is to be optimally developed.
Enormous vested interests will need to be overcome to bring about such changes.
Sound argument based on long-term interest carries little weight against a sound economic argument based on short term interest ( "in the long term we are all dead" says Keynes).
It is worth noting that the bulk of the existing forces of production have been built upon fossil fuels, high energy and non-renewable resources and have evolved an infrastructure and internal relationships with a clear economic rationality, despite their ecological unsoundness.
Flows of materials and energy have been primarily determined by market structures and economics and only secondarily by ecological factors.
Biotechnology unless.politically directed will be forced to enter the forces of production on those terms.
Ecotopian biotechnology on the contrary would possess an infrastructure based firstly on ecological rationality and secondarily on an economic basis.
How could the relationship between economic and ecological rationality be inverted or rather corrected?
It is worth reflecting on the difference in approach on this question between Callenbach and FAST.
Both are concerned to overcome the ecological problem by using biotechnology.
However, they differ greatly in their social scenarios.
FAST's biosociety is seen as something to be achieved within existing relations of production.
FAST does not consider the possibility of a social discontinuity or rupture as a necessary Step towards the biosociety.
Presumably the interplay of political and economic self-interest of government in industry will bring us to their goal.
The public are seen to need educating into the necessity of a biosociety, but on the whole the social relations of the biosociety are taken as unproblematic and FAST scenarios rarely go beyond techno-economic details.
Callenbach's Ecotopia on the other hand is brought about by a green revolution of West Coast ecological activists.
He provides very detailed social scenarios though relatively little technical detail (suggestive sketches suffice).
For all FAST's expertise in industry and biotechnology the biosociety is a far more hazy society than Callenbach's Ecotopia.
It is not easy to imagine just how different life would be in a biosociety, compared with life in our present society.
On the other hand the Utopian future of Ecotopia proves more vivid to the reader and therefore a more real world than does the "objective analysis" by expert groups of the biosociety.
It all goes to show that biotechnology — or any technology — cannot be sensibly assessed outside an analysis — or even an explicit image — of the social relations within which it operates.
Whilst it is true that Utopias are generally short on analysis, the best ones do provide an image of a world which, despite their fantastical form, one can come to terms with.
If you read Callenbach you will know what I mean by an "Ecotopian" , if you read FAST's voluminous reports I doubt whether you will recognise a citizen of the biosociety.
Since I have taken his name in vain earlier on, perhaps I can let Marx have the penultimate word.
If a mechanical interpretation (see Figure 1) of Marx's theory of historical change is any guide, then the move towards the biosociety/Ecotopia model is already occurring.
Marx argued (The Poverty of Philosophy) that in acquiring new forces of production men change their mode of production and, in changing their mode of production, in changing their way of earning their living, they change all their social relations.
He sums up his theory in the aphorism: "The hand mill gives you society with a feudal lord; the steam-mill, society with the industrial capitalist." 
As we biotechnologicalise our existing forces of production we may well one day come to extend Marx's aphorism by adding: and the advanced bioreactor (fermenter) gives you society with the Ecotopian.
Marx had a down on Utopians, perhaps because he was such a great Utopian himself (and that is a compliment), and liked to stress how scientific he was.
However, I do not think the contradiction between  subjective "Utopianism and" objective"scientificity is an incompatible one.
Their relationship in humanity is a dialectical one; in the whole person the proper development of the subjective and the objective are equally neceSsary.
Social existence no doubt determines consciousness but then only human consciousness can imagine an alternative social existence.
It may take a Utopian or dystopian form — contemporary social existence creates our green dreams as well as our nuclear nightmares.
Political action in its widest sense will determine which we make a reality.
The fireside and the kitchen: domesticity and rationality in twentieth century British family housing
Marion Roberts Welsh School of Architecture, University of Wales Institute of Science and Technology, UK
This paper reviews two themes which have been exposed by feminist researchers: the idealisation of domesticity and the rationalisation of housework.
These themes are symbolised by the fireside and the kitchen.
Arguments are put forward to show their importance to an understanding of the relationship of women to the home, and to suggest that they have had a significant influence on British architecture.
The discussion illuminates the way in which concepts such as public, private, and rationality have different and asymmetrical effects for each sex as applied to the home and its physical container the house.
The fireside and the kitchen were a unified symbol in the nineteenth century working-class home,"they are now separate and distinct.
Rather than presenting a unified theory, the paper explores the tensions and contradictions which surround each theme and the connections between them.
A feminist perspective on, and analysis of, architecture and planning has only just begun to emerge over the last decade.
Work in the field is scattered between a number of approaches and takes as its subject differing historical periods and geographical areas.
Feminist authors have raised a number of themes and issues: this paper will introduce two which concern women and the houses in which they live and work as part of a family.
These themes are the idealisation of domesticity and the rationalisation of housework.
Much of the work on these themes has taken Victorian middle-class English society as its context.
It is the aim of this paper to extend and explore these themes with reference to my particular interest, twentieth century British popular housing design.
Design signifies architectural design in this context, although such a review raises issues in town planning and housing policy which are beyond the scope of this paper, and which have been addressed in part by others.
Hall and Davidoff have studied Victorian domestic ideology; they have shown the importance of that ideology to an understanding of what we might now consider to be a "natural" division between public and private spheres based on a supposedly "natural" division between the sexes.
Hall's (1979) examination of the Evangelists highlights the notion that home is the most appropriate setting for women's lives.
The Evangelists proposed the concept of home as a private retreat for man, and home as a centre of morality, away from the rigours and corruption of the outside world.
Davidoff et al(1976) in a seminal paper, made connections between the idea that home is the ideal setting for women's lives and the supposition that rural villages are ideal contexts for community life in a wider setting.
They saw the two ideas as analogous, but that "The very core of the ideal was home in a rural village community" (1976 p 140).
They called this double yoked model "the Beau Ideal" and suggested that it was epitomised by the Victorian villa in a garden suburb.
The authors showed how this set of interconnecting ideas depended upon separation.
The "ideal village" was separated from the commercialism, moral pollution, and degradation of the city; home was separated from the outside world and its neighbours by walls, drives and privet hedges.
Relationships within the home were characterised by segregation, stratification, and subordination, of servants to family, family to wife and wife to husband.
Coal fires became a cult of the "temple of the hearth" and a symbol of the domestic refuge.
Davidoff et al have shown that the Beau Ideal was underpinned by a morality of mutual duty and service, although the benefits and freedom which each participant drew from such an arrangement varied directly according to their position in the hierarchy.
The female servants at the bottom had their physical horizons limited to the house and their sexuality suppressed.
Francis (1980) took a plan of a nineteenth century upper-middle class villa and examined the differentiation of rooms.
She remarked how each definable function of the household had a special room set aside for it, for example there were dining rooms, parlours and drawing rooms, and serving pantries, pantries and sculleries.
Francis analysed the hierarchy of rooms and commented that the servants' attic bedrooms were both smallest in size and farthest from the front door.
Francis showed how a similar separation and differentiation of functions, with domestic service being concealed from the public portion of the house, was repeated in a more compressed form in Victorian lower middle class detached and semi-detached villas.
Davidoff et al suggested that the Beau Ideal has permeated twentieth century life and thought in terms of an aesthetic blurring, and an emotional identification with an image of an ideal home in a rural village community.
This they argue is the ideal at the heart of twentieth century suburbia.
They show that the aspect of the ideal which is concealed is the isolation and subordination of housewives.
However, much of twentieth century suburbia has neither been designed by architects, nor planned by planners, and has indeed been the subject of much invective by architects for the first half of this century.
How was the Beau Ideal absorbed and reinforced by the architectural profession in the design of municipal suburbs?
In order to answer this question the work of Raymond Unwin would appear to be a suitable subject of study.
Unwin was one of the main architectural protagonists for the Garden City movement.
He planned Letchworth, and had an important influence on the proposals of the Tudor-Walters Report.
The cottage estates which were built under the provisions of the Tudor-Walters Report were conceived as purely residential districts and in fact were municipal suburbs.
Unwin's architectural ideas showed a continuity from the previous century.
A particular emphasis was placed on a village-like notion of community.
Unwin and his colleague Parker in their 1901 essays brought forward the arguments of the Beau Ideal to support the rustic vernacular with which they designed their mass housing.
They said: "It is this crystallization of the elements of the village in accordance with a definitely organised life of mutual relations respect or service, which gives the appearance of organic whole the home of a community, to what would otherwise be a mere agglomeration of building" (1901 p 92).
Through his desire to impart a feeling of an "organic whole" Unwin upset the separation between houses which characterised the Victorian suburb.
In his address on The Improvement of Towns, Unwin attacked the then common desire to have each house in its own individual plot, and regretted the way in which wide margins of grass were taken into individual gardens (1904 p 3).
Unwin and Parker reacted against a Victorian excess of ornament, which required endless dusting by an army of servants.
Instead they argued for a simplicity of home life.
Unwin, in his essay, Art and Simplicity, proposed a "rational cottage"  "…which the lover of art and beauty would desire for himself" (my italics; 1901 p 65).
The size of the cottage was reduced to one large living room, study, scullery, pantry and bedrooms only.
Although the planning of the cottage rested on the patriarchal assumption that it would house a male art lover, with perhaps a wife and certainly a (female) domestic to service it, Unwin displayed some unease about the status of such service, and thought that: "It is possible, though not easy, to introduce one helper into home life on equal terms, but very difficult indeed to do this with two" (1901 p66).
Unwin's middle class "rational cottage" had an aesthetic unity which was focused on the fireside.
Unwin particularly remarked that the plate rack would not appear out of place in close juxtaposition with the bookshelves.
The Victorian idea that domestic work should be subordinate and invisible had shifted, to the extent that the cooking was now done on centre stage, over the fire.
Working class families rejected Unwin and Parker's vision of a unified family life in their desire for a parlour.
However till the outbreak of the Second World War the majority of working class houses had a coal range in the living room, over which cooking was carried out.
So in the working class home fireside and kitchen were one.
This unity was to be rent asunder by changes in technology and by the impact of the Modern Movement in architecture.
Which introduces the second theme, the rationalisation of housework.
To rationalise, according to the Concise Oxford English Dictionary, is to bring into conformity with reason, or in the economic sense, to eliminate cost in labour time and materials.
False notions of rationality have been imputed to the Modern Movement in architecture, stressing economic and technological imperatives.
F.R.S.
Yorke who popularised the new architecture in Britain, foresaw that as the number of servants declined, and the price of domestic machinery fell, there would be a greater convergence between working class and middle class households.
He thought that architects should design for the new life style which was to arise, and design "for service" , making economical and logical use of space and using mechanical devices in order to provide comfort and to make housework pleasant by lightening the time and effort spent doing it (1934 p 32).
The historian Giedion further represented the emergence of the fitted kitchen as a logical outcome of the twentieth century architect's desire to rethink the problem of the family house and to organise the work process within it (1948 p 522).
The adoption of the idea that housework is a process analogous to manufacturing production led architects to devote much time, in the 1920s, 1950s and 1980s, to studying the logical sequence of work processes in the kitchen.
Feminists from the beginning of the twentieth century onwards have criticised the assumption that a different architectural mode and mechanical devices could by themselves rationalise housework.
Oakley (1974a) in her study of housework could find no correlation between hours worked by housewives and the quantity of domestic machinery they had access to.
Furthermore she also showed that the number of hours spent by women doing housework had actually risen between 1950 and 1971 (1974b p 7).
Markusen (1980) has remarked that efficiency depends upon  which side of the dinner table you are sitting on.7 Davidoff (1976) has observed that rationalising housework in the economic sense is in itself an absurdity since, after the Second World War at least, the majority of housewives are unpaid.
A further facet of "rationality" applied to housing design was the assumption that a house was efficient if it was small enough in size to be cleaned by one woman.
This argument presumed that only one person in the family was capable of cleaning; furthermore, that the smaller a house is, the easier it is to keep clean.
There is no evidence to support this view.
For the last 20 years architectural historians have criticised the attribution of "rationality" to the Modern Movement in the sense of economic and technological determinism.
They have paid attention to the academic, moral and philosophical roots of the movement.
As regards architectural conceptions of the "rational household" some of these roots may be seen to lie in Victorian domestic ideology.
Davidoff (1976) examined housework in nineteenth century Britain as culture.
She emphasised the status of housework as a moral code rather than a logical practice.
Davidoff noted that the Victorian upper and middle classes were obsessed with a desire to reject all contact with dirt before the emergence of germ theory and medical knowledge of bacteria.0 There was an ambiguity, however, as nineteenth century furniture harboured dust.
Concomitant with the obsession with dirt was a desire for order.
Order was achieved by the hierarchies, separation and subordination previously described, and an elaboration of ritual.
Children were dispersed to remote parts of the house and subjected to a strict regime of meals, walks, and lessons.
Le Corbusier, with Gropius and Lubetkin, have been described as having had a poetic vision of a future society, organised along egalitarian and emancipatory lines, supported by modern technology.
Le Corbusier's ideas about houses, the household, and housework are expounded in his classic work, Vers Une Architecture.
Le Corbusier mounted an attack on nineteenth century furniture, ornament and stuffiness; his vision for living was of sunlight and exercise, space and harmony.
This was apparent in his advice to mothers of families where he recommended bare walls, built-in furniture and large light bathrooms with shower baths and gymnastic appliances.
However this vision was also one of tidiness, he advised: "An adjoining room to be a dressing room in which you can dress and undress.
Never undress in your bedroom.
It is not a clean thing to do and makes the room horribly untidy.
In this room demand fitments for your linen and clothing, not more than five feet in height, with drawers, hangers etc"(1927 p 114).
Children were to be subsumed within the dwelling to this notion of order: "Teach your children that a house is only habitable when it is full of light and air, and when the floors and walls are clear.
To keep your floors in order eliminate heavy furniture and thick carpets"(1927 p 115).
Le Corbusier's admonitions echo much of nineteenth century morality in terms of emphasis on order and health, and by inference cleanliness.
It seems a trifle crass, but necessary, to point out that Le Corbusier's egalitarian vision rested on servants, presumably female, clearing up the clutter.
For example, the mass-produced house, the Maison Citrohan, and the PavilIon de l'Esprit Nouveau had maids' rooms.
The freehold maisonettes, proposed in 1922 were to have communal facilities run by servants in three shifts.
Lack of attention to these "details" has led to an erroneous assumption that bare walls and kitchen fittings are by their very nature labour-saving.
Le Corbusier's ideas transformed nineteenth century ideas of snug domesticity grouped around the fire into a concept of family life surrounded by pure form, centrally heated in space, with kitchens only delineated and separated by cupboard fitments.
He opposed the nineteenth century hierarchy of rooms, but upheld an ideal of family life.
Le Corbusier talked of the "man-of-today…following in his leisure the organic development of his existence, which is to create a family and to live, like every animal on this earth and like men of all ages, an organized family life" (1927p 268).
In the post-war world the fireside has been split apart, indeed subsumed to the kitchen.
The aesthetic of the post-war Modern Movement in Britain has placed an ideal of family life as a whole, with the elevation of cooking and cleaning as work processes, over the Victorian hierarchy of space.
Women as a category have become collapsed into the family.
At its most liberal this concept of housing design perceived the interiors of houses and in particular kitchens to be the women's domain.
The relationship of women within the family and to waged work throughout the twentieth century has not been so clear cut.
In terms of wages the "family wage" has been the norm, perpetuating a Victorian ideal of a male breadwinner with dependant wife and children.
However more and more married women have entered the waged labour force: for a significant proportion of these women, their wages are vital to prevent their families from sliding into poverty.
The requirement that homes should be a haven of peace and rest for the male breadwinner has set up a tension with an architectural notion of "rationality" which proclaimed bare simplicity, tidiness, and the  importance of cooking and cleaning as work processes.
The contradictions between the two modes of thought, house as women's workshop, house as breadwinner's retreat, have meant a conflict in architectural terms, not only from the point of view of interior decoration, but also in terms of the planning configuration of kitchen, dining room and living room.
The resolution to this conflict would seem to imply a reappraisal of a number of established assumptions about women, children, and men, and their activities in families, workplaces and homes.
Utopia and Numerosa: a conversation about the future of planning
J Christopher Jones (with apologies to UNESCO) London, UK
UTOPIA is the voice of perfection, NUMEROSO the voice of us all.
They are quite fond of each other, though of differing temperaments.
UTOPIA has ideas for the improvement of twentieth-century life while NUMEROSO is suspicious of attempts to set the future into a mould, however good it may seem.
UNESCO, who has suddenly come alive, has invited the two of them to plan an experimental city in which new technologies and new ways of living can be explored more fully than they were in the real world.
The new city is to be built as a film set and life in it is to be broadcast as a TV spectacle.
UTOPIA and NUMEROSO are camping on a deserted airfield where the city is to be built.
They are having breakfast.
NUMEROSO: Honey.
UTOPIA: Mmmm?
NUMEROSO: Honey on toast.
Is there going to be honey in the city?
What will people eat?
Perhaps we should begin by asking that?
Utopia: I think they should decide that for themselves.
The whole idea of this experiment, as I see it, is that everyone in it is going to decide, and carry out, much of what is now decided by experts and provided by big organisations.
This honey you're eating.
Did you decide to eat it, or are you just taking it because it's there…?
It was my idea to bring it along.
Remember?
NUMEROSO: I've no idea, I just like the taste.
If we are going to get this philosophic about every detail we'll never have any plan at all…
But I like it here.
I don't care how long it takes us.
I hope the inhabitants enjoy it as much, Utopia.
UTOPIA: It's nice.
Nothing's decided.
Everything's possible.
But we're forgetting that Unesco has a definite purpose.
He wants us to plan a city in which the inhabitants will be expected to explore new lifestyles, to discover new ways of life appropriate to our time.
It won't be a holiday.
More of an adventure, a risk, a new kind of danger sport, a new form of work.
Applied anthropology you might call it.
Something that's not been tried before.
I believe that Unesco got the idea when he saw that TV series about some people.who lived for a year in a simulated stone-age Village, cut off from the world.
This is going to be the same thing, only it will be set in the future.
What we have to do is decide what kinds of technologies they are to be provided with, how far into the future they are expected to go, and how the whole experiment is to be organised.
All we have to do is to propose a few initial targets, and guidelines, to get it launched.
I imagine that, once it's going, even that role will be gradually taken over by those who are carrying it out: the ones who run the risk.
As we know, it could be dangerous.
And there's the question of how much of it is to be real life, for those in it, and how much will have to be some kind of fiction, or simulation, where the risks are too great or the technologies not yet available.
NUMEROSO: Very good.
That's the first time I've heard it put so clearly.
You seem to have thought it out already, more so than Unesco has himself.
Whose idea was it?
UTOPIA: It's been around for quite a time.
But until now it's been ignored.
Our scribe's had a hand in it.
Soleri too.
NUMEROSO: That's interesting.
And now its being put into effect, on quite a grand scale.
It's becoming fashionable.
The experimental city is about to become one of the ideas that everybody knows about, thinks about; and a few actually do it, make it happen…
Whatever it is that decides when such changes in fashion, in culture, come about — I'd say that is the real futurology, the thing to try to predict…
But I don't believe in prediction on that scale, the scale of history, you might say.
I don't believe that this city of ours was preordained, or was entirely a function of the recent past.
It need not have happened.
And we two might not have been here now, trying to set it going.
But I'm glad we are, Utopia.
I'll never forget this.
Our moment.
Or one of them.
I can't believe it's really happening.
UTOPIA: I don't know what to say.
No need to say anything, I guess.
More coffee?
NUMEROSO: OK.
What are we doing, do you think — trying to improve life, or just enjoying it?
UTOPIA: Well I'm pretty sure we're doing both.
It took a lot of effort by some strongly motivated people to get to this point.
But now that the experiment seems bound to happen, one way or another, its becoming part of life, something to enjoy, if one can, or to suffer, if things go wrong.
The whole thing could go very wrong.
I expect you've thought of that.
NUMEROSO: No I hadn't.
So far I've not given it much thought.
I came because I was asked.
And to be with you.
You know that.
But I suppose you're right -we could have some sleepless nights.
What happens if the people living here get violent?
If they start killing each other.
Is that on the cards, or has Unesco got some rules that he is going to enforce after all?
UTOPIA: That's for us to decide.
He said it's to be as realistic as we dare to make it.
He'll accept what we say.
NUMEROSO: Perhaps he will, but if I were one of the people coming to live here I'd want some kind of security I think…or would I?
This sounds like the most difficult question we have to decide.
If the thing's to be more than a game there'll have to be some risks.
But I'm forgetting.
Its to be a semi-fiction.
When it gets too dangerous it will be a matter of simulating what's supposed to happen so that it looks real to the TV audience, but not to those involved.
But what about it's political effect, on the viewers?
Are there any limits there?
UTOPIA: No.
This is to be one bit of TV where the only censor is to be the channel selector.
Unesco is going to beam it world-wide from satellites.
Of course, with the present technology, each country can decide for itself whether to re-transmit on their own networks, but  there'll be videotapeS too which will reach some people, at least , in most countries.
But it's not our job to think about that, it's outside our influence.
It's up to us to make it as perfect as possible.
To give the future a chance.
NUMEROSO smiles.
UTOPIA: Shall we go outside?
It's getting hot in the van.
NUMEROSO: You're quite fragile, aren't you, when it comes to realities.
Yes.
Let's go outside.
It's a beautiful morning.
It's perfect.
Next day.
UNESCO arrives.
The conversation continues.
UNESCO: Don't let me interrupt.
I'm only here to listen.
There's a meeting tomorrow and I have to make a report.
UTOPIA: Perhaps you'd like a summary of our thinking so far?
We've discussed a lot of possibilities and it would help us both, I think, to describe them in brief, and to hear what you think.
We could be losing sight of the goal.
UNESCO: The goal, Utopia?
I remember you lecturing about goals.
You said that the age of fixed goals is over; they are things of the industrial past.
If the process is informative we should be open to act on what it teaches.
Isn't that what you said?
Or somebody did.
UTOPIA: Yes of course.
I should have said "we can learn from your reactions" .
But it's hard to shed that reductionist jargon, the vocabulary of the narrow path.
UNESCO: That's a nice way to put it.
But I don't pay so much attention to the words people use.
I listen more to the tone of the voice.
NUMEROSO: Before we go on, Unesco, could you tell us what you really had in mind when you proposed this experiment?
UNESCO: Yes of course.
I had two very clear reasons for starting it.
Firstly, I am tired of hearing from experts that so many of the world's problems are insoluble: poverty, malnutrition, pollution, road accidents, bureaucracy, illiteracy, inflation…there are literally hundreds of such problems, and most of them are getting worse.
So why not make a fresh start?
Try to clear our minds, to rethink the possibilities in a less restricted context?
The conventional planning methods seem to be too limiting to make any real difference.
And my second reason is that I've come to doubt the futurologists, the people in the think tanks.
Too much thinking and too little practice.
They seem to forget that technology is not just an idea: it's action.
It's the making of physical changes to the world; it's altering nature, to an extent at least.
And such changes, such actions, create a reaction: a social reaction, when we see for ourselves what the changed world is really like.
Seeing it, and experiencing it, changes our perceptions.
I'm sure of that.
It tells you things you didn't know about yourself and leads you to act in new ways.
Ways that are not predictable from a theoretical model, or concept.
That's my belief.
That's why you're here.
Ideas are essential to generate something new.
But I don't believe that they can predict its effects.
That's my theory!
UTOPIA: That's not a theory, Unesco.
It's a morality, an ethic.
A theory is meant to predict, to control, to create certainty.
But what you're saying is that ideas, if acted upon, do the opposite.
Your belief, as I understand it, is that we should accept not knowing what the future will be like and that we should trust in the abilities of ourselves, and of everyone else, to be surprised by what happenS, to be changed by it, and to be able to react in new ways that at present we do not know?
To seek to fix the future into a predicted form is, by this ethic of yours, a wrong thing to do.
It's to deny us our humanity, our ability to be.
Life will change beyond our expectations.
NUMEROSO is silent.
He looks surprised.
A little embarrassed, perhaps.
It's getting dark.
The scribe knows that they have a lot more to say and wonders how it is to be fitted into 3000 words.
Most of them are gone.
NUMEROSO: It's time we spoke of the details, the kinds of new technology to be tested in the city and the precise questions that the experiment is meant to answer.
But what we've just been saying makes me ask if even that is going too far.
It's hard to see how to begin with enough reality to generate action while leaving space for genuine doubt.
UNESCO: What specific proposals have you discussed?
NUMEROSO: Many.
Here are a few.
Not in any special order but just as I remember them.
Education: very largely without books, perhaps without literacy, even.
The paperless office.
No jobs.
Everything is to be produced automatically, without workers or managements, or else is to be made by hand by those who need it.
No cash, just credit cards, and a guaranteed unearned income.
At first all structures will be temporary — mobile homes and the like.
Public access to all information, personal files included, no copyrights, no privacy of information, public or private.
Each profession is given the task of translating its specialised services into a mixture of computer aids' and do-it-yourself.
Private cars and buses to be replaced by automated minicars and minibuses accessible by credit card, and free of accidents, congestion, and parking problems, being computer controlled.
Walking and cycling facilities to have top priority in city design.
Private ownership of space to be limited to the times when the persons concerned are actually present, each person's territory being a mobile entity in law.
Law-making, and law-changing, being a public responsibility to which everyone has to give a lot of time.
Referenda, by TV viewdata systems, every day.
Have I said enough to let you see what we  have in mind?
Obviously it's going to call for very different motivations, and ways of living, than those we are used to.
To discover those is, I imagine, the main question.
UNESCO: All this sounds like technology and Western culture carried to the extreme.
What about the poor countries?
UTOPIA: We propose that it begins, as you say, with the most advanced technologies we know, but with a new factor that changes the picture completely: negative growth, or rather planned economic decline.
The aim of this imaginary economy is gradually to approach the levels of income that are common in the majority of the world, a fraction of Western incomes now.
Why not try to close the gap from the top down?
That's the idea we'd most like to see tried.
Why not?
It's no more astonishing than was the growth of industrialisation in the first place.
The alternative technology people have in many cases shown the way.
NUMEROSO: You don't have to argue with us, Utopia.
I'm sure we agree.
But, where it's a proposal that seems to call for persuasion, shouldn't we be thinking of letting the inhabitants of the city decide for themselves?
I don't think I understand the politics of this experiment.
Who's in control?
At this point my story becomes the introductory scene of a fiction which could be continued.
Design as a socially significant activity
Clive Dilnot, Faculty of Art and Design, Preston Polytechnic, UK
In understanding design-society relationships it is crucial that we understand what we are talking about when we use the word "design" .
Too often the term is used not to denote a specific (designing) but rather to denote either or both, the results of that activity (designed products) or the problems which initiate design activity.
This paper seeks to uncover and resolve confusions which occur in the use of "design" as a term; to delineate the significance, philosophically, socially, politically, and so on, of the design activity (considered both as an "ideal" activity and in its empirical reality); and to outline some particular benefits of this in problems to do with understanding the social benefits of design, design evaluation, technological control, education and social futures.
The paper also seeks to show the importance of design in epistemological terms; how it provides a model of rationality which, properly developed, challenges one-dimensional rationalities.
Thus the social and political implications of design, it is suggested, are wider than is usually supposed.
Re-reading the paper which formed the background to this presentation, I am struck most of all by the difficulties there are in moving from a statement in critique — containing arguments about the weaknesses in our current models of design understanding, such as our failure to be able to define satisfactorily either design phenomena or design activity or to assert powerfully enough, and at the right levels, design's wider social significance — to positive statements; to being able to say this is the phenomena with which design is concerned, this is the nature of design activity, this, therefore, is the significance of design — epistemologically, socially, and practically.
Preamble
There are two points here.
First, clearly, this is not a problem unique to me.
It is a general problem within design studies.
But it has particular force when attempting to understand design-and-society relations.
For if, as has recently been persuasively argued, design practice should not become too involved in the search for general design principles, design theory, by its very nature, has no choice.
If the former involves drawing on a richness of tacit knowledge the latter is necessarily concerned with reversing this process, ie with making explicit the tacit richness of design activity.
So we come to the second point.
If we are to argue design's social significance or to model its social relations this must be based on our understanding, our explicit, sharable and imperfect understanding as to what "design" is and what design does.
Only then can we model "design-and-society" relations (beginning of course by replacing this wholly misleading formula…design, of course, is in society).
Note that we are not here trying to derive models for designing — or at least not in the first instance.
This task is prior to such work.
It defines, from a point "outside" designing, the context in which design operates and "lives" .
It tries to make evident, to say what in these complex relations remains unsaid and therefore unthought, in design practice as much as in design policy or social thinking.
But of course this in itself has implications for method.
Precisely because we are forced, in order to model these relations, into defining design activity as it takes place in its real context — that of the social — and do not attempt to abstract it, to isolate it from these relations, we find we build a model of designing that has surprising efficacy in application to questions of design method.
Questions of design-society relations then appear of major significance — not only for society or for questions of "design-and-society" but for design itself.
If we think about it this is hardly surprising.
The antithetical models of design's significance that we possess today, all of which contain implicitly or explicitly a view of "design-and-society" relations (for example the view that sees design as merely the activity of commodity shaping, or the view that sees design as the activity which alone allows us to organise consciously the meeting of material human needs — which "involve things or usable products" — in forms consonant with and conducive to particular kinds of social relations or ways of life…) contain also, naturally, a view of what design is.
The two are in internal relation to one another: views of design imply notions as to what design is socially and vice versa .
Debates as to the "nature of design" thus have social implications.
Equally revelations as to the form of design-society interactions have consequences for "pure" design theory and for design method.
In a context where design debate, narrowly conceived, seems to be meeting with little success in evaluating design's social import, the questions raised — is design the means whereby we can shape future socio-technological systems to create a richer and more emancipated life or simply the often impotent agent of techno-economic systems?— become a means to general design understanding.
The key to the latter now appears to be in understanding, both structurally and historically, the relations involved in what is misleadingly termed "design-and-society" .
Design and society
No statement in the whole of design is more peculiar than this one.
It is peculiar on the one hand because a moment's reflection reveals design as a human activity taking place within, and not without, human societies.
Yet on the other hand it is frighteningly indicative of our real position.
It models precisely the position of alienation vis-a-vis design and society felt  on the one hand by designers — who in general express profound unease at even thinking about the social sphere — and who embody this alienation in the very fabric of design practice (mass housing is the obvious example)— and on the other by society in general which remains both deeply suspicious of designers and their possible beneficial work and, paradoxically, deeply uncertain about objects — or, more precisely, about the significance of their form.
The most characteristic version of this alienation lies here in the responses we have both to objects in general and their forms in particular instances.
In relation to the former, as I indicated in the first paper, our capacity to invent commodity vocabulary is not paralleled by levels of commodity understanding.
The "World of Goods" , as Douglas and Isherwood have made clear, is still a world closed to our understanding above all in relation to the communicative function, the language functions, which goods perform.
Since communication through goods depends on our abilities to read form, and since designing is that activity which "gives" form to things,(cf Abel: design "lends concrete form to the cultural processes of human individuation and identity formation" ) it is scarcely surprising that, while we "know how" to read designed form, lack of "knowing that" about the workings of form (form as the mediation between technical and communicative [ie social]requirements) crucially inhibits the understanding of design in general and "design-and-society" relations in particular.
What is lost here is the sense of form as integral element, as the means, in fact, whereby a particular human need is met — ie is materially realised — in a way consonant at once with the levels of provision and "list of requirements" and with a certain way of life.
Forms embody and enable not only technical functions (utility) but "ways of life" .
The form in which a need is met (say, the need for shelter or the production of very basic goods or services) opens up some human possibilities and closes down others.
Forms do not then merely passively reflect or represent "ways of life" (though they do this too); crucially they enable or curtail forms of living (producing, reproducing).
 "Ways of life" then are not simply characterised by forms, rather, "ways of life" are structured by forms (of organisation, by material forms which themselves, "habitus" -like, structure activities…).
But design then is not socially peripheral.
Design is the activity which produces the form, which mediates the complex of inputs and shapes these into a form.
The ends of design activity are social and not (merely) technical: "the architect empathises with a people and a place in order to give form to that identity…" 
But supposing this sense of design is lost?… "what many feel, touch upon, but hardly articulate…" design"as a term which is a noun and a verb, and also one which denotes a form of representation, an activity, a practice, a product etc etc at one and the same time…ie design as a priori a social activity unable to be undertaken without having social implications.
In that case design loses its context.
In relation to our "design-and-society" problem, design, in rending itself from the social fabric and attempting to construct itself as an independent discipline — and having constructed its own pantheon of values and principles with only tangential relation to the social — becomes, quite literally, socially unintelligible.
Its values now those of a specialist activity, design severs the communicative link which formerly bound it to society.
These values and this separation of course react back on to design practice itself; after all practice models itself on conceptions of what, theoretically, it is.
In terms of knowledge of design then, knowledge which merely describes, attempts to objectify or to naturalise this kind of practice does so in asocial terms.
At the same time if design in both practice and theory cannot be "read" as belonging to the social, the latter turns its back on it.
Design's effective denial of a social formative or linguistic-representational function further isolates itself from the academies traditionally orientated towards understanding and valuing these.
In this situation neither the academy nor design itself can any longer be aware of design's actual social content (designed without explicit social formative function, such functions are "achieved despite design's comprehension" ).
But worse, at this point design can"no longer be aware of itself for to separate the social formative and communicative-representational functions is to reduce itself, to make its activity into a variation of technical activity, unimportant in itself, important only in so far as a problem can be solved through it, a product constructed.
Socially, at this point the significance of design as such is more or less lost: significance can only been seen in terms of problems solved or products produced.
But then design too disappears.
For design cannot be identified wholly with either "products" or "problems" .
As I discussed in the first paper, design has to be characterised in terms of activity.
It is design activity which gives designed products significance, which finds solutions to the problems.
In turn both solutions (products) and problems, and the activity itself receive their "value" socially.
Denial of the social reduces the felt value of design at the same time as activity is devalued.
Devaluing activity, assimilating it in analogous models (art, science, technology), design makes of itself models of its practice which deny design (in the sense we have been working towards here) both in process and in end.
We can best begin to sketch the positive characteristics of this activity by reversing the usual procedures.
As I hinted in the first paper, traditional design understanding has tried, in effect, to simplify design to make it conform to an already existent model of what a (scientific, technological, artistic) activity should look like.
Such approaches have always seen the complexity of design activity with its range of apparently contradictory impulses and antitheses; is the emphasis to be on questions of form or of function or on solving technical or aesthetic desires and needs?
Are we to consider it an activity in itself or as an instrumental activity significant only in terms of ends?
We should ask if it is product (end) or problem (origin) that should be seen as the generic base of what design is' — not as a challenge to construct a dialectical, interactionist model of design activity, which takes each of these moments seriously as a necessary moment or characteristic of "what design is" , but as an affront to rationalism.
The dialectic of apparent antitheses has been suppressed in favour of a one-dimensional model of what design is; depending on the format of precise models one of the antitheses has been subsumed or repressed under the aegis of the other.
Activity has been made to conform to rational pattern.
Rethinking "design" 
This simplification of what design is has also extended until very recently to pictures of the design activity itself.
Seeing the latter in one-dimensional terms, and characterising it as a weak version of the more prestigious intellectual analogues used (design as weak art or weak science), such models never explored design — cognitive activity from its own standpoint or in respect of its own efficacy.
The idea that design was a form of knowing in its own right — and one moreover significantly different from and possibly, in certain respects, superior to, the analogous "prestige" model — was never explored; indeed given the processes of false rationalism noted above, could never have been since the prerequisites of a truly rational model of design activity — comprehension of all of design's moments as a prelude to modelling what whole they constituted in interaction — were never realised.
The challenge now is to reverse these standpoints.
To read design first socially, second in its full complexity and richness (and, bearing in mind injunctions concerning the significance of the tacit dimension and tacit knowing in design, to try to incorporate these levels in this complex model), and third, as a cognitive-practice in its own right, with its own levels and spheres of operation both mental and praxiological, irreducible to metaphoric models.
If we now take the social as a "given" — bearing in mind everything we have said above in regard to this — then we can approach the second of these injunctions by modelling the "antitheses" of design activity as internal relations, aspects of a totality (design) which embraces, and theoretically transcends, any single pole of the matrix.
How can we consider this matrix?
Very crudely we can base it on those elements which albeit often apparently antithetical or contradictory as they seem to be, have figured more or less constantly in discussions on "what design is" .
Very roughly we can characterise perhaps four main axes to this debate.
Firstly, there is the tension between product and activity, between design as embodied in products (objects, buildings, systems) and design as an activity in its own right.
Secondly, the tension surrounding the question of "form" — the sense that what design is or does is embodied in form ie the material form of objects, yet also the sense that form, once considered as important is yet not enough, that design is "more than" a matter of merely forming things.
This is closely linked, possibly indivisibly, to the debate between form (aesthetics) and function.
Finally, there is the tension in the design process between the sense of design as a transformative activity, a positing activity, transcendent of the givens of a problem (in the sense of both breaking with context and with the form of the immediately perceived requirements — design as defining needs as well as solutions) and design as a posited activity, that which works from the given which deals with what is real not with what is merely planned or speculated or imagined.
If we approach these tensions from the perspective of assuming that these represent the dialectical poles, or at least some of them (for of course others could be discussed here had we the space: for example the tension between "knowing how" and "knowing that" in design activity) of a design activity which encompasses all of these in a vertical moment of synthesis, a synthesis that is counterposed horizontally (ie over time) by the changing movements of the activity itself (from product critique through to problem definition to cognitive modeling of potential solutions etc), a movement of understanding and practice which parallels in its sphere the circle of historical understanding and historical praxis (and just as the latter is the "way in which history itself moves" so the former is the "way praxis itself moves" ) so design can be seen as embodying that movement in its movement from or across actuality ie in its activity of transformation from one set of "givens" to another; in its movement from problem to product.
The total process is a double synthesis of moments, one the "vertical" , more or less unique to design, the other the "horizontal" composed of regular moments of cognition and practice.
Taken together we have a unity of knowing and doing, of "actuality" and "the human interest in self-perfection and fulfilment" : design, in this theoretical sense, as the model of human culture.
Perhaps the easiest way to begin to explain this is to consider design as a model in practice of human  culture in general.
Design models, in its transformative activity, both action and consciousness, both "work" (purposeful instrumental activity) and "speech" (all that is involved in communication from the attribution of meaning — both on things and ourselves, to systems of classification and symbolism, to modes of communication) and models these not merely theoretically but in reality, in form.
Bhaskar has defined "the ontological structure of human activity or praxis…as consisting in the transformation by efficient (intentional) agency of pre-given material (natural and social) causes" .
Design mirrors (represents and directly embodies) this transformative reality by uniting, in the vertical direction, in the moment "of designing, complex human abilities both cognitive and practical and in the horizontal (over time but in interaction with the vertical moment), the movement from critique through the various moments of problem resolution and definition to the realisation of the" solution"in practice (also cognitive-practical moments but of a different order).
This unity of abilities and moments moving between the theoretical and the practical within the context of transformation has special significance in terms of social ontology.
As the philosopher Gillian Rose has pointed out, "recognising our transformative or productive activity has a special claim as a mode of acknowledging actuality which transcends the dichotomies between theoretical and practical reason…transformative activity acknowledges actuality in the act and does not oppose act to non-act" .
As far as I can read her argument, it is precisely this which allows recognition of it to model our human position as suspended between, as she says at another point, unconditioned actor…and conditioned agent."
— ie transformative activity, above all design activity, allows and recognises actuality in its equation, understanding and transcending the usually antithetical worlds of the given (the posited) and the "would be" (the act of positing).
Because design necessarily sees this relation (albeit tacitly) then its thinking (whether it recognises it or not) has social import.
Design then, "cognitive-modeling" — "an action-based" form of knowledge "for thinking, reasoning and operating" which is not "tied to concrete-operational levels of thinking" but deals also with "formal operational thought and hypothetical-deductive reasoning" — returns these levels of thought to the concrete through the medium of form and the activity of forming.
The concept of forming should be seen as an extention of the notion of "cognitive modelIng" as developed by Archer et al.
Archer describes this as "imaging" — the ability "to conjure up in the mind's eye an image of something or system…rotate and transform it" …make shrewd judgements about its construction, practicability and worth".
But clearly designing involves more than this rather technical definition: we are talking about the ability to shape and unite, to bring together complexes of factors.
Consider for a minute the tenacity that the concept of "form" has had in design even amongst those most determined to eradicate the idea of "aesthetics" .
Clearly "form" even in its most denuded days had a necessary content for design.
That content too has always been felt to be linked to the aesthetic in some way — though again as of late, in theoretical studies this has not been examined.
But if we consider for example the kind of idea about "aesthetics" or aesthetic experience"held by Adorno we can begin to understand this persistence.
Adorno, says Susan Buck-Morss, argued that "aesthetic experience was in fact the more adequate form of cognition because in it subject and object, idea and nature, reason and sensual experience were interrelated without either pole getting the upper hand in short, it provided a structural model for" dialectical "," materialist "cognition" .
This is a long way from traditional ideas regarding good form".
But the latter were clearly hopelessly reductionist in relation to a concept such as this which at once opens up the possible significances of what was once merely seen as the aesthetic.
The connection between this and the concept of form as sketched much earlier in this paper-the notion of form as enabling ways of life, of form as a part of "processes of human individuation" — is contained within the concept.
The dialectic of subject and object (human, social and technical-economic factors) is part of the concept in both senses (it is absent only from current asocial concepts of what "form" or aesthetics are).
But what we have here is a model of cognitive experience which privileges synthesis as its active principle and whose particular cognitive ability is that of interrelating the interconnections between phenomena or "opposed" moments of experience.
Like this it is at once a moment of knowledge ( "to understand reality is to see and understand things in their connectedness and their interpretation, one to the other" ) and moment of praxis (synthesis) whose material embodiment is the process of modelling (forming: here both in terms of cognitive modelling, including the modeling of meaning and the extension of this modelling, with all its reciprocal interactions).
Modelling/forming in this sense models double patterns of interconnections: both that of relations between "objects" , and between minds (and of course, in the synthesised representation which is the process of "bringing to form" in design, the interaction between these two worlds).
Even given the briefest of sketches we can begin to glimpse the wider significances of design activity considered in this manner.
The cognitive-epistemic implication is clear.
Design as a complex, multi-dimensional activity achieves through forming at once a mode of knowing the world which is at the same time also a mode of acting in the world.
This acting-knowing unites the purposive-instrumental and communicative-symbolic impulses in praxis (in that it is unique).
This models, too, the complex interactive relation of subject and object privileging neither pole.
Discursively design unites two discursive worlds (that of technique — science, and that of communication — understanding) normally held apart in the alienated world.
In relation to, for example , technological systems, design posits a means of overcoming control problems since it posits a means of knowing-practice which incorporates the technical as a moment and which can itself thus internally incorporate social requirements (no other mode of knowledge practice can do this).
Politically this has clear significance.
Design becomes the means for ordering the socio-technical world in a manner compatible with both socio-cultural and technical-economic ends; the means for forming, literally, future society in a manner at once desired and yet internally dialectically related to actuality requirements.
Socially, design models as a practical transformative.
Practically, design becomes the means whereby we can change (transform) society in accordance simultaneously with what is desired and the reality principle.
It is proper to end this presentation by returning to the equation we began with.
That premised the understanding of design as a means to understanding design-and-society relations as a means to reconciling the rupture that was evident between design as is and its public position and design as felt, or intuited, or could be — or as was necessitated by the possible changes in social structure occurring, in accelerating form, in the new configurations of late capitalism.
Implicit in this argument, though not explored, was the idea that current models of design understanding, with all their weaknesses, were not accidental — that in fact they grew out of the present configuration.
That implied that a new social configuration may well give rise to new forms of designing…
Except that to say this like this negates some of the significance of what has been said earlier.
For the import of the "new" sense of design which I have hypothesised could be developed from these sketches is its interaction with social forces — literally its forming of them.
Design, which has had a poor record in not exercising choice, in not challenging what is "given" , in eschewing the social, is faced in these propositions with a "new" operative role.
If forming is social, forming organises the future.
Moreover, extrapolated outside design — into society, politics, education, living — design in this sense becomes the means by which more of us begin to determine and to form our own lives.
Design is, for example, the means by which we regain control of technological processes by assimilating their one dimensionality into the overarching and multi-dimensional (higher cover-set) model of design.
(Which is, if you think about it, precisely what the Lucas Aerospace shop-stewards have done in their Alternative Corporate Plan).
Design then is more than design.
Certainly more than Design (capitalised).
Probably more than design (verb; lowercase "d" ) in the sense that we understand at the moment; paradoxically, not only does design become the only possible means of saving the human species (and I mean this very seriously; I can think of no other approach which could enable us to transcend the dichotomies — between reason and emotion, technique and meaning, power of technical systems against impotence of ethical systems, and so on— built into our dominant culture) but it "finds itself" at just this moment; at this point the contradictions that run through present forms of design practice, contradictions which we can now read as the "distortions" of the holistic and embracing matrix of design, cease to exist.
Design then becomes truly social; and the social becomes a matter of what is designed and formed socially.
At that point the phrase design-and-society will finally become redundant.