

Benjamin Britten's Librettos
Peter Porter
Of the three elements which make up an opera — the music, the words and the drama — the third arises from the first two realised by the performance of the singing actors, with the collaboration of the musicians and within the ambience of the set and the costumes.
Criticism may devote itself to an actual performance; analysis, both musical and dramatic, can be done away from the theatre, by an examination of the score.
For both, the words must be considered.
One sort of examination, however, is almost impossible: consideration of the book of the opera as a text in its own right.
Opera librettos, as Hans Keller has written, should never be discussed away from the music they have helped to bring into existence.
There are some texts which break this rule — W. S. Gilbert's for the Savoy Operas and the books of Broadway Musicals, such as those by Lorenz Hart, Cole Porter and Ira  Gershwin .
Their lyrics stand up as poems, good light verse in their own right.
But opera, whether their texts are well-written in the conventional literary sense or not, have almost no value as plays, and their librettos make only a shadowy sense away from their music.
Consider Le Nozze di Figaro (The Marriage of Figaro).
Generations of music lovers have admired Lorenzo da Ponte's brilliant adaptation of Beaumarchais's original prose comedy, rejoicing in the skill with which the librettist has provided Mozart with a vehicle for his overwhelming genius, not least in those two miraculous finales, to Acts Two and Four, where formality of design goes hand in hand with the dramatic unfolding of the story, inspiring the composer to crate some of his most complex structures.
Yet the text of Figaro is conventional poetry, and, from the point of view of a theatregoer interested in Beaumarchais's ideas, not a patch on the play.
Thus the best libretto ever written for the best opera ever written is scarcely tolerable as reading matter.
Da Ponte's genius lies in his serving Mozart's genius.
What then can one proclaim about the book of an opera?
And how does a good libretto from a bad one?
The answer is in the music.
You can go so far as to say that any words which produce good music constitute a good libretto.
But the example of Handel's operas and Weber's Euryanthe give one pause.
The convention of the Handelian opera seria has corroded so that today we find it frigid entertainment, but was it ever a satisfactory dramatic form, with its succession of da capo arias, its wastelands of recitative, and its statuesque indifference to tension, beyond conspiracy and complication?
It produced concerts of fine music, and, sometimes as when Handel was drawn to "magic" subjects — his Ariosto operas, Alcina, Ariodante and Orlando — words of striking, if not truly dramatic, impact.
But it lacked the breath of life, which real and worldly characters give to musical drama.
Handel's Giulio Cesare (Julius Caesar) is dead in the way that Monteverdi's L'Incoronazione di Poppea (The Coronation of Poppea) is not, even though the Handel work offers a story as racy as Shaw's Caesar and Cleopatra.
The librettist's convention has spoiled it.
So we must change our definition to read — a good opera book is one which produces good dramatic music.
Perhaps this is what is wrong with Euryanthe.
Romantic attitudes were natural to writers and composers of the early 19th  century, but the distance between attitudinising in words based on a great dramatic notion (Der Freischutz) and hollow fustian (Euryanthe) is all-important.
After this preamable, the question is, where did Benjamin Britten, the latest if not the last of the great composers of opera in a line stretching over three and a half centuries, look for inspiration to invent his masterpieces?
What kind of librettos did he receive from his collaborators?
A composer is haunted by certain themes, subjects or moods, and he must look around for the stories or dramatic vehicles he needs to bring these themes to life as musical theatre.
By the time Britten began to write operas, at the start of the 1940s, the task was a formidable one.
The operatic tradition, never strong in England, had weakened everywhere.
It was especially out of favour with the rising avantgarde.
Mozart may have sorted through hundreds of librettos discontentedly and only produced his masterpieces after finding a poet able to construct the librettos he needed, but, in his apprentice years, he had set the standard texts of the professional theatre hacks.
Da Ponte was just a professional himself, though a highly superior one.
Rossini set the words of his theatre librettists happily and so, give or take a few personal quiddities, did the Italian stories, outline and the dictate the treatment, but he handed over the actual versification to Piave, Ghislanzoni, Boito and the rest.
Wagner and Berlioz went their own way and, significantly, wrote their own words.
Britten's contemporary, Michael Tippett, has constructed his own texts.
But the professional librettists — the so-called "poets" of the 18th-century court theatres, such as Metastasio, and those of the 19th century, epitomised by Felice Romani, have no equivalent today, outside Tin Pan Alley and Broadway.
Tippett turned down Auden as a possible collaborator.
It's a matter for conjecture whether he would have been willing to accept a real theatre wordsmith had one been available.
There is one shining example of a literary man willing, with however many fastidious reservations, to collaborate with a compose — Hugo von Hofmannsthal, whose series of librettos for Richard Strauss, from Elektra to Arabella, is the most distinguished collaboration of an established poet and a famous composer since Busenello wrote for Monteverdi.
A highly sophisticated and well-read composer such as Britten could be expected to look for his own Hofmannsthal.
Interestingly enough, Britten did so initially, but soon turned to quite other directions.
Britten's first librettist was W. H. Auden, later to become Hofmannsthal's successor as prime librettist of the age, with operatic books written, in collaboration with Chester Kallman, for Stravinsky (The Rake's Progress) and Hans Werner Henze (Elegy for Young lovers, the Bassarids).
Auden's influence on the young Britten was enormous: it shaped his whole attitude to the setting of words.
Britten is a vocal composer par excellence, and he learned, under Auden's powerful didactic spirit, much that was to bear fruit in his years as a mature artist.
Although this influence is too big a subject to be discussed here, one aspect of it is vital to any consideration of Britten's operas.
The operetta, Paul Bunyan, which Auden and Britten mounted in New York in 1941 was a bitterly disappointing experience for Britten.
Whether or not he was right in thinking that he had allowed his music to be led by and all but overwhelmed by Auden's words Paul Bunyan marked the end of his close collaboration with Auden.
Late in life, Britten thought better of his first operatic venture but, as the time, it made him determined to escape from Auden's artistic and personal domination.
Never again would Britten allow a   writer to be the more powerful partner in a musical collaboration.
All the operas on which his world reputation are based are entirely his in idea, inspiration, lay-out and dramatic emphasis.
His librettists whether poets, novelists, producers or scholars, tailored their books to his minutely worked-out requirements.
None, not even literary men of distinction in their own right, like E. M. Forster, Ronald Duncan and William Polmer, showed him the way or disputed his paramountcy.
Thus the qualities, including the faults and limitations of language and notion in some of the operas, are Britten's responsibility completely.
People showered unsought librettos on him all his life and he ignored them.
he may have taken up ideas for operas put to him by collaborators — Myfanwy Piper remembers that she first suggested the Henry James story.
The Turn of the Screw, as a suitable subject — but the signal to proceed came from him alone.
As much as Verdi, Britten is the originator of his own operatic texts.
The governing principle, therefor, in Britten's operas is the musico-dramatic thrust, and the words he set to bring the opera about are stepping-stones to the final product.
I think it is sensible to separate his many librettos into categories — not for the sake of ultimate classification, but because it helps to understand the nature of the finished works, in their full musical dress.
Britten's taste in opera and his forms are generally traditional, though this means nothing beyond a few observable lineaments.
it does not tell us how his music works.
After Bunyan, he is not a pioneer of operatic form until we come to the three Church Parables.
I state this knowing that, in practical terms, the foundation of the English opera Group and the composition of chamber operas of manageable proportions, such as The Rape of Lucretia, Albert herring and The Turn of the Screw, look pretty initiatory.
But it is not in the forces involved that I would locate the main divide in Britten's operas.
The real difference is observable in the breakdown of scenes and the manner in which Britten chooses to deploy the dramatic action.
The three Piper operas represent a different vision of musical dramaturgy to the rest of the Britten canon.
The Turn of the Screw, Owen Wingrave, and Death in Venice are cinematic in technique in the sense that they evolve by the quick promotion and melding of short scenes.
Each comes from a prose story or novella, and  concentrates on a sequence of sharply and economically presented emotional points, eschewing the larger structures of tension usually encountered in operas based on the dramatic convention of acts and scenes.
There is no real need for any of the Piper operas to be divided into acts, least of all Owen Wingrave, which was created for television.
Curiously, there are few parallels for this, a natural enough way of making an opera, when the librettist and composer are dealing with a narrative not already shaped into theatrical scenes.
Berg's Wozzeck is one forerunner, but Britten and Mrs Piper deserve the accolade of being unconscious innovators.
The two masterpieces of their collaboration.
The Turn of the Screw and Death in Venice, have a wonderful appropriateness of form to subject.
Each is a tightening or turning of the screw as, scene by scene, the action brings its denouement closer.
Brevity was always Britten's motto, as well as Verdi's.
Of these two operas, the one is a remarkable spiral set of variations on a theme, and the other, a sort of whirlpool of thematic reference and counter-reference.
Their style is right for obsessional subjects.
You feel that the music carries the words along on the back of its urge to secure release.
The innovation is not noticeable verbally.
Only the complete work turns up new ground.
But if the Piper operas and, in another way, the Church Parables, are special categories within Britten's chorus of operas — what about the rest of his output, which contains his better-known creations?
They are all "Act and Scene" operas — their librettos organised along familiar lines, those analogous to the partitioning of dramatic action usual on the non-musical stage, where soliloquy, dialogue, ensemble, and purely mimed material add up to a whole dramatic structure.
Certainly each inhabits its own world, and they all differ from each other.
The Rape of Lucretia, for instance, is encased within a Christian commentary provided by a male and female narrator.
A Midsummer Night's Dream is a brilliant biopsy of the play, where Britten's music miraculously replaces Shakespeare's poetry without damaging the original drama.
Even Billy Budd, which seems on the face of it the most orthodox — that is the most like the 19th-century Grand Opera — is unusual in having no part for a female voice, and Albert herring has elements of Gilbert and Sullivan in it, not least in the cunningly-written farcical libretto.
This leaves Gloriana and Peter Grimes, the subjects of this book, to be considered.
Gloriana is much less familiar than Grimes, and I shall approach it first.
Elsewhere contributors will deal with the circumstances of Gloriana's creation, and the unfavourable reception it had during the Coronation Festivities in 1953.
I intend to consider the libretto as Britten's realistic reaction to a story that was all too easy to rended as either full-blown Grand Opera or stagey High Camp.
Examples of the first sort were there to warn him before he began in Schiller's Mary stuart and Donizetti's relatively ineffective Maria Stuarda, plus dozens of other representations of Tudor history and the Virgin Queen in opera, novel and film.
Britten includes Sir Walter Raleigh as a character in Gloriana.
Raleigh, sung by a bass, is shown as dignified, even pompous, slightly resentful of the aspirations of younger courtiers such as Mountjoy and the Earl of Essex.
Britten invests him with a memorable sententiousness of utterance, something one might call proverbial if such a word could apply to melodic line.
His music stems from the same shaping hand as that which invented the Voice of God in Britten's second canticle Abraham and Isaac, composed just before Gloriana.
 "When head and heart are hot/ Then tongue and hand are wild: /So, Ma'am, it looks to me" .
Raleigh replies when the Queen asks him what he thinks of the dispute between Essex and Mountjoy, and the last line is set with a homely finality which reminds us  that, by the end of Gloriana's reign, Raleigh is no longer a young man, and that the historic Raleigh had a taste for literary homily, as in his poem The Lie".
Nothing could be further from costume drama or the spreading of cloaks over puddles.
Still, that first audience was not wrong in noticing something unusual in Gloriana.
It is an opera of the romance of truthfulness.
Britten and William Plomer, his librettist, must have known instinctively that an opera celebrating the most masterful sovereign in English history nevertheless could not offer a modern (even a Coronation) audience Good Queen Bess or Schiller's avenging spitfire.
It was the glory of the realm which could go into music: that and the triumphant regality of an old, vain woman.
They therefore devised no conventional love interest.
Essex loves the Queen since she is the embodiment of England.
With Lytton Strachey's Elizabeth and Essex as their source, they invented scenes which would open out the twin deltas of their story; Elizabeth the monarch and Elizabeth the woman.
The opera was to be half a triumphant progress of a great queen through history (and how appropriate that it should contain, in Act Two, a Royal Progress), and half a story of an old woman disappointed by a selfish man.
The two themes converge in the final act, when the Queen is faced with the warrant for Essex's execution.
Her hesitation is filled with pathos, but the opera's other vein of emotion dictates the sacrifice of an indulgence for the welfare of her country.
Plomer and Britten did not attempt any Verdian tug of love and duty, as will be found in Don Carlos.
Gloriana is a pageant opera, but it shows us the heartbreak behind the painted progress.
It is at an opposite pole to The Turn of the Screw, where every detail advances the tragedy.
Thus the last scene, with the Queen's death, and the recollection of the glories of her reign, is not irrelevant.
Essex was never more than the human relaxation of Elizabeth's supreme call to duty.
Her love was always for her people, and the quotations from her historic speeches (which are not set to music) represent her carefully-chosen communications to them.
Death, of course, lays its icy hand on kings, as on other men, and Elizabeth's remonstrance against Essex is proclaimed in the thunderous recapitulation of his lute song.
The opera was twinned in themes from the start, and it remains so, even after the one theme of individual love is sacrificed.
The text of Gloriana is finely literate, but it is not literature.
It would be exceeding its purposes if it were.
William Plomer, writer of some of the best light satires in modern English and a happily ironic novelist, is never tempted to bring his own genius forward at the expense of dramatic necessity.
A composer adds music to the basic shapes of language as a poet adds poetry to notions.
Therefore poetry on its own is out of place in a libretto.
Nevertheless, Plomer shows a fine ear for the dramatic exchanges of his story: his half-rhymes are as just as his formal pieces — songs, homilies and ballads.
The choral dances from the Norwich scene are often performed in concert and are widely admired.
Plomer's words for this formal masque are nicely dry and traditional: there is none of that damply effulgent poetry which is so damaging in Ronald Duncan's verse for The Rape of Lucretia.
Above all, Plomer merely touches on the Elizabethan cadence and diction.
His text hints at the periods and utterances of Gloriana's England, but it quite avoids the "half-timbered" .
The second lute song, Essex's own poem, does not stand out unduly.
The libretto is the true counterpart of Britten's music for the ball scene (Act Two, scene three), where period inflexions and cadences stop short of pastiche.
The scene of Essex's rebellion, in which the Earl never appears, has been judged unfavourably, especially the running commentary provided by the blind ballad-singer.I wonder how widely praised this scene would be if it had issued   from the hands of Brecht or one of his collaborators.
In general, the action in Plomer's drama is neither wilful nor shrinking.
It is just different from what it would be had Gloriana been intended as a Grand Opera in the A ida sense.
Instead, it is an opera about the genius of England, and about the vicissitudes, at the end of a long and glorious reign, of one of England's most loved and applauded worthies.
Perhaps the chorus of the English people, which its wide-arching melody and plangent harmonising, sums up the whole work.
As a piece of poetry, it seems a fairly conventional summoning of royal emblems.
Heard in the opera, it is tinged with love and sadness:
Peter Grimes is so famous it runs the risk of being taken for some sort of operatic norm.
It is, rather, a very singular opera, like no other.
That it made both Britten's reputation and, at one stroke, recreated opera in English, a lost cause since the days of Purcell, is today almost a hedge to our seeing it clearly.
For a start Grimes is peculiar in being derived from a poem, or a set of poems
George Crabbe's omnibus portrait of The Borough, a sort of demographic survey of Aldeburgh, on the Suffolk coast, at the beginning of the 19th century.
Britten happened upon an article about Crabbe, the most English of poets and the most local, by E.M.
Forster in The Listener, while homesick in California in 1941.
Armed with a commission for an opera from the Koussevitzky Foundation, Britten enlisted the aid of Montagu Slater in making an opera about his native demesne, the fishing villages of East Suffolk.
It is only rarely that places become the heroes of operas, yet such is the case of Peter Grimes.
The opera is first and foremost an evocation of genius loci, and subsequently a gallery of types and humours.
It stands directly in the line of great folk operas, such as Verdi's La Forza del Destino (The Force of Destiny) and Mussorgsky's Boris Godunov, and, like them, it makes a great play with the chorus as a   centre of passion.
I stress this folk opera strength in Grimes, because it is usually considered an example of the doom of the individual, faced by the oppression of society.
Although it is true that Grimes is seen by Crabbe and by Slater and Britten as an outsider figure, he is no typical tragic hero.
His fate, as shown by both poet and librettist, is almost foredoomed, and on his struggle they hang the themes of the harsh life of the fishing community, and the power of an indifferent Nature, moulding all men, conformists and rebels alike, to rituals of accommodation.
Almost everything in Peter Grimes is superbly realised by the music, except the character of Peter himself.
Yet the miracle of Britten's score is that this does not injure the effect of the whole work.
Our noses are simply pointed in other directions.
Montagu Slater worked from Crabbe's many detailed portraits of Aldeburgh's denizens to fashion his libretto.
There is a mass of couplets itemising the Vicar, the Curate, the Clubs and Social Meetings, Inns, Almshouses etc…
Here are found almost all the characters of the opera, including Auntie the publican and her ubiquitously recruited "nieces" , Ned Keene the quack apothecary, Mrs Sedley the East-Indiaman's widow, Ellen Orford the widowed school-teacher, Bob Boles the Methodist Lay-preacher, Swallow the local magistrate, bully and lawyer, and even Dr Crabbe (a nominal intrusion) the medico.
The heart of Crabbe's presentation of The Borough is the fisherman Peter Grimes, attaining in the midst of Crabbe's Parliamentary Blue Book couplets, a strangely "poete maudit" character.
As Crabbe describes him, Grimes begins as a brutal product of harsh circumstances.
But by the end of the poem, he has become a character of extra-terrestrial proportions, a romantic sufferer carrying on his shoulders the sins of society.
It was this romantic dimension which Britten set out to portray.
But when he and Slater came to devise the dramatic structure of the libretto, something different resulted.
The music Britten has given to Grimes is superb — obviously such pieces as "Now the Great Bear and the Pleiades" , his visionary monologue in the Pub scene, and his final exaltation of madness after the manhunt, are wonderful dramatic music by any standard — but nevertheless, Grimes's romanticism is at variance with the plot.
Such difficulty is compounded by the fact that Britten  wrote the part of Grimes with Peter Pears in mind.
Pears is probably the best singing actor I have ever seen and heard, but the range of his abilities does not extend to playing a brutal fisherman.
Pears as Captain Vere in Billy Budd, an equally tailor-XXXX made role, is utterly convincing.
I have seen him as Grimes many times and never without a sense of embarrassment that this finely sensitive singer should have been asked to adopt a vicious role alien to him.
Nor have other performances, those by Edgar Evans, Ronald Dowd and Jon Vickers, convinced me.
Mozart tailored his parts to his singers.
The musical personality of Grimes, devised for Pears, cannot be made to fit the character of the libretto.
In Crabbe's poem we are shown Peter deriding his dying father.
Grown-up in his own fisherman's kingdom, his cruelty brands him an emblematic villain.
Yet there is also a warped idealism:
The apprentice boys whom Grimes mistreats are attendant angels of his fallen state.
His violence towards them might even be deemed no more than a Satanic desire to get them used to the notion of reigning in Hell rather than serving in Heaven.
Grimes's misanthropy is a proper match for the Borough's small-minded respectability.
The Borough, willing enough to disparage and hunt down Grimes, cares little for the fate of his apprentices, though Crabbe is never as explicit as Slater is in the libretto.
There Balstrode, the retired sea-captain, says, "Something of the sort befits /Brats conceived outside the sheets" .
Crabbe asks rhetorically why no-one raised a hand to help Grimes's workhouse slaves, but comments that all they ever said on hearing of the children's misery was — Grimes is at his exercise".
This line becomes the key passage in the great scene in Act Two when, after church, the Borough is aroused to invade Grimes's hut.
The ruin of Grimes inspires some of Crabbe's greatest poetry, a real vision of despair, as the fisherman, fallen into madness, finds no consolation but the contemplation of Nature at its most implacable, drifting in his boat among the unlovely reeds, mudflats and backwaters of Aldeburgh and Slaughden Quay.
(These lines are quoted in Forster's article on page 16: "When tides were neap…
")
There is no real equivalent of this poetry in Britten's opera because his gaze is directed elsewhere.
Slater and Britten were writing an opera, and had to have more plot than Crabbe affords.
Slater did a marvellous job, and I think this should be asserted firmly, now that both he and Britten are dead, since the composer was given to accusing his collaborator, in later days, of penning many solecisms in the text of Peter Grimes.
The libretto is an extremely skilful composition of short lines, dotted with half rhymes, traditional sayings and vernacular turns of language.
It is neither quite verisimilitudinous, nor unnecessarily poetic: it accommodates all the many Borough characters without strain.
It is as though Crabbe's personal inspiration, which surrounds Grimes with a visionary nimbus, becomes one part of the opera, and the whole series of poems which make up The Borough become the rest of the opera.
Slater provided Britten with pen-portraits out of Crabbe which can never be forgotten once they are encountered.
The superb choruses, picking up as they do lines from various Crabbe poems, inherit the point-of-view of his editorial stoicism.
This is what Kipling called "England…on the anvil" , and the character of Peter Grimes, is the centre around which so much of this English genius revolves.
It is appropriate that the first great English opera of modern times should be so deeply English in tone, and should derive from the art which the English have always excelled at — poetry.
George Crabbe: The Poet and the Man
E.M.
Forster
To think of Crabbe is to think of England.
He never left our shores and he only once ventured to cross the border into Scotland.
He did not even go to London much, but lived in villages and small country towns.
He was a clergyman of the English Church.
His Christian name was that of our national saint.
Moreover, his father was also called George, and so was his grandfather, and he christened his eldest son George, and his grandson was called George also.
Five generations of George Crabbes!
Our particular George Crabbe was born (in the year 1755) at Aldeborough, on the coast of Suffolk.
It is a bleak little place; not beautiful.
It huddles round a flint-towered church and sprawls down to the North Sea — and what a wallop the sea makes as it pounds at the shingle."
Near by is a quay, at the side of an estuary, and here the scenery becomes melancholy and fiat; expanses of mud, saltish commons, the marsh-birds crying.
Crabbe heard that sound and saw that melancholy and they got into his verse.
He worked as an unhappy little boy on the quay, rolling barrels about and storing them in a warehouse, under orders from his father.
He hated it.
His mother had died: his father was cross.
Now and then he got hold of a book, or looked at some prints, or chatted with a local worthy, but it was a hard life and they were in narrow circumstances.
He grew up among poor people, and he has been called their poet.
But he did not like the poor.
When he started writing, it was the fashion to pretend that they were happy shepherds and shepherdesses, who were always dancing, or anyhow had hearts of gold.
But Crabbe knew the local almshouses and the hospital and the prison, and the sort of people who drift into them; he read, in the parish registers, the deaths of the unsuccessful, the marriages of the incompetent, and the births of the illegitimate.
Though he notes occasional heroism, his general verdict on the working classes is unfavourable.
And when he comes to the richer and more respectable inmates of the borough who can veil their defects behind money, he remains sardonic, and sees them as poor people who have not been found out.
He escaped from Aldeborough as soon as he could.
His fortunes improved, he won the patronage of Burke, took orders, married well, and ended his life in 1832 in a comfortable West Country parsonage.
He had done well for himself Yet he never escaped from Aldeborough in the spirit, and it was the making of him as a poet.
Even when he was writing of other things, there steals again and again into his verse the sea, the estuary, the fiat Suffolk coast, local meannesses, and an odour of brine and dirt — tempered occasionally with the scent of flowers.
We must remember Aldeborough when we read this rather odd poet, for he belongs to the grim little place, and through it to England.
And we must remember that though he is an Englishman, he is not a John Bull, and that though he is a clergyman, he is by no means an "old dear" .
His poems are easily described and read.
They are mostly stories in rhymed couplets, and their subject is local scenes or people.
One story will be about almshouses, another about the vicar, another about inns.
Peter Grimes, which inspires Britten's opera, had an actual original.
Another story — the charming Silford Hall tells of a happy visit which a little boy once paid to a country mansion, and how the kind housekeeper showed him round the picture gallery, and gave him a lovely dinner in the servants' hall; Crabbe had himself  been that humble little boy.
He is not brilliant or cultivated, witty or townified.
He is provincial; and I am using provincial as a word of high praise.
How good are these stories in verse?
Crabbe is a peculiar writer: some people like him, others don't, and find him dull and even unpleasant.
I like him and read him again and again; and his tartness, his acid humour, his honesty, his feeling for certain English types and certain kinds of English scenery do appeal to me very much.
On their account I excuse the absence in him of a warm heart, a vivid imagination, and a grand style: for he has none of those great gifts.
Here are some verses from Peter Grimes.
They show how Crabbe looks at scenery, and how subtly he links the scene with the soul of the observer.
The criminal Grimes is already suspected of murdering his apprentices, and no one will go fishing with him in his boat.
He rows out alone into the estuary, and waits there — waits for what?
How quiet this writing is: you might say how dreary.
Yet how sure is its touch; and how vivid that estuary near Aldeborough.
Not great poetry, by any means; but it convinces me that Crabbe and Peter Grimes and myself do stop beside an opening sluice, and that we are looking at an actual English tideway, and not at some vague, vast imaginary waterfall, which crashes from nowhere to nowhere.
Into this ordinariness, out of the muddy water, rise the spectres the murdered boys, led by Grimes's father; and Crabbe, hostile to his own father, leads up to a death-bed of insanity and terror.
He is not often so powerful.
My next quotation is a lighter one.
It comes from a malicious poem about the Vicar or.the Parish "whose constant care was no man to offend" .
He begins with a sympathetic description of Aldeborough church, and its lichen  encrusted tower, and now he turns, with less sympathy, to the church's recently deceased incumbent.
What a cruel account is this of the Vicar's one and only love affair!
He had been attracted to a young lady who lived with her mother; he called on them constantly, smiling all the time, but never saying what he was after; with the inevitable result that the damsel got tired of her tortoise", and gave her hand to a brisker suitor.
Thus ended the Vicar's sole excursion into the realm of passion.
he was always "cheerful and in season gay" , he gave the ladies presents of flowers from his garden with mottoes attached; he was fond of fishing, he organized charades, he valued friendship, but was not prepared to risk anything for it.
One thing did upset him, and that was innovation; if the Vicar discovered anything new, on either the theological or the social horizon, he grew hot it was the only time he did get hot.
The Vicar's fault is weakness, and the analysis and censure of weakness is a speciality of Crabbe's.
His characters postpone marriage until passion has died; perhaps this was his own case, and why he was so bitter about it.
Or they marry, and passion dies because they are too trivial to sustain it.
Or they drift into vice, and do even that too late, so that they are too old to relish the lustiness of sin.
Or like the Vicar they keep to the straight path because vice is more arduous than virtue.
To all of them, and to their weaknesses, Crabbe extends a little pity, a little contempt, a little cynicism, and a much larger portion of reproof.
The bitterness of his early experiences has eaten into his soul, and he does not love the human race, though he does not denounce it, and dare not despair of its ultimate redemption.
But we must get back to the Vicar, who is awaiting his final epitaph in some anxiety.
For the Vicar died as a child, who retains his innocence because he has never gained any experience.
These two poems, Peter Grimes and The Vicar, represent the tragic and the satirical side of Crabbe.
He is never romantic.
Charming at first sight is this picture of the warm-blooded sailor who sets out to win a girl because he has been told he is beneath her.
But the chase ends in squalor.
The sailor dies in battle, the girl is disowned of her father, the Parish Clerk enters another bastard in the Register.
Melancholy mists invade the scene.
The warm blooded, like the wicked, and like the prudent, have failed.
Crabbe's personality is definitely unattractive.
For this his upbringing and his epoch were partly responsible; he was not quite the gentleman, which he regretted, and Burns had not yet exempted literary men from this particular form of remorse.
And he suffered from moral gaucherie also: he disapproved, he reproved.
Wherever he looked, he saw human beings taking the wrong turning.
This advantaged his art.
Disapproval is all too common in the pulpit, but it is rare in poetry, and its presence gives his work a curious flavour, subtle yet tart, which will always attract connoisseurs.
We take a bite from an unusual fruit.
We come away neither nourished nor ravished, yet aware of a new experience, which we can repeat at will.
Were Crabbe insincere, we should not return, but disapproval is as genuine in his hand as indignation in Carlyle's, and, like Carlyle, he never hesitates to turn his weapon against himself.
An unusual atmosphere results: it is, so to speak, sub-XXXX Christian: there is an implication throughout of positive ideals, such as self-sacrifice and asceticism, but they are rarely pressed; only occasionally does the narrator let himself testify.
As a rule, he prefers to shake his finger at men as they move by wrong paths from the cradle to the grave, and to remind himself with a frown that he, too, is human — a frown that is almost a sigh:
A worm with an immortal soul no doubt, but he never stresses this, for his muse, like his church, discouraged enthusiasm.
Crabbe is not one of our great poets.
But he is unusual, he is straight, and he is entirely of England.
Aldeborough stamped him for ever.
His life was written by the George Crabbe who was his son; modest, truthful, and sensitive, it is one of the best biographies in our language.
[Reprinted, with alterations and additions, from The Listener for May 29,1941, in the Sadler's Wells Opera Book about Peter Grimes, 1945.]
A Commentary on the Music
Stephen Walsh
Like most works that are felt to mark some kind of watershed in the history of music, Peter Grimes has been heavily probed for, among other things, debts to and possible borrowings from the works of other composers.
But the initial impression of that first-night audience in June 1945, a month after the end of the war in Europe, seems to have been that the music was above all something new, a fresh beginning, or, for those who disliked it (a fair number), a regrettable break with the English tradition.
One can reasonably say that British opera-goers in 1945 knew a lot fewer works than their modern counterparts and knew them, by and large, in less good and faithful performances.
Moreover, stage performances of opera had been a rarity during the war.
So one can well imagine that Grimes blew into Sadler's Wells like an Aldeburgh gale, changing the coastline, breaking down bridges, and generally modifying the landscape by its sheer force and energy.
The fact that it was profoundly a work of synthesis was obviously much less important at first, and may even seem not very important now, as one settles down to enjoy it for the first or umpteenth time.
In fact it was already a quality of Britten's music before Grimes that it said new things with material which, on closer inspection, often turned out to be surprisingly familiar and straightforward.
One has only to think of the simple arpeggios and ostinatos based on triads in Les Illuminations (1939), or the seemingly effortless, tuneful setting of well-XXXX known poetry in the Serenade (1943).
The same sort of thing is true of Grimes on practically every level.
The freshness and novelty of the musical language can gradually be heard as a brilliant, prismatic treatment of "old-fashioned" tonal devices refracted through two or three prevailing modal scales.
Or take the word-setting and the overall flow of the dramaturgy.
Their apparent naturalism, which perturbed early audiences who thought of opera either as foreign and artificial or as translated and doubly artificial, is more truly a clever new stylisation of conventional operatic procedures like recitative, aria, rhyming couplets, verse forms, linguistic conceits, and so forth.
The musical form itself, notwithstanding its almost televisual "realism" of pace, is contrived, in the best sense.
In an introduction to the Sadler's Wells Opera Book on Peter Grimes Britten mentioned his adoption of the "classical practice of separate numbers" and his rejection of "the Wagnerian theory of" permanent melody".
Neither point is as obvious on hearing as one might expect.
With a couple of exceptions, the separate numbers' are actually inseparable from their context while, on the other hand, Britten does use Wagnerian leitmotifs as part of a rather more generalised system of motivic transformations.
And the purpose of these transformations, it transpires, is to mediate between the necessity for the plot and characters to develop, and a purely musical need for form in the classical sense.
Since these points are clearly illustrated by the Prologue, it might be as well to launch our discussion of the score, without more preamble, at the start of the work.
The ingredients of this court scene are typical of Britten's particular kind of naturalism.
For one thing, nearly all the characters in the drama are introduced to us.
But while it seems at first quite normal that this should  happen at an inquest involving the opera's central character one soon notices that the process is in fact highly artificial, like the narrations which open several of Britten's later operas, designed in this instance to have the dramatis personae stand up and be recognised but in a context which fits the story.
None of these figures actually gives evidence, and even musically they are practically ignored.
Instead the music concentrates on three characters and the thematic contrasts they suggest: the lawyer Swallow, Grimes himself, and the chorus as a kind of Mussorgskian entity, representing the Borough and popular feeling on both sides of the "Grimes question" .
The very opening theme [1], in a matter-of-fact but distinctly pompous B flat major, is Swallow's own motif, while Grimes is portrayed not by a theme but, as we shall see, by a texture.
The chorus appears in two musical guises: first, a little chattering woodwind semiquaver figure [2]which greets the more startling of Grimes's revelations and Swallow's jokes ( "You mean, you threw the fish overboard?" ); secondly, a series of choruses in the manner of Bach's Passions accompanied by this figure.
These various ideas are joined by what amounts to recitative, with speech patterns in the vocal parts, extended passages of monotone (a device Britten uses a lot in Grimes), and very light orchestral accompaniment including a number of silent bars.
However, there is nothing "free" about this recitative.
The whole scene is composed in a strict 4/4 time broken only by two or three pauses, and every nuance of verbal rhythm, as well as pitch, is notated.
This technique enables Britten to vary, in a controlled compositional way, the essential squareness and down-to-earthness appropriate to a court of law.
When Grimes steps into the witness box, the veiled string texture and weary cross-rhythms in the bass tell us before he has opened his mouth that here is a man who will not fit into conventional social patterns.
More prosaically, the conversational exchanges which are such a convincing aspect of the scene are achieved simply by shifting the word stress in relation to the constant pulse.
[music]There is a corollary to this in the curious offset notes and phrases of the vocal melody which lend a kind of speech colour to the basically simple tonal language, while giving mobility to the harmony (a change of direction in an unaccompanied vocal figure may lead unceremoniously to a change of key).
Thus Britten contrives a flexible yet controlled naturalism of detail.
But what is perhaps more surprising about this scene, which has about it so much of the "well-made play" , is that its form is a purely musical conception, with a closed key structure, a carefully placed recapitulation, balanced episodes and a definite coda and conclusion.
Again this is a standard procedure throughout Grimes.
These closed, self-XXXX contained forms are hardly the "classical practice of separate numbers" , though they certainly embrace elements of that practice.
They are more like (while much clearer than) the formal method used by Berg In Wozzeck and Lulu, both of which use concealed forms of various kinds to brace the free symphonic flow of the music-drama.
Not that Britten's   Prologue is in "sonata-form" or any other nominal academic form (though it does bear some passing resemblance to the first movement of Sibelius's Third Symphony, which is in sonata-form).
Rather, its form is sui generis, tailored to the needs of the drama, but so that its musical lay-out has a pattern and logic of its own which at once support and channel the energy of the story.
At this early stage, the impact of the idea is modest.
But later on it will assume much greater significance as a vehicle for the dramatic thrust of the music.
It might be helpful at this point to consider how the opera as a whole works along comparable lines.
Leaving aside the Prologue and the short Un-accompanied duet for Peter and Ellen which links it to the first act proper, each of the three acts is prefaced by an orchestral "interlude" , and there are three more of these interludes separating the scenes within the acts.
Hans Keller pointed out many years ago that, while the three preludial "interludes" are broadly speaking of a generic nature, setting the scene and mood for when the curtain rises, the three mid-act interludes have more specifically psychological connotations, telling us something about the state of the dramatic action and particularly about Grimes himself.
As one would expect, if this analysis is correct, the role of these central interludes is also structurally decisive.
The interludes at the start of each act determine the character of the music for a time (except for Interlude V, which is abruptly curtailed by the Barn Dance music of Act Three scene one, lending thereafter only a few sinister flecks of moonlight).
But they soon fade into the background, leaving behind only thematic reminiscences which are picked up and swiftly developed in a manner suitable to the changing dramatic context.
In each case this process culminates, both musically and dramatically, in the central interlude, and these central interludes are so powerful and momentous that the scenes which follow can only be fitted, so to speak, into their musical reverberations.
One could almost say that the second scenes really belong to the interludes which precede them though in the final act Britten adds to  Grimes's last monologue a reprise of the first interlude, whose function is to close out the musical form of the opera as a whole.
Though it looks painfully obvious described so baldly, this scheme is wonderfully successful in dramatising the way in which life gradually closes in on Peter, driving him inexorably to madness and suicide.
In the first half of each act we have a seascape followed by a variety of genre scenes interspersed with conversations, arguments, quarrels.
Each time the tension starts building up round Grimes, either in his person or in his absence, and eventually the mood erupts in an orchestral interlude descriptive in some way of the horror and introspection of Grimes's existence and leading to a scene in which that existence is laid bare in monologue.
But in the first of these scenes, Act One scene two, the intensity is not yet, of course, such that the monologue occupies the entire dramatic space.
Instead it increases from act to act.
So there is a very strong sense, produced by both the narrative and the musical design, that the mad-scene (hallowed operatic device that it is) is a truthful climax of everything that has preceded it.
The final "Dawn" sequence then has the effect both of a reprise, closing the musical form, and of an ironic comment on the human tragedy which, when it is taken out of the public arena into the privacy of Grimes's mind, actually passes out of the consciousness and memory of those who, only a few hours before, have been clamouring loudest for its execution.
Not the least remarkable thing about Peter Grimes, bearing in mind Britten's theatrical inexperience at the time, is his equal assurance in handling two quite different basic types of music-XXXX drama: the genre crowd-scene on the one hand, and, on the other, the monologue.
With the genre scenes, part of the secret lies again in the way natural-sounding dialogue is skilfully caught up into a formal musical structure.
Britten combines this with a highly resourceful method of linking and transforming themes, so that ideas which are at first simply pictorial take on a psychological meaning in the story, or vice versa.
There is a fine example of this between the Peter/Ellen duet at the end of the Prologue and the well-known "Dawn" Interlude (I) into which it leads.
After the Prologue's plain B flat close, Peter slides up a semitone, B flat to C flat, on the words "the truth" , raising a question (both musical and verbal) which is then twisted, in the course of the duet, into a doubt between Ellen's optimistic E major and Peter's pessimistic F minor (a semitone above, but with the same third degree, G sharp/A flat).
The same interval, extended by an octave into a minor ninth, later expresses the couple's quest for a peace beyond the agony of the present ( "Your voice out of the pain…" )
[music]But as this music fades into the Interlude the E/F figure is suddenly no more than a detail in the seascape, a gull's cry perhaps or a slight turbulence on the water [3].
This particular idea, unpromising though it may seem when reduced to words, is put by Britten to astonishingly fruitful use in the course of the opera.
Melodramatic examples, like Peter's clawing up to F sharp on the phrase "We shall be free" while the chorus chants relentlessly on F natural (Act Two scene one), or the foghorn's mindless E flat against D on "the tide will turn" in the last scene, hardly need pointing out to the attentive listener.
Nor perhaps need one dwell on the powerful thematic use of the expanded, minor-ninth version of the idea, especially as it expresses Grimes's insatiable yearning for "haven" , for acceptance and respect — a yearning so intimately bound up with his personal tragedy because, to most of us, these things seem comparatively within reach (whether we desire them or not) but are patently and without qualification beyond Peter's grasp:[8,10,17].
More subtle is the way the minor second also becomes symbolic of the Storm, again starting as a purely graphic detail.
There is no mistaking the physical menace in the soft but grinding discord which announces Balstrode's "Look, the storm cone" , or the thrill of fear in his fugue theme "Now the flood tide" [7], with its opening minor second, which is picked up by the entire chorus and worked into one of those overwhelming Verdian ensembles which climax the first scene of each act.
But in the ensuing duet for Balstrode and Grimes, this motif gets so entangled with Grimes's personal strife and obstinate nature that by the time the "Storm" interlude itself begins (with a variant of the fugue subject) we may genuinely wonder whether the hurricane is not as much an inward as an outward affair.
The storm theme [11]hurls the minor second at us on various levels, but most powerfully on the root note E flat, suggesting the Phrygian mode (i.e. E to E on the white notes of the piano, transposed down a semitone).
And this dark Phrygian colouring is one of the most prominent melodic and harmonic effects in the whole opera.
The Storm, as already noted, is the first of those central interludes which explode out of the tension of the preceding scenes and reach forward to control the scenes which follow.
Once again Britten keeps his grip on the music with the help of a formal scheme, this time a rondo with episodes the third of which alludes directly to Grimes by quoting the two distinct themes of his phrase, "What harbour shelters peace, away from tidal waves, away from storms" [10], followed by a pointed combination of his next theme, "With her there'll be no quarrels" , with one of the most agitated of the semitonal storm motifs (almost the next time Peter and Ellen meet on stage they do quarrel).
As the curtain rises on the interior of The Boar (Act One, scene two) we embark on the first of four scenes in which Britten frames a rapidly foward-moving dramatic action with elements of an abstract and self-generating musical form.
In the present case the effect is helped by the realistic context, since the storm is still raging outside and whenever the door is opened to let in a new character the form-generating music rushes in as well in the shape of the hurricane.
Although we only hear fragments of the storm, the music has such presence, and its elements are so cunningly chosen, that we can quite well imagine that the rondo form of the interlude is itself continuing outside in the darkness.
In the next scene and in the Barn Dance scene of the last act Britten's handling of intermittently-heard offstage music is much more in the well-tried tradition of Romantic opera.
But here there is no offstage band.
What Britten has done, in effect, is to create in his audience's minds another dimension in which an unseen but imagined space is felt to be lull of unheard but imagined music.
Of course there are precedents for this, too, in 19th-century opera (for example, the last act of Rigoletto).
But this scene of Peter Grimes seems to me uniquely precise in its blend of realistic, formal and psychological impact.
At the climax, when Grimes himself comes in to fetch his new apprentice, the formal and the psychological again move into phase with his "Great Bear" monologue [14]introduced by a minor version (over the original "storm" discord) of his yearning "What harbour shelters peace" tune.
In the stretches of dialogue which, like old-fashioned recitative, carry the action forward between the more formal gestures, Britten adopts a different technique from the very strict writing of the previous two scenes.
Here he uses free secco-type recitative over a series of tense percussion rolls.
Again the balance is cleverly held between plain natural speech contours and rhythms on the one hand, and more artificial, almost sing-song, figures on the other — figures designed to tell us something more concentrated about the character.
Compare Auntie's "Him and his women" (a fine, natural contour) with her That is the sort of weak politeness' just afterwards, where the thought is dwelt on in a manner quite foreign to real life; or the inane canonic whining of the Nieces (not perhaps Britten's most successful creations) with Balstrode's "D'you think we should stop our storm for such as you?" 
An unexpected source for this kind of writing, as for the more schematic dialogue in the first scene of the act, has been suggested in Gershwin's Porgy and Bess, an idea which has the virtue of postulating a rare English-language model for lifelike conversational recitative.
It seems to be confirmed, moreover, by the resemblance between the meccanico ostinato figure at Ellen's entrance after the "Old Joe" round (originally the"away from tidal waves' motif) and the crapshooting ostinato in Act One of Porgy, among other similarities of detail.
Britten had heard Gershwin's opera in America, and his own solitary previous stage work, Paul Bunyan, evidently owes still more than Grimes to the American show tradition.
The next three scenes all use form-building procedures in some way comparable to the one in the Boar scene, though (for reasons suggested earlier) only one of them, Act Two scene two, does it so systematically and   with such power.
In the other two scenes, what is involved is not much more than a relatively conventional dramatic mechanism: in the Sunday Morning scene (Act Two, scene one) the music in church provides a kind of running commentary to the developing quarrel between Ellen and Peter (in the manner of countless 19th-century operas from Faust to Werther), while the barn dance of Act Three similarly updates an ironic tradition stretching at least from The Marriage of Figaro to Wozzeck.
If anything Britten outdoes his models by the pointedness of his treatment, in which irony is constantly heightened into a more specific symbolism.
In the church scene the words of the Anglican matins are made to allude heavily to Grimes's troubles at almost every point: "we have erred and strayed from thy ways" just as Ellen notices the tear in the apprentice's coat; "0 Lord open Thou our lips" with Ellen's "John, what are you trying to hide?" ; and finally "Amen" as answer to Ellen's "We've failed" , which Peter takes up literally in his most crucial phrase "So be it, and God have mercy upon me!" [18].
(As Philip Brett has now shown, this was originally even more loaded, with "He descended into Hell" answered by Peter's "To Hell then, and God have mercy upon me" .
Britten took this out, however, although he kept the obvious reference to it in Grimes's last soliloquy, "To Hell with all your mercy" .)
The barn dance has, at first, only the more general ironic meaning of, for instance , the cafe music in Wozzeck (which it faintly resembles).
Again the idea is taken farther: we hear a whole suite of dances, badly harmonised (perhaps!).
And at the climax of the scene Britten reverts with extraordinary dramatic effect to the Landler music of earlier on [23]for no obvious reason, beyond the sheer Mahlerian power of the musical idea.
Of all the scenes in Peter Grimes this is the one which most reminds one of Britten's
enthusiasm for the music of the post-Romantic Viennese tradition.
The links with the later scenes in Wozzeck are palpable.
The situations of the two antiheroes are similar: both men rejected by a hypocritical social order and about to meet an unnoticed death by water.Just as, in his murder scene, Berg heightens the tension by building his music round a single repeated note (B), so here Britten touches on the same procedure, using a held F sharp for the momentous dialogue between Ellen and Balstrode (which also partly explains the curiously inert harmonies of Ellen's song "Embroidery in childhood" ).
The E flat foghorn in the mad scene is another example.
One of the "movements" in the suite which makes up the first act of Wozzeck is, it may be recalled, a passacaglia, that is, a set of variations on a ground bass.
It would be much too tendentious to suggest an influence on Britten in this case.
Berg's use of a twelve-note theme and a "mechanical" form parodies the pseudo-XXXX scientific obsessions of the Doctor in his dietary experiments on Wozzeck a mere episode in the poor soldier's decline.
Britten, by contrast, makes his Passacaglia the centrepiece of his drama, and uses the form to take us to the heart of Grimes's tragedy.
As his mind wanders guiltily over the past and longingly towards a future which even he now realises can never be, the Passacaglia motif anchors him more and more inescapably in the present, with the posse of Borough vigilantes coming nearer and nearer.
The ground-theme itself [21]is, of course, Grimes's "God have mercy upon me" from the end of his argument with Ellen [18](there are earlier foreshadowings of the theme, too, which need not concern us here).
But in case we should be so facile as to see  this as a Grimes leitmotif in the Wagnerian sense explicitly rejected by Britten, we must notice the somewhat complex history of the theme after its first full appearance, as well as the fact that almost every theme in the opera (apart from the non-recurring tunes of some, but not all, of the individual songs) could be called a "Grimes" leitmotif, which would leave us where we began.
Certainly all the explicit references to the theme are in direct "Grimes" contexts: where he is present or being talked about.
But that is virtually the whole opera anyway.
What sets this theme apart is the way Britten harps on it once it has emerged and uses it, in a number of variants, to build up the pressure on Grimes until he starts to break under the strain.
From the moment that Grimes renounces salvation (in everything but his actual words) the theme pursues him as relentlessly as ever the Furies pursued Orestes.
It dominates the "Grimes is at his exercise" ensemble and chorus, and, in inversion, the ensemble which follows ( "whoever's guilty gets the rap" ).
It gives Boles his "She helped him in his cruel games" and the Borough its "Speak out in the name of the Lord" , one of those superb unison ejaculations which will always send shivers down the spine of anyone who hates and fears mob agreement on any subject whatever.
It even invades "We planned that their lives" , which starts innocently enough.
It only does not colour the beautiful "gutter" quartet [20], where Grimes is not mentioned — a temporary release which is as happy dramatically as it is musically.
The Passacaglia Interlude (IV) itself is unusual in that the ground [21]and the variations do not coincide — there are 39 statements of the ground and ten variations, or nine if one counts the viola solo [2 I]as a theme (for the variations) rather than a variation (on the ground), though it is certainly that as well.
In fact all the variations are dominated by the intervals of the ground, and what is astonishing, this being so, is the variety of texture and above all the freedom of rhythm Britten achieves in a form once thought rigid and constricting.
The secret lies in the rhythmic and harmonic independence of the ground from the variations, and of both from the nominal 4/4 time in which the music is notated, though Britten further complicates this by making phrase-groupings of the variations irregular.
It is a lucid symbol of Grimes's flailing efforts to free himself from reality.
These continue, needless to say, in the scene which follows the rise of the curtain, where Grimes's behaviour once more leads directly to the death of his apprentice.
As his mind rambles from the boy to the jersey to Ellen (who knitted it), to the sea and the Borough (via the fish Grimes is going to get rich by catching), back to Ellen and the future life they will never lead because Grimes cannot escape his past — as his mind rambles in this way, so the music probes our sympathies by constant allusion back to the variations in the interlude.
Some of them now take on graphic meanings which, naturally, they did not have before.
The eighth variation, for instance, with its intertwining triplet quavers, now goes with Ellen embroidering, and the third variation depicts the boy weeping.
Others merely maintain the general atmosphere of menace and despair, while giving shape to a scene which could otherwise so easily have become itself rambling and melodramatic.
Indeed it is a feature of this scene that the tension is kept up to the very last pizzicato, and of course it is no accident that Britten, when he made the concert version of the fourth interlude, had to jump to the last two pages of the act to get his conclusion.
Even in the opera the Passacaglia ends not when the curtain goes up but when it comes down.
Like the Boar scene, the scene in the hut includes farther-reaching reminiscence, in the big chunk of "They listen to money" from Act One scene   one [9].
But the main role of reminiscence in Grimes is reserved for the final interlude and the monologue which follows it.
In a sense, just as out and out dementia is less interesting than neurosis and eccentricity, so the music of these episodes, with their rather obvious distortions and wrong attributions of earlier themes, is less gripping than the Passacaglia, where Grimes was still somewhat in control of his faculties.
The scene is nevertheless necessary and, if well sung and acted, very moving.
One of the reasons for its effect is the astoundingly sensitive word-setting.
The whole scene demonstrates admirably Britten's approach to words and his understanding of how they can be made vehicles, both for meanings which go beyond their own familiar significations, and for a special kind of music which comes, by some alchemy, from the combination of phonemes and notes.
Britten himself put this well, if guardedly, when he wrote (in the 1945 Sadler's Wells Opera Book) that "good recitative should transform the natural intonations and rhythms of everyday speech into memorable musical phrases (as with Purcell)." 
In fact one of the things Peter Grimes shows is that, for a composer of Britten's artistry, there is no clear boundary between the "natural" speech patterns of recitative and the artificial patterns of what he called "more stylised music" .
Britten discovered early that the very act of setting words to music involves stylisation.
In Grimes he also showed that the same is true of the act of setting drama to music.
Peter Grimes
An opera in Three Acts and the Prologue derived from the poem of George Crabbe
Words by Montagu Slater
Music by Benjamin Britten
For the Koussevitzky Music Foundation dedicated to the memory of Natalie Koussevitzky
Peter Grimes was first performed at Sadler's Wells, London, on June 7, 1945.
It was first performed in the USA at the 1946 Berkshire Festival.
This libretto is based on the revised version published in 1961 but there were many phrases which had been altered when set to music, and the final text has been preferred here.
Punctuation, spelling and the layout of ensembles have also been systematised according to what was set to music.
The stage directions are, however, those in the libretto and are quite substantially different from the more extensive ones in the score.
The form of the libretto is a four-beat line with half rhythms which, according to Montagu Slater, seemed "appropriate for the quick conversational style of the recitatives" .
The prologue (apart from the chorus) is written in prose.
 "Peter Grimes" and "Gloriana" 
Joan Cross CBE and Sir Peter Pears CBE in conversation with John Evans
JOAN CROSS can be said to have had two distinguished performing careers: pre-war and post-war.
Though this was perhaps not unique among artists of her generation, whose careers were interrupted by war service, very few chose to rechannel their talents in the service of new music as she was to do in her close association with Benjamin Britten as a founder artist of the English Opera Group and the Aldeburgh Festival.
She joined the Old Vic Company (which later was to become the Sadler's Wells Opera) in the 1923-4 season as a member of the chorus.
Gifted with a touchingly beautiful voice of the lyrico-XXXX spinto variety (with that quality described by Italians as morbidezza) she became the leading soprano of the company, singing a wide variety of roles, for instance in The Marriage of Figaro, La Traviata, Tannhauser, Lohengrin, The Valkyrie, Carmen, Otello and Der Rosenkavalier.
During the war she toured initially with a small company of Sadler's Wells artists all over the country and then helped to keep the company alive by undertaking its management at a time when its very existence was threatened.
She sang very seldom during these years — an occasional Butterfly or Violetta and at the end of the war a superb Fiordiligi in Cosi fan tutte — and considered her repertory career to have been brought to an early end.
In 1945, in the closing months of the war in Europe, she convinced the Administrators of the Old Vic and Sadler's Wells that it would be altogether admirable to reopen the theatre in Roseberry Avenue with the world premiere of Benjamin Britten's first opera, Peter Grimes.
At Britten's insistence she sang the role of Ellen Orford in that premiere, which proved to be the watershed of her post-war career with the English Opera Group.
Britten in Albert Herring, and Mrs Grose in The Turn of the Screw especially for her, and in June 1953 she created the title role in Britten's Coronation opera, Gloriana, in a gala at the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden.
During this period she also founded and directed the National School of Opera at Morley College.
She now lives in Suffolk and continues her association with the Britten legacy as a guest teacher at the Britten-Pears School for Advanced Musical Studies at Snape Maltings.
PETER PEARS began his lifelong association with Benjamin Britten in 1937, when he and the composer first gave recitals together.
After a three-year period in North America, Britten and Pears returned to the UK in 1942 at the height of the Second World War.
Both were convinced pacifists and appeared before a Tribunal as committed conscientious objectors and were exempted from military service.
Pears joined Sadler's Wells Opera in 1943, singing leading roles in The Magic Flute, Rigoletto, The Bartered Bride, La Traviata, The Barber of Seville and Cosi fan tutte during the war, and creating the title role in the premiere of Peter Grimes at Sadler's Wells on June 7, 1945.
Thereafter his close relationship with Britten proved a powerful source of inspiration for the composer; a vast quantity of music — including thirteen operatic roles (from Grimes to Gustav von Aschenbach in Death in Venice (1973)), song-cycles (with piano and with orchestra), five canticles and solo  parts in major choral works such at St Nicolas (1948), Spring Symphony (1949) and War Requiem (1961) was composed specifically for Pears.
In 1953 he created the role of the Earl of Essex in Gloriana.
He was a founder artist of the English Opera Group in 1947, a founder Artistic Director (with Britten and Eric Crozier) of the Aldeburgh Festival in 1948 and Founder-Director of the Britten-Pears School for Advanced Musical Studies in 1972.
I interviewed Miss Cross and Sir Peter at the Red House in Aldeburgh, Sir Peter's home with Benjamin Britten since 1957.
Since Britten's death in 1976 Sir Peter has continued to live at the Red House where he observes with sometimes amused and sometimes astonished eyes, the considerable development of the Britten-Pears Library and the Britten Archive.
The interview that follows was undertaken in informal circumstances and we have attempted to retain the atmosphere of the original transcript of our taped conversation.
May 1983 John Evans
I began by asking Sir Peter to recall the incidents that led to Britten's choosing George Crabbe's The Borough, and specifically the story of the fisherman, Peter Grimes, as the subject of his first opera.
PETER PEARS: We were staying in Escondido on the West Coast of America with Rae Robertson and Ethel Bartlett, the pianists for whom Ben wrote the Scottish Ballad.
It was at this time that we read Morgan Forster's article in the Listener about George Crabbe and we were touched and interested enough to seek out a copy of Crabbe's poems and I well remember my surprise in discovering a mid-19th-century edition in San Diego, I think.
And almost at once we started work on the Crabbe.
By that time we were really longing to get back to England.
We drove back across the States at the end of the summer of 1941 and then waited until we could get a passage home, which wasn't until the following March.
JOAN CROSS: And at that time Grimes was occupying your minds?
PP: Well, it was certainly at the back of our minds when we went to hear Koussevitzky conduct Ben's Sinfonia da Requiem in Boston in January 1942.
But it wasn't until Koussevitzky offered a commission of a thousand dollars from the Koussevitzky Music Foundation that Ben was seriously able to contemplate setting aside all the time that is required to write a full-scale opera.
JOHN EVANS: You started work on Grimes while still in America, didn't you?
PP: Yes.
We started the first rough outline of a scenario.
Then in March we travelled back to England on the Axe/Johnson, a Swedish cargo boat with some passenger accommodation.
We took four or five weeks to get across the Atlantic, being pursued by enemy submarines — all very worrying!— and while Ben was setting Auden's Hymn to St Cecilia and writing A Ceremony of Carols I started to put the Grimes scenario into shape.
JE: Did this scenario differ substantially from the opera as we now know it?
PP: Initially we had a prologue in which Peter Grimes's father appeared on his death-bed, in which he solemnly cursed his son; but it became apparent fairly soon that this was not a very good idea and the prologue was reshaped by the time we arrived back in England.
JE: Had you, at this time, any ambitions to write the libretto yourself, Peter?
PP: I really didn't think of myself as being capable Of writing a libretto.
I'm not a man of all that much letters, though I like to think that I was fully capable of arranging Shakespeare for Ben's A Midsummer Night's Dream.
While we were still in America Ben had approached Christopher Isherwood about Grimes, but that collaboration was obviously not gOing to be feasible when we decided to return tO England.
When we arrived home Ben asked Montagu Slater to write the libretto; he was a playwright and had worked in films, and Ben had written incidental music for a number of his Left Theatre productions, including a very well-XXXX received play called Stay Down Miner, during the thirties.
During the war Montagu worked for the Ministry of Information in the film division.
He was based in London and Ben felt he would be sympathetic to the subject.
As it turned out it was hard work one way and another because Montagu was not very prolific.
He was a very slow writer and found it very difficult to produce what Ben wanted, so the actual work of the libretto was often well behind the work of the music.
I remember ghastly evenings when we sat round willing him to write half a line or finish a stanza and he couldn't do it, it wouldn't come out.
JC: I wonder how far the piece had progressed when I engaged you to come and sing with Sadler's Wells Opera in January 1943?
I seem to remember that the first information I ever had about Ben was that he had measles!
At the same time I became aware of the fact that this opera was on the stocks.
JE: Had you heard much of Britten's music by this time, Joan?
JC: 1 regret to say no.
That is until I was invited with Lawrance Collingwood to the Wigmore Hall and heard Peter perform Les Illuminations [May IS 1943].
And we were stunned.
I had no idea that a composer could conjure the sounds of trumpets, horns and trombones from a string orchestra.
Following this I also heard the first performance of the Serenade with Peter and Dennis Brain at the Wigmore Hall in October 1943.
JE: And Peter was by now in the company?
JC: Yes.
When he auditioned for us, late in "42, Collingwood's reaction was" a marvellous musician!", but at the same time Menges was concerned that his voice wouldn't carry in the larger theatres.
But, of course, I was determined to take him into the company and his first role for us was Tamino in Magic Flute.
Then he joined the cast of Barber of Seville, Bartered Bride, Traviata and Cost fan tutte.
JE: What were the circumstances of the company during the war?
JC: During the first year of the war a somewhat depleted company continued to perform at Sadler's Wells (Rosebery Avenue).
But on September 7, during a matinee of Tosca and an evening performance of Faust, the docks were attacked and the blitz began.
Of course, all theatrical activities came to an abrupt halt; but Guthrie was not prepared to accept what seemed like being the total demise of Sadler's Wells Opera, and proposed sending a small touring group of the company round the provinces and he offered me a small contract.
I was happy to accept.
We began a more than modest tour in Buxton in October 1940 and continued touring all over the country, with occasional visits to the Prince's Theatre or the New Theatre [now the Albery]in London, until the war ended.
JE: At what stage did you decide to premiere Peter Grimes at Sadler's Wells?
JC: I remember Ben arrived in Liverpool with his score and played parts of the  opera to me.
I became at once possessive about it…there was already talk about the war ending and Sadler's Wells reopening and it seemed to me entirely fitting for the Sadler's Wells Company to reopen the theatre at Rosebery Avenue after the war with a new opera by a leading young English composer.
But there were difficulties.
Boosey and Hawkes were not, at first, terribly willing to co-operate.
They owned the lease of Covent Garden and had plans to reopen the Opera House and stage Grimes there.
And Ralph Hawkes, who was a splendid person and a very good friend, was not prepared to extend friendship to this degree and allow the piece to be done in Sadler's Wells, and he took a lot of persuading.
JE: How were you able to overcome these difficulties with Britten's publisher?
JC: Ben took it into his own hands.
He had decided that Sadler's Wells was where he wanted the first performance.
He realized that it could be ideally cast within the existing company.
JE; But, ironically, the members of the company were none too keen on the prospect of stag Peter Grimes, were they?
JC: At the time there was a lot of discontent in the company.
They had had four years' grind up and down the country with uncomfortable lodgings, often very bad theatres and performing the same limited repertoire week after week, month after month.
They wanted to reopen Sadler's Wells with Carmen, Aida, Trovatore, operas they hadn't been able to perform during the war.
And here they were faced with this strange opera, the plot of which they found unattractive, the music very difficult and, indeed, unrecognizable in any way at all as operatic music as they understood it.
I received a letter from one of the repetiteurs informing me emphatically that the chorus thought the music was very bad for their voices.
One sympathized, but how they failed to recognize the extraordinary quality of the work will always be beyond me.
JE: Was there, in a sense, a policy decision on the part of the management, to give the younger generation of producers and conductors the responsibility for the premiere of Grimes?
JC: Eric Crozier had had a great success producing The Bartered Bride.
He admired Ben and seemed to get on well with him.
I suggested to Ben that he might produce Grimes and Ben, having seen The Bartered Bride and, I think, enjoyed it, agreed.
And then it was a question of who was to conduct the piece.
Collingwood felt that it was a young man's opera and suggested Reggie.
PP.
Reggie was marvellous.
No one has ever conducted the big man-hunt scene as well as he.
No one!
JC: Kenneth Green had designed our production of Cosi fan tutte which had been a great success.
His Grimes was really quite a nice piece of work.
PP: I thought the enclosed, claustrophobic quality of his set was absolutely right for the Borough.
JE: In what respects do you consider your interpretations of the roles of Ellen and Peter to have differed from more recent exponents of these roles?
JC: Most of the opera repertoire is written for younger singers.
Ellen Orford in the poem is a middle-aged woman and it was fortuitous for me that I was about the right age — it's not a part for a young soprano.
I always regarded Ellen's attitude towards Grimes as one of sympathy and understanding and a desire to help him out of his difficulties.
She has a deep regard for him  and a feeling that here is a poet, a man that nobody understands.
PP: He, in turn, merely envisages a peaceful orderly life that, with her help, could be possible.
JC: Of course, in Crabbe's The Borough she is blind.
I Once asked Ben,"Would you like her to be blind?
I could do this if you like."
He was horrified!
It could be possible, but unbearably pathetic.
Grimes couldn't possibly hit a blind woman, could he?
PP: No, he wouldn't have done that.
JC: Peter, in fact could never ever bring himself to hit Ellen, blind or otherwise.
I remember a perfectly exhausting rehearsal with Guthrie and Peter, Guthrie persuading, saying, "It doesn't hurt her really — slap, wallop -you do that." 
Peter would go so far and then no further, till I was bright scarlet from Guthrie's ministrations and nothing from Peter.
Oh dear!
PP:I think most of the time I dim! hit you, I just hit the air.
You were saying, Joan, that you regard Grimes as a poet in a way.
And of course that is specially true and where one differs frequently from one's successors.
JC: Surely this is the difficulty with the part.
The man is such an incredible mixture, and so fascinating.
 "The Great Bear and Pleiades" — this is pure poetry and it flows out of him.
Whether he's aware of it is another matter altogether.
What do you think?
PP: Grimes is in lull reaction against his environment.
While he cannot really be called a poet, he has strong and sensitive feelings which show themselves in poetic music in the opera.
Essentially he is frustrated and releases his frustration by careless and violent action.
JC: 1 remember I used to take great pleasure in performing in the Prologue.
I don't know whether it contributed much — one never knows oneself whether it contributes or nOt — but I never took my eyes off Peter during this scene, willed him to do this, that and the other, and was saddened and grieved and distressed by the fact that everybody turned against him at the end.
PP: And the duet at the end of the Prologue is a very touching moment.
JC: It also happens to be very difficult to sing.
The other passage that makes a most extraordinary effect emotionally is Ellen's exit after she agrees tO go and collect the new apprentice for Grimes.
The succession of downward phrases in the orchestra is so moving.
Time after time I used to land up off the stage in tears.
I cannot tell you why.
It had such incredible dignity and power, and it was something that made these villagers, these people who were being so tiresome, give way to her as she walked through them, and it's in the music.
JE: Though this role was written for you, in a sense, did you find it difficult having to sing Britten after a long career in the standard repertoire?
JC: Ben didn't write this role for me.
No, he didn't really know my voice.
PP: That's not quite true.
From 1943 onwards he probably didn't miss a single performance in which I was taking part and he must have seen Us in Traviata every time it was done.
And he came to our performances of Cosi.
JC: That's interesting, because I've often wondered whether "Come scoglio" gave him ideas.
All those wide leaps and difiicult intervals in the Mozart could just have influenced his writing of the "Embroidery" Aria.
And isn't the women's quartet a remarkable piece of music?
It has the same kind of surprising beauty as the trio at the end of Rosenkavalier.
JE: It's interesting that you should mention Rosenkavalier in this context, because while Britten was in hospital with measles, during the period when he was writing Grimes, Ralph Hawkes sent him a score of Rosenkavalier.
And though the wOmen's quartet in Grimes is a quartet of voices, it is more often in three-part counterpoint because the Nieces sing in unison in the refrain.
PP: Yes, quite extraordinary.
I remember very well Ben's insistence that he wanted to retain that quartet.
Originally it wasn't there at all.
And he said that we'd got to have some softening, some change, some relaxation after the intensity of the march to the hut.
I remember also the reaction of one or two of Ben's older contemporaries, Constant Lambert and Patrick Hadley, who were particularly touched by this quartet when they first heard it at the dress rehearsal.
JC: And it's wonderful stuff to sing.
And nothing could be more marvellous to sing than parts of the church scene.
[Sings:]"Were we mistaken when we schemed…
"
Glorious phrase!
And the interruptions from Grimes and the orchestra are so staggeringly dramatic.
It is a work that could have been written by a man who'd been writing operas for twenty years and it introduced me to Ben's remarkable sense of theatre.
A pity it was launched really under unhappy circumstances inasmuch as the company was so antipathetic.
It didn't make a great occasion for me, though I think the backstage tension did contribute something to the success of the production.
But it made it a very anxious first night for me, and before the curtain went up, as I sat in my dressing-room in make-up and costume ready to go on stage, Guthrie, who'd been really very sympathetic if not totally convinced all along, came in, patted me on the shoulder and said, "Whatever happens, dear, we were right to do it." 
JE: As it turned out, Peter Grimes was a very great success, despite the tensions that surrounded its premiere.
Gloriana, by contrast, was launched in the most auspicious of circumstances but seemed to be one of Britten's most upsetting professional disappointments.
PP: It was absolutely fatal, of course, to have made a royal gala out of the first night.
Quite fatal!
That was really the trouble.
JC: What I remember about the first night was an uncomfortable feeling that the piece was under-rehearsed musically.
PP: You may be quite right about that, because something intensified the first night nerves, not only because of the artificiality of the occasion.
JC: Would you agree, Peter, that there was a feeling at this time that Ben was receiving too much attention and that there was a kind of resentment kicking about amongst musicians?
PP: It could have been so.
Ben had been made a Companion of Honour in the Coronation Honours List and the very fact that he was writing an opera for the Coronation created jealousy in some quarters.
But what was hoped for by many was a kind of superior Merrie England.
This story about an ageing monarch was considered quite unsuitable for the young Queen at the start of her reign.
JE: Were you made painfully aware of the lack of interest of that first-night   audience, made up of monarchs and dignitaries "commanded" to the performance as part of the Coronation celebrations?
PP: It was such an unusual relationship with the audience.
It was almost like performing to an empty house.
JC: It really was quite an experience to sing to such an audience!
At most, fifteen per cent were musical and able to appreciate the work.
It was a relief to find that the reaction to the first public performance at Covent Garden contradicted the impression that the command performance had been a disaster.
JE: Peter, was there never any possibility of Britten conducting the premiere?
PP: No, he'd more or less crippled himself with bursitis alter four months of conducting Billy Budd.
It was the first big opera he'd conducted and he just didn't know how to do that, how to pace himself Incidentally he did the same thing when we recorded Peter Grimes and Reggie had to come in and help finish the recording.
JE: But, presumably, he worked with you both individually?
JC: Oh yes, that was for me a very great joy.
I stayed in Aldeburgh for some weeks in order to work with Ben whenever he had time.
Viola Tunnard came and stayed and was very, very helpful.
She bullied me.
I had begun to find it very difficult, at that stage of my life, to memorize new music.
JE: What was Britten striving for in these sessions?
JC: He was after a musical performance, but, as always, he was deeply interested in the characterization and the theatrical dimension of the role.
His remarkable understanding of the stage made him immensely stimulating.
The historical period is so well documented it was only necessary to read what had been written about Elizabeth and integrate it with Ben's score.
PP: I do think that Ben's treatment of that last scene, at the end of the opera, was something that was quite new…
JC:…suddenly having to stop singing and launch into speech…
PP:…terribly difficult to project into a vast theatre.
JC: I regret that so much of the spoken word is now cut.
It was one of Ben's innovations that I greatly enjoyed.
I well remember, when rehearsing this piece, that Basil Coleman took immense trouble persuading me to use enough voice.
When I came to rehearse this scene with him, we went through it and he said to me, "That won't do, you know," and I was shattered.
He said, "You've really got to make a big speaking sound." 
So we worked at it: he went to one end of a huge rehearsal room while I stood yelling at him from the other.
Those speeches are remarkable in that they're echt, you know, they are historically recorded and accurately transcribed in the libretto.
But Gloriana herself is an extraordinary person, she's a dual-XXXX personality: on the one hand the public image, crisp, incisive, brusque, dismissive and intensely regal; on the other hand, the private nature, vulnerable, lyrical…
JE: And the strong rhythmic profile of much of her music enables the singer to create a direct impression of her public image…
JC: Precisely.
The lyricism looks after itself.
JE: Am I right in saying, Peter, that you didn't feel entirely well cast as Essex?
PP: I adored the lute songs, of course, and there are two wonderful duets with Elizabeth, but I think that in many ways in the rest of the part I was wrongly cast.
I'm not sure, but I think somebody else should have done it rather than me.
JE: Do you remember when the idea of a Coronation opera was first mooted?
PP: Yes.
Ben and I had just given a recital in Vienna.
That would have been in March 1952.
We were joined there by George and Marion and we all went off to a skiing resort called Gargellen.
George VI had died in February and the subject of the Coronation inevitably cropped up.
JE: It was the Earl of Harewood who approached the Palace with the proposal of a Coronation opera by Britten, was it not?
His cousin was the Queen's Private Secretary.
PP: Of course, George was the obvious person to start the wheels turning.
But Ben was already planning a children's opera with William Plomer to be  called Tyco the Vegan.
There were wonderful names in it, including a woman called Madge Plato.
It was a sort of story that started with an aeroplane made by children in a garage.
They managed to get it going, then took off and landed on a star.
It was a dear idea, terribly sweet.
But, of course, Ben had to drop that idea in order to write Gloriana.
JE: Presumably it's for this reason that he asked Plomer to collaborate on Gloriana instead.
JC: Peter, do you remember that really worrying evening when you, Ben, William and I were invited to a dinner party by the Harewoods at Orme Square [May 18,1953]?
The Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh were to be there and the Queen requested that she should hear some of Gloriana.
PP: William went through the story and described each scene…
JC:…and you and I performed bits and pieces from the opera with Ben at the piano.
Not my favourite evening.
I don't think they enjoyed the evening any more than we did.
JE: Joan, were you at all reluctant to take on this major role so late in your career?
JC:Reluctant, yes.
I appreciated the very great honour of being asked — Coronation opera and all that — but I knew that my voice had been punished mercilessly during the war and I had, indeed, decided to retire from the opera stage.
PP: You had every right to retire if you wanted to, but of course we also had the right to try and persuade you not to.
I agree that Gloriana was a considerable challenge.
JC: Yes, it's not an easy piece.
Let's face it, none of Ben's pieces are easy.
But I found the tessitura very awkward here and there.
Ben never seemed to make up his mind whether I was a contralto or a soprano.
JE: Yes, much of the music he wrote for you, for instance the Female Chorus in The Rape of Lucretia, lies very low, particularly the slumber song that precedes the rape.
PP: of course, Ben always challenged the artists he wrote for, extended them and offered new insights into the capabilities of their own voices or instruments.
JC: Whether he overestimated my capabilities or not, I'm pleased to have sung Gloriana, and enjoyed later performances conducted by my dear friend Reggie on the Covent Garden tour and during a visit to Rhodesia [Zimbabwe]for the Rhodes Festival in 1953.
I'm more than delighted that more recent revivals have reinstated the work to its rightful place in the repertoire.
As Guthrie foresaw and wrote to me after attending an early performance: I feel confident that Gloriana will survive and be considered a great work…that disastrous miscalculation of opening it to an audience and on an occasion that required an all-star Iolanthe will set it back twenty years.
But one has to try and remember that's not important.
The work, I think, crystallized an important change in operatic style which Ben is pioneering, texturally quite different — spiky, transparent, and a radically different conception of what theatre music should be.
I know nothing of orchestration, but I have two ears (which is two more than the professional critics seem to have)…