

Do you want to walk in safety in the countryside
Dear FoE supporter, As a supporter of Friends of the Earth, I know how much you want to establish and maintain a safe and clean environment for us all.
But did you know that The Ramblers' Association is also heavily involved in working to conserve our countryside?
We are constantly hard at work protecting our environment.
When the safety of walkers is threatened by the use of pesticides on crops, The Ramblers' Association challenges the government to bring in better safety regulations.
When planners put forward proposals to build a road right through a beautiful stretch of country or to quarry an unspoiled area of a national park, The Ramblers' Association puts up strong opposition.
And when the network of 120,000 miles of footpaths is threatened — when paths are blocked by barbed wire or by crops like oilseed rape which you simply can't walk through — The Ramblers' Association campaigns long and hard to keep the countryside open.
What The Ramblers' Association wants — and will fight for — is to make the countryside a better place for everyone to walk in.
We want to safeguard the special beauty of our countryside and make sure that it is not only pleasant to walk in but that it is safe too.
And being safe means that older people and young children must also be able to go walking without fear of dangerous pesticides sprayed on paths or obstructions blocking the way.
After all, what better way is there to get to know the countryside and to become aware of the natural world than to go walking in the countryside?
So I invite you to join us and add your voice to that of The Ramblers and help protect the countryside.
If you want to be actively involved in the work of The Ramblers' Association, there are 300 groups throughout England, Scotland and Wales, many of which organise practical work — clearing paths, raising signposts, opposing path closures, reporting obstructions and generally making sure the countryside can be walked.
All the local groups organise programmes of walks — long and short, to suit different tastes.
But of course, you may prefer to join The Ramblers' Association simply to add your voice to that of our 63,000 existing members and to keep in touch with what is going on in the countryside.
Whatever your reasons for joining, all members receive: * a bi-monthly colour magazine, The Rambler, with countryside news, opinion, features and reviews
* a free copy of The Ramblers' Yearbook, available only to members, with over 2,000 bed and breakfast addresses alongside articles on equipment, long distance paths, public transport and rights of way
* your own Area News three times a year
* discounts on a large number of outdoor equipment shops
So why not join us, knowing that you are helping conserve the British countryside for yourself and generations to come?
We will give the first 100 people who apply a FREE copy of our broadsheet on "Pesticides: Waging War on our Countryside" .
Your sincerely PS Join us today: just fill in the application form in the enclosed leaflet — there's FREEPOST so you don't need a stamp — and show your support for the countryside.
The first 100 people who apply will receive FREE our broadsheet on pesticides.
PPS If you already a member of The Ramblers' Association, please forgive us, but because we want to preserve the confidentiality of each other 's membership lists, some element of duplication is inevitable.
Why not pass this letter to a friend who may be interested?