

1 Composition of the Firm
1 Introduction
Those who wish to practise the profession of solicitor in England and Wales may presently do so as sole practitioners, as employees of other solicitors (either individuals or firms) or in partnership with other solicitors.
The latter has for many years been the preference of the majority of established practitioners: according to a recent Law Society survey, almost 75 per cent of solicitors in practice are equity partners in a firm.
Section 9 of the Administration of Justice Act 1985 comes into effect on 1 January 1992; so incorporation of a solicitor's practice will become an additional option.
The initial public reaction within the profession to this facility has, perhaps not surprisingly, been muted, though commercial and financial pressure for incorporation of at any rate the largest firms may ultimately become unstoppable.
The imminence of 1993, in the context of UK membership of the European Community, and the active discussion of the feasibility of multi-national and multi-disciplinary partnerships (the question no longer being whether but when and subject to what regulation they should be permitted) makes this a fast-developing area of legal practice.
This chapter contains an overview of the present state of play, and considers the basic requirements for practice in a conventional solicitors' partnership.
A necessary caveat is that the presently available regulatory material is certain to be superseded before long: for example, the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988 will require fundamental revision to accommodate any permitted incorporation of multi-disciplinary practices.
The constant factor in all these matters is the ultimate authority of the Law Society in the regulation of the profession.
Whilst fundamental changes may be demanded by Westminster or Brussels, implementation and supervision will foreseeably remain in  Chancery Lane.
The policy of the solicitors' governing body is encapsulated in Rule 1 of the Solicitors' Practice Rules 1990 (and of earlier editions): A solicitor shall not directly or indirectly obtain or attempt to obtain instructions for professional work or permit another person to do so on his behalf, or do anything in the course of practising as a solicitor, in any manner which compromises or impairs or is likely to compromise or impair any of the following:(a) the solicitor's independence or integrity;(b) a person's freedom to instruct a solicitor of his choice;(c) the solicitor's duty to act in the best interests of the client;(d) the good repute of the solicitor or of the solicitor's profession;(e) the solicitor's proper standard of work;(f) the solicitor's duty to the Court.
This reflects the Society's function to monitor and maintain the highest professional standards.
It provides a benchmark against which every proposed change to practices and procedures will be measured.
2 Qualifications for practice in England and Wales
(a) The individual solicitor Practising Certificates By s1 of the Solicitors Act the essential qualifications for practice as a solicitor are admission as a solicitor, enrolment and the possession of a current practising certificate.
To resolve a doubt as to whether employed solicitors not being held out to be solicitors by their employers were required to hold practising certificates, s1A was added by s85 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 in the following terms: 1A.
A person who has been admitted as a solicitor and whose name is on the roll shall, if he would not otherwise be taken to be acting as a solicitor, be taken for the purposes of this Act to be so acting [and therefore being required to hold a practising certificate]if he is employed in connection with the provision of any legal services (a) by any person who is qualified to act as a solicitor;(b) by any partnership at least one member of which is so qualified; or (c) by a body recognised by the Council of the Law Society under section 9 of the Administration of Justice Act 1985 (incorporated practices).
Where a person continues to act as a solicitor having failed to comply with these requirements he commits an offence under s20 of the Solicitors Act.
Moreover, the failure (even inadvertent) of  a solicitor partner to hold a current practising certificate leads to the automatic dissolution of his firm under s34 of the Partnership Act 1890, on the authority of Hudgell Yeates & Co v Watson [1978]QB 451 (see below).
Under the former practice (see s14 of the Solicitors Act as originally enacted), certificates were issued by the Law Society during the months of November and December of each year and backdated to 1 November.
It was realised (admittedly in connection with problems over legal aid payments, rather than dissolution of partnerships) that difficulty might ensue where a solicitor continued to practise after applying for a renewal only to have his application eventually rejected.
Accordingly, with effect from 1991–92, a new procedure established under s86 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 operates whereby every practising certificate will specify a "replacement date" by which the holder must apply for its renewal.
A practising certificate will expire in the following circumstances:(1) immediately upon its holder being removed from or struck off the roll;(2) upon its withdrawal at the instance of the Law Society after the designated replacement date has passed without application for renewal being receivedbut such expiry will not be automatic;(3) upon its replacement by a new practising certificate;(4) upon the Society refusing to issue a new certificate or upon the replacement date if that is subsequent to the Society's refusal.
By this system any unexpected hiatus should be avoided and the Law Society will no longer be compelled to process applications for renewal of certificates from the entire profession at one and the same time.
The cost of a practising certificate comprises a fixed fee of £420 (for 1991–92) together with a contribution to the Law Society's Compensation Fund.
The latter consists of an ordinary annual contribution of £215 (for 1991–92) where the solicitor has stated in his application that he has (during the past practising year) held or received clients' money.
Where the application properly contains no such statement, the fee is £150.
Solicitors in respect of their first three practising certificates are exempt from all contributions to the Fund (whether or not they have held clients' money), and in respect of their next three renewals are only required to pay one half of the full amount.
The possibility of  reducing the practising certificate fee for low earners is under discussion, but at the time of writing no decision has been taken.
By s12 of the Solicitors Act, the Law Society is given discretion to grant or refuse an application for a practising certificate in the following cases:(1) a first application;(2) an application by a solicitor who has never held an unconditional certificate since admission;(3) where 12 months or more will have elapsed since a practising certificate was last held;(4) after the disciplinary tribunal has ordered a penalty or costs against the applicant or delivered a reprimand;(5) after failure by the applicant to offer sufficient explanation for his or her professional conduct after being called upon so to do;(6) after failure to deliver an accountant's report in due time (and an additional fee will be payable if the discretion is not invoked to refuse the application);(7) after the expiry of a period of suspension;(8) after the name of the applicant who has been struck off is restored to the roll;(9) while the applicant is an undischarged bankrupt;(10) after the applicant's discharge from bankruptcy or after the applicant has entered into a composition or deed of arrangement for the benefit of his creditors;(11) while the applicant is a patient as defined by s94 of the Mental Health Act 1983 or a person as to whom powers have been exercised under s104 of the Mental Health Act 1959 or s98 of the 1983 Act;(12) where the applicant has received a sentence of imprisonment;(13) where the applicant has failed to satisfy a money judgment against him or her which is not a judgment limited to costs and which is not a judgment in respect of which indemnity or relief from some other person is available.
Applicants for certificates must notify the Society if any of the above cases apply.
Where after notification of any of the matters in cases (4) to (13) the Society proceeds to grant an unconditional certificate subsequent applications need not contain references to those matters.
Indemnity insurance At the same time as applying for replacement of his practising certificate a solicitor must satisfy the Law  Society (by attaching to his application a copy of the form of evidence issued and stamped by London Insurance Brokers Ltd) that he has complied with the provisions of the Solicitors' Indemnity Rules 1991 or that he is exempt from so doing.
The Indemnity Fund was established (pursuant to s37 of the Solicitors Act) to provide indemnity against loss arising from claims in respect of any description of civil liability incurred:(1) by a solicitor or former solicitor in connection with his practice or with any trust of which he is or formerly was a trustee; and (2) by an employee or former employee of a solicitor or former solicitor in connection with that solicitor's practice or with any trust of which that solicitor or the employee is or formerly was a trustee.
The Rules (a summary of which can be found in Chapter 12) provide for the raising of contributions to the Fund from every partner and every other solicitor held out by his firm as a partner.
Many firms, however, will find the basic level of cover inadequate for the protection of themselves and their clients and will wish to take out additional policies in the insurance market.
Top up insurance cannot be obtained with unlimited cover, and may be made subject to certain other conditions, eg the exclusion of indemnity in respect of claims brought in courts in the USA.
Beyond whatever limits of cover are commercially obtainable the choice would seem to lie between limiting liability by agreement (where this is possiblesee Chapter 2) with the client and exposing the private assets of the partners.
It is clear that as a matter of prudent management in a firm of any size one of the partners or a senior member of staff should be given overall responsibility for ensuring that all partners and employed solicitors (whether or not held out as partners) comply with these basic requirements of professional practice (by keeping a check on replacement and renewal dates, collating relevant statistical information, ensuring timeous completion and posting of applications, etc) and that the firm is spared the embarrassment of financial penalties or, even worse, an unwanted dissolution.
Specialist work Solicitors wishing to work as insolvency practitioners require to be licensed by the Law Society individually.
A group licence, however, granted to the Society covers all practising solicitors in respect of credit brokerage, debt adjusting, debt counselling and debt collection regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974.
Solicitors' Practice Rule 14 requires solicitors who wish  to provide structural surveys or formal property valuations to ensure that:(1) the work is carried out by a principal or employee who is a chartered surveyor or who holds another professional qualification approved by the Council of the Law Society; and (2) an appropriate additional contribution is paid to the Solicitors' Indemnity Fund (see Chapter 12).
(b) The Firm Name (Clauses 1.01.3 and 3) Rule 11 of the Solicitors' Practice Rules 1990 provides that: The name of a firm of solicitors shall consist only of the name or names of one or more present or former principals together with, if desired, other conventional references to the firm and to such persons; or a firm name in use on 28th February 1967; or one approved in writing by the Council of the Law Society.
Moreover, as will frequently be the case, where the chosen name does not consist of the surnames of all the partners (including persons held out as partners) without any addition other than forenames or initials or a reference to a previous owner of the business, the provisions of the Business Names Act 1985 will apply.
Except where there are more than 20 partners (including persons held out as partners), the names of the partners must be shown legibly on all business letters, written orders for goods or services, invoices and receipts sent out by the firm; an address at which service of documents may be effected on the firm and its partners must also be shown; and a full list of the partners with that same address must be displayed in a prominent position in each of the firm's offices.
Whilst in many cases firms with more than 20 partners will for reasons of publicity wish to set out their names on the firm's documentation, there is no compulsion for them so to do (and beyond a certain number it obviously becomes impracticable).
Such firms must, however, maintain a list of all the partners at their principal premises for inspection by interested persons during normal business hours and a statement that such list is available for inspection must appear on business correspondence.
It is not permissible for some only of the partners' names to be shown on business stationery.
Breach of the provisions of the Act involves the commission of an offence punishable by fine and may even in certain circumstances disqualify the firm from bringing proceedings to enforce its contractual rights—where by reason of the breach the defendant is unable to pursue his own claims against the firm or has otherwise suffered financial loss and the court does not consider that justice and equity require that the firm's action should be allowed to proceed.
As a matter of general law, apart from the statutory provisions and the Law Society's regulations, the firm's name must not be such as to deceive the general public into believing that it is dealing with some rival firm.
A passing off action will lie to restrain the use of any firm name which breaches this rule.
Number of partners A firm of solicitors is exempt from the statutory requirement (Companies Act 1985, s716(1)) that a partnership of more than 20 members be registered as a company.
This exemption, it might be noted, will require amendment in the event that multi-disciplinary partnerships are to be permitted (see below) as in its present form it only applies to solicitors' partnerships where all the partners are qualified solicitors.
Supervision of offices Rule 13 of the Solicitors' Practice Rules 1991 sets out the minimum standards required.
Whilst in practice day to day supervision may rest with a single partner or small committee of partners, the rule imposes professional responsibility on every member of a firm to see that each one of its offices is properly supervised.
Every office shall, on each day that it is open for business, be supervised by a practising solicitor who need not be a partner in the firm but must have been admitted for at least three years, and be managed by a practising solicitor (of whatever seniority) or a Fellow of the Institute of Legal Executives of good standing and of at least five years' seniority.
It follows that no firm may be set up which does not have at least one principal of at least three years' professional standing.
The manager, though not the supervisor, should normally be in attendance throughout the time when the office is open to the public or to telephone calls from the public.
Where the continuity of management is broken, eg by holidays or illness, there is an obligation to make alternative arrangements to ensure adequate supervision.
The Council of the Law Society has power to grant waivers in appropriate cases, eg where additional accommodation is not so much a separate office as an annexe to the main place of business, and will as a matter of practice take soundings from the local law society before reaching its decision.
Waivers may be permanent or limited in time or conditional on some agreed  reorganisation of a firm's practices.
Limited waivers may particularly be required and granted to deal with the hiatus caused by unforeseen death or illness.
Investment business While a summary of the Solicitors' Investment Business Rules 1990 may be found in Chapter 12, it is appropriate at this point to note that every firm which carries on investment business within the meaning of the Financial Services Act 1986 is required to be authorised either through a Self-Regulating Organisation (SRO) such as FIMBRA or through a Recognised Professional Body (RPB) or directly from the Securities and Investments Board.
So far as concerns solicitors, the majority of firms will wish to be authorised through the Law Society, which is an RPB, though where the volume of investment business undertaken exceeds 20 per cent of the work of the practice (calculated by comparing investment business income including commissions with the gross practice income) sanction from an SRO will normally be required, the Law Society having agreed not, save in exceptional circumstances, to issue certificates to such firms.
It is important to note, however, that although firms may or may have to obtain authorisation from a body other than the Law Society, the latter's Practice Rules (in particular, r1 (obtaining instructions), r2 (publicity), r3 (introductions and referrals), r5 (offering services other than as a solicitor), and r10 (receipt of commission from third parties)) must continue to be observed notwithstanding that the requirements of the authorising body may be less demanding.
The annual fees for certification by the Law Society are based on the size of the firm and, for 1992, amount to £75 per principal and £170 per firm.
Application must be made before 1 April in each year.
No adjustments to the fees are made on account of changes to the membership of a firm during the year.
3 Non qualified personsMulti-disciplinary practices
By ss20 and 21 of the Solicitors Act, a person who is not duly qualified to practise commits an offence if he acts as a solicitor or pretends to act as such.
Nor (ss22 and 23) may an unqualified person who is not a licensed conveyancer or otherwise authorised under the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990 provide conveyancing or probate services or prepare documentation in connection with such specialised work.
Section 25 prevents the recovery of  costs in respect of work done by an unqualified person acting as a solicitor.
The severity of this is mitigated (for the sake of the clients) by the permitted recovery by a solicitor whose practising certificate has lapsed of moneys paid or due to be paid on behalf of a client.
The former s39 (now repealed so as to open the way for MDPssee below) prohibited solicitors from acting as agents for unqualified persons.
Section 5 of the Partnership Act makes each partner an agent of his co-partners for the purposes of the business of the firm.
A potential difficulty for solicitors was highlighted by the case of Hudgell Yeates & Co v Watson [1978]QB 451 when solicitors attempted to recover their costs from a client by action.
One of their partners had unwittingly failed to renew his practising certificate.
He was not the partner dealing with the client's affairs but the point was taken that by applying the agency principle and s25 of the Solicitors Act there was an irresistible defence to the claim for costs.
By a majority the Court of Appeal held that on the true analysis the firm had in fact been automatically dissolved (because its continuance would have been illegal) so soon as there was a failure to renew the practising certificate by one of its members, and that thereafter the properly qualified partners had carried on in a new partnership at will which was not prevented from recovering its costs.
The repeal of s39 does not reduce the impact of this decision (since partnership with unqualified persons remains for the moment prohibited by the rules of the profession), though the new procedures for the issue and replacement of practising certificates may make accidental disqualification less common.
There is obiter dictum(voiced with apparent unanimity by the Court of Appeal) that s5 of the Partnership Act has the effect of making the act of each partner the act of every co-partner.
If that is really so, the mere repeal of s39 and relaxation of the existing professional restrictions may not be enough, as a matter of law, to permit the formation of MDPs and the avoidance of breach of ss20-24 where one of the partners is not a qualified solicitor.
It may be, however, that the dictum is an overstatement of the true position and that the agency principle does not require that the act of one partner be that of all for all purposes, but merely deems that to be the case for the limited purpose of attaching liability to the firm for the acts and omissions of one of its members.
If, as might appear on the face of it to be the case, ss20-24 can only be breached by actual acts, no difficulty arises with MDPs.
Solicitors' Practice Rule 7 In its present form this rule maintains the effective prohibition of partnerships in England and Wales between solicitors and non-solicitors formerly proscribed by s39 of the Solicitors Act.
By this rule a solicitor may not share or agree to share his fees with any person except:(1) another solicitor;(2) a lawyer qualified in some foreign jurisdiction who has his principal office in that jurisdiction;(3) the solicitor's bona fide employee, but not in circumstances which would create a partnership with a non-solicitor;(4) a retired partner or the dependants of a retired or deceased partner.
A general waiver has been granted by the Council to permit the establishment of staff bonus schemes which make payments to employees calculated by reference to the gross fee income or net profits of the firm; which are open to all employees subject only to a short (maximum three years) qualifying period; where the basis of distribution (length of service, proportionate to salary etc) is disclosed to the staff, but where the actual level of profits or income need not be so disclosed; and where no distribution is permitted which is related to the introduction of business.
Multi-disciplinary practices For some time the desirability of permitting partnerships between solicitors and other professionals (particularly accountants) has been the subject of intense discussion both within and without the legal profession.
It seems that those in favour of a change in the present restrictions have won the day; for the repeal of s39 of the Solicitors Act was specifically designed to facilitate MDPs.
The public legal obstacle having been removed, however, caution required that the final lifting of the ban depend upon the Law Society changing its rules.
Such change is at the time of writing imminent, though it is unlikely that the whole profession will be affected at the outset.
Some limitation seems likely to be imposed which ensures that only larger firms will be able to enter MDPs.
Perhaps the most difficult matter will be to resolve differences between the professional regulations of bodies whose members may wish or be permitted to form MDPs or, in the absence of complete harmonisation, to prescribe effective means for dissolution of an MDP where the standards required by one body only are put in jeopardy.
Salaried partners Every salaried partner whose name appears on the firm's stationery without distinction from the equity partners  is a "principal" for the purposes of indemnity insurance whose personal responsibility for ensuring that the firm and all its members comply with the Indemnity Rules is no less than that of an equity partner.
As noted above, any former doubt as to the need of a salaried partner to hold a practising certificate has been resolved by s86 of the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990.
A more thorough discussion of the position of salaried partners may be found in Chapter 2.
4 Overseas dimension
(a) Overseas Practice Rules 1990 Whilst the Solicitors' Practice Rules only regulate the conduct of solicitors in practice as such in England and Wales, those who practise as solicitors outside that jurisdiction nevertheless remain subject to the authority of the Law Society and must comply with its Overseas Practice Rules.
At times the question may arise as to the precise capacity in which a solicitor is in practice overseas, more especially where he or she has qualifications in two or more jurisdictions.
Where the only professional qualification held is that of an admitted solicitor in England and Wales, the presumption (albeit rebuttable) will be that the overseas practice is carried on as such.
Where a qualification is also held in a foreign jurisdiction it will be a question of fact as to the capacity in which the practice is carried on.
The Rules only apply to solicitors practising as such overseas; practice purely as a local lawyer is subject only to the local professional rules.
Where the Rules apply, a solicitor must hold a current practising certificate and meet the same fundamental professional standards as those set out in the introduction to this Chapter as reflected in r1 of the Solicitors' Practice Rules (which is in fact reproduced in its entirety in the Overseas Practice Rules).
Compliance with the Solicitors' Publicity Code and the Introductions and Referrals Code is a minimum requirement though any more rigorous regulations of the local jurisdiction must also be observed.
A solicitor employed by a non-lawyer may not carry out professional work for any person other than his employer (ie working directly with the employer's clients is not permitted) but may act for a company or other organisation controlled by the employer or over which the employer has substantial control or for a company in the same group as the employer or which controls the employer.
Professional fees may be shared and partnerships entered into with the same categories of persons as under Solicitors' Practice Rule 7 (see above) and also with a lawyer qualified in another jurisdiction.
This does not, however, enable a partnership with a foreign lawyer to be carried on within England and Wales.
Rules, in substance the same as those relating to solicitors' accounts, and those concerning the permitted name of the firm and the need for proper supervision of offices, apply equally to overseas as to domestic practices, subject generally to the caveat that nothing in the Law Society's Rules will override particular duties imposed on practitioners by the local law.
The Indemnity Fund set up by the Law Society is not concerned with overseas practices for which no compulsory arrangements of a similar nature have yet been devised.
The overseas practitioner is, however, required to take out such insurance as may be reasonable having regard to the risks attached to the practice, local conditions and the availability of suitable insurance on reasonable terms.
This is not interpreted so as to compel a solicitor in overseas practice to maintain cover in excess of the current levels prescribed by the Solicitors' Indemnity Rules, though local requirements may have that result.
(b) CCBE Code of conduct Both the Bar Council and the Law Society have ratified the Code of conduct adopted by the Council of the Bars and Law Societies of the European Community as providing a common basis for professional regulation.
Solicitors' Practice Rule 16 expressly requires solicitors to observe the Code in relation to their professional contacts with EC lawyers (except those in the UK) and their professional activities in any part of the EC (other than the UK) whether or not the solicitor is physically present in that part.
The Code draws attention in a preamble to the duties of lawyers towards their clients, to the courts in which they practise, to the profession of which they are members and to the general public, noting the potential for conflicts of interest to arise.
Whilst no attempt is made to play down the importance of local rules to meet local needs, the existence of certain shared values is reflected in the provisions of the Code.
Thus there are recognised as general principles: the independence of the legal profession, the traditional virtues of trust and personal integrity, the need for confidentiality, the maintenance of respect for individual bars and law societies, the desirability of prohibiting the involvement of  lawyers in incompatible occupations and of regulating personal publicity, and the recognition that the interests of the client must come before those of the lawyer.
In a section dealing with relations with clients, the Code highlights the need for lawyers to act on instructions and to be prompt, conscientious and diligent in handling work.
Agreements for fees on a contingency basis, whilst not wholly outlawed, should be subject to professional regulation.
Steps should be taken to eliminate conflicts of interest as soon as they arise and fee-sharing with non-lawyers should not be allowedamendment being required here to permit MDPs.
Clients' funds should be kept separate from the firm's own moneys and be held in bank or building society accounts clearly designated as belonging to the client.
The firm's accounting practices should be open to inspection by the local professional body.
Adequate indemnity insurance should be effected in the interests of the clients having regard to the nature and extent of the risks which lawyers incur in practice.
Further sections deal with relations with courts and with fellow lawyers.
Similar sentiments are to be found contained in the Code of Ethics produced by the International Bar Association (IBA).
A provision in the IBA code not to be found in the CCBE version draws attention to the need, when in the client's interest, to endeavour to reach a solution to disputes by out of court settlement rather than by starting proceedings and adds: "lawyers should never stir up litigation" .
(c) Foreign lawyers in the UK This section is concerned with foreign lawyers becoming involved in legal professional work within the UK.
The only relaxation presently available from the absolute prohibition against foreign lawyers (other than those who duly obtain the professional qualifications necessary to become members of the legal profession in England and Wales) undertaking the work of solicitors and barristers is that afforded under the European Communities (Services of Lawyers) Order 1978 which, as amended, has effect for the stated purpose of enabling an EC qualified lawyer to pursue his professional activities in any part of the UK by providing, subject to conditions, the services otherwise reserved to the local professions (advocates, barristers and solicitors).
Thus, for example, in regard to proceedings in court, the mere absence of UK qualifications will not disqualify an EC lawyer from acting so long as he  is instructed with and acts in conjunction with a UK lawyer.
Curiously, the Order discriminates against Scottish and Irish lawyers: the relaxation of the general rule applies only to a defined class of EC lawyers from which those qualified in Scotland or Northern Ireland are, whether by accident or design, excluded.
Nothing arising out of UK membership of the EC, however, requires that the prohibition against the formation of partnerships with foreign lawyers to carry on business within England and Wales be relaxed.
But this is about to change.
(d) Multi-national partnerships The Law Society has recently introduced provisions for the regulation of MNPs which will affect all foreign lawyers, whether or not from within the EC.
A statutory register for foreign lawyers was established in October 1991 to define recognised foreign legal professions and individual categories of foreign lawyers with whom solicitors will be permitted to form multi-national partnerships (MNPs).
Foreign lawyers will still be able to practise as such on their own within the UK without registering but solicitors employed by them will not be able to hold themselves out as such to clients of the business.
Registered foreign lawyers are not permitted to carry out activities reserved to solicitors, but MNPs may employ assistant solicitors to perform the full range of solicitors' services for clients of the practice.
An earlier proposal that solicitors employed by foreign lawyers in England and Wales should be allowed to give legal advice to clients of the practice as well as doing non-reserved work for such clients has been dropped, at any rate for the time being until some adequate system of regulation can be devised.
Registered foreign lawyers are required to pay a fee (£280 for 1991/92) on first registration and an annual fee of an amount equal to two thirds of the current practising certificate fee in order to remain on the register.
They are required to make contributions to the Compensation Fund, again at a reduced level, and their fees in relation to Investment Business certificates are also be reduced.
Principals of firms operating mainly from overseas offices are not taken into account for the purposes of calculating the premium payable by an MNP for indemnity insurance and the fee income from all overseas practice is excluded from the computations.
Individual MNPs with offices outside England and Wales have to make their own arrangements for appropriate insurance cover.
5 Limited partnerships
There is no professional restriction in force which prohibits the formation of a solicitors' limited partnership under the Limited Partnerships Act 1907 and, indeed, s717(1) (a) of the Companies Act 1985 expressly contemplates their existence.
The profession has not to date, unlike the world of venture capital, perceived any practical advantages to be obtained from their use.
An arrangement whereby a limited partner invests a capital sum in the business which he is not permitted to withdraw until dissolution of the partnership (which will not automatically occur on death or bankruptcy etc) and which represents his maximum liability in respect of the firm's debts and obligations, who is given a profit share but who is excluded from the management of the firm, is doubtless seen as too restrictive.
In theory, a limited partnership could be set up on the retirement of a working partner, where the continuing partners experience difficulty in acquiring the outgoing partner's share by an immediate cash payment.
In practice, the interests of the firm and the outgoing partner are secured by less formal arrangements which do not expose the outgoing partner to any liability to third parties.
6 Incorporated practice
Section 9 of the Administration of Justice Act 1985 empowered the Council of the Law Society to make rules permitting and regulating the conduct of a solicitor's business by a body corporate.
This provision was introduced towards the end of the parliamentary process and was passed without any apparent debate at all.
Despite little apparent enthusiasm within the profession for such a development, the Council duly produced the Solicitors' Incorporated Practice Rules 1988 and the Solicitors' Indemnity (Incorporated Practice) Rules 1989.
All that remained was for the Lord Chancellor by statutory instrument to appoint a day for s9 to come into effect.
After some uncertainty, presumably not unconnected with the ongoing debate in connection with MDPs and MNPs mentioned above, that day has recently been named as 1 January 1992.
A full overview of the new rules is not included in Chapter 12 but their salient provisions are noted here.
The fundamental requirement for incorporated practice is  recognition of the company by the Council of the Law Society.
To qualify for recognition, the company has to satisfy the Council that its management will be in the hands of qualified solicitors (or another recognised body corporate, which will permit the formation of groups of incorporated practices with an overriding corporate management).
All members of the company (though not its secretary) must be qualified solicitors, and there are special provisions to apply when a member dies or is struck off the roll or otherwise loses his qualification to practise, which in essence provide that such member's shares become non-voting so long as they remain registered in unqualified hands, and only qualified solicitors will be able to vote as proxies.
The Council needs to be satisfied generally that the company is able to provide a proper professional service to its clients.
The practice has to have its registered office in England and Wales, and be registered under the Companies Act 1985 as an unlimited company having a share capital or as a company limited by shares; and any change from unlimited to limited status requires the consent of the Councilnot, presumably, to be lightly given.
Recognition, which once granted will remain in force for three years, will automatically cease upon liquidation or the making of an administration order under the Insolvency Act 1986 and may be withdrawn by the Council in the event that it is subsequently discovered that it was obtained as a result of any error or fraud.
The practice will at all times have to comply with the professional rules applicable to individual solicitors and firms, subject only to certain necessary procedural variations.
Whilst top-up insurance cover will be left to the discretion of individuals and firms, a recognised body corporate will have to effect cover of at least £500,000 on an each and every claim basis (or £2 million pa on an aggregate basis) over and above that available to solicitors' partnerships through the Indemnity Fund.
A special provision applies in the case of those firms which have set up wholly owned, unlimited executor and trustee companies to act as executors and trustees for clients.
Such arrangements have for some time been permitted so long as clients are fully informed of the nature of the company and the profits go to the firm.
After a transitional period of three years from 1 January 1992, such companies will only be operable as part of a solicitors' incorporated practice.
The new rules apply only to practices within England and Wales.
Incorporated practices are already permitted (subject to local law requirements) if their business is carried on only wholly outside England and Wales so long as all directors and shareholders are properly qualified lawyers (ie barristers or solicitors or locally qualified advocates etc) and the practice complies with the Overseas Practice Rules (see above).
Service companies The attractiveness of service companies in the administration of a solicitors' practice will by and large depend upon the perceived fiscal advantages at any particular time (see Chapters 5 and 10).
So far as concerns professional regulation, the Law Society requires that the membership of each such company be confined to qualified solicitors, retired partners and the dependents of retired or deceased partners.
The books of such company must be available for production to the Council on demand under its powers of inspection contained in the Solicitors' Accounts Rules 1986.
2 The Practice and Third Parties
1 Introduction
This chapter deals with two distinct aspects of the relationship between a firm and the persons with whom it does business.
In the first place, the extent to which partners may be liable for acts done on behalf or in the name of the firm is considered in the context of the provisions in that behalf contained in Pt II of the Partnership Act.
The procedural aspects of actions by and against firms are dealt with as a necessary adjunct to this.
A separate matter of particular importance is the regulation by the Law Society of the professional conduct of solicitors.
Here, the scheme is to discuss the principles which govern the relationship between solicitors and their firms with their clients.
No attempt at a comprehensive review of the rules is made (for that solicitors will use the current edition of The Law Society's Guide to Professional Conduct); rather, those provisions which touch on matters affecting firms, either directly or through the consequence of their being liable for the acts of their individual partners, are considered.
Chapter 12 contains summaries of the more important rules relevant to solicitors practising in partnership in England and Wales.
2 Under the Partnership Act 1890
(a) The Agency Principle Section 5 of the Partnership Act (power of partner to bind the firm) states that: Every partner is an agent of the firm and his other partners for the purpose of the business of the partnership; and the acts of every partner who does any act for carrying on in the usual way of business of the kind  carried on by the firm of which he is a member bind the firm and his partners, unless the partner so acting has in fact no authority to act for the firm in the particular matter, and the person with whom he is dealing either knows that he has no authority, or does not know or believe him to be a partner.
As between themselves the authority of individual partners to bind the firm can be properly circumscribed by agreement in effective variation of the basic principle set out in this section.
But no such agreement will be binding on third parties save to the extent that they have knowledge thereof.
This is made clear by s8 of the Partnership Act as follows: If it has been agreed between the partners that any restriction shall be placed on the power of any one or more of them to bind the firm, no act done in contravention of the agreement is binding on the firm with respect to persons having notice of the agreement.
All acts done within the actual authority of a partner will be binding on the firm whether carried out in the usual course of business or otherwise.
An act carried out by a partner in the usual course of the business of the firm will be binding on the firm notwithstanding that the partner concerned lacked the necessary authority unless the third party knew of the limitation to that partner's authority or did not know or believe him to be a partner.
Acts done by a partner outside the normal course of the firm's business will generally not bind the firm unless his co-partners have expressly authorised or subsequently ratified those acts.
What acts may be considered usual for a firm of solicitors will change with the times.
Recent developments in the area of financial services will obviously have a major impact on this.
As was said by Staughton LJ in United Bank of Kuwait Ltd v Hammond [1988]1 WLR 1051, advising that older judicial authorities should be treated with a degree of caution: the work that solicitors do can be expected to have changed since 1888; it has changed in recent times and is changing now.
So I prefer to have regard to the expert evidence of today in deciding what is the ordinary authority of a solicitor.
That case involved a solicitor who was a salaried partner in the first of the firms involved in the case and an employee in sole charge of a branch office of the other firm giving undertakings to a bank to pay over certain funds which were shortly due to come under his firm's control to the credit of individuals who were seeking loans from that bank, the undertakings being accepted as  security for the loans.
On both occasions the solicitor had acted without authority and the transactions were frauds on the bank.
The Court of Appeal detected "underlying transactions of a solicitorial nature" and determined that on the expert evidence (inter alia from a former President of the Law Society) which had been presented the undertakings given were such as might come within the usual course of a solicitor's business.
Another case of comparatively recent vintage, Re Bell's Indenture [1980]1 WLR 1217, confirmed that a solicitor in the ordinary course of his business has the implied authority of his partners to accept trust moneys as agent of the trustees but has no such authority to accept office as trustee and so make his co-partners liable for any misapplication of trust property.
As to less peculiarly solicitorial matters, a partner will generally be taken to have the implied authority of his co-partners in such matters as:(1) rendering accounts in respect of work done by the firm;(2) bringing or defending legal proceedings;(3) employing and dismissing staff;(4) opening bank accounts in the name of the firm;(5) entering into contracts on behalf of the firm;(6) accepting payments of partnership debts.
The provisions of ss15 and 16 of the Partnership Act will also come into play in connection with the matters presently under discussion: 15 An admission or representation made by any partner concerning the partnership affairs, and in the ordinary course of its business, is evidence against the firm.
16 Notice to any partner who habitually acts in the partnership business of any matter relating to partnership affairs operates as notice to the firm, except in the case of a fraud on the firm committed by or with the consent of that partner.
(b) Holding outsalaried partners In the United Bank of Kuwait case no particular consideration was given to the consequences of the undertaking having been given by a salaried partner.
The actual decision was given on the basis that applying s5 of the Partnership Act in the first case and the general law of agency in the second, the firms were liable on the undertakings because they were given by their partner/employee acting within the usual course of his business as a qualified solicitor.
The solicitor who gave those undertakings was not made a party to the proceedings, although if he had been held out by  his firm as a partner, s14 of the Partnership Act would have fixed him with potential liability.
That section is in the following terms:(1) Every one who by words spoken or written or by conduct represents himself, or who knowingly suffers himself to be represented, as a partner in a particular firm, is liable as a partner to any one who has on the faith of any such representation given credit to the firm, whether the representation has or has not been made or communicated to the person so giving credit by or with the knowledge of the apparent partner making the representation or suffering it to be made.
(2) Provided that where after a partner's death the partnership business is continued in the old firm-name, the continued use of that name or of the deceased partner's name as part thereof shall not of itself make his executors or administrators estate or effects liable for any partnership debts contracted after his death.
This provision is of particular significance in relation to salaried partners.
The salaried partner is frequently encountered in modern solicitors' firms.
His status, and salary, will be higher than that of a lowly assistant solicitor, but he makes no capital contributions to the firm nor does he have any right to a share in profits.
The extent of his involvement in the management of the practice will vary from firm to firm, but typically salaried partners may be invited to some, if not all, of the partners' meetings though be denied any right to vote.
The position is naturally seen as a step towards full equity sharing partnership.
Given the nomenclature of his position, he will prima facie be held out as one of the members of the firm.
Where steps are not taken to avoid such holding out, the salaried partner has the same professional responsibilities as a full partner to ensure that his firm complies with the Indemnity Insurance Rules (under which salaried partners are treated as principals) and the Accounts Rules (see Chapter 12); and in theory the Inland Revenue could look to a salaried partner who is held out as a member of the firm for payment of income tax payable in respect of its profits, though in practice such a claim is unlikely.
In the event of the firm's insolvency, such a salaried partner will be liable in respect of the firm's debts together with the equity partners.
It should always be possible for the salaried partner to rely on the nature of his subordinate position to claim to be entitled (at any rate by necessary implication) to an indemnity from the full partners in respect of any additional liabilities to which his being held out has exposed him: but as a matter of good practice, every would-be salaried partner should insist on written terms which clarify his standing in the firm and effectually indemnify him  against extraordinary expenses and liabilities.
Even then, of course, an indemnity is only as good as the persons required to give it: and if the equity partners themselves become bankrupt in the wake of the firm's insolvency, the salaried partner is left exposed.
As to what steps may be effective to prevent a holding out, there may be some discrepancy between what will suffice for the Law Society to exempt a salaried partner from compliance with the professional rules already referred to and what the Court might regard as appropriate in proceedings brought by a creditor of the firm.
For example, in the experience of lawyers generally, use of the expression "salaried partner" will indicate that the person concerned is not a full equity partner in a firm; but the lay client may naturally miss the significance of "salaried" and be more influenced by the reference to "partner" as indicating membership of the firm.
The Court would be bound to look at the matter from the latter point of view.
The dilemma for the firm is that to adopt any other terminology (eg associate) may diminish the status of the salaried partner in both his own and the client's eyes.
(c) Liability of partners to third parties By s6 of the Partnership Act: An act or instrument relating to the business of the firm and done or executed in the firm-name, or in any other manner showing an intention to bind the firm, by any person thereto authorised, whether a partner or not, is binding on the firm and all the partners.
Provided that this section shall not affect any general rule of law relating to the execution of deeds or negotiable instruments.
Whilst this section is confined in its application to acts expressly authorised to be done on behalf of a firm, the general law of agency will continue to attach liability to the firm for the unauthorised acts of its employees when those acts are within the course of their normal or apparent activities for the firm.
Where an unauthorised act outside the normal scope of his authority is committed by a partner or someone holding himself out to be a partner, liability will not attach to the firm.
This principle is reflected in s7 of the Act which provides: Where one partner pledges the credit of the firm for a purpose apparently not connected with the firm's ordinary course of business, the firm is not bound, unless he is in fact specially authorised by the other partners; but this section does not affect any personal liability incurred by an individual partner.
As regards professional negligence and the commission of other torts (in the name and on behalf of the firm within the usual scope of the tortfeasor's authority), s10 of the Partnership Act defines the liability of the firm as follows: Where, by any wrongful act or omission of any partner acting in the ordinary course of the business of the firm, or with the authority of his co-partners, loss or injury is caused to any person not being a partner in the firm, or any penalty is incurred, the firm is liable therefor to the same extent as the partner so acting or omitting to act.
It is likely that innocent partners have the implied right to be indemnified by the tortfeasor in respect of any liability which attaches to them under this section, though this would be subject to any express agreement to the contrary.
Where claims for professional negligence against solicitors are met by payment out of the indemnity fund, the firm will nonetheless bear the amount of the relevant excess or "deductible" and its partners will suffer from claims loading in future years.
In theory the whole of the extra cost to the innocent partners could be recouped from the individual responsible for the negligence, but in practice in most firms this would be regarded phlegmatically as just another expense of the business to be shared by all.
Claims (for what they may be worth) for indemnity from a miscreant partner will more readily be encountered in the context of fraudulent activities in relation to the misapplication of money or property received for or in custody of the firm, to which s11 of the Partnership Act is directed: In the following cases; namely—(a) Where one partner acting within the scope of his apparent authority receives the money or property of a third person and misapplies it; and (b) Where a firm in the course of its business receives money or property of a third person, and the money or property so received is misapplied by one or more of the partners while it is in the custody of the firm; the firm is liable to make good the loss.
Again, the liability depends upon the money or property in question being received in the ordinary course of the receiving partner's activities within the firm and not upon any authority vested in himsee Willett v Chambers (1778) Cowp 814 (misapplication of moneys received from a client for investment on mortgage, the client being billed in the name of the firm), Rhodes v Moules [1895]1 Ch 236 (partner absconding with bearer share warrants proffered by client as collateral security for a mortgage loan, where the firm was in the habit of receiving such securities  from its clients) and Blair v Bromley (1847) 12 Ph 354 (misapplication of money by a partner who paid interest on it to the client, the fraud only coming to light on the partner's bankruptcy.
His innocent co-partner was liable as the money had originally been paid into the firm's account).
No liability will attach to the firm if the fraudulent partner is acting outside the scope of his apparent authority on a matter not connected with the business of the firm.
In this respect the cautionary words of Staughton LJ quoted above were never more apposite; practices which on the old authorities would not have been regarded as part of a solicitor's normal work may well, not least in the wake of the Financial Services Act 1986, become commonplace.
Section 13 of the Partnership Act deals with improper employment of property subject to a trust along similar principles, in recognition that trust money comes into a firm otherwise than in the normal course of its business so that something extra is required to fix liability on the firm as a whole: If a partner, being a trustee, improperly employs trust-property in the business or on account of the partnership, no other partner is liable for the trust-property to the persons beneficially interested therein.
Provided as follows:(1) This section shall not affect any liability incurred by any partner by reason of his having notice of a breach of trust; and (2) Nothing in this section shall prevent trust money from being followed and recovered from the firm if still in its possession or under its control.
The Law Society has in force strict regulations (a summary of which may be found in Chapter 12) regarding clients' money and trust money, though infractions of the relevant rules do seem to occur with depressing frequency.
(d) Apportionment of liability and its duration The liability of partners for acts and omissions for which their firm is legally responsible is prima facie unlimited.
The rules defining the nature of their liability to third parties are contained in ss9 and 12 of the Partnership Act as follows: s9 Every partner in a firm is liable jointly with the other partners…for all debts and obligations of the firm incurred while he is a partner; and after his death his estate is also severally liable in a due course of administration for such debts and obligations, so far as they remain unsatisfied, but subject…to the prior payment of his separate debts.
s12 Every partner is liable jointly with his co-partners and also severally for everything for which the firm while he is a partner therein becomes liable under either of the two last preceding sections.
The liability of someone held out to be a partner is co-extensive with the liability of partners properly so called(see s14 above).
The basic rules enunciated in ss9 and 12 are unvariable so far as concerns the right of a third party to bring proceedings against a firm or against individual members.
Within the firm, however, the burden of liability will be apportioned by agreement, either generally, as for example by reference to profit and loss sharing ratios or by recognition of the right of a salaried partner held out as a partner to an indemnity from the equity partners, or specifically to meet the circumstances of a particular claim against the firm.
The duration of a partner's liability is the subject of s17 of the Partnership Act:(1) A person who is admitted as a partner into an existing firm does not thereby become liable to the creditors of the firm for anything done before he became a partner.
(2) A partner who retires from a firm does not thereby cease to be liable for partnership debts or obligations incurred before his retirement.
(3) A retiring partner may be discharged from any existing liabilities, by an agreement to that effect between himself and the members of the firm as newly constituted and the creditors, and this agreement may be either express or inferred as a fact from the course of dealing between the creditors and the firm as newly constituted.
In practice, as between members of a firm, these rules will undergo some variation.
Thus, when a partner retires, agreement may be reached with the continuing partners to exonerate or indemnify him from or against existing liabilities of the firm, and a new partner joining the firm in his place may be required to accept additional liability in that respect.
Such matters will be considered more fully in Chapters 6 and 8.
Not surprisingly though, an agreement under subs (3) involving the creditors of a firm of solicitors will rarely be encountered.
As regards third parties, liability under this section will depend upon the extent of their actual or presumed knowledge as to the composition of the firm.
Section 36 of the Partnership Act assists in this connection:(1) Where a person deals with a firm after a change in its constitution he is entitled to treat all apparent members of the old firm as still being members of the firm until he has notice of the change.
(2) An advertisement in the London Gazette as to a firm whose principal place of business is in England or Wales…shall be notice as to persons who had no dealings with the firm before the date of the dissolution or change so advertised.
(3) The estate of a partner who dies, or who becomes bankrupt, or of a partner who, not having been known to the person dealing with the firm  to be a partner, retires from the firm, is not liable for partnership debts contracted after the date of the death, bankruptcy, or retirement respectively.
In practice, clients of a firm of solicitors (if not so readily creditors) will usually be informed of a change in the membership quite speedily.
Good professional practice requires notification to clients of major changes to the composition of a firm; the provisions of the Business Names Act oblige firms with fewer than 20 partners to publicise their membership accurately on the firm's stationery; and in any case professional common sense dictates that the sooner clients become informed as to retirements from and admissions to the partnership the better.
Whilst an announcement in the London Gazette is good notice to all persons who are not existing clients or creditors, it is always a question of fact as to whether persons who have had dealings with the firm have received sufficient notice of changes.
Their receipt from the firm of business letters with updated letterheading would doubtless be convincing evidence of actual knowledge, sed quaere where the correspondence is of a wholly formal nature (eg a compliments slip accompanying a cheque in settlement of a bill) which would not ordinarily be expected to be read carefully by the recipient.
A retired solicitor will not be treated as continuing to hold himself out as a partner merely because he has neglected to ensure that revised letterheads are used by the firm from the date of his retirement, but there could be more of a problem when he has been party to a lease of partnership property and steps have not been taken to replace him as one of its lessees/trustees. (e) Sureties Section 18 of the Partnership Act contains a special provision which applies, in the absence of contrary agreement, whenever there is a change in the membership of a firm: A continuing guaranty or cautionary obligation given either to a firm or to a third person in respect of the transactions of a firm is, in the absence of agreement to the contrary, revoked as to future transactions by any change in the constitution of the firm to which, or of the firm in respect of transactions of which, the guaranty or obligation was given.
This derives from the long established principle that the risk to which a guarantor is exposed cannot be altered in any material way without his prior consent.
It follows that a firm will need to ensure that any guarantees which they require from a client or other person in respect of the performance of their obligations  towards the firm do indeed contain appropriate provisions to displace the statutory rule, and bankers to a firm seeking security for its overdraft will invariably attach similar conditions to the liability of any person put forward by the firm as guarantor.
The lien of a solicitors' firm over clients' papers pending payment of its costs will not be lost by a change in membership so long as the papers have come into the firm's possession before the change: they cannot (subject always to any specific arrangements with the client to the contrary) lawfully be retained after such a change in respect of a debt falling due before that event.
3 Actions by and against partners
Actions may be commenced by or against partners in their own individual names or in the name of the firm.
As to the former, the usual procedural rules apply depending on whether proceedings are commenced in the High Court or county court.
Where proceedings are in the name of the firm, Ord 81 of the Rules of the Supreme Court (RSC) constitutes a code relating to partnerships and all its component rules should be construed together.
The procedural distinction between the two types of action is crucial in relation to the question of service and to execution pursuant to judgment.
In this section the salient provisions of Ord 81 are noted.
(a) Parties By RSC Ord 81, r1 actions may be brought by and against partners in the name of their firm so long as that firm (whether plaintiff or defendant) carries on its business within the jurisdiction of the High Court.
An action duly brought against a firm is an effective action against all those who were partners at the date the cause of action accrued (and so, for example, an order for discovery will be in essence an order for discovery against all those persons), and this is irrespective of subsequent changes in the composition of the firm.
There would, however, be considerable practical difficulties in proceeding in this way against a firm where such changes had been substantial.
Where a partner dies before the action is commenced, or later but before judgment, his personal representatives will need to be joined if any judgment is to be enforceable against his estate.
Rule 2 permits a litigant to apply to the court in an action against a firm for an order that full disclosure be made as to the identity and residence of its partners  at the relevant time.
This would not involve disclosure of persons held out to be partners: if a party litigating against a firm is unaware of the identity of persons held out as partners, he cannot by definition have acted in reliance upon the holding out, so liability under s14 of the Partnership Act cannot arise.
(b) Service and acknowledgment A writ or originating summons may be served on a firm in any of the following ways:(1) by service on any one or more of the partners; or (2) by personal service at the principal place of business on the manager of the firm; or (3) by post to the principal place of business;(4) in such other manner as may be agreed between the parties (see Kenneth Allison Ltd v A E Limehouse & Co [1991]3WLR 672).
Acknowledgment cannot be entered in the name of the firm, though the action will continue in that name.
Only partners in their own names can acknowledge service.
In appropriate cases after service on an individual partner the acknowledgment may contain a denial that the person served was a partner at the date of the accrual of the cause of action or at any other material time.
Acknowledgment by a manager served with proceedings is only permissible if he is also a partner in the firm.
(c) Enforcement of judgments Where there has been a judgment against the firm, execution may be issued against:(1) assets of the firm; or (2) any person who has acknowledged service as a partner; or (3) any person served as a partner who has failed to acknowledge service; or (4) any person who has admitted in his pleading to being a partner or who has been found by the court to be a partner.
There are two provisos as follows:(1) execution will not issue against either property or persons without leave of the court where the proceedings have been brought against the firm by one of its members or by another firm having partners in common with the firm against which or against the partners of which execution is sought;(2) execution will not issue against a partner if he is out of the jurisdiction at the date when the proceedings were commenced unless he has acknowledged service or was duly  served within the jurisdiction as a partner or outside the jurisdiction after leave had been obtained to so serve him.
An order for the attachment of the debts of a firm may be obtained notwithstanding that one or more of its members is outside the jurisdiction.
A charging order over an individual partner's share in the firm may be obtained under s23 of the Partnership Act:(1) A writ of execution shall not issue against any partnership property except on a judgment against the firm.
(2) The High Court, or a judge thereof, or a county court, may, on the application by summons of any judgment creditor of a partner, make an order charging that partner's interest in the partnership property and profits with payment of the amount of the judgment debt and interest thereon, and may by the same or a subsequent order appoint a receiver of that partner's share of profits (whether already declared or accruing), and of any other money which may be coming to him in respect of the partnership, and direct all accounts and inquiries, and give all other orders and directions which might have been directed or given if the charge had been made in favour of the judgment creditor by the partner, or which the circumstances of the case may require.
(3) The other partner or partners shall be at liberty at any time to redeem the interest charged, or in case of a sale being directed, to purchase the same.
(4) This section shall apply in the case of a cost-book company as if the company were a partnership within the meaning of this Act.
(5) This section shall not apply to Scotland.
The partnership agreement will usually (Clause 13.03) impose an obligation on partners promptly to discharge their private debts.
Breach of this provision would normally lead to expulsion, if only to pre-empt the possibility of a creditor seeking to have a receiver appointed.
Quite apart from any such provision, if an order is made under s23 (which, it should be noted, confers on the court a separate jurisdiction from that under the Charging Orders Act 1979) the other partners will have the right to dissolve their partnership with the judgment debtor (s33(2) of the Partnership Act).
4 Professional relationships
(a) With the client As mentioned in Chapter 1 all professional regulation relates directly or indirectly to the matters dealt with in r1 of the Solicitors' Practice Rules.
In that rule the freedom of an individual to instruct the solicitor of his choice and the responsibility of a solicitor once instructed to act in the best interests of his client is underlined.
Two codes of practice have been promulgated by the  Law Society relating to Publicity and to Introductions and Referrals.
Summaries of those codes can be found in Chapter 12.
The Law Society also issued a set of written professional standards concerning communications with clients, with the broad aim (now enshrined in Solicitors' Practice Rule 15) of ensuring that clients are kept regularly and fully informed in layman's terms as to the course and conduct of their affairs; as to the identity of the solicitor or other person in the firm having day to day conduct of the matter; as to the nature of the legal issues raised in the case; as to the progress being made; as to the cost (including the availability of legal aid); and as to the prospects of success.
A solicitor will generally be free to decide for himself whether or not to accept instructions from a client, though he must always bear in mind the statutory obligation not to discriminate against potential clients on the grounds of race, colour, sex etc (see Chapter 3) and he must refuse to act or to continue to act in any of the following circumstances:(1) where his client seeks to insist on the solicitor conducting his case in a way which would involve some breach of law or professional regulation;(2) where the client's affairs are outside his professional competence;(3) if he suspects that the instructions purporting to come from his client do not in fact represent the client's wishes;(4) where the solicitor is unable to obtain confirmation from the client of instructions received from a third person;(5) where there is or is likely to be some conflict of interest involving the solicitor himself, his client, other clients (present, past or prospective), or the firm;(6) where the solicitor may be a material and not merely formal witness in any proceedings;(7) where another solicitor has already received instructions which have not been formally withdrawn.
Once instructions have been accepted by the solicitor he is under a professional duty (and, for that matter, a contractual duty) to carry out those instructions with all due skill and diligence and not to terminate his retainer without due cause and upon reasonable notice.
Upon termination of the retainer, the client is entitled to be handed back all relevant papers (ie documents prepared by the solicitor for the benefit of and paid for by the client, eg instructions to counsel, copy letters to third parties etc, and documents  prepared by a third party during the retainer and sent to the solicitor other than at the latter's expense, eg vouchers for the solicitor's disbursements) and other property which may be in the solicitor's possession, though the solicitor does have a lien in respect of his unpaid costs.
That lien, however, may be overridden by an order of the court (under RSC Ord 106, r3; s68 of the Solicitors Act) or the Law Society (under Sched 1 of the Solicitors Act).
The solicitor is entitled to retain documents prepared by himself for his own benefit and for which no charge is made to the client and documents sent by the client to the solicitor the property in which is intended to pass to the solicitor (eg letters from the client to the solicitor).
Clients must be notified of major changes in the membership of a firm, though this rule does not compel a firm with more than a few partners to incur the expense of notifying all its clients every time a partner retires or joins, though there may, of course, be good commercial reasons for doing just that.
Clients of an outgoing partner must, of course, always be informed of his leaving the firm.
A client is entitled to have his affairs treated with complete confidentiality (save with his consent, or where the solicitor's duty is overridden by his public duty to disclose matters tending to the commission of a crime or to disclose information in response to a sub poena or witness summons) and the retained solicitor is under a duty to ensure that his co-partners and staff do nothing which might result in a breach of that rule.
Solicitors are not permitted to enter into an agreement with their clients that purports to exclude their liability for professional misconduct (which extends to professional negligence) though subject to the following rules liability can be limited by contract:(1) liability may not be limited below the minimum level of cover afforded under the Indemnity Fund;(2) liability cannot be limited at all for fraud or reckless disregard of professional obligations;(3) s60(5) of the Solicitors Act avoids any provision in a contentious business agreement purporting to exclude the liability of a solicitor for negligence or to relieve him of his professional responsibilities;(4) ss2(2) and 11(4) of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 will apply to agreements between solicitors and their clients to ensure that limited liability provisions which do not fall foul of any other rule comply with the essential requirement  of reasonableness.
In this connection the court will, it is thought, be prepared to recognise the unavailability of cover beyond certain limits and that such top-up cover as may be arranged may only be available on an aggregate, as opposed to an "each and every claim" , basis;(5) any limitation must be brought to the attention of the client and should be confirmed by the client in writing.
Firms are now required to set up an internal complaints procedure "which shall, inter alia, ensure that clients are informed whom to approach in the event of any problem with the service provided" (Solicitors' Practice Rule 15 and see Chapter 5).
Where that does not resolve any difficulty, the client may pursue his claims with the Solicitors' Complaints Bureau.
Where a solicitor realises himself that he has been negligent or his client makes a claim against him on that ground, the client must be told of the circumstances (if he is not already aware of them) and be advised to seek independent advice.
Notice of the potential or actual claim must be given to the Solicitors' Indemnity Fund Ltd (see Chapter 12 for a summary of the Solicitors' Indemnity Rules).
In Chapter 12 will also be found a summary of the Accounts Rules regulating the handling by solicitors of clients' and trust money and the obligation to pay interest on deposits.
Solicitors' Practice Rule 10 deals with commission received by solicitors in the following terms:(1) a solicitor shall account to his client for any commission received of more than £10 unless, having disclosed to the client the amount of the commission or, if the amount cannot be ascertained, the basis of calculation of the commission, he has the client's agreement to retain it.
(2) this rule does not apply where a member of the public deposits money with a solicitor who is acting as agent for a building society or other financial institution and the solicitor has not advised that person as a client as to the disposition of the money.
The Law Society published guidelines in question and answer form as to accounting for commission received on 23 October 1991 in 88 L S Gazette 33. (b) Professional undertakings An undertaking given by a solicitor in the course of his practice or by his employee on his behalf or by a solicitor qua solicitor (whether or not in the course of his practice) and made with the intent that it should be relied upon is binding in law upon that solicitor personally.
Such undertaking may be given orally or in  writing, though a solicitor can never be compelled to give an undertaking.
The Law Society, though not the courts, will hold a solicitor personally liable (as a matter of professional conduct) on an undertaking given by him on behalf of a third person unless any such liability has been sufficiently and clearly disclaimed.
Moreover, all co-partners of a solicitor who gives an undertaking in the course of his practice are bound to ensure its performance, and this liability will continue even after the undertaker has retired or died.
An undertaking should be given in clear and unambiguous terms, though certain matters will be implied, eg the right of the undertaker to taxation in default of agreement as to the amount of costs which he has undertaken to pay.
But to undertake to pay a certain sum after the sale of a property does not give rise to any implication that the solicitor will be exonerated if no sale proceeds come into his hands.
Generally, an undertaking is construed against the undertaker.
It will depend on the particular circumstances of each case as to whether a solicitor who has suffered financial loss as a result of having to comply with an undertaking given in the course of his acting for a client can look to the latter for reimbursement.
(c) With other solicitors The overriding principle is the obligation to act with complete frankness and good faith consistent with a solicitor's responsibilities to his client.
This extends to such matters as the avoidance of abusive correspondence or personal behaviour and the desirability of warning that a telephone conversation is being recorded.
If one solicitor instructs another on behalf of his client he becomes personally liable for that other's costs, unless some other arrangement has been agreed.
A solicitor may not accept instructions in a matter in which to his knowledge another solicitor has been retained without the consent of that other solicitor, nor should a solicitor instructed in a particular matter communicate directly with anyone who has retained a solicitor on the other side, though a direct approach may be justified if there has been difficulty in making contact with that solicitor.
A solicitor may properly suggest that his own client makes personal contact with the other side.
Save where considerations of privilege and confidentiality are involved and subject to agreement about costs, a solicitor should supply information about documents in his possession upon request from another solicitor.
3 The Partners Inter Se
1 Introduction
This chapter considers the relationships between the partners themselves during the course of their business.
Those relationships are governed by general legal principles and by statute but most importantly by self-regulation which in any well run solicitors' practice will be embodied in a properly drafted and partnership agreement kept up to date by regular review.
In the absence of such agreement, the partners will be faced with the unattractive alternatives of:(1) concluding appropriate agreements ad hoc, quite possibly under the pressure of burgeoning dispute between the partners; or (2) accepting regulation of the affairs of the firm under the Partnership Act which will ensure that where agreement proves impossible dissolution will follow.
2 The duty of good faith
This duty which every partner owes to each of his co-partners lies at the very heart of the partnership relationship.
It may be described in general terms as a duty which requires a partner to act openly, fairly and honestly in all partnership dealings and which prohibits his obtaining any private benefit at the expense of the firm.
The origin of the duty is to be found at common law though it is reinforced by certain provisions in the Partnership Act.
It is not a duty which can be overridden by consent of the partners and its breach by one partner will in the ordinary course be a ground for dissolution at the behest of the other or others.
Its importance is invariably recognised in the partnership agreement itself by the inclusion of a "just and faithful" clause (Clause 13.02).
For practical  purposes the duty may be further dissected under the following heads.
(a) Every partner must make full disclosure to his co-partners This duty is given statutory force by s28 of the Partnership Act: Partners are bound to render true accounts and full information of all things affecting the partnership to any partner or his legal representatives.
The importance of this aspect of a partner's duty will be readily apparent, for example, in relation to decisions taken at the insistence of a majority against the opposition of the remaining partners or where the question of a partner's expulsion or compulsory retirement arises (see Blisset v Daniel (1853) 10 Hare 493).
The larger the firm the greater will be the difficulty in keeping members fully au fait with developments affecting the practice.
Some system of delegated management (to committees or separate departments) might need to be introduced which would not involve all partners in all aspects of the firm's affairs on a day to day basis.
Nonetheless every partner will have a right to know what is being carried on in his firm's name and for which he is ultimately answerable.
A partner must not be prohibited access to information at his reasonable request.
Wherever management of affairs is delegated sufficient reports should regularly be prepared for submission at full partners' meetings.
(b) Every partner must account to his co-partners for his private profits This is recognised in s29 of the Partnership Act:(1) Every partner must account to the firm for any benefit derived by him without the consent of the other partners from any transaction concerning the partnership, or from any use by him of the partnership property name or business connexion. (2) This section applies also to transactions undertaken after a partnership has been dissolved by the death of a partner, and before the affairs thereof have been completely wound up, either by any surviving partner or by the representatives of the deceased partner.
Thus if a partner obtains a renewal of a lease of partnership property in his own name, he is not permitted to treat that lease as his own property to the exclusion of his co-partners while the business continues and before there has been a distribution of assets following a dissolution (see Featherstonhaugh v Fenwick  (1810) 17 Ves Jr 298).
And the partner who purchases the reversion on such a lease is fully accountable for any profit made on re-sale (see Thompson's Trustee v Heaton [1974]1 WLR 605).
A solicitor who personally receives financial benefits as the director (appointed as a result of his connection with the firm) of a company for whom the firm has acted, or from buying property from or through the agency of a client of the firm or from investing in a business run by a client of the firm will, unless he has cleared matters (after full disclosure) with his co-partners, be accountable under this head.
A solicitor in receipt of directors' fees from his family company, however, would be under no duty to account to his co-partners in the absence of express agreement to that effect.
As a matter of good practice, not least because such matters will often touch on the ability of a partner to devote his full time and attention to the firm, full disclosure should always be made of such privately remunerated activities, whether or not the profits therefrom are strictly due to be brought into account.
(c) No partner should carry on any business which competes with the firm or from which he derives benefit at the expense of the firm Section 30 of the Partnership Act provides as follows: If a partner, without the consent of the other partners, carries on any business of the same nature as and competing with that of the firm, he must account for and pay over to the firm all profits made by him in that business.
The statutory provision is restricted in scope.
Whilst the partnership agreement may well expressly or by implication prohibit a partner from becoming involved in other (non-competing) business in an attempt to secure his full time devotion to the firm, breach of such provision will not result in the offending partner becoming accountable in respect of profits earned from that other business.
Nevertheless any such other business will be likely to interfere with the partner's ability to devote his full time and attention to the firm: such matters should be discussed between all partners and special arrangements agreed as necessary in relation to individual partners to be either incorporated in the partnership agreement itself or contained in a separate memorandum to which all partners are signatories.
The duty of good faith is owed between would-be partners from the start of their negotiations and endures until the winding-up of  the firm is completed by the distribution of its surplus assets.
Remedies available in the case of breach of the duty will include having the partnership agreement itself set aside, dissolution of the partnership, expulsion of the offending partner (where sufficient powers exist for this purposesee Chapter 7), actions for accounts and damages, and the discretionary remedies of injunction and receivership.
There is little in this which is peculiar to a solicitors' partnership dispute but with regard to the last noted remedy the court recognises the great and possibly irreparable harm that could be done by appointing a receiver over a professional firm and may be reluctant to make such an order at the behest of one disaffected partner (see Floydd v Cheney [1970]Ch 602 and Sobell v Boston [1975]1 WLR 1587).
3 Self-regulationthe partnership agreement
There is no rule of law or statutory provision or professional regulation which requires solicitors in partnership to reduce the terms of their agreement to writing.
While there is no dispute between partners and goodwill reigns on all sides, documentary evidence of the business relationship will seldom be necessary.
The risk, however, is that come the day of dispute adequate proof of the business practices will be difficult if not impossible to assemble and that the default provisions of the Partnership Act (see below) will have to be applied to sort out the problem.
That is likely to please no-one.
In practice, though virtually every firm should have a written agreement or deed, a surprising number do not, and even where one is in existence it is frequently open to doubt as to whether its terms accurately or adequately reflect the actual practices of the partnership.
Execution of the partnership agreement as a deed is only required when, and this will rarely be the case with solicitors' firms, it seeks to transfer land or an interest in land: otherwise an agreement under hand will be sufficient.
A quick glance at a standard form partnership agreement (Appendix 1) gives a good impression of the wide range of matters upon which agreement is desirable.
The following chapters of this book will consider each of the usual provisions.
This chapter deals with more general aspects of partnership agreements.
It is important to realise that the complexity of the business carried on by solicitors in partnership is such as to make the  adoption of a standard draft risky and unsatisfactory.
No two firms will be alike, nor will the personalities of their partners.
Nowhere, for example, will this be more apparent than in determining how management decisions are to be taken, the circumstances in which a partner is liable to be expelled, and how the shares of partners who leave the firm are to be acquired.
These are matters which must be attended to as a matter of priority before business commences: it makes no sense at all to leave them to be dealt with in accordance with the Partnership Act.
The properly drafted agreement will contain only those provisions which the partners have discussed fully and agreed upon.
It would be counter-productive to include a clause which no-one really regards as appropriate to the particular circumstances of the firm just because that clause is commonly found in the precedent books: better by far to leave it out until agreement on a satisfactory alternative can be agreed.
This indeed is perhaps the principal danger of using a complete "off-the-peg" draft: the implications of each provision may not receive sufficient consideration.
In any well-run firm the agreement will not be allowed to remain under lock and key unlooked at and unconsidered for years at a time.
Whilst the provisions of the agreement should when drafted accurately reflect what the partners desire to happen in certain specified events or, at any rate, what the partners may have agreed as a satisfactory basis for subsequent negotiation or a sufficient fall-back position if those negotiations should break down, they should be kept under regular review.
The occasion of a partner leaving or joining the firm should always be taken as the opportunity to update the provisions of the agreement and, since each single provision is properly looked at in the context of the entire document, it is the whole agreement which should then be reconsidered and not simply isolated clauses.
Whenever difficulty is experienced in the course of business, such as dealing with a partner who appears not to be pulling his full weight or a developing personality clash between two partners, if the existing agreement proves inadequate to the task of resolving the dispute it should as a matter of priority be revised so that from then on it sufficiently deals with such matters in a way that takes account of the actual experience.
Amendments to the agreement can properly be, and frequently are, made by supplemental agreement.
The partners should not, however, fail to reconsider the principal agreement (and any earlier supplemental agreements) at the same time, for that is the  only way to ensure consistency between all documents.
Matters which are not thought fit for inclusion in the agreement itself (perhaps to cover some short term matter affecting one partner alone) can sometimes be accommodated by a side letter, though it must be signed by all partners to be binding on the firm.
All too frequently heads of agreement alone are drawn up and the full agreement left for later long delayed execution.
This is not to be encouraged, particularly if it turns out that only some of numerous partners have actually signed the paper.
The drafting of a full partnership agreement is a difficult and time-consuming business.
In many cases it will be best to seek professional assistance from outside the firm.
That course may offer the best hope that the entire document will be given the desirable objective overview: in house productions tend to have a disjointed appearance born of their production by committee which often leads to inconsistency and difficulty of construction.
(a) Conflicting interests In settling the terms of the partnership agreement there is often a need to strike a balance between the conflicting interests and aspirations of individuals and the firms of which they are members.
This is especially true when considering provisions dealing with the retirement and expulsion of partners.
Admission to a partnership is no longer looked upon so frequently as in the past as a job for life either by the individual solicitor whose loyalty to the firm may well be strained by the availability elsewhere of fresh challenges for greater rewards or by the firm which will be reluctant to tolerate any falling off in the performance of its partners which may affect overall profit levels.
While individuals may be seeking:(1) freedom to advance their careers by moving on to other firms, but "job security" in the meanwhile;(2) payment, on death or retirement, of the full value of their partnership shares (including capital contributions, undrawn profits, goodwill etc); and (3) upon death and/or retirement from practice, financial security for themselves and their families, the firm's priorities in the interests of preserving profitability are likely to be concentrated on:(1) the need to impose restrictions on the freedom of partners to leave without adequate notice and/or thereafter to compete with the firm;(2) the ability to remove from the firm any partner who has failed to meet proper professional standards who is disruptive or who is not seen to be pulling his weight; and (3) the need to minimise the strain on the firm's finances when a partner leaves whilst recognising a certain moral responsibility towards the family of a deceased partner.
All these matters can and should be tackled in the partnership agreement in a way that, whilst not excluding sufficient flexibility to make the particular arrangements fit the precise circumstances of a partner's departure, at any rate eliminates doubt as to the broad basis from which negotiations should start.
(b) Continuations There is a statutory presumption that where a partnership continues after the time fixed for its termination the provisions of the original agreement will continue to apply.
Thus s27 of the Partnership Act states:(1) Where a partnership entered into for a fixed term is continued after the term has expired, and without any express new agreement, the rights and duties of the partners remain the same as they were at the expiration of the term, so far as is consistent with the incidents of a partnership at will.
(2) A continuance of the business by the partners or such of them as habitually acted therein during the term, without any settlement or liquidation of the partnership affairs, is presumed to be a continuance of the partnership.
This section will be displaced by the adoption of a new partnership agreement but not by an unexecuted draft or by heads of agreement unless their terms have in fact been acted upon or all the partners have agreed to be bound by those terms (see Walters v Bingham [1988]1 FTLR 260).
(c) Construction of partnership agreements The following general rules apply:(1) The agreement will not be presumed to be exhaustive so as to disallow evidence of actual practices of the partnership said to be inconsistent with the written terms or alleged to indicate how those terms should be construed.
(2) No individual provision in an agreement will be looked at and construed in isolation from the entire document (and any documents subsidiary thereto, eg accession agreements, variations of particular clauses etc).
(3) Evidence of negotiations leading to the agreement and of the  interpretations placed on it by individual partners will generally be inadmissible.
(4) The agreement will be construed to take account of the known commercial objectives of the partners.
(5) The agreement will be construed so as to prevent fraud.
Thus, for example, a provision declaring signed accounts to be binding will not apply in the event that a partner is induced to sign a false account believing it to be true.
(6) The agreement will be construed so as to avoid unfairness or exploitation of individual partners.
Hence the strict construction of expulsion clauses and restraint covenants (see Chapters 7 and 8).
(7) The agreement will be construed so as to give it business efficacy.
4 Self-regulationconduct
The terms of a partnership agreement may be varied by the unanimous agreement of the partners.
Such agreement may be express, and contained in a separate instrument of variation or in a written minute of the decision taken, or it may be implied from the conduct of the partners.
This principle is given statutory effect in s19 of the Partnership Act: The mutual rights and duties of partners, whether ascertained by agreement or defined by this Act, may be varied by the consent of all the partners, and such consent may be either express or inferred from a course of dealing.
Evidence of variation by conduct may be found in the books of account of the firm, in letters written by partners, and the oral evidence of employees, agents and others.
Certain conduct may, rather than effect a variation of the agreement generally, have the effect of creating an estoppel in a particular case, not infrequently in connection with the possible expulsion of a partner on the ground of his breach of provisions in the agreement where his behaviour has in fact been tolerated over a considerable time.
5 Regulation by statute
(a) Under the Partnership Act As already mentioned, Pt II of the Partnership Act contains certain basic provisions to regulate the rights and duties of partners in so far as they are not defined in writing or otherwise  discernible in some course of conduct.
Only one of these provisions (s23—which has already been discussed in Chapter 2) cannot be overridden by the partners themselves.
Some of these clauses have been considered earlier in this chapter.
Sections 20 and 21 deal with the holding of partnership property as follows: s20 (1) All property and rights and interests in property originally brought into the partnership stock or acquired, whether by purchase or otherwise, on account of the firm or for the purposes and in the course of the partnership business, are called in this Act partnership property, and must be held and applied by the partners exclusively for the purposes of the partnership and in accordance with the partnership agreement.
(2) Provided that the legal estate or interest in any land…which belongs to the partnership shall devolve according to the nature and tenure thereof, and the general rules of law thereto applicable, but in trust, so far as necessary, for the persons beneficially interested in the land under this section.
(3) Where co-owners of an estate or interest in any land,…not being itself partnership property, are partners as to profits made by the use of that land or estate, and purchase other land or estate out of the profits to be used in like manner, the land or estate so purchased belongs to them, in the absence of an agreement to the contrary, not as partners but as co-owners for the same respective estates and interests as are held by them in the land or estate first mentioned at the date of the purchase.
s21 Unless the contrary intention appears, property bought with money belonging to the firm is deemed to have been bought on account of the firm.
The onus is on the partners themselves to determine what property belongs to their firm.
Section 20 will come into operation in the absence of express agreement or other clear evidence of the intention of the partners.
It is thought that the presumption contained in subs (3) in relation to the purchase of land would be applied by analogy in the event of a dispute over the ownership of other assets purchased in similar circumstances.
It may be noted, however, that disputes among solicitors as to what property belongs to their firm are comparatively rarely encountered.
The provisions which might be included in a partnership agreement relating to the ownership of partnership property are considered in more detail in Chapter 4.
Section 22 reaffirms the notion that a partnership share is ordinarily to be seen as a proportion of the net distributable assets of the firm available for distribution at the end of the winding-up process and not as comprising a severable share in each of the partnership assets—though, as mentioned in Chapter 10, the Revenue may take a different line.
So the section provides: Where land or any heritable interest therein has become partnership property, it shall, unless the contrary intention appears, be treated as between the partners (including the representatives of a deceased partner) and also as between the heirs of a deceased partner and his executors or administrators, as personal or moveable and not real or heritable property.
Section 24 lays down the basic default rules as to the interests and duties of partners subject to their special agreements: The interests of partners in the partnership property and their rights and duties in relation to the partnership shall be determined, subject to any agreement express or implied between the partners, by the following rules:(1) All the partners are entitled to share equally in the capital and profits of the business, and must contribute equally towards the losses whether of capital or otherwise sustained by the firm.
(2) The firm must indemnify every partner in respect of payments made and personal liabilities incurred by him (a) In the ordinary and proper conduct of the business of the firm; or,(b) In or about anything necessarily done for the preservation of the business or property of the firm.
(3) A partner making, for the purpose of the partnership, any actual payment or advance beyond the amount of capital which he has agreed to subscribe, is entitled to interest at the rate of 5 per cent per annum from the date of the payment or advance.
(4) A partner is not entitled, before the ascertainment of profits, to interest on the capital subscribed by him.
(5) Every partner may take part in the management of the partnership business.
(6) No partner shall be entitled to remuneration for acting in the partnership business.
(7) No person may be introduced as a partner without the consent of all existing partners.
(8) Any difference arising as to ordinary matters connected with the partnership business may be decided by a majority of the partners, but no change may be made in the nature of the partnership business without the consent of all existing partners.
(9) The partnership books are to be kept at the place of business of the partnership (or the principal place, if there is more than one), and every partner may, when he thinks fit, have access to and inspect and copy any of them.
The above provisions constitute what the law will presume to be the intention of partners in the management of their affairs in the absence of evidence (not necessarily documentary) that they have agreed otherwise.
No pretence is made that this is an ideal code: indeed its paucity (subs (8) for example has well nigh limitless  potential for disputes as to what matters might be considered "ordinary" in the circumstances of a particular firm), and the reliance on dissolution as the means to resolve disputes, is the very reason why a properly drafted partnership agreement should be regarded as commercially indispensable.
Sections 25 and 26 deal with the expulsion and retirement of partners as follows: s25 No majority of the partners can expel any partner unless a power to do so has been conferred by express agreement between the partners.
s26 (1) Where no fixed term has been agreed upon for the duration of the partnership, any partner may determine the partnership at any time on giving notice of his intention so to do to all the other partners.
(2) Where the partnership has originally been constituted by deed, a notice in writing, signed by the partner giving it, shall be sufficient for this purpose.
Drastic though the remedy is, no firm of solicitors can realistically afford to risk being unable for want of an appropriate agreement to remove any partner whose professional or personal conduct has become an embarrassment or worse.
Equally most firms will want to make express provision for the retirement of their partners, though that need not involve compulsory retirement on attaining a specified age.
The drafting of such provisions (Clauses 18 and 19) is no straightforward affair.
This is discussed in Chapter 7.
Section 31 explains the rights of an assignee of share in partnership:(1) An assignment by a partner of his share in the partnership, either absolute or by way of mortage or redeemable charge, does not, as against the other partners, entitle the assignee, during the continuance of the partnership, to interfere in the management or administration of the partnership business or affairs, or to require any accounts of the partnership transactions, or to inspect the partnership books, but entitles the assignee only to receive the share of profits to which the assigning partner would otherwise be entitled, and the assignee must accept the account of profits agreed to by the partners.
(2) In case of a dissolution of the partnership, whether as respects all the partners or as respects the assigning partner, the assignee is entitled to receive the share of the partnership assets to which the assigning partner is entitled as between himself and the other partners, and, for the purpose of ascertaining that share, to an account as from the date of the dissolution.
Acquisition of the share of one partner by another is an exception to the duty of good faith in so far as the acquiring partner is not  obliged to inform his co-partners of his purchase.
Such private dealings, however, are not likely to occur with any frequency in modern solicitors' partnerships.
The relationship between the personal representatives of a deceased partner and the trustee of a bankrupt partner and the continuing partners is considered further in Chapter 8. (b) Under the Solicitors' Act Much of the work of a solicitor is now the subject of regulations made by the Law Society under the Solicitors' Act.
The impact of these, increasingly numerous, regulations upon the partnership as a legal entity and upon the partnership agreement itself is limited, though where relevant is noted throughout this book.
Chapter 12 contains summaries of the regulatory material presently in force so far as it may affect the running of the partnership business.
(c) Under anti-discriminatory legislation The Sex Discrimination Acts 1976 and 1986 These apply to all partnerships irrespective of the number of partners (before 1986 they only applied to partnerships with six or more partners).
The Act proscribes discrimination on the grounds of sex or marital status.
The Race Relations Act 1976 This Act has not been similarly amended and applies only where there are six or more partners.
The Act prohibits discrimination on the grounds of race, colour or nationality.
The Disabled Persons (Employment) Acts 1944 and 1958 These make provision for the employment of a quota of disabled persons in larger firms (with more than 20 employees).
The Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970 The Act deals with the provision of suitable facilities (access to premises etc) for disabled employees.
The Equal Pay Act 1980 This obliges employers to pay similar salaries to employees of either sex who are engaged in similar duties.
Detailed consideration of these Acts is beyond the scope of this book, but reference is made throughout where the draftsman of a partnership agreement should bear in mind their possible impact—most obviously in connection with maternity leave (Clause  15.02–15.04) and part-time employment.
Quite apart from statute, as a matter of professional conduct solicitors must not so discriminate in their professional dealings with their clients, fellow solicitors, employees, barristers or others.
Particular care to avoid discrimination needs to be taken in regard to the appointment and removal of partners or employees and to the conditions under which they are required to work, the acceptance or rejection of instructions from clients, and the selection and instruction of counsel.
The Law Society has issued guidance notes for equal opportunities in solicitors' firms which reproduce a standard policy for their use which has been drawn up on the basis of recommendations of the Equal Opportunities Commission and the Commission for Racial Equality.
4 Initial Decisions
1 Introduction
It is not the purpose of this or the following chapter to present a comprehensive guide to the administration of a solicitors' practice or to advise as to the ways in which its profitability can be increased.
Matters such as the hiring and firing of staff, the selection of office equipment, filing and costing systems, office layout and design and the formation and maintenance of a good working library are beyond the scope of this book.
The interested reader is invited to dip into "Organisation and Management of a Solicitor's Practice" (Longman, 1980, updated to 1991) for guidance in these respects.
Nor is there offered a guide to accountancy principles and practice.
The object of this book being to consider those problems essentially of a legal nature which will commonly occur in all partnerships, this chapter is concerned with fundamental decisions which need to be taken from the outset of the firm's existence; Chapter 5 with day to day problems of management.
It is assumed that provisional agreement has been reached between prospective partners, all of whom are fully qualified solicitors; that the firm name has been chosen and premises identified; that certificates and licences have been obtained as necessary in relation to specialist aspects of the work of the practice and registration obtained for VAT; that the Solicitors' Indemnity Fund has been informed of the existence of the new practice; and generally that there is no legal or professional obstacle to accepting instructions from clients.
What does remain to be done (although in an ideal world it will already have been settled) is to record the terms upon which the members have entered into their partnership, and ironically that will involve particular consideration of what is to happen when the partnership comes to an end.
2 The property and finances of the firm
Few other aspects of the business of a firm give rise to dispute more frequently than those in relation to the ownership of its property and the extent to which individual partners are interested in its assets.
(a) Capital The initial financing of the firm will be contributed in cash or kind by the partners and reinforced by bank borrowing.
Sometimes a partner will be recruited on the strength of his professional expertise alone and yet receive a share in the firm's capital: where such arrangement can properly be regarded as commercial (and this will usually be the case) there will be no adverse tax consequences (see Chapter 10).
In other cases, a partner's contribution may be agreed to be collected in over a period of years out of his profit share.
While that may seem an attractive option for a young partner, it ought to be remembered that such payments will come out of his taxed income.
It may be more efficient for the partner concerned to raise his capital contribution by way of bank loan, the interest on which will be fully deductible from his income before tax.
Whatever may be the position, the agreed capital shares must be agreed at the outset, for there is no presumption that capital entitlement is the precise reflection of capital contribution and, failing specific agreement, s24(1) of the Partnership Act imposes equal sharing.
The partnership agreement should therefore contain the following provisions: 1.
(Clause 7.01) A statement of the initial capital of the firm preferably expressed in monetary terms (for which purpose, agreed values should be entered in the firm's books in respect of any non-monetary contributions).
A general reference to the state of the partners' capital accounts for the time being to establish both the quantum of the firm's capital and its members' shares therein may be substituted, with the important caveat, mentioned below, that poor accounting practices may serve to confuse the matter.
2.
A statement of the amounts paid or credited as paid to each partner so as to establish the agreed capital sharing ratio (Clause 7.01 and Sched).
More fashionably, this may be expressed in terms of "capital points" which may facilitate mental calculation of the agreed ratio at any given time but otherwise add nothing to the traditional method.
All too frequently, however, the relevant  clause simply refers to the firm's capital by some generalised expression such as "the sums brought into the firm by each partner and shown standing to his credit in the books of the firm" .
That rather presupposes that the firm's books are prepared correctly.
For example, it is bad but commonly encountered accounting practice to show profits undrawn by the partners in each accounting year as standing to the credit of their capital accounts.
Such sums may, of course, be specifically agreed to be treated as additional capital contributions, though in practice that possibility is unlikely to have been discussed, and it would certainly be a rather haphazard method of raising finance.
Injections of "capital" from this source will probably differ wildly from one partner to the next and so, taking the generalised capital clause at its face value, adjustments to capital sharing ratios will appear to be taking place at annual intervals, whereas no change at all will have been intended by the partners.
The unscrambling process could be time consuming and expensive.
Proper accounting, on the other hand, will credit undrawn profits not agreed to be capitalised to the current account of each partner and the capital account will be confined strictly to agreed capital contributions.
Drawings from a properly maintained capital account are not permissible without the consent of the partners and a partnership agreement will ordinarily not make any express provision in this regard.
Drawings from a current account, or from non-capital moneys shown in an "irregular" capital account, would prima facie be allowed—which again highlights the need for proper accounting to avoid confusion and to reduce the potential for dispute.
Many of the decisions in this regard will be taken annually by the partners: where departures from the general rules are agreed, they should be promptly set down in writing and signed by all partners.
3.
In some firms, interest is agreed to be paid in respect of the partners' capital accounts (Clause 7.03): that fact together with the agreed rate should be specified, for it would not be presumed.
When paid out of the firm's profits (or credited to current accounts) such interest would be taxed as part of the receiving partner's income from the firm.
4.
Raising fresh capital from the partners depends on agreement as and when the need arises (unless some medium or long term plan has been settled in advance) and the matter does not strictly need to be addressed in the agreement.
It would not be unusual, however, to provide (Clause 7.02) that new capital should be provided in the same proportions as the original  contributions unless otherwise agreedwhich would at any rate provide the basis for subsequent negotiation when additional funding is found to be required.
Alternatively it might simply be recorded that additional capital should be credited in the firm's books to the partner who contributes it as an addition to his share—with a corresponding alteration in the capital sharing ratio.
To include any such anticipatory provision has the merit of bringing home to the individual partners the importance of viewing their involvement in the firm as a long term commitment, which may serve to reduce, if not to eliminate, the pain felt if and when a cash call has to be made.
5.
A particular problem which is frequently overlooked (perhaps because the distinction is not made explicit in the Partnership Act itself) is the allocation of capital profits, ie the difference between the book values of partnership assets and their market value.
By virtue of s44(b) of the Act, such profits will (subject to contrary agreement) be shared between the partners on a (solvent) dissolution according to their profit sharing ratios.
The partnership agreement should make it clear if this is not what is required.
And, as a matter of good drafting, specific mention should be made of capital profits as a separate item (eg in connection with payments to outgoing partners) to avoid any ambiguity (Clauses 10.01 and 20.02.2).
(b) Profits and losses The partnership agreement will, as appropriate to the particular circumstances of the firm, typically contain the following provisions: 1.
(Clause 10.01 and Sched) A statement of the agreed profit sharing ratio as agreed between the partners at the outset in relation to the ordinary income of the firm.
Many and varied are the arrangements which firms may adopt in this respect.
The ratio may be simply expressed as a percentage or fraction of the firm's profits or as "income points" ; it may involve preferential salaries; it may vary as the firm's profits fall within certain predetermined bands; it may be subject to reduction if specified targets are missed; it may contain a discretionary element to be awarded by way of performance bonuses.
In the usual way the ratio will largely if not wholly be determined in advance of preparation of the firm's accounts, though, if desired, to follow a modern practice of American origin, final determination of each partner's share could be agreed to be deferred until after the year's profits  have been ascertained and the performance of each partner assessed in that context: in the interim, permitted drawings would be based on past performance.
There is no need whatever to follow the capital sharing ratio and no presumption would be made that that should be implied.
The agreed ratio will reflect a number of considerations, such as:(a) the age and experience of each partner;(b) the amount of time a partner is required to devote to the firm;(c) the nature of each partner's work (legal aid or private, fee earning only or including a generous proportion of remuneration for office and appointments held);(d) the extent to which the profits of separate departments within the firm differ substantially from one another ;(e) whether the firm's policy tends to equality of reward (and equality would be imposed under the Partnership Act in the absence of some other agreed ratio) or whether, for example , it attempts to relate profit shares to salaries in comparable employments.
This is an especially fertile area for discontent in any firm as junior and middle ranking partners press for increased reward for increased work and senior partners are reluctant to contemplate any reduction in their incomes before retirement; and where one area of the work of a firm consistently produces higher returns than others, the clamour for tangible recognition in the form of greater profit shares for the partners involved can all too easily become the rock upon which the whole firm eventually founders.
It is unrealistic in these times to work on the assumption that profit sharing ratios, once fixed, are sacrosanct only ever to be changed when the number of partners changes.
There may well be a case for fixing the ratio a year at a time.
The problem for the draftsman of a partnership agreement who specifies the initial ratio and provides that in future years it shall be as agreed between the partners at the beginning or end of each year is that the equal sharing required under the Partnership Act in default of agreement will always benefit at least one of the partners.
Maybe, an in terrorem provision to the effect that:(a) the ratio for year one should be [as specified];(b) the ratio for future years shall be determined annually by the partners; and (c) pending agreement by the partners, no drawings at all are permitted, would provide the necessary pressure for all partners to approach the matter constructively, but it would be a bold firm which chose such a course.
In the larger firms, determination of profit sharing ratios will be entrusted to a committee whose conclusions all partners would be bound to accept or would be put into effect pending any contrary decision of the partners.
2.
A provision for sharing profits of a capital nature (see above) and losses, though the ratio will often be the same as at 1 (Clauses 10.01 and 10.09).
3.
A provision for the payment of a salary to a partner, effectively as a preferential share of profits.
This need not be confined to salaried partners as such, but could be extended to all; for example, introducing a salary scale based on age and experience comparable with Civil Service pay at its administrative grades with an equal division of surplus profits.
4.
A provision for partners to be repaid their expenses incurred on behalf of the firm out of profits before any division thereof (Clause 10.04).
5.
A provision for the partners to draw in advance of final ascertainment of their profit sharethe limits of which might conveniently be defined by reference to some proportion of the previous year's profits (Clause 10.03) making sufficient allowance for the possibility that that year's profit levels may not be repeated let alone exceeded.
6.
A provision for division of profits after the firm's annual accounts have been approved (see below) but with provision for appropriate amounts on account of anticipated liability to income tax to be withheld out of the undrawn balance of each partner's share at the year's end (Clause 10.02) and for repayment of excessive drawings (Clause 10.03).
7.
A provision, exceptionally, for interest to be paid on undrawn profits (Clause 10.05).
8.
A provision for the partners to bring in to the firm's account their fees and other remuneration derived from offices and appointments held by them (see below)(Clause 10.06).
(c) Partnerships premises and property The arguments in favour of partnerships holding the freehold of their premises or seeking leasehold offices are finely balanced.
Economic conditions, nationally and locally, the size and location of the firm, and the availability of finance will all have a part to play in the final decision.
Essentially, of course, a freehold is seen  as an appreciating asset the value of which can be realised for the benefit of the firm free from tax (where the proceeds of sale are reinvested in other firm property).
The disadvantage (occasionally overwhelming) is the capital cost, even allowing for relief in respect of interest charges and capital allowances for new buildings and other improvements.
A leasehold is free from such initial expense, though the incidence of rent and other onerous covenants may reduce its appeal.
The partnership agreement should contain express mention of the following matters: 1.
The agreed terms of use of property in the ownership of one only, or some but not all, of the partners which is used by the firm (Clause 8).
It will be in everyone's interest that the precise arrangements are specified, eg whether the partnership has a tenancy or contractual licence to occupy and in consideration of what payments, or whether the property is to be enjoyed rent free, or whether the firm is given only a non-exclusive personal licence which will determine on the death or retirement of the partner who grants the same.
Agreement as to the responsibility for repairs should also be recorded.
2.
The legal title to freehold or leasehold premises can only be held by a maximum of four persons.
In the case of partnership premises it is desirable to ensure that the four partners chosen to go on the title are specifically declared to hold their interest (freehold or leasehold) on trust for the firm.
In the case of a freehold this requires a straightforward declaration of trust for the benefit of the partners for the time being of the firm and, possibly, express provision for the retirement of a trustee on his ceasing to be a partner.
A lease, because of the involvement of the landlord (who is not or who at any rate in his capacity as landlord is not a member of the firm), needs not only an appropriate declaration that the named partners joined as lessees hold the term on trust but also:(a) a declaration that possession of the demised premises by partners who are not trustees of the lease shall not by itself constitute a breach of the usual covenants against parting with or sharing possession;(b) a provision which dispenses with the landlord's consent (or makes it automatic) to an assignment of the demised premises to partners other than the original lessees or to the vesting of the premises in new trustees for the firm.
It is important to ensure that only current partners appear as  lessees/trustees of partnership premises, if only to avoid any possibility that a retired partner who has not been duly replaced on the title could be regarded as still being held out as a member of the firm.
The necessary changes should be effected before a retiring partner actually leaves the firm.
Where this is overlooked, it is not unknown for the continuing partners to have difficulty in persuading their former colleague that it is in his own interest that changes need to be made.
The agreement should accordingly impose all necessary obligations in this behalf (Clause 24).
3.
Where the firm is taking over another practice, accepting its outstanding liabilities and receiving payments for work in progress at the date of the takeover, these matters should be spelled out, particularly where the partners of the acquired practice or some of them join the new firm.
3 Accounts
The partnership agreement should contain detailed provisions for the taking of the firm's accounts.
This will be done:(1) annually in accordance with Revenue requirements (see Chapter 10)(Clause 12.01); and (2) extraordinarily upon the departure of one of the partners in connection with the payment out to him or his estate of the value of his partnership share (Clause 20.02.1).
All agreements relevant to the taking of accounts should be clearly set out.
Thus, where at the outset it has been decided (Clause 12.01) to leave the goodwill of the firm out of individual account so as to allow it to enure for the benefit of the continuing practice, or where, for similar reasons, revaluations of partnership assets have been ruled out, this should be specified (Clause 12.02).
In the case of solicitors, some of the partners may well derive an income from offices and appointments held outside the normal scope of their practice.
It will, essentially, be a matter for negotiation between the members of the firm as to whether or not such remuneration should be treated as income of the firm: whatever is decided should be duly recorded in the agreement (Clause 10.06).
The agreement (Clause 11) will specifically impose on the partners an obligation to do all things necessary to ensure that the firm's books are in order and that all proper information is available for the firm's accountants.
Each partner will have the right to inspect the firm's books, but not to remove them from the place  where they are agreed to be kept.
Every firm of solicitors is subject to detailed professional regulation in relation to its accounting practices, with particular reference to its handling of clients' money.
Essentially, it is necessary:(1) to keep clients' money and trust money separate from the firm's own accounts;(2) to account to clients for interest earned on their moneys held on deposit whether in designated or undesignated client accounts in the circumstances set out in the rules; and (3) to submit the firm's books and accounting practices to annual inspection by a qualified accountant.
Failure to satisfy that accountant that the rules have been observed to the letter will attract disciplinary procedures against the firm and its partners.
The Solicitors' Accounts Rules 1991 and the Accountant's Report Rules 1991 are reviewed in Chapter 12.
4 Partnership changes
It is essential that the partners establish the basic principles on which payments are to be made to outgoing partners or their estates.
This will be dealt with in greater detail in Chapter 8, but it needs to be mentioned briefly here as something which should be agreed at the outset.
Having settled the principle, the partners must make provision for the actual event.
Whether payments are to be made by way of annuity or by lump sum they will be a drain on the continuing practice if no or inadequate provision is made in advance.
By far the most effective arrangements presently available are those which:(1) provide for the continuing partners to have the option to acquire the share in the firm of an outgoing partner (which overcomes the tax problems noted in Chapter 10 and offers some desirable freedom of manoeuvre to the continuing partners without ordinarily causing any disadvantage to the outgoing partner);(2) finance the purchase of the share of a partner who dies before retirement by way of insurance effected on the lives of each of the partners the proceeds of which are declared to be held on trust for the partners for the time being;(3) finance by endowment insurance the purchase of the shares of partners whose retirement can be predicted;(4) ensure that in any case which is not or cannot be  sufficiently covered by available insurance (eg payments to a partner who is expelled or who otherwise leaves the firm before normal retirement date) payment of any capital sum is spread over a period so to reduce the burden on the continuing partners without imposing any great hardship on the outgoing partner or his estate; and (5) impose on each partner an obligation (Clause 14.02) to take out adequate (as discussed with all the partners from time to time ) retirement provision for the benefit of himself and his familyso as not to impose any burden in that respect on the firm, which in former times would have accepted responsibility.
Having provided for the acquisition of an outgoing partner's share, the partners must determine what restrictions should be put on him to prevent any action of his eroding the value of that share.
This is especially relevant when a partner leaves on bad terms, but has a general application as well.
The object of the exercise (as for the acquisition of the partner's share) will be to settle a basic scheme.
The partners for the time being should not exclude the possibility of negotiation to take account of the particular circumstances of a partner's departure, eg where to delay payment for his share could result in hardship for himself or his family, or where to insist on strict observance of restraint covenants might stand in the way of a young solicitor wishing to develop a specialised practice in a field of work rarely undertaken by the firm.
5 The duties of the partners
Whilst no-one can predict with certainty all the problems which will occur during the life of a firm, it is important that certain basic matters be attended to from the outset in relation to the conduct of the partners and their responsibilities.
(a) Retirement and expulsion As explained in earlier chapters of this book, where no express provision is contained in a partnership agreement or satisfactory arrangements cannot be agreed to meet the particular circumstances of the partner concerned, the Partnership Act only offers dissolution as the answer to what to do with a partner whose continued presence in the firm is unwanted by his co-partners.
Since no firm of solicitors can ever afford to retain the services of  any employee or partner whose conduct tends to reflect ill on the reputation of the practice, and since the circumstances may rarely be so clear cut as to secure withdrawal from the firm by consent, thorough consideration must be given at the outset to the conditions for expelling partners.
If suitable provisions (Clause 19) are included in the partnership agreement (and they are discussed in greater detail in Chapter 7) the interests of the firm can be largely protected (or at any rate damage limited): when getting rid of a miscreant partner is likely to be rather easier than dismissing an employee whose thoughts may have turned to taking proceedings for wrongful dismissal.
If appropriate provision for expulsion is essential, it is as well also to consider the eventuality of partners leaving in less contentious circumstances, if only to ensure (as considered above) that the firm's finances are so arranged as to be able to cope with both expected and unexpected departures.
A planned policy in relation to retirements from the firm is also more likely to strengthen the loyalties of junior partners by giving them sight of a clearly defined career progression within the firm.
(b) Professional conduct Given the nature of a solicitors' practice, even in the absence of a written agreement it would readily be implied that each partner owed a duty to his co-partners to observe the professional conduct regulations promulgated by the Law Society.
Any adequate expulsion clause would refer specifically to professional misconduct (Clause 19.01.8), but it would not be unusual also to impose positive duties on partners:(1) to apply timeously for the replacement of their practising certificates.
Some system might be adopted (Clause 13.06) for coordinating applications for new certificates;(2) to maintain bank accounts in accordance with the Solicitors' Accounts Rules and to provide for restrictions on drawings from such accounts (Clauses 6.0.4 and 6.0.6).
Certainly all partners should be made fully aware of their responsibilities in these respects and the potential consequences for the firm should they fail to observe the rules.
(c) Restrictions on partners' authority (See Clauses 6 (in relation to accounts) and 18 (generally)) No body of partners will wish any one of its number to have unlimited authority to incur liabilities in their firm name so as to  make all members potentially liable even in respect of transactions which form no part of the normal business of the firm.
The extent to which any one partner may bind the firm must be settled by agreement at the outset.
In the case of solicitors, as well as the usual provisions common to most businesses, specific restrictions may, for example, be desired:(1) in relation to the operation of bank accounts (more particularly drawings and transfers from client and trust accounts);(2) to prohibit a partner from carrying on investment business at any time when the firm has not applied for and obtained an Investment Business certificate from the Law Society; and (3) in relation to professional undertakings made in the name of the firm, perhaps by requiring the consent of another partner (if not all partners) or notice to the other partners.
(d) Offices and employments As a matter of prudence, agreement should be reached at an early stage in the life of any firm whose partners, or some of them, are likely to find themselves appointed to some professional or public office as to:(1) whether remuneration from such offices should in principle be accounted for as part of the profits of the firm (Clause 10.06); and (2) the amount of time any partner should be permitted to devote to such activities (before his profit share suffers some downward adjustment).
Executorships and trusteeships are, of course, commonplace and will (save perhaps where there is a family connection) nearly always be effectively treated as activities of the firm.
A particular provision in this respect (Clause 10.08) should be included in the agreement to cover the case of a partner being appointed without the benefit of a charging clause where it is necessary to exclude him from participating in fees earned on behalf of the firm for work done in the estate or trust concerned: for him to accept any benefit through the firm's involvement would be incompatible with his position as executor or trustee.
(e) Duties generally (NB Clause 13) The matters which would normally be recorded in the partnership agreement under this head include:(1) the standard form "just and faithful" obligationstrictly unnecessary in view of the overriding nature of the equivalent statutory provisions and the implication that will always be made that such duty exists, but invariably spelled out in writing;(2) a requirement that the partners devote themselves to the business of the firm.
This covers three distinct matters:(a) the time which each partner is required to devote to the firm.
Where a partner is permitted to work less than full time, this should be set out clearly;(b) the extent to which a partner must not just be available to do work for the firm but is put under some positive obligation to promote the interests of the practice.
On balance, it is probably better not to define such obligations in the partnership agreement itself except in general terms (Clause 13.01);(c) the obligation on a partner not to involve himself in other professional activity save for the benefit of the firm (and in particular not to compete with the firm) and to account to the firm for any profits made.
It would be usual in this connection for partners to be expressly permitted to act as solicitors for their own families free of charge except for any disbursements or out of pocket expenses incurred by the firm (Clause 13.05);(3) requiring each partner to be responsible for the prompt discharge of his separate obligations and to indemnify his co-partners should circumstances ever arise in which they could be made liable for the same.
(f) Indemnity Whilst it might readily be implied that where one partner's breach of some provision in the partnership agreement leads to liability attaching to his co-partners the latter should have the right to an indemnity from their colleague, the better practice is to make that right express (Clause 16.02) in the partnership agreement.
(g) Dispute resolution From the beginning the partners should realise that on occasion disagreements will occur.
It will pay them to settle in advance how such matters are to be resolved and to make appropriate  provision in the partnership agreement.
Arbitration is not the only option short of full blown litigation in open court.
Mediation (see Chapter 11) is a faster and more flexible process where internal negotiations have broken down.
As a declaration of intent, a clause such as that included (Clause 29) in the model agreement in Appendix 1 might be considered appropriate.
5 Day to Day Management
1 Introduction
Subsections (5),(7) and (8) of s24 of the Partnership Act provide a convenient starting point for any consideration of the management of a firm.
Subject to the contrary agreement of the partners:(5) Every partner may take part in the management of the partnership business (7) No partner may be introduced as a partner without the consent of all existing partners (8) Any difference arising as to ordinary matters connected with the partnership business may be decided by a majority of the partners, but no change may be made in the nature of the partnership business without the consent of all existing partners It is obvious enough that if a partner is to be held responsible for the acts of his co-partners committed in the name of the firm he should in principle have:(1) unrestricted access to information about those acts;(2) every right, indeed a duty, to assume personal responsibility (equally with his co-partners) for the conduct of the firm's affairs; and (3) the right (by exercise of a veto) to prevent any act for which he is unwilling to accept liability.
Whilst that may work well enough in a small firm (though even then the theory may need some adjustment, if only for example to permit decisions to be taken while partners are on holiday), the complexity which attends the affairs of all solicitors' practices of any size will make it impossible to give each of the partners such degrees of freedom or power.
This chapter is chiefly concerned with the steps that may be taken to achieve a reconciliation between the theory and the practicalities of everyday business life.
This is a matter of considerable importance: failure to strike  the right balance will all too frequently lead to disruption and discontent.
But the right balance is not something which partners should expect to be able to settle at the outset in such a way as will necessarily be appropriate throughout the life of the firm.
Different procedures will need to be adopted as the practice grows or contracts; as the nature of the work undertaken becomes more specialised; as technological advances offer the facility for, and the clients demand, ever quicker responses.
The aim should be to allow management systems to be shaped by the experiences of the firm.
Partly for this reason and partly because of the inherent complexity the partnership agreement itself will rarely include (at any rate in its main body) a breakdown of the chosen management structures in full detail, though where a decision is taken on a matter of principle (eg what matters require the unanimous approval of the partners, how a senior partner should be chosen, etc) the partnership agreement is the logical place for it to be recorded.
There still remains the primary need for all agreements, however limited in scope, which affect the partners to be set down clearly and exhaustively in writing to avoid subsequent dispute: such writing may range from the proper minutes of a partners' meeting to a separate manual describing a firm's management process as a guide, in the largest firms, to enable every partner and every employee to identify the person responsible for any particular aspect of the firm's administration.
2 Decision taking
It is, of course, important to the success of any firm that its partners should be in complete accord on fundamentals.
That will not just include the admission of new partners and the nature of the partnership business (which in the case of solicitors cannot really changeand see ss24(7) and (8) above) but will extend to matters of policysetting up new departments to take on types of work not previously accepted or closing departments which have proved unprofitable, opening and closing branch offices, expelling partners, changes to the name of the firm, raising additional capital from the partners themselves or by way of loan, and other matters which one way or another can significantly affect the liabilities of each partner.
Equally, in practice, there will be many matters calling for decision where to insist on unanimity would be time-consuming and probably tendentious—the purchase of books for the library, decoration of the premises, recruitment of  additional secretarial staff, and similar matters of an essentially administrative nature.
Between the two there is a grey area where the size of the firm is likely to be the determining factor as to whether decisions should be unanimous or taken by majority vote.
In particular, perhaps, there will be the question of agreeing the partners' profit shares, the problem of which has already been touched on in Chapter 4.
It might perhaps be thought that this would always be classified as a matter for unanimity.
In practice, however, such is the scope for self-interest to stand in the way of the smooth running of the firm that the right of any one partner to veto some proper alteration should be excluded.
The choice does not have to lie between unanimity and a simple majority of the partners: frequently the required majority will be set at a higher level than 50 per cent plus one to reflect the importance of the matter under discussion.
It is of vital importance that any agreement which is reached between the partners in relation to the taking of decisions is set down in writingpreferably in the partnership agreement itself (Clause 17.09.1), but if not there then at least in the minutes of the meeting at which it was concluded.
(a) Meetings and their conduct Whatever may have been agreed as to the taking of decisions by unanimous or majority vote, as much a matter of good management as of good faith is the need to ensure that all relevant information is given to all the partners before a vote is taken: the requisite majority of partners should not purport to take decisions and act on them behind the backs of the minority unless such has been expressly authorised or the need for immediate action precludes the convening of a partners' meeting; and even then there should be no delay before all partners are acquainted with the circumstances and invited to ratify any decision taken in their name.
In the ordinary course of a solicitors' practice the partners will meet at regular intervals to discuss the affairs of the firm (Clause 17.03).
This will be the primary opportunity for the dissemination of information as to the running of the business and individual partners charged with specific managerial duties (see below) will report back to their colleagues on material developments.
It should also be possible for extraordinary meetings of partners to be convened on reasonable notice (Clause 17.04); by any one partner (in a small or medium sized firm) or a specified number  (in a larger concern).
Some arrangement for instant decision taking (by, for example, the senior partner and/or a specified number of other partners) without prior consultation might also be introduced to cope with emergencies.
All these matters should be incorporated in the partnership agreement (or a schedule thereto) or in some other writing of equal force and effect (ie one signed by all the partners).
Provision should be made for the chairing of each meeting and for the taking of votes.
Clause 17 in the model agreement in Appendix 1 sets out a basic scheme which avoids any system of voting by proxy, putting the onus on individual partners to attend and vote in person (with only a limited exception (Clause 17.10.1) where a matter requiring unanimity is on the table).
It will be for the partners in each firm to decide whether some such arrangement suits their particular circumstances or whether more or less complex procedures should be introduced.
It should hardly be necessary to mention that every partners' meeting should be duly and sufficiently minuted and the minute approved at the next meeting.
(b) Notices (See Clause 28.)
The validity of decisions taken by the partners may depend upon all of them having at least received notice of a partners' meeting or upon one or more of them having been duly informed of action to be taken against them by their co-partners.
It is usual to make specific provision for service of such notices, eg at the last known home address of a partner, in a way that will afford evidence that it has been duly given (eg by registered delivery, entry in the firm's post book etc).
Where a notice of expulsion or compulsory retirement is to be served pursuant to a unanimous vote the question will arise as to whether all the voting partners should be signatories.
In anything but a small firm that will be impracticable and some other arrangement should be adopted (Clause 17.11 for example).
3 Management
Section 24(5) of the Partnership Act (see above) follows logically from the liability of all partners for the acts and omissions of their co-partners in the name of the firm, but applied to a firm of any size this simple principle overlooks the practical impossibility of literal compliance.
Delegation of management responsibilities will be needed:(1) to avoid having to take day to day problems to full partners' meetings for decision;(2) to free individual partners from onerous administrative tasks so as to allow them to concentrate on fee earning;(3) because it is inherently more efficient.
Just what system is put into place will vary from firm to firm and, indeed, from time to time as particular problems are identified and changes made.
For that very reason it would be unusual to include detailed provisions in the partnership agreement itself.
Nevertheless it is important that every member of a firm should be familiar with at least the basic arrangements for its administration and should not be denied access to information about the activities of the firm at any level, subject always to their giving reasonable notice.
Any formalised structures should be reduced into written form and be available for inspection by all interested persons, employed staff as well as partners.
The partners are personally responsible for all the affairs of the firm so that whatever system of management is put into place must be subject to their overall supervision.
Arrangements will differ from firm to firm according to the number of partners and employees, the nature of the work of the firm, the number of offices and so on.
Typically, and here we are considering a firm whose size justifies formalised management structures, various aspects of the firm will be identified as needing individual treatment under the immediate daily supervision of a partner (or committee of partners) or a senior employee.
Thus separate administrative departments might be established to deal with such matters as:(1) personnel;(2) accountancy and finance;(3) communications;(4) property and maintenance;(5) library;(6) costs (ie fee collection);(7) administration (office equipment, stationery supplies etc);(8) public relations (advertising, client care etc);(9) professional standards (and compliance generally, unless the volume of corporate and financial services work justifies a separate department for this);(10) complaints.
These departments will needless to say be answerable direct to the main body of partners but, for administrative convenience an  additional tier will usually be introduced in the form of a managing partner or a partners' management committee as a more efficient method of control and a useful filter to ensure that the partners as a whole are spared the necessity of dealing with anything other than matters of real importance.
Where the partners of a firm are numerous, frequent meetings of the full body become impracticable.
Where committees are established to overcome this problem they will ordinarily meet as regularly as all the partners of a smaller firm to ensure continuous supervision of the firm's business.
The increasing complexity of everyday business life has led many firms to recruit full time administrators whose status matches (if indeed in terms of the power they wield it does not exceed) that of the partners themselves; or indeed one partner may be seconded to administrative duties on a permanent basis.
Such administrators will be given titles to match up to their responsibilities: "chief executive" is not unknown.
The variations on this particular theme are pretty well endless: the financial side of a firm's affairs may, for example, be treated quite separately from administration and its director of finance may report straight back to the partners and not through the managing partner or any management committee.
The partners themselves may wish to form their own partners' finance committee so that questions of profit and capital sharing can be settled independently from the mainstream finances of the firm.
On a less technical level, in any professional firm, whatever its size, two matters ought to be given particular attention:(1) the need to involve all its members and its professionally qualified employees in day to day management; and (2) the need to keep under constant supervision the professional conduct of its members and employees.
Experience shows that insufficient involvement can soon lead to frustration and dissatisfaction which can only damage the firm; and that applies as much to assistant solicitors and salaried partners as to equity partners.
The equity partners will usually want to give their junior colleagues and associates the opportunity to prove their ultimate worth to the firm and that can only be done by giving them direct experience of management.
This may involve their being invited to serve on committees and, certainly in the case of a salaried partner appointed with a view to full partnership, attendance at partners' meetings.
Equally, it is not unknown for a partner gradually to lose interest in mundane  administrative matters: often enough the problems that this can cause are exacerbated by his co-partners allowing him to escape his share of responsibility over a long period.
Job satisfaction at all levels is an essential ingredient of any successfully run business; and involvement is the key to job satisfaction.
Someone (logically the senior partner) should take personal responsibility for ensuring that this aspect of the life of the firm is kept under constant review.
So also should steps be taken to ensure that the professional standards of members and employees are maintained.
This will involve not only matters of professional competence and etiquette but also the need to ensure compliance with regulations regarding replacement of practising certificates, the annual delivery of certificates to the Solicitors Indemnity Fund and obtaining all other licences and authorisations relevant to the work of the firm.
As regards conduct generally it will be the responsibility of all partners to see that no breach passes unnoticed and (where necessary) unpunished.
As to administrative matters, in most firms it would be appropriate to delegate responsibility to one of the partners (or a committee) for ensuring that every member of the firm complies with the rules.
4 Publicity
Advertising costs now form a not inconsiderable part of the budget of most solicitors' firms.
The pressure to publicise the practice will be roughly commensurate with the intensity of the competition.
A long established firm in a small country town may not immediately detect any need or have any desire to increase the local population's awareness of its existenceuntil, that is, some larger, more publicity conscious firm begins to make its presence felt by offering a wider range of services at "competitive" prices.
A small firm in a suburban area where solicitors abound will, in times of recession, of high interest rates and high rents, be desperate to attract business from wherever it can find it; and that means spreading the word among potential clients.
In the cities, where competition is intense, to be seen to be involved with clients at the top of the commercial (and to a lesser degree social) tree, publicity will take very different forms, but whether it comprises the full page recruitment advertisement or a high ranking in some statistical table devised by the editors of a legal journal, a bigger than average spread in a legal directory or an article by one of its partners explaining some development unique to the firm, the message will be the same: we are professional people of the highest calibre who run their practice efficiently and with success; we have earned the respect of our fellow professionals and the esteem of our clients who are themselves of comparable stature to ourselves.
Until fairly recently the Law Society (in common with the governing bodies of other professions) frowned upon solicitors advertising their services in any way.
Now, the restrictions have been swept aside.
Rule 2 of the Solicitors' Practice Rules 1990 provides: Solicitors may at their discretion publicise their practices, or permit other persons to do so, or publicise the businesses or activities of other persons, provided there is no breach of these rules and provided there is compliance with a Solicitors' Publicity Code promulgated from time to time by the Council of the Law Society with the concurrence of the Master of the Rolls.
The proviso is, of course, the ruband only half the rub at that.
The greater the freedom given (and in this case the overt touting of particular potential clients and an obligation not to offend whatever passes for good taste are the only restrictions of substance) the more numerous the regulations on matters of detail: C Northcote Parkinson would be in his element!
Thus:(1) the said Solicitors' Publicity Code (which is summarised in Chapter 12) was introduced in 1988, revised in 1990, and covers the whole field; from the general (solicitors may hold themselves out to be good, but not to be better than the other firm down the road; publicity must be accurate and not mislead; a solicitor's advertisement must identify the solicitor by name) to the particular (the correct designation of a solicitor's practice, entries in legal directories, addresses to the Court and the use of the legal aid logo);(2) the Law Society's code incorporates by reference the provisions of the British Code of Advertising Practice which in its own way requires publicity material to be honest, truthful and decent, unambiguous and responsible, and contains a separate section relating to the advertising of financial services and products;(3) the Financial Services (Conduct of Business) Rules 1987 also cover the advertising of financial services and products and will need to be studied by any firm carrying on investment business;(4) solicitors will also need to be familiar with the Consumer  Credit (Advertisements) Regulations 1989 and other secondary legislation in that connection, the whole corpus replete with the jargon unique to that area of law;(5) the Business Names Act 1985, which has already been referred to in Chapter 1, requires revision of a firm's letterheading every time there is a change in the identity of the partners, which will include any occasion when a salaried partner whose name has previously been shown "below the line" is promoted.
Even though the application of common sense will almost always ensure that no breach occurs, it will pay even small firms to detail one of the partners or a senior employee to vet all publicity material to ensure its compliance with these rules and regulations.
5 Personnel
This section deals with a number of miscellaneous matters affecting individuals within the firm, both partners and employees.
(a) The Senior Partner Almost every firm sees the need to have a figureheadand, because of the need to name partners on the notepaper, every firm will be perceived as having a senior partner, however democratic the instincts of its members.
In many firms there will be no room for dispute as to who should fill the position and for how long, ie the most experienced member of the partnership for as long as he remains hale and hearty.
In larger firms the matter is never quite so straightforward.
The person appointed will be chosen not only for his professional experience but also for his diplomatic ability to handle particularly onerous duties; the chairing of meetings within the firm and constant involvement in public relations without.
Increasingly the demands of the position are such that appointments are made with limited tenure only; and the rotation of the office between partners of firms which have amalgamated is often adopted.
No person should be permitted to remain senior partner beyond the point when he has lost the confidence of his co-partners.
It will make sense for the partnership agreement (Clause 17.01) to contain appropriate details as to the election procedures and basic provisions as to the length of tenure and the circumstances in which a senior partner can be required to stand down.
(b) Holidays etc In practice, partners will agree between themselves as to the amount of time they should be allowed to take away from the practice and when their absence from the firm will cause the least difficulty.
Flexibility is bound to be required to take account, for example, of a sudden increase in a particular type of work, of a complex transaction of such importance that the partners dealing with it must be on constant standby, of parents wishing to be free during school holidays.
Nevertheless it would be usual to specify some basic entitlement in the partnership agreement (Clause 15.01).
If desired the agreement could contain separate provisions regarding partners attending continuing education courses in accordance with Law Society training regulations or even the taking of sabbaticals, but perhaps these matters are best left to ad hoc arrangements with individual partners.
Maternity leave arrangements should be clarified, and once settled, included in the partnership agreement (Clauses 15.02–15.04) or such other writing to which an incoming lady partner may be invited to subscribe.
(c) Medicals In some firms partners are required to submit themselves to regular medical checks as a way of confirming their fitness to remain in harness or as a means of alerting their co-partners as to some future problem.
If this is the policy of a firm, the details should be duly recorded in the partnership agreement and the right established of the partners to see the results of any examinations.
(d) Pensions and insurances Now that payments for goodwill to outgoing partners are fast disappearing, partners must address themselves to the question of making financial provision for themselves in retirement and their families in the event of their death.
There is still a feeling, and rightly so, that every firm owes some responsibility to its members and their dependants in this respect and that it is not enough to leave it to the individual partner to make his own arrangements.
An increasingly common arrangement is for the partnership agreement to provide (Clause 14.02) for each partner to commit himself to take out and keep in force such policies as may be agreed between himself and his co-partners; and to reinforce that, it may be provided that appropriate deductions should be made  from his profit share and applied in payment of the premiums.
(e) Staff Two particular matters, in the nature of carrot and stick, may conveniently be mentioned here as being important for the partners to determine as a matter of firm policy:(1) r7 of the Solicitors' Practice Rules 1990 permits solicitors to share their profits with their bona fide employees so long as such arrangements do not conceal an effective partnership.
Thus, firms can reward their staff by setting up bonus schemes related to the firm's profits or otherwise relating pay to performance; and (2) just as the partners will wish to impose restraint covenants upon themselves (see Chapter 8) to prevent an outgoing partner damaging the continuing practice by setting up in competition thereto, so in the case of salaried partners, assistant solicitors and other key members of staff their terms of employment should include similar restrictionssimilar, but not necessarily identical.
The court will look at restraints imposed upon employees rather more strictly than those which have been agreed between the partners themselves, as there is likely to be an inequality of bargaining power.
Care should, however, be taken to avoid any glaring inconsistency between the covenants accepted by the partners and those imposed on their employees: and in many cases, looked at objectively, the value to a firm (and to its potential competitors) of a senior employee (even one who is not legally qualified) can be every bit as great as that of any of its partners.
6 Service companies
Solicitors are allowed to form service companies, subject to the following conditions:(1) membership of the company must be limited to members or partners of the firm, admitted solicitors holding practising certificates, retired partners of the firm and dependants of retired or deceased partners;(2) the books of the company must be made available where the Council of the Law Society require an inspection of the accounts under the Solicitors' Accounts Rules 1991.
The principal object of the formation of a service company will be  to carry out administrative functions concerned with the running of the practice—eg the employment of staff, hiring premises, furniture and equipment and general maintenance.
It will be financed directly out of the firm's profits.
Given recent reductions in the rate of personal taxation, there is now little fiscal benefit to be obtainedthough in any case that should have been regarded as an incidental benefit and not a justification in itself for the establishment of such a company.
It is doubtful, however, whether, save in the case of larger firms, the additional costs of the exercise now justify the incorporation of new service companies, but this is a matter which partners will doubtless wish to take up with their accountants.
7 Complaints procedures
Rule 15 of the Solicitors' Practice Rules 1990 requires solicitors to "operate a complaints handling procedure which shall, inter alia, ensure that clients are informed whom to approach in the event of any problem with the service provided" .
What is envisaged is that every client will be informed at the outset that a procedure exists for dealing with "problems" : it is not necessary to mention the word "complaint" at this stage.
When a problem develops, the hope will be that the client will be able to resolve it by discussion with the solicitor or other person dealing with his case (whose identity and status must have been disclosed upon acceptance of instructions).
If that does not work, then the internal complaints procedure comes into its own and the dissatisfied client should be referred to another member of the firm (possibly the senior partner) or, though this perhaps will rarely be encountered, someone outside the firm who has been nominated to deal with such matters.
Only if the client is still unhappy would he be directed to the Solicitors Complaints Bureau.
Whatever particular procedures are put in place, any complaint should be capable of speedy and thorough investigation: that is the overriding consideration.
6 Expansion
1 Introduction
According to a recent Law Society survey, some 22 per cent of solicitors' firms in England and Wales are considering merging with another practice: that percentage rises to 47 in the City of London.
While small firms still predominateand 80 per cent have fewer than five partners—many expect to grow in size.
Financial and commercial pressures on firms to change their traditional practices have become irresistible.
Small firms suddenly find their viability under threat by the arrival of a regional or even nationwide grouping with an enviably large budget for self-promotion.
Sole practitioners are increasingly regarded with suspicion from officials armed with the latest statistics from the Disciplinary Tribunal.
Partners in commercial practice change firms with unprecedented frequency.
Specialist departments are opened up as others are closed, all in the interests of continuing profitability.
Firms form regional alliances either generally or for the provision of specific services whether for clients or for the firms themselves.
Networked computer facilities are set up into which any number of firms can be hooked.
And no firm can avoid the need for professional accountancy advice on a regular basis.
So much so, that practices of any size will usually need to recruit their own in-house accountants, not infrequently in larger firms giving them partner status as "directors of finance" or similarly impressive titles.
The purpose of this chapter is to review such developments along with the more mundane business of recruiting new partners and opening new offices generally, and to analyse some of the problems they involve.
Not forgotten is the possibility that some mergers do not in the event prove successful so that expansion rapidly becomes contraction.
The economic recession during which this book has been written has seen a reduction in merger  mania but one can almost guarantee that this will be a temporary blip in the inexorable progress towards higher and higher profits.
Detailed analysis of the increasingly sophisticated mechanics and fiscal ramifications of inter-solicitor and multi-national groupings would form the subject of a book in itself and no attempt is made here to deal with such matters.
Many of the more intractable problems involved with merger of solicitors' firms will be within the province of the accountancy profession: and the best advice as to how to reconcile the apparently irreconcilable will be obtained not through the pages of any book but from a fellow professional who has actually and successfully observed the process at first hand.
2 New partners
The introduction of new partners involves similar problems whether they arrive as part of an expansionary exercise or merely to replace a partner who has died or retired from the firm.
(a) Status When recruiting new members of the firm the partners will have to determine whether to accord them full equity or salaried status.
In larger firms, the latter is now commonly used as a stepping stone to the former.
Every new partner should ensure that his terms of partnership are reduced to writing.
Re-writing the partnership agreement will not be a practicable exercise in larger firms, although in certain circumstances it may become necessary, eg if in the course of negotiations with a new partner some hitherto unsuspected inadequacy is revealed.
The new partner should, it hardly needs to be said, be given an opportunity of studying the full agreement together with the firm's accounts for, say, the last three years before being invited to sign any instrument of accession or adherence.
The latter document should, of course, contain any provisions which may be peculiar to the new partner, especially as regards clarification of his status in the firm, his involvement in the decision making process and the precise extent of liabilities which he is required to undertake or against which he will be entitled to an indemnity (see below).
(b) Capital As the capital resources of the firm will have been reduced by the amount required to acquire an outgoing partner's share in the practice, so that may need to be recouped from the incoming  partner (possibly with additional contributions being needed from the continuing partners); or, in the case of an increase in the number of partners, additional capital may be needed to finance new activities or new offices.
Leaving aside those equity partners who, exceptionally, are never obliged to put cash into the firm, as mentioned in Chapter 4, the choice lies between:(1) seeking capital contributions when the new partner joins the firm, he borrowing the amount required as necessary; or (2) allowing the new member of the firm to buy his way in over a period out of his profit share, appropriate restrictions on his drawings being imposed as "security" for the agreed payments.
The new partner's capital share will be assessed accordingly and any required adjustments made to the shares of the other partners.
(c) Profit share This is a matter which depends upon agreement with the continuing partners and may, eg where the new recruit is of some seniority, involve reductions in their shares.
Equally, where a young solicitor replaces a retired senior partner whose profit share was substantial, increased shares may be awarded to the continuing partners.
(d) Liabilities Under the Partnership Act a new partner is not to be made responsible for liabilities of the firm accrued before he joins.
In practice, often enough he will be "invited" to accept such responsibility so that his predecessor can be exonerated therefrom and thus make a "clean break" with the firm.
A salaried partner's position must be made explicit, in the interests both of himself and the firm.
There are four possibilities which need to be covered:(1) that he is held out as a partner and is liable as such;(2) that he is held out as a partner but is indemnified against liability as such;(3) that steps are taken to ensure that he is not held out as a partner; and (4) that, even though the original intention may have been as at (3), he is in fact held out as a partner, either by the firm or by himself acting in the course of his work for the firm, in circumstances not initially contemplated by anyone.
The salaried partner will rarely agree to accept full responsibility for the debts of the firm along with the equity partners where his share of the profits is finite and his involvement in management restricted.
He would be well advised to insist on a written indemnity in that respect to cover both intentional and accidental holding out, and, as regards the latter, to cover his accidentally holding himself out as a partner so long as that is done in the course of carrying out his duties for and in the interests of the firm.
It may, of course, happen that he deliberately holds himself out as a partner for his own private benefit and not in the course of his work or in the interests of the firm.
The equity partners should perhaps guard against any indemnity being drawn so widely that a salaried partner is relieved from the consequences of such "individualism" .
(e) Continuation election In law, a new firm is constituted upon every change in its membership, whether that arises on a partner leaving or a partner joining.
Where the accountants advise that the Revenue ought to be asked to treat the firm as a continuing business, a new partner will be required to join in a continuation election under s113 of the Taxes Act (see Chapter 10).
3 New offices
The opening of new offices may take place as part of a general expansion of the activities of a firm to additional locations (though usually never so far away that they cannot benefit from the goodwill attaching to headquarters) or involve streamlining administration by establishing different departments in separate offices.
Although such developments are usually a sign of a firm's success they are not by any means free from potential difficulty which should be resolved before final decisions are taken.
(a) Supervision Where a new office of a firm is opened, save as a separate department in close proximity to the main office, arrangements will need to be made to ensure compliance with r13 of the Solicitors' Practice Rules 1990 relating to the supervision of the office (see Chapter 1).
In certain circumstances it may become necessary to seek waivers from the Law Society, as for instance:(1) where the new office is no more than a consulting room  open for restricted periods, when a waiver would normally be granted provided (a) the opening hours are sufficiently advertised;(b) during those hours there is always in attendance a person duly qualified to manage or supervise the office and that all correspondence is seen by a partner of the firm; and (c) the business of the consultancy is accounted for centrally and not as a separate business; or (2) where the new office is an annexe (whether housing a separate department or otherwise) near to the main office, when a waiver could be expected to be granted if (a) a common switchboard is used for both main office and annexe;(b) accounts are centralised;(c) correspondence is attended to in the main office; and (d) clients are asked to address correspondence to the main office.
(b) Separate practice The decision must be taken as to whether the business of a new office is to be integrated with that of the main office or whether it is to be run (or the extent to which it is to be run) as a separate, self-financing enterprise or even a separate partnership but using the same firm-name.
For example, separate decisions need to be taken in relation to :(1) VAT registrationwhere, if the partners of the new office are not to be the same as those carrying on business at headquarters, separate registration will be required;(2) preparation of accountswhere if separate accounts for each office are kept, with separate accounting dates (which is a matter to be settled between the partners and the firm's accountants and involves no breach of professional conduct whichever decision may be taken), accountants' reports will have to be produced in respect of each office;(3) identity of the partnerswhether the new office should be run as a separate partnership or as a branch office;(4) investment business certificatesseparate certificates will be needed if there is not an identity of partners at all a firm's offices.
(c) Management problems Where a practice is carried on in a number of different locations:(1) rivalry between different offices will naturally occur and is generally healthy, but the partners should not overlook the potential for a fissiparous tendency to develop.
A broad compatibility between offices is what is requiredas to the nature and volume of work.
Where that cannot be achieved, the formation of separate partnerships under a single firm-name may be a more successful method of preserving unity;(2) the rivalry mentioned above will commonly show itself in relation to the profitability of each office.
Where an imbalance develops, pressure for rearrangement of profit sharing grows and, if refused, the likelihood of a break up increases.
The partners should be alive to this.
The key to harmony would seem to be the preservation of comparable turnovers.
Consideration may need to be given to switching partners or departments to achieve this;(3) inevitably, where the activities of a firm are spread over a wide area, problems arise in connection with the basic decision making processwhen, for example, partners' meetings become more difficult to arrange.
Such difficulties should be anticipated and management structures devised to cope with them;(4) where the work of a firm is departmentalised and allocated to different offices, the question of transferring work from one branch to another needs to be confronted.
Guidelines must be settled and administered centrally.
(d) Restraint covenants Whenever it is intended to open up a new office the partners must as a matter of urgency consider the adequacy of the restraint covenants to which they have agreed to submit themselves and which they have imposed on their key employees.
It may be decided that different restrictions should be applied to different partners, particularly in relation to area restraints.
4 Acquisition and amalgamation
Solicitors' firms large and small have come to realise that at a time when competition is intense and growth is seen as essential  in order to meet increased overheads and maintain profit levels (let alone to increase them) any policy which irrevocably rules out fundamental reorganisation of their practices is likely to prove short-sighted.
A firm looking to expand will not simply contemplate recruiting new partners or opening up new branch offices.
Other options are:(1) the acquisition of existing practices, often enough from sole practitioners or from firms which (perhaps because of the death or defection of a senior partner) have ceased to be viable; and (2) true amalgamation between firms where the member firms are subsumed into an entirely new firm (even if past identities find some reflection in the chosen firm-name).
The line which divides takeover from merger can admittedly sometimes be rather hard to detect where solicitors in acquired firms are introduced into partnership with the enlarged practice, and the true nature of the arrangement may take some time to develop.
Publicly, too, some obfuscation may actually be favoured and letterheading designed to indicate an "incorporation" of the acquired firm into the expanded practice.
(a) Motives Expansion pure and simple may not be the only reason why a firm seeks to merge.
A small firm may feel vulnerable and unable to compete effectively and look to be taken over, though with an agreement that those of its partners who do not retire should be taken on by the new firm.
The acquisition of such a firm by a larger firm with expansion in mind has the advantage to the latter over the opening up of a new branch office of being able to start with an existing client base.
There may be a corresponding disadvantage in having to accommodate the partners of the acquired firm who are unwilling to retire from practice.
Some continuity of personnel between the new and the old is often welcomed as the most effective means of preserving the loyalty of the clients and maybe the appointment of the sole practitioner or the senior partner of the acquired business as consultant to the new firm for a limited time will be considered.
But merger is not always tantamount to takeover.
The desire to complement the relative strengths and frailties of a practice may commend a true amalgamation of firms of more or less equal standing with the aim of providing a more comprehensive service at a higher standard.
There is increasingly a feeling that the larger the firm the better it  can withstand recessionary periods and the more effectively it can compete with other firms; and these two sentiments may succeed each other as, say, a regional grouping for mutual protection develops into a nationwide conglomerate for enhanced profits.
(b) Compatibility The success or failure of an amalgamation will depend on the degree to which the aspirations and business practices of each of the firms involved can be harmonised.
More projected mergers fail to materialise (even at the eleventh hour) than are actually completed and the reason will invariably be the discovery of some basic incompatibility between the practices involved or their respective partners.
Better that negotiations should break down than such difficulties be suppressed: a merger which fails is potentially disastrous.
Particular attention needs to be given by those responsible for the conduct of the negotiations to the following matters:(1) Professional outlook.
It ought never to happen that firms with incompatible ideas as to the sort of service to be provided for their clients should ever come together with a view to merger.
(2) Nature of the practice.
Similarly, the adoption of a common policy for the new firm will be essential: modification or even abandonment of formerly held views may be required.
(3) Firm-name.
It will be readily appreciated how important it is to agree on a name which reflects the separate identities (and vanities) of the firms involved without assuming Dickensian proportions and which at the same time commands the approval of any public relations consultant who has been engaged.
(4) Premises.
Agreement must be reached as to the location of the new firm's offices, their acquisition, and the disposal of unwanted premises.
(5) Partners.
Depending on the terms of the respective partnership agreements of the firms involved, the dissent of any one partner might effectively scupper a proposed merger.
Even when all intended partners of the new firm have indicated assent it will still be necessary to establish some order of seniority and to select the first senior partner: though joint senior partners are not unknown, the better arrangement may be for some restriction to be put upon  the time that office is held by any one individual so that by rotating it between the participating firms a reasonable balance is achieved.
(6) Payments to partners.
Four potentially explosive matters need to be agreed:(a) a common system to apply on the retirement or death of a partner to secure the acquisition of such partner's share in the firm, ie automatic accruer, option to purchase etc;(b) how such share is to be valued, ie with or without goodwill, capital profits etc;(c) the capital share of each partner in the new firm;(d) the initial profit sharing ratio and the basis upon which it may be changed.
Where the practices of each of the merging firms are already compatible, much of the difficulty is removed but this is rather unlikely to be the case across the board.
Adjustments will almost certainly have to be made to secure the agreement of individual partners who are asked to make concessions: guaranteed consultancies for partners who reach retirement age or preferential profit sharing etc may need to be introduced.
(7) Management structures.
A system of management must be put in place for the new firm which:(a) does not diminish the influence over the firm's affairs which individual partners have formerly enjoyed; and (b) which ensures that particular attention is given to those matters which proved most difficult to agree during the course of the merger negotiations.
The above does not purport to be a comprehensive list of the items which need to be agreed before a merger can workselection, retention and dismissal of staff, harmonisation of computer systems and other equipment, for example, are as likely to prove the sticking point.
Such relatively minor matters as the firm's car policy, the payment of home telephone bills and payments to partners' wives for "secretarial" services also have to be agreed.
And if all these matters can be agreed in outline, the firm's accountants really come into their own.
(c) Accounting and tax Whilst agreement in principle may have been reached on the relative standing in the new firm of its partners, precise calculation  of their capital and profit sharing ratios can be a nightmare as the accountants wrestle with the task of bringing the accounts of the firms involved into line with one another: and it will be assumed here that there are differing practices which need to be harmonised.
In order to get a true comparison between the firms (and accordingly between the contributions, both capital and income generating, of their partners) it may be necessary:(1) to revalue capital assets to a common date;(2) to bring in the profits from the disposal of any property not required by the merged firm;(3) to devise some means of compensation if goodwill is to be written out of account where it has previously been treated as an asset in which the partners have a share;(4) where work in progress features in the accounts of one of the firms, to eliminate it by billing or to write it off against the capital accounts of that firm's partners;(5) to settle how bad debts are to be treated post-merger, either charged generally against the new firm or separately against the partners of the old firms;(6) to write off the value of old fixtures and fittings;(7) to revise profit and loss accounts to a common accounting date.
Even where such process does not demonstrate the incompatibility of the firms seeking a merger it will frequently happen that the actual merger will need to be delayed for an agreed period so as to phase in the new arrangements.
For this genuinely commercial purpose there will be no Revenue objection to the changing of accounting bases or dates.
The tax consequences of a merger are considered generally in Chapter 10. (d) Notifications Though solicitors will need little enough encouragement to advertise such changes, the amalgamation or acquisition of a firm is the occasion of a material alteration which as a matter of professional conduct must be notified to the clients of all the firms involved.
Where a practice is acquired by another firm its clients should be:(1) notified of the change;(2) reminded of their right to instruct the solicitor of their choice; and (3) asked to indicate whether they wish to instruct the new (acquiring) firm.
The Law Society also recommends that each client is given an  indication of the balance (if any) of moneys standing to his credit with the firm.
Notifications should be sent out before the new firm starts to act for clients of the old firm.
It would, however, be proper for a circular letter to indicate that in the absence of any contrary indication within a specified period the client's affairs would be acted upon in accordance with instructions previously given to the acquired firm.
Circularisation along similar lines will also be required of the clients of all firms involved in a merger, and this exercise will be particularly useful in identifying any conflicts of interest.
In many cases the major clients of the merging firms will have been asked for their views on the merger at the outset of negotiations.
Besides notice to the clients, information as regards mergers and takeovers will be required to be given to the Law Society and to the Solicitors' Indemnity Fund, to the Inland Revenue and to Customs and Excise—just as upon the starting up of any new firm.
(e) Conflicts of interest Where firms involved in an amalgamation have previously acted for clients who have been involved in litigation against each other, the amalgamated firm must not accept instructions to act for any of those clients unless they are able to erect and maintain effective "Chinese Walls" and:(1) none of the solicitors involved are professionally embarrassed by continuing to act;(2) all the clients have given their consent;(3) those clients have received full and frank independent advice before giving their consent; and (4) such continuing to act can be shown to be in the best interests of the clients.
Only very rarely will the conditions be met so as to enable the new firm to act for one of the litigating clients let alone all of them.
The problem must be tackled before the amalgamation takes place.
Where the possibility of a conflict of interest arising is detected the clients affected must be advised of the circumstances fully and promptly and told to obtain independent advice.
Where the problem is only realised after agreement to merge has been reached, then before the merger is completed, all clients affected must be written to in similar terms emphasising:(1) the need for independent advice; and (2) that the new firm would be unable to act for any of them if only one were to withhold his consent.
If the new firm is able to accept instructions, it must take all proper steps to erect the "Chinese Wall" to preserve the confidentiality of the client's affairs: the stringency and complexity of this pretty well rules out any possibility that instructions could be accepted from more than one of the clients involved.
Geographical separation between those solicitors and staff continuing to deal with the case and those who have previously been involved on the other side is recommended and it will be essential to extract appropriate undertakings from all such personnel.
Security arrangements for the opening of mail etc have to be made watertight.
The firm should keep the matter under regular review and be alert to the possibility of a breach in the wall (accidental or otherwise) or to other circumstances arising which would prevent them from continuing to act: in which events the client must be informed immediately.
Solicitors will not need to be reminded that for them to continue to act despite a conflict of interest is a breach of their duty to the court.
(f) The new partnership agreement Whilst agreements on particular matters should be set down in writing as soon as they have been concluded, that should not be regarded as an adequate substitute for a properly drafted partnership agreement for the new firm to be in place from the outset of business.
Moreover, that agreement should be kept under constant scrutiny during the initial period after the merger and amended as necessary to take account of the adjustments which will almost certainly be required as a result of the new firm's experiences.
All too frequently the merger agreement (which may itself comprise little more than random heads of agreement born of their production by separate teams working on specific issues) will be relied upon as a sufficient substitute.
It is not.
(g) Demergers The break-up of a firm after a failed merger is not unknown; sometimes it is not so much the result of any defect in the merger arrangements themselves as a change of circumstances (eg an unexpected collapse in the volume of a particular type of work).
The legal consequences are much the same as ensue on the dissolution of any firm or the departure of partners.
The main difference will be in regard to the transfer of work to the demerged firms—which will depend upon the agreement of the partners and the wishes of their clients.
Restraint covenants agreed to  in respect of the merged firm will be unenforceable unless some part of the business can be properly regarded as continuing the merged practice and entitled to protection.
The better arrangement would be to renegotiate the restraints to protect the goodwill which it is hoped will accrue to the new firms in their first few years of business after the demerger.
Unravelling the merger would be an accountant's (worst) dream, but it should be remembered that, unless the partnership agreement of the new firm specifically provides for that process (which is unlikely) it would depend on the agreement of the partners themselves.
Prima facie their rights on demerger would be determined according to the arrangements put in place for the merged firm in relation to the departure of partners or the dissolution of the firm.
5 Alternative groupings
For some years now solicitors' firms have perceived benefits to be gained by forming associations which fall some way short of partnership.
There are two broad categories:(1) where the object is to generate more work by some system of cross-referral in particular fields, though such arrangements are difficult to sustain over a long period if member firms wish to retain their independence and separate profitability.
It is almost impossible to devise a method of ensuring that all the firms involved obtain an equal share of the cake.
Association on this professional level can in the short term, however, certainly secure greater public awareness of the individual firms.
Such arrangements may also be adopted as a first tentative step towards full merger;(2) where the aim is to pool resources with a view to lowering overhead costs and achieving administrative savings.
Thus shared use of computer, library and training facilities can be organised regionally or nationwide to a level which individual firms could never hope to attain on their own.
As mentioned above, where a firm which wishes to retain its own identity has increased the number of its branch offices it is sometimes difficult to retain an acceptable degree of harmony between the component parts of the firm and the partners attached to each part.
An alternative to attempting to deal with such matters by a policy of continuous and possibly unsettling adjustment (by moving departments and personnel around) would be to allow each branch to become a separate partnership under the aegis of a  superimposed managing firm.
Profits need not necessarily be pooled but expenses could be shared and administration streamlined, the goodwill attaching to the firm-name being preserved.
The possible application of r6 of the Solicitors Practice Rules 1990 should not be forgotten.
That rule prohibits solicitors practising in partnership or "in association" (where two or more firms have at least one common principal) from representing:(1) both seller and buyer in a transfer of land for value at arm's length; or (2) both lessor and lessee on the grant of a lease for value at arm's length; or (3) both lender and borrower in a private mortgage at arm's length with exceptions made only in the case of:(1) small transactions;(2) where the parties are connected with each other(commercially or personally);(3) where there is no other solicitor or licensed conveyancer in the vicinity whom either party might reasonably instruct;(4) where two associated firms or two offices of the same firm acting for the parties are in different locations, neither firm having received instructions to act on referral from the other and the matter is dealt with or supervised by a different solicitor at each firm or office and, where the solicitor is not involved in the negotiations, where no conflict of interest arises and where neither vendor nor lessor is a builder or developer.
The Solicitors' Publicity Code (see Chapter 12) also contains specific provisions for the control of "flag advertising" by firms publicising their services under a group name or logo to ensure that the names of all firms involved are disclosed in the publicity material.
Whatever arrangements are set up, it is essential that the relationships between the firms involved are clearly defined.
Unless entry into partnership between firms is actually intended, steps should be taken to ensure that nothing is done which would create such relationship.
A recent hearing of the Disciplinary Tribunal highlighted the dangers, albeit in a case involving two sole practitioners.
Each agreed to provide practical assistance to the other in times of difficulty.
They held each other out as being in partnership (appearing together on each one's business stationery etc) but neither had any significant involvement in the other's practice, or any financial interest therein or any right to examine the other's accounts.
Whether the primary motive for the association was the wish to appear to be in partnership or to avoid being identified as sole practitioners was not clear, but the Tribunal drew attention to the fact that "such a sham partnership would serve to mislead the public who are entitled to believe that the persons being held out as being partners would enjoy the full relationship of support and responsibility which that state engendered" .
There is an obvious lesson here for existing partnerships in their association with other solicitors and their firms.
6 Overseas business (see also Chapter 1)
Just as on the domestic front, firms are exploring new ways towards greater efficiency and profitability, so too larger firms are looking beyond the frontiers of the UK to the opportunities which present themselves overseas.
Membership of the EC started the trend, and the break-up of the Warsaw Pact and the Soviet Union has given it a new lease of life as fledgling democracies create markets ripe for exploitation.
Three main developments should be noted:(1) the opening up overseas of branch offices of English or Welsh partnerships;(2) the creation of new partnerships overseas carrying on business in the English firm-name and involving some, or all, of the English partners together with foreign lawyers (the counterpart of the multi-national practices which will shortly be set up in the UK);(3) associations between English and foreign (typically from the USA) firms to carry on business together in a third country or as a regional or transnational grouping.
Such arrangements may range from full partnership down to "strategic alliances" designed for pooling resources and sharing expenses and generally spreading the risk between the member firms.
Where the English partners of these enterprises are carrying on their practice as English solicitors they will be bound by the Overseas Practice Rules 1990 as well as by the local laws of the countries in which they operate.
In the first of the examples given, so long as the profits of the business are remitted to be dealt with  under the English partnership agreement and the same persons are partners of the English firm and of its overseas branch, the branch office practice will be covered by the Indemnity Fund.
It may be noted that practices set up outside England and Wales are exempt from the provisions of r5 of the Solicitors' Practice Rules 1990 which prevents solicitors from offering certain legal services in a capacity other than that of a practising solicitor.
7 Leaving the Firm I
1 Introduction
The inevitability of partners leaving the firm for one reason or another is a matter which must be addressed at the outset when considering the terms of the partnership agreement.
It will be recalled from Chapter 3 that the Partnership Act provides that where no definite duration is set for the partnership any partner may "retire" by giving his co-partners notice, whereupon in the absence of any contrary agreement the firm is dissolved.
Dissolution will also be the consequence of the death or bankruptcy of a partner if the statutory provisions have not been displaced by agreement of all the partners.
The Act contains no provisions permitting retirement specifically on the grounds of old age or ill health or for the expulsion of miscreant or unwanted partners.
Such matters are left to the members of each firm to decide for themselves.
There are three basic considerations:(1) the need to avoid the consequences of a dissolution and winding up of the whole business;(2) the need to define the circumstances in which leaving the partnership is permitted or made compulsory; and (3) the need to anticipate the financial and administrative consequences of the departure of members of the firm.
This chapter will concentrate on the circumstances and Chapter 8 on the consequences of departure.
Dissolution of a firm will be considered in Chapter 9.
2 Death
A properly drawn partnership agreement will contain a provision (Clause 4.02) to ensure that, whilst the partnership determines as between the deceased and his co-partners, as between the latter  themselves there will be no termination.
This will allow the business of the firm to continue without the general dissolution which could be the result if the agreement was silent on the point.
Further provisions (which are discussed in detail in Chapter 8) will be included to deal with the financial consequences of a partner's death in such a way as to quantify the deceased's share in the business and also provide for its payment without the need for any forced sale of partnership property.
That will be the primary object even in the case of the death of one of two partners if, as would usually be the case, it is desired that the survivor should acquire the entire business.
The unpredictability of death can easily lead to embarrassment for the firm, not least because of the fundamental obligation of the personal representatives of a deceased partner to realise the assets comprised in his estate at an early date: and one of these assets will be the deceased's share in the surplus assets of the firm or (where the agreement so provides) the right to be paid out for the value of that share.
The continuing partners will also regard themselves as under a moral obligation (quite apart from any annuity arrangements that may come into operation) to the spouse and dependent children of their deceased colleague to ensure that such cash as may be due to his estate is paid over without undue delay.
The financial strain on the firm can be eased by:(1) effecting sufficient insurance cover (see Chapter 5);(2) the inclusion of suitable provisions (Clause 20) in the partnership deed clearly setting out the procedures to be adopted for the continuing partners to have the option to purchase the deceased's share from his estate on an appropriate time scale or providing for an automatic accruer to the surviving partners;(3) the inclusion of provisions in the deceased's will enlarging the discretion of the personal representatives as to the time for realisation of assets in the estate and generally as to arrangements which may be concluded with the continuing partners; and (4) where (which is not unusual) one of the personal representatives is a continuing partner, the inclusion in the will of specific authority for that partner in his capacity as personal representative and trustee to conclude agreements with the firm.
Such agreements would otherwise be void or unenforceable under the general prohibition against trustees  dealing with trust property in which they have a personal interest.
It should be remembered that the personal representatives of a deceased partner do not in their official capacity have the right to participate in the business of the firm.
3 Retirement on grounds of age
There is no right to retire from a partnership otherwise than by mutual agreement or unilaterally by effecting a dissolution.
Curiously, it is still rather unusual for solicitors' partnership agreements to provide that partners should retire upon reaching an agreed age, though it might be thought that there are good reasons for making this a requirement in the interests of a firm's long term planning.
Where this is provided for (Clause 18.02) the exact date of retirement may be tied to the end of the firm's accounting year for administrative convenience.
It will be a matter for discussion as to whether all partners should retire at the same age or whether circumstances justify disparity.
In this connection discrimination on the grounds of sex (Sex Discrimination Act 1975 as amended 1986) will not be permitted.
It is not unknown for senior partners or founding partners to be given an extended period but, whilst opinions may legitimately differ on this, in principle a common retirement age might seem to be less contentious and the lower the age the better.
It will nearly always be easier subsequently to reach agreement to extend the partnership than to persuade an elderly partner to stand down voluntarily before the contractual date: hence the relative unpopularity of agreements which simply permit a partner at his option to retire upon reaching a certain age.
In a rapidly changing profession the instinctive caution of the most senior practitioners, however much their experience is enormously valuable on other counts, can on occasion prove an obstacle to their firm's growth and an irritant to more progressive junior colleagues.
Every attempt should be made to anticipate this generation gap.
Consideration could be (and, in the larger firms, frequently is) given to limiting the period during which any one individual carries responsibility as "senior partner" and the inclusion of an option to take a consultancy at retirement age is often the favoured solution where the firm is keen to retain the expertise and experience of its senior men without thwarting the legitimate ambitions of their successors.
The drafting of satisfactory consultancy provisions is not without difficulty: it is not always easy to predict an individual's suitability for a consultancy until his normal retirement date is near, and younger partners may press for some overriding veto.
It may be felt that the better course is not to deal with such matters in the partnership agreement itself but to leave the offer of consultancy to be produced as an inducement to or reward for retirement at such time as may appear to be in the firm's best interests.
4 Early withdrawal on notice (Clause 18.01)
The problem here is not so much to prevent partners leaving before reaching retirement age (any such general prohibition would be unrealistically restrictive in all but a few firms) as to ensure that as little damage is done to the firm as possible when they do.
The basic period of notice should always be sufficient to allow for the firm to absorb the financial shock of a partner's going and to make any necessary adjustments to the day to day business of the practice (allocation of work, finding or training a successor, and so on).
In the partnership agreement itself it should perhaps not be made too easy for partners to leave, though in practice, of course, an unhappy or unsatisfied partner is a liability whom the firm will usually want to see depart at the earliest convenient time.
There may, however, be an argument for imposing restrictions on leaving in individual cases as a form of key man insurance.
When, for example, a solicitor is recruited as a specialist to head up a new department it would be appropriate to seek some commitment from him at any rate in the medium term.
Such agreement would not be fully enforceable: the court will not compel a partner to remain in the firm against his will, but an unwilling partner would have to choose between honouring his contract or laying himself open to an action for damages for breach of contract.
Some firms have adopted a formula which reserves a power to prevent more than one partner departing in any given period (say a year), with complementary provisions to determine priority as between notices served on the same day, though in these frantic head-hunting times when whole departments may be recruited at a stroke, such provisions are realistically best seen as providing a basis for negotiation (and perhaps financial adjustment by way of compensation).
Indeed, the particular circumstances of a departure can rarely be predicted, so that considerable flexibility may  be required when the event occurs.
That, however, does not justify a failure to include in the partnership agreement a clear and effective set of rules (as to length of notices, coincidence with accounting dates, and so on) settled with the interests of the firm and its continuing partners as the priority.
The risk that failure to agree terms could result in the outgoing partner seeking a formal dissolution of the firm on peremptory notice is one which is not worth running.
5 Expulsion (Clause 19)
As noted in Chapter 3, there is no inherent power for partners to rid themselves of an unwanted colleague short of seeking a dissolution unless their partnership agreement contains express provision.
As the Vice-Chancellor said in Walters v Bingham (1988) 1 FTLR 260,268: In modern professional partnerships with very numerous partners a power of expulsion, far from being "special and extraordinary" , is commonplace and normal.
Indeed, such a power is essential if a total dissolution as between all the partners is to be avoided when it is necessary to get rid of an unsatisfactory partner.
Even where there may only be two or three partners, the case for incorporating a power of expulsion in the partnership agreement is strong.
Rarely will a formal dissolution of the firm be a more acceptable method of disassociation from a miscreant partner.
The drafting of such a provision is critical for it will be strictly construed against those with the power to expel.
Thus a clause which permitted "any partner" to be expelled by "the other partners" was held not to enable a single partner to expel either or both of his colleagues (Re A Solicitor's Arbitration [1962]1 WLR 353).
Still, the court will not insist that a partner signs his own expulsion notice!
(Hitchman v Crouch Butler Savage Associates (1983) 127 SJ 441).
Moreover, the courts will only uphold an expulsion where the power has been exercised in good faith in the interests of the firm.
If the power should be exercised solely for the financial gain of the remaining partners the expulsion will not be upheld—as in Blisset v Daniel (1853) 10 Hare 493, where the motive for the purported removal of Mr Blisset was rather his remaining partners' desire to acquire his share at a low valuation as provided in the partnership deed than any misconduct on his part.
Discrimination on the grounds of sex or, where there are six partners or more, race is unlawful and any offending provision is  unenforceable (Sex Discrimination Acts of 1976 and 1986; Race Relations Act 1976).
The partnership agreement must deal with two elements: the grounds for expulsion and the procedure to be adopted.
(a) Grounds (Clause 19.01) All or any of the following may be expected to be encountered, though in any given agreement the grounds may be more or less specific as the requirements of particular firms differ.
Once again, the object is to set out with precision the circumstances in which the partners can remove an offending colleague without the need to seek a dissolution of the firm.
As a matter of drafting it is important to ensure that the grounds are treated as separate so that any one of which may be taken by the remaining partners as justifying the service of an expulsion notice.
Bankruptcy of a partner See also Clause 4.02 which, as in the case of the death of a partner, seeks to prevent an automatic dissolution of the firm under the Partnership Act.
The relevant date will be the making of a bankruptcy order under s278(a) of the Insolvency Act 1986.
Impending bankruptcy It may be preferred to activate the power to expel at an earlier date in the bankruptcy process so as to minimise the damage caused to the firm by protracted, and possibly contested proceedings.
Agreements not infrequently will provide that the mere fact of the presentation of a petition for a bankruptcy order by a creditor, or a partner applying for an interim order under s253 of the Insolvency Act 1986, or a partner entering into a compromise for the benefit of his creditors generally, or even the circumstance of a partner being unable and having no reasonable prospect of being able to pay his debts, should make the power exercisable.
The continuing partners will wish to minimise the possibility of their having to negotiate with the trustee in bankruptcyanother reason why the partnership agreement should deal with clarity as to what may ultimately be payable to the trustee and when.
Mental incapacity It is usual to provide that upon a partner becoming a patient under the Mental Health Act 1983 his colleagues should have the option of terminating their partnership with him.
The test of incapacity should be either that contained in  s94(2) (where a judge has to be satisfied of the incapacity) or that in the wider provision of s145(1) (where the patient is "a person suffering or appearing to be suffering from mental disorder" ).
General incapacity There are frequent instances of partners who, although not certifiable in any formal sense, are plainly unable to cope with the physical and mental demands of their job.
It is usual to provide for such circumstances by permitting expulsion where a partner, through ill health etc, is prevented from performing his obligations to the firm.
The matter may be looked at retrospectively (ie where the partner has been unable to work for some defined period or periods) or prospectively (where it has become apparent that the partner's health has failed and will not improve).
Some firms insist on partners submitting themselves for regular medical examinations after reaching a certain age and for disclosure of the results to all partners.
It would perhaps be unusual for expulsion to follow as a matter of course under this head without some discussion with the invalid to see whether other arrangements might be made and the real object of including this as a ground for expulsion is to remove doubt on all sides as to when such delicate matters are liable to be brought up for discussion in the context of early retirement.
Breach of professional standards and etiquette This ground should be extended (either specifically or generally) to cover all instances of professional misconduct which might damage the good name of the firm.
Plainly there are different degrees of misbehaviour and the partners will not readily resort to the extreme sanction of expulsion, but it is in the interests of the firm that a tendency to depart from proper professional standards be investigated and warnings handed down at an early stage before serious harm is done.
Frequently this ground will be split into matters of etiquette on the one hand and questions of professional competence on the other.
Neglect of obligations The last mentioned ground principally covers the behaviour of a partner towards clients and other persons outside the firm.
This is a separate head under which to deal with the solicitor's duty to his colleagues to attend to his work with proper expedition and to achieve a satisfactory level of performance to justify his agreed profit share.
It should be  considered in the context of any specific "understandings" concluded outside the partnership agreement itself as to what targets each partner is expected to achieve.
In the absence of any such prescribed ground rules, invocation of the power of expulsion on this ground is likely to be highly contentious.
Breach of the partnership agreement It is usual to specify certain provisions of particular importance (eg failing to maintain proper accounts or actions which might cause the firm to lose its investment business certificate) the breach of which would enable the power of expulsion to be exercised and, in a further ground, to refer in more general terms to persistent and general failure to observe the spirit of the agreement.
Failure to pay moneys owed to the firm This is invariably and obviously a ground for expulsion.
Conduct sufficient for a dissolution This sweeping provision is nearly always found in agreements although if the expulsion powers have been properly drafted it should always be possible and preferable to invoke some more specific ground.
(b) Procedure It is of vital importance that the procedures to be adopted in the case of an expulsion are clearly and effectively laid down in the partnership agreement and that they are observed to the letter.
Invariably the other partners will be required to serve a written notice upon their offending colleague and the expulsion will usually take immediate effect.
The notice should specify upon which ground the expelling partners rely but no more than that.
Arguments over the validity of the notice and justification of the motives of the partners serving it are better left to an appropriate tribunal (judge, arbitrator or mediator) than carried on in acrimonious correspondence.
The circumstances of a particular case may oblige the partners as a matter of good faith to proceed first by way of warning as to future conduct or to offer a personal hearing to the offending partner, but few general rules can be laid down in this respect.
If the matter is to be discussed with the miscreant partner at all he should be given a genuine opportunity to put his case to all the other partners.
Experience suggests, however, that attempting to  tackle such problems sympathetically may be more likely to lead to an embittered and protracted dispute (perhaps because it is seen as an admission that there may be doubt as to whether expulsion is really justified) than acting decisively and impersonally, refusing to be drawn into arguments with the partner whose expulsion is sought.
If desired the expulsion clause might specifically leave such matters to the discretion of the partners, though that discretion could only validly be exercised in good faith.
It might be wise to include provisions (Clause 28.01) for some form of substituted service to cover the case of a partner who deliberately absents himself from the firm, whether such absence is the ground for his expulsion or otherwise.
The agreement must make it clear who has the right to exercise the power: all the other partners acting unanimously or just a majority (simple or special).
Nor, for example, will it follow without being made explicit that only the majority whose decision is sufficient to exercise the power need be the signatories to any expulsion notice or that more than one partner can be expelled at the same time by the same notice.
Neither the decision to expel nor the service of an expulsion notice are matters where majority decisions can be taken relying on s24(8) of the Partnership Act.
Except in larger firms, unanimity might be thought to be desirable in the interests of preventing further splits in the firm, and even where a majority decision is available, a genuine attempt to achieve unanimity should always be made: save in any but the clearest case, exercise of the power by a permitted majority without consultation with the remaining partners would be regarded as being in bad faith.
(c) Suspension In many cases, of course, the need to expel a partner who has misbehaved will be obvious.
It may be, however, that the other partners will wish to take time to consider the position, to wait upon particular events (the outcome of bankruptcy proceedings, the settlement of financial or matrimonial problems etc).
There is much to be said for the inclusion of a procedure for suspending with immediate effect a partner whose conduct has given ground for expulsion (Clause 19.02) when the surrounding circumstances may not immediately indicate whether it would be in the interests of the firm that the power to expel should in fact be exercised.
Expulsion is an extreme sanction which will rarely leave the continuing, innocent partners entirely unscathed.
The period of suspension would normally, in everyone's interests, be kept short.
Attention to the wording of any such power should be no less scrupulous than in regard to the power to expel itself.
(d) The expelled partner Whilst often enough the circumstances will be sufficiently clear for even the most recalcitrant individual to accept his fate, the traumatic nature of the process is highly conducive to acrimony.
The instinct of a partner served with an expulsion notice will be to fight, through the courts if he is able.
The firm, on the other hand, will prefer to avoid potentially adverse publicity and will seek arbitration or mediation (see Chapter 11 and Clause 29).
If the court or the arbitrator should find against the validity of the expulsion, the injured partner should as a matter of common sense be given the opportunity of retiring from the firm on short notice: relations with those party to an attempt to expel him could scarcely be expected to remain harmonious.
That may not, however, be enough for the offended partner.
Depending on the circumstances and the provisions of the partnership agreement:(1) he may be justified in treating the service of an invalid expulsion notice as an event which in turn gives him the right to serve a similar notice; or (2) he may (not unreasonably) be able to contend that the service of an invalid notice is such breach of good faith as to justify his seeking a dissolution of the firm; or (3) he may be tempted to sue for damages, though these would be particularly difficult to quantify and it does not seem that the service of an invalid notice would be held to amount to a repudiatory breach of the partnership agreementsee Woodar Investment Development Ltd v Wimpey Construction UK Ltd [1980]1 WLR 277. (e) Waiver of the right to expel Once circumstances exist which might justify the exercise of a power to expel, the partners should not delay bringing matters to a head.
Laches could amount to bad faith and, in any case, the longer the time lag the greater the likelihood that the partners will, even inadvertently, do some act which affirms their partnership with the offending partner and which might raise an estoppel to prevent their proceeding with his expulsion.
It may be appropriate to specify in the partnership agreement that the power to expel must be exercised, if at all, within a particular time.
6 Compulsory retirement
It will be apparent from the last section that expulsion is a remedy of last resort and is all too likely to result in bitter dispute.
Can anything be done to prevent this?
Particular attention should be given to those grounds for expulsion which depend upon the partners making necessarily subjective assessments about their colleagues (level of performance, observance of the spirit of the partnership etc) where the issues are rarely clear cut.
An alternative to the expulsion procedure exists in what might be called compulsory retirement (Clause 18.03).
If the partners unanimously or by a prescribed majority feel that one of their number should no longer remain with the firm they are given power to require him to retire at the end of a period of notice, typically six months or not less than six months to expire at the end of the firm's accounting year.
The partners should resist the temptation to give their reasons for deciding to exercise the power.
No implication will usually be made that reasons should be given (see Price v Bouch (1987) 53 P & C R257) unless to withhold them would be a breach of good faith, but once reasons are vouchsafed, whether orally or in writing, they will be open to scrutiny by the court.
It is thought (though without the benefit of judicial authority) that a similar principle applies in relation to giving the right of a hearing to a partner whom his colleagues wish to leave: no such right will be implied unless good faith requires it, but if a hearing is allowed it must be fairly conducted.
When the procedure is correctly observed it is virtually unchallengeable.
It would be appropriate not simply as a true alternative to expulsion where the grounds for the latter exist but also where the circumstances make it difficult to identify some particular breach or failure by the partner served with notice, where the problem is more that his face no longer fits, where his general approach to the business of the firm is inconsistent with the policy which the other partners have decided to adopt, and so on.
Such matters are almost incapable of being satisfactorily defined within the partnership agreement itself.
The consequences of being on the receiving end of such a notice are, of course, little less severe than when an expulsion is put into effect.
It may be that the draconian and secret nature of the procedure makes it unattractive for smaller firms: perhaps where there are as few as three partners, some check on its exercise should be incorporated in the  partnership agreement.
It should be noted that the anti-discrimination statutes also apply to termination of partnerships by this means.
7 Dissolution
Sometimes dissolution is unavoidable.
Sometimes even it is desired to vest a power to dissolve in one partner or a specified majority.
In any event, nothing partners do or say can prevent the court entertaining an application by one of their number for a dissolution on appropriate grounds (see Chapter 9).
Accordingly, it is usual to find in partnership agreements some reference to possible dissolution (Clause 27).
Matters which the partners might wish to settle in advance include their rights to bid for partnership assets (since the court would probably not grant the necessary authority to one only of the former partners against the objection of the others), the transfer of assets to individual partners in specie, the manner in which sales of partnership property should be conducted (by private treaty or at auction), advertisement of the dissolution, and provisions conferring special authority upon individual partners in any respect during the winding-up of the firm.
If such matters are not covered in the partnership agreement or the partners are unable to reach agreement between themselves on an ad hoc basis, dissolution will proceed in all respects strictly in accordance with the Partnership Act.
8 Leaving the Firm II
1 Introduction
The previous chapter covered the circumstances in which partners cease to be members of their firms.
In this chapter the steps which need to be taken to ensure that the continuing partners are able to carry on the practice, beyond the basic declaration of intent (Clause 4.02), are considered in some detail.
Where, for one reason or another, continuance becomes impossible, the firm will be dissolved: this is discussed in Chapter 9.
In the best of worlds the provisions of the partnership agreement will cover all eventualities arising out of the departure of a member of the firm.
In reality, further negotiation around the written provisions or worse, where no writing exists, negotiation from scratch will be required.
To the extent that agreement is reached which goes beyond the provisions of a pre-existing document or displaces the relevant provisions of the Partnership Act, the agreed terms should be reduced to writing to reduce the scope for subsequent dispute.
2 Payments to outgoing partners
In the absence of some other agreed procedure, an outgoing partner, or his estate, is entitled to have the affairs of his former firm wound up under the Partnership Act and to be paid out for his interest.
If the court can spell out an implied agreement that all parties recognised that the continuing partners would be entitled to carry on the practice after the departure of an outgoing partner, the right to a full dissolution will not be available, but the outgoing partner will have the benefit of s43 of the Act and the continuing partners will, after all necessary accounts and inquiries have been taken, be obliged to pay him the value of his interest in  the firm—see Sobell v Boston [1975]1 WLR 1587.
Section 43 is in the following terms: Subject to any agreement between the partners, the amount due from surviving or continuing partners to an outgoing partner or the representatives of a deceased partner in respect of the outgoing or deceased partner's share is a debt accruing at the date of the dissolution or death.
The outgoing partner will also be entitled to a continuing share of profits or, at his election, interest in lieu under s42 (see below) until accounts with his former partners have been finally settled.
In well-run firms, the right of the continuing partners to carry on the practice will be expressly recognised and the partnership agreement will contain detailed provisions as to the entitlements of outgoing partners (Clause 20).
(a) Manner of acquisition The share of the outgoing partner must be acquired by the continuing partners.
That will be achieved in one of two ways:(1) by providing for its automatic accruer in consideration of or linked to an appropriate payment; or (2) by giving the continuing partners an option to acquire the share at an ascertainable price.
Automatic accruer is perhaps more commonly used by professional partnerships (and has the practical advantage of not being dependent upon compliance with a prescribed timetable) but there is considerable uncertainty as to whether such an arrangement should be regarded as a binding contract for the sale and purchase of the partnership share so as to take its value outside the scope of business property relief for the purposes of Inheritance Tax (see Chapter 10).
The option approach is the more flexible.
The unexpected departure, for whatever reasons, of several partners within a short period of time could place an intolerable strain on the surviving partners in the event that they were bound to pay out their former colleagues at one and the same time.
The alternative of dissolving the firm might in such circumstances be less burdensome.
Whatever is decided upon, the procedures to be adopted must be made explicit.
A time should be prescribed for exercise of any option, though that could be extended by subsequent agreement and the court would readily imply a reasonable time if none were in fact specified.
The mechanics of valuing the entitlement of the outgoing partner should be specific (see below) and once ascertained a timetable should be laid down for its payment, as to which the  alternatives (depending on the circumstances and needs of the firm in question and its partners) are immediate payment or payment by instalments over a period with or without interest on the unpaid balance.
If provision is to be made (Clause 20.02.5) for retentions from the amount due on account of tax liabilities or compensation for damage caused to the firm by the outgoing partner (a somewhat controversial matter, but one which might be considered, for example, in relation to increased indemnity insurance premiums becoming payable by the continuing partners as a result of the negligence of the outgoing partner) the terms must be set out with clarity.
It will be in everyone's interests to ensure that accounts are taken and valuations made promptly and, perhaps, if the involvement of a third party as independent valuer, arbitrator or mediator is contemplated to break any deadlock, that a time limit be imposed for agreement inter partes. (b) Calculation of what is due to the outgoing partner The first and obvious step in the valuation process is the taking of an account up to the date when the outgoing partner dies or leaves the firm, unless that happens or (except in the case of a death or bankruptcy) is made to happen at the end of the firm's normal accounting period.
What will need to be ascertained in relation to the outgoing partner is:(1) his profit share for the current year up to the cessation date, less any drawings made during the year;(2) his balance on the firm's capital account;(3) his balance on the firm's current account in respect of undrawn profits from earlier years; and (4) his entitlement to a share in the surplus partnership assets, that is to say, in particular , goodwill, work in progress and the excess over book values of other assets.
In all probability, however, in the modern solicitors' partnership it will have been agreed to leave goodwill out of account (see below).
Work in progress may be agreed to be brought in at less than its face value to reflect expenses incurred during the period between bill delivery and payment.
Nor is it unknown for agreements to provide that payments should be made on the basis of book values, avoiding the expense of revaluation and leaving the benefits of capital appreciation to the continuing partners.
(c) Goodwill Before the Finance Act 1956 and the introduction of tax relief for contributions to retirement annuity contracts for the  self-employed, outgoing partners in solicitors' firms invariably relied upon being paid out for their interest in the firm's goodwill as the principal means of providing for themselves and their families during their retirement and after their death.
Financing such payments (which frequently would take the form of annuity payments by the firm out of its profits or an annuity contract purchased by the firm) was never easy and reliance had to be placed on incoming partners' immediate capital contributions.
In the course of time, economic and social pressures ensured that the coincidence of sufficient financial resources and professional potential was encountered with diminishing frequency.
For the younger partner, progressive fiscal relaxation (the Finance Act 1974 introduced earned income relief for professional annuity income and tax deductibility for payments by firms to retired partners and their dependants) was adequate compensation for agreements to take goodwill out of account when making termination payments.
Such changes enabled junior partners to be taken on without initial capital contributions and to buy their way in effectively through restrictions on their drawings.
Wherever possible, the better course would seem to be to make the switch from paying outgoing partners for goodwill to ensuring that all partners make proper retirement plan contributions (Clause 14.02).
Special ad hoc arrangements should then be made to compensate those partners whose age has prevented them from extracting the maximum benefit from the changes in fiscal legislation.
No ideal solution to this problem has been found.
Compensation for the loss of goodwill payments may be offered inter alia by:(1) consultancy arrangements, which guarantee the outgoing partner an income in return for a reduced work load, but do not survive his death and therefore cannot benefit his dependants;(2) annuities for himself and his family payable out of the firm's profits, which are fiscally unattractive and can place undue strain on the firm's finances; and (3) guaranteeing the partner nearing retirement a generous level of income overriding, in a bad year, his strict entitlement under the agreed profit sharing ratios; but the reluctance of younger partners to accept such arrangement may easily be imagined.
There will always be some resistance to this sort of change and the problem will continue in some firms for at least another  decade, so it is still apposite to mention briefly the methods of valuing goodwill.
The Law Society produced a paper on the subject in 1981 against the background of the difficulties mentioned above to which the attention of the Royal Commission on Legal Services had already been drawn five years previously.
Where goodwill still has to be valued in relation to payments to outgoing partners, one of two bases is likely to be used:(1) excess profits, that is to say the amount by which an outgoing partner's profit share exceeded (a) what he might have been expected to earn as an employed solicitor, and (b) the income he might have been expected to receive from investing his capital contributions in safe securities; or, and much more frequently,(2) the average net profits of the partner concerned.
In each case a multiplier will be applied having regard to such matters as:(1) the size of the firm in question;(2) the personal attributes of the partners;(3) the type of practice (specialised or general etc);(4) the locality of the firm;(5) the security of tenure of the firm at its premises; or (6) the firm's profit trend.
The multiplier in the case of the net profits basis will usually be 1-1.5, but no general guide can be given to the excess profits calculation.
The disarming, though understandable, conclusion of the Society is that it is a matter for each individual firm to decide for itself just how its goodwill should be valued.
(d) Post-dissolution profits Section 42 of the Partnership Act is concerned with the rights of outgoing partners in certain cases to share profits made after dissolution:(1) Where any member of a firm has died or otherwise ceased to be a partner, and the surviving or continuing partners carry on the business of the firm with its capital or assets without any final settlement of accounts as between the firm and the outgoing partner or his estate, then, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, the outgoing partner or his estate is entitled at the option of himself or his representatives to such share of the profits made since the dissolution as the Court may find to be attributable to the use of his share of the partnership assets, or to interest  at the rate of five per cent per annum on the amount of his share of the partnership assets.
(2) Provided that where by the partnership contract an option is given to surviving or continuing partners to purchase the interest of a deceased or outgoing partner, and that option is duly exercised, the estate of the deceased partner, or the outgoing partner or his estate, as the case may be, is not entitled to any further or other share of profits; but if any partner assuming to act in exercise of the option does not in all material respects comply with the terms thereof, he is liable to account under the foregoing provisions of this section.
This right of election (which may be exercised by the beneficiaries of a deceased partner's estate in the event that no personal representative has been appointed) may be excluded by agreement, eg provision for the automatic accruer of the share of an outgoing partner or for the purchase of such share with interest until payment—see Vyse v Foster (1872) LR 8 Ch App 309.
But an election to take interest in lieu of profits will not exclude the right to an account for capital profits made between dissolution and sale—see Barclays Bank Trust Co Ltd v Bluff [1982]Ch 172.
Where acquisition of the share of an outgoing partner depends upon the exercise of an option, it will be a question of the true construction of the written option agreement as to whether the potential operation of this section has been excluded in relation to income profits arising between the dissolution and the exercise of the option.
Where after a full dissolution the winding up of the practice is in the hands of some only of the former partners an allowance may be made to them in recognition of their efforts before the net profits are determined for the purposes of this section or otherwise.
3 Restraint covenants
Where a practice continues after the departure of one of its partners, the continuing partners will have acquired the outgoing partner's share in the firm's goodwill by one of the methods mentioned above.
The continuing partners will wish to ensure that the outgoing partner cannot damage that goodwill.
The partnership agreement will normally contain provisions (applying equally to all signatories) to restrict the ability of an outgoing partner to compete with the firm.
Where the share in goodwill has been purchased from the outgoing partner (sed quaere where goodwill has been excluded from the purchased share or been valued at nil), even in the absence of a specific agreement, the law  offers limited protection particularly as regards the solicitation of existing clients (see Trego v Hunt [1896]AC 7 and Churton v Douglas (1859) Johns 174).
Beyond that, the matter is entirely dependent upon agreement.
Such agreement will be valid to the extent, but no more, that it is reasonably necessary to protect the business of the continuing firm and does not offend the public interest.
In the case of a solicitor, the latter essentially comprises both the freedom of any person to instruct the solicitor of his or her choice, and also the ability of a qualified solicitor to practise his profession.
Since in the case of a solicitors' partnership all parties to such agreements should be taken as being familiar with the legal principles governing covenants in restraint of trade as well as with the particular circumstances of the practice with which they have all been involved, it might be thought that the court would be unwilling to substitute its own ideas as to what might constitute reasonable protection for the business.
Indeed, such sentiments can be clearly detected in the judgment of the Privy Council in Bridge v Deacons [1984]AC 705 (see below).
To that general principle, however, there would seem to be a number of exceptions where the court will not simply accept the verdict of the solicitors as expressed in their own agreement.
Public interest Where a question of public interest is involved.
The public interest would not perhaps be regarded as well served if a fully qualified solicitor was effectively deprived of the opportunity of practising his profession: this may be behind the Scottish decision of Dallas McMillan & Sinclair v Simpson (1988) SLT 454 where the covenant purported to prevent the outgoing partner from practising as a solicitor within 20 miles of the centre of Glasgow, an area in which roughly half of Scotland's law firms were said to be located.
Such a covenant was held to go well beyond what was necessary to protect the interests of the firm.
Unequal negotiating positions Where the parties to a restraint agreement are not on equal negotiating terms.
A new and very junior partner may make little headway in challenging the terms of partnership offered him where similar terms are already in force as regards other partners in the firm.
Accession to pre-existing standard form partnership articles has little in common with a freely negotiated agreement between parties with a broad equality of bargaining power.
Change in firm's circumstances Where the circumstances of the firm have changed in some material respect which could not reasonably have been foreseen at the date of the agreement.
The terms of many restraints will have been settled long before an occasion for their enforcement arises.
If, when agreed, the restraint was not excessive it will remain valid in law but in deciding whether to grant equitable relief by way of injunction, the court will have regard to the circumstances obtaining at the date of the alleged breach.
While in many cases the application of a degree of common sense by the parties involved will indicate whether a restriction has fallen out of date or should continue to be respected, the better course is to keep the matter under regular review.
Covenants imposed on employed solicitors will always be looked at objectively and the court will presume an inequality of bargaining power.
In the case of a salaried partner the position may be rather less clear.
He ought, whether he remains technically an employee or is treated as a partner or is classified as somewhere between the two (eg taxed under Sched D on his "salary" ), to be in a position to know enough about his firm to judge what amounts to a reasonable restriction and not to need the court's protection if he should have agreed to covenants in stringent terms.
Where an assistant solicitor's employment came to an end on the dissolution of the firm, such dissolution was held to constitute a breach of his contract of employment such that the restrictive covenants imposed on him ceased to be enforceable—see Briggs v Oates [1990]ICR 473.
The leading modern authority of Bridge v Deacons concerned a firm of solicitors in Hong Kong.
Bridge had joined the firm as an assistant solicitor and was later made a salaried partner with a view to and shortly before his becoming a full capital (equity) partner.
The partnership agreement sought to restrain outgoing partners over a period of five years from acting as a solicitor, notary, trade mark or patent agent or in any similar capacity in the Colony of Hong Kong whether as principal, clerk or assistant for any person, firm or company who was at the time of his ceasing to be a partner or had during the period of three years prior thereto been a client of the partnership…
The agreement would not however have prevented their being employed as a solicitor etc by the colonial government or local companies.
The evidence suggested that Bridge had worked in only one of the departments of what was a very substantial firm  and had had no professional contact with the work of other departments.
The restriction was upheld by the Privy Council which rejected the argument that Deacons were only entitled to protect such part of their goodwill as would be threatened by Bridge if he were to set up in practice on his own account, ie that part of the firm's goodwill as attached to the particular department in which he had worked.
The court stressed the mutuality of the partnership contract by which the restriction was applied to all partners who together were interested in the profits of the firm as a single practice.
It noted the possibility that in theory the interests of the partners might be so separated that a blanket restriction on competition would be unreasonable but rejected the contention that the mere fact of administrative departmentalisation could lead to that result.
As to the periods of restraint, the court observed that their reasonableness was "hardly susceptible of proof by specific evidence" , "some weight should be given to the fact that the restriction is found in a partnership agreement which has evidently been carefully drafted and which must be taken to represent the views of experienced solicitors who would be well aware that an unduly severe restriction would be unenforceable" .
The judgment also draws attention to the "clear public interest" involved in the recruitment of younger partners to ensure continuity in the practice and confirms (contrary to certain dicta of Lord Denning in Oswald Hickson Collier & Co v Carter-Ruck [1984]2 WLR 847) that a restriction against acting for former clients is not itself contrary to public policy.
Whilst private individuals should have the right to choose a solicitor, a solicitor is not under any professional obligation to accept instructions in any particular case.
No rule of law or the profession, therefore, prevents him from entering into a contract by which he undertakes not to act for a specified class of person.
The drafting of restraint covenants is no easy matter.
Restrictions (Clause 21) will commonly be sought in relation to four specific matters:(1) the nature of the work which it sought to prevent the outgoing partner from undertaking;(2) the persons for whom it is sought to prevent the outgoing partner acting;(3) the area over which the restrictions are to operate; and (4) the solicitation of clients of the firm, whether directly by personal contact or indirectly by advertising.
The details of each restriction must depend upon the special  circumstances of each firm.
It cannot, therefore, be predicted that any particular restriction will necessarily be accepted as reasonable.
It is, however, possible to point to what might well be regarded as unreasonable and the parties to an agreement should always endeavour to check their provisions against such benchmarks.
The following might be regarded as excessive restrictions:(1) an attempt to prevent a qualified solicitor from setting up a specialist practice in a field in which his former firm has never before undertaken work and has no plans to start accepting instructions;(2) an attempt to prevent an outgoing partner from accepting instructions from any person or firm (whether or not a client or former client of his former firm) within a prescribed area;(3) a general area restraint where the outgoing partner's former firm has its offices in a location where competition is already intense.
Conversely, where existing competition is light and the traditional catchment area of the firm large, a wide restraint may be expected to be upheld; and (4) a prohibition against accepting instructions from any person who has at any time, or over a long period, been a client of the outgoing partner's former firm.
The draftsman should bear in mind that any restriction will be construed against the firm in whose interest it purports to be imposed.
Each of the component parts of the restriction should be incorporated into the agreement in such a way that any provision which the court might feel goes beyond the bounds of reasonableness can be severed under the "blue pencil test" leaving the bulk of the desired restriction in full force.
The court will not, however, attempt to renegotiate or re-write the covenants.
It will try to leave as much of the restriction as is reasonable in force, but that will only be the result if what remains after deletion of the void provisions can stand alone as a coherent, meaningful agreement: all too often the several restraints are jumbled and effectively unseverable, so that the whole fails.
Enforcement of restraint covenants will be by way of injunction, if the firm does not in the event consider that the attendant publicity will do as much damage as an actual or threatened breach.
The rights and wrongs of the case are frequently effectively settled on motion for interim relief.
On such a hearing the court will be reluctant to devote time to technical argument and will concentrate on the balance of convenience.
This will usually  favour the firm which seeks injunctive relief, since the damage which might result from failing to restrain a former partner is almost bound to exceed that which could be caused by holding the latter to his covenants.
Once an interim order has been made, there may be little for either side to gain from seeking a full hearing on the validity of the covenants.
Often enough, restrictions are imposed in terrorem so as to discourage the more blatant activities of the outgoing partner but with the realisation that to hold him to the letter of the restraint might well be impracticable.
As a matter of good practice, where the parting of the ways is amicable, restrictions will often be waived or varied so as not to thwart the outgoing partner's career advancement.
Where the departure follows upon some dispute, on the other hand, there will be a natural inclination to enforce the restrictions in full, but it should be remembered that they will only be binding upon the outgoing partner himself, not on third parties.
For example, if an outgoing partner accepts an employed position with a firm outside any prohibited area, there would be little his former firm could do to prevent that other firm from advertising within the area concerned.
Where the outgoing partner joins another firm as a partner he would be in a position to influence the actions of that firm.
It may be that in those circumstances an injunction could be obtained against him effectively to prevent his giving his authority to advertising activities in the name of the firm which would be prohibited if done in his own name.
4 Administrative arrangements
(a) Notification Upon the departure of a partner the continuing firm will need to take steps to publicise the change.
Under the Business Names Act 1985 its letterheading must be changed promptly.
That would be a prudent exercise in any event to avoid any apparent continuing holding out of the outgoing partner as a member of the firm.
A notice of the change in the composition of the firm placed in the London Gazette is necessary to notify the world at large(as opposed to existing clients, business connections and creditors) of the change—see s36(2) of the Partnership Act.
But more important still will be notification of the change to the firm's existing clients.
Where a major change to the firm has taken place (eg the  departure of one partner out of only a few or several partners at one time, merger or takeover, or the closure of an entire department) there is a professional obligation to notify clients as soon as reasonably practicable.
The Law Society advises that the following information might properly be given:(1) notification that the partner concerned will be leaving the firm on a specified date.
Whenever possible, notices of change should precede the event;(2) identification of the partners who will continue the practice under the original or a new firm name;(3) notification of the outgoing partner's new address and firm name;(4) invitation to the client to indicate which of the firms referred to he wishes to instruct.
It is regarded as essential that the client is expressly reminded of his freedom of choice of solicitor.
In the ordinary way a pro forma letter would be included for the client's signature; and (5) a note of any moneys standing to the client's credit.
Where the change is not so fundamental as to be caught by this rule and the departure follows upon some dispute, client notification will not be unconnected with whatever restraint covenants have been imposed on the outgoing partner(s).
As a matter of prudence, the matter should be addressed in the partnership agreement itself (Clause 23) preferably by leaving all decisions, as to the time, manner and content of notifications, to the continuing partners.
If this is not done, the scope for embittered argument over the right of the outgoing partner to notify clients of the firm (at any rate those with whom he has had personal contact) of his departure and of his future practice address in the context of a non-solicitation covenant leaves little to the imagination.
The outgoing partner who is to continue in practice as a solicitor must comply with s84(1) of the Solicitors Act: For the purposes of facilitating the services of notices and other documents, every solicitor who has in force, or has applied for, a practising certificate shall give notice to the Society of any change in his place or places of business before the expiration of 14 days from the date on which the change takes effect.
(b) Transfer of work A client is properly regarded as a client of the firm and not of the individual solicitor unless there is some personal, often family, connection between the two.
The goodwill of a firm in essence exists in its client base.
Accordingly, on the departure of a  partner, the continuing firm will try, subject always to the wishes of individual clients, to retain clients for whom the outgoing partner has acted in the past and is currently acting at the date of his leaving the firm.
The loyalty of past clients can be stimulated by appropriate notification as discussed above.
In the case of present clients, the firm will want to effect a transfer of their affairs from the outgoing partner to one of the continuing partners.
It may be advisable (Clause 22.02) to include some provision in this regard in the partnership agreement, though it should be recognised that enforcement through the courts is impossible, depending as it does on the consent of a client who is not privy to the agreement.
Again, retention of client loyalty is in practice more easily achieved by effective notification.
Executorships, of course, are appointments of a personal nature which cannot be transferred; and in the case of trustee appointments not even the consent of all co-trustees and adult beneficiaries could compel (though such combination ought in most cases to be regarded as persuasive) an unwilling trustee to retire in favour of a new appointee.
(c) Books and papers An outgoing partner should be required (Clause 22.01) to deliver up all books and papers in his possession which belong to the firm.
He should be given the opportunity on reasonable notice to inspect the same.
(d) Continuation election In most cases, though not all, the continuing partners will wish the future profits of the firm to be taxed as if there had been no change in the membership of the partnership.
The fiscal implications of this are discussed in Chapter 10.
Here it is enough to note the invariable practice of including in a partnership agreement (Clause 26) a provision which requires an outgoing partner, or his representatives, to join in a continuation election under s113 of the Income and Corporation Taxes Act 1988 upon being requested so to do by the continuing partners.
If no such election is made, the profits of the firm must be taxed as if , on the departure of the outgoing partner, the existing business had closed and a new business started up by the continuing partners.
(e) Leases Where partnership property is held on lease by no more than four of the partners on trust for the partners for the time being of the  firm and one of the partners joined as lessee leaves the firm, an assignment of the lease should be effected forthwith into the names of four of the continuing partners: the partnership agreement (Clause 24) should oblige the outgoing partner to execute all necessary deeds etc in this behalf.
A properly drafted lease will ensure that the lessor cannot object to such formal assignment and will expressly provide that the named lessees hold the term for the partnership.
Where the lease itself does not expressly fix the lessor with notice of the partnership's interest, the individual named lessee may be liable as principal.
Even where the lessor does have notice of the partnership, a failure to change the lessees may result in an apparent holding out of the outgoing partner as a continuing member of the firm, if the lessor has no other means of knowing of the change.
In his own interest, an outgoing partner should take steps to regularise the position by requiring that he be replaced as lessee and insisting on an indemnity against future liabilities of the firm generally; and the partnership agreement (Clause 25) should give him those rights.
5 Personal representatives and trustees in bankruptcy
As a general principle, personal representatives and trustees in bankruptcy merely stand in the shoes of the deceased or insolvent partner and have no greater rights against the continuing partners than are conferred by the partnership agreement (or by statute in default of a sufficiently comprehensive agreement).
In particular, they have no right to take part in the running of the firm's business, which remains firmly under the control of the continuing partners.
(a) Death The estate of a deceased partner will ordinarily be entitled to some payment on account of his partnership share (see above) and his personal representatives will be entitled to have all appropriate accounts taken in that behalf.
The provisions of s42 of the Partnership Act will (unless excluded by the partnership agreement) apply until final settlement of this matter.
If, by agreement with the continuing partners, the personal representatives, themselves duly authorised by provisions in the will or otherwise, are content to leave the deceased's share in the continuing firm by way of loan, for example to help the firm over some temporary  financial difficulty, they do not on that account become entitled to any account of the profits of the firm, merely to payment of interest at the agreed rate.
(b) Insolvency The partnership share (or, where the insolvent partner ceases to be a partner prior to any bankruptcy order, the right to have it ascertained and paid) of an insolvent partner vests in his trustee in bankruptcy subject to any lien to which the continuing partners may be entitled under s39 of the Partnership Act and accordingly all partnership liabilities must be discharged and accounts between the partners settled before anything is paid over to the trustee.
It is thought that where acquisition of the outgoing partner's share is subject to the option procedure, the consent of the court is required where the exercise of the option by the continuing partners has to be made (if at all) between presentation of the bankruptcy petition and vesting of the insolvent's estate in the trustee since it involves a disposition of the partnership share of the insolvent partnersee s284 of the Insolvency Act 1986.
Where there is provision for automatic accruer, such consent to its operation would not seem to be required.
In the event that the continuing partners have outstanding claims against their insolvent former colleague, they will be able to prove for the same in his bankruptcy as ordinary unsecured creditors.