

2 Damages on Death
Thomas Saunt, Barrister
Contents
The Legislation
2.1 It is, of course, self-evident that once an injured person has died he himself cannot receive damages and any award of damages must be received by other persons.Prior to 1846, the date of the first Fatal Accidents Act, English law gave no remedy at all to dependants in the case of death.
The rule was that a personal action died with the person to whom it attached.
Today there are two separate ways in which English law enables actions for damages to be brought after death.
The first of these is through the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1934 (see Appendix B).
This provides for the survival of causes of action vested in the deceased for the benefit of his estate.
Section 1 provides that on the death of any person (after the commencement of that Act) all causes of action subsisting against or vested in him survive against or, as the case may be, for the benefit of, his estate.
This Act did not create any new cause of action for wrongfully causing death; it merely continued any existing cause of action for personal injuries  and loss of expectation of life that was vested in the deceased when he died that would otherwise have been extinguished on his death.
2.2 Section 1(2) (c) of the 1934 Act expressly stated before amendment that where the act or omission that gives rise to the cause of action results in death the damages are to be calculated without reference to any loss or gain to the deceased's estate consequent on his death, except that a sum in respect of funeral expenses may be included.
2.3 In the case of deaths occurring before 1 January 1983, damages recoverable under the 1934 Act include damages for pain and suffering and loss sustained by the deceased before his death, damages for loss of expectation of life, damages for loss of future earnings during the "lost years" and funeral expenses.
The claim for damages for loss of expectation of life is limited to a moderate conventional sum; by 1985 it had reached £1,750 (Kralj v McGrath [1986]1 All ER 54).
Damages awarded for loss of future earnings can be substantial.
The calculation of damages for loss of earnings during the "lost years" is dealt with in the concluding portion of Chapter 5 (Damages for Future Pecuniary Loss).
2.4 In the case of deaths occurring on or after 1 January 1983 the right to damages for loss of expectation of life is abolished by s1 of the Administration of Justice Act 1982.
Section 4 of the 1982 Act amends the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1934 so as to exclude the survival of any claim for damages for loss of earnings during the lost years for the benefit of the estate in respect of deaths occurring on or after 1 January 1983.
It follows that damages recoverable by the estate under the 1934 Act in the case of deaths occurring on or after that date are limited to financial loss suffered before his death, to damages for pain and suffering sustained by the deceased before his death and to funeral expenses.
In the many cases where death is instantaneous or almost instantaneous, there will of course be no award for pain and suffering.
The Fatal Accidents Act 1976
2.5 The second, and more important, cause of action that English law now allows on death is the independent cause of action given to the near relatives of the deceased who have been deprived of his or her support or services.
This is the remedy provided today by the Fatal Accidents Act 1976.
2.6 At common law the relatives had no cause of action when they suffered loss in consequence of a tortiously inflicted death.
Such a cause of action was first introduced by the 1846 Act.
The present provisions are contained in the Fatal Accidents Act 1976 as amended (see Appendix B).
Section 1(1) provides that if death is caused by any wrongful act, neglect or default which is such as would (if death had not ensued) have entitled the person injured to maintain an action and recover damages, the person who would have been liable if death had not ensued is liable to an action for damages, notwithstanding the death of the person injured.
2.7 The important thing to remember about the right of action created by the Fatal Accidents Act 1976 is that it is a claim for damages suffered, not by the deceased himself, but by his family after his death.
It is, of course, a pre-condition under the Act that the deceased would have been entitled to maintain an action on his own behalf and recover damages if he had survived.
Furthermore, damages recoverable by his dependants are reduced if the deceased contributed to the accident by his own negligence (s5).
If the deceased's death is caused by the negligence of one of his dependants, that negligence does not affect the claims of the other dependants (Dodds v Dodds [1978]QB 543).
Dependants
2.8 There have been a large number of judicial observations over the years about the general nature of the remedy established by fatal accidents legislation.
It has been said that the Acts "provided a new cause of action and did not merely regulate or enlarge an old one" .
The most familiar description perhaps is that given by Lord Wright in Davies v Powell Duffryn Associated Collieries Ltd (No 2)[1942]AC 601 at p611: It is not a claim which the deceased could have pursued in his own lifetime because it is for damages suffered not by himself, but by his family after his death.
2.9 The first question, then, when making a claim under the Fatal Accidents Act 1976 is to consider who can claim.
This is dealt with by s1 of the Act.
Section 1(2) provides that every such action shall be for the benefit of the dependants of the deceased.
Section 1(3) originally defined "dependant" as (i) the wife or husband of the deceased;(ii) any person who is a parent or grandparent of the deceased;(iii) any person who is a child or grandchild of  the deceased; and (iv) any person who is, or is the issue of, a brother, sister, uncle or aunt of the deceased (and that of course is wide enough to include nephews, nieces and cousins).
Section 1(4) stated that in deducing any relationship for the purposes of s1(3) any relationship by affinity is to be treated as a relationship by consanguinity, any relationship of the half-blood is to be treated as a relationship of the whole blood, the step-child of any person is to be treated as his child, and an illegitimate person is to be treated as a legitimate child of his mother and reputed father.
The classes of dependants and relatives who have a potential claim under the Fatal Accidents Act 1976 were therefore, fairly wide.
Originally the class of persons entitled to claim was limited to the wife, husband, parent and child of the deceased but over the years the classes have been extended to enable all those classes mentioned in the 1976 Act to claim.
That extension has continued.
2.10 The definition of dependant was extended in respect of causes of action accruing after 1 January 1983 by s3 of the Administration of Justice Act 1982.
Section 1 of the 1976 Act was thereby amended to include as dependants spouses and former spouses of the deceased, any person who (i) was living with the deceased in the same household immediately before the date of the death; and (ii) had been living with the deceased in the same household for at least two years before that date; and (iii) was living during the whole of that period as the husband or wife of the deceased, any parent or other ascendant or child or other descendant of the deceased, any person who was treated by the deceased as his parent, and any person (not being a child of the deceased) who was treated by the deceased as a "child of the family" in relation to any marriage of the deceased, and any person who is or was the issue of a brother, sister, uncle or aunt of the deceased.
Section 1(4) was maintained.
Claims for bereavement are restricted to a narrower class (see 2.15 below).
2.11 In practice most claims under the Fatal Accidents Act 1976 are brought by a widow or widower on behalf of herself or himself and their children, or sometimes by the parents of an unmarried son or daughter who was contributing to their support.
It goes without saying that even if a person falls within the definition of "dependant" provided in the Act he or she will still have to prove loss arising from the death of the deceased, and in practice many relatives have no claim at all.
Where a person becomes a dependant within the statutory definition between the date on which the deceased sustained the tortious fatal injury and the date  of death, that person has a good claim under the Act.
In Phillips v Grampian Health Board (1989) The Times, 9 March a widow was held entitled to recover damages even though she married the deceased when he was already suffering from a fatal disease and she knew that his death was inevitable within a few years.
Assessment of Damages
The principles
2.12 Section 3(1) of the Fatal Accidents Act 1976 deals with the assessment of damages.
It provides that such damages can be awarded as are proportioned to the injury resulting from the death to the dependants respectively.
This is in similar, but not identical, terms to s2 of the 1846 Act, but no change was made by the rewording of the section.
2.13 The effect of s3 is that there is no statutory limitation on the damages to be awarded.
However, over the years firm limitations have been placed upon damages that can be awarded by the courts.
Very soon after the enactment of the 1846 Act it was held by the courts that the action was based upon financial loss and nothing else.
Save as provided by s3 of the Administration of Justice Act 1982, in the case of causes of action accruing after 1 January 1983 (see below), no sum can be awarded to relatives under the Act for their own mental distress or for the loss of society of the deceased.
2.14 Lord Wright in Davies v Power Duffryn Associated Collieries Ltd (No 2)[1942]AC 601 provided perhaps the best known expression of this fact.
He stated the position at p617 as follows: There is no question here of what may be called sentimental damage bereavement or pain and suffering.
It is a hard matter of pounds, shillings and pence, subject to the element of reasonable future probabilities.
The starting point is the amount of wages which the deceased was earning, the ascertainment of which to some extent may depend on the regularity of his employment.
Then there is an estimate of how much was required or expended for his own personal and living expenses.
The balance will give a datum or basic figure which will generally be turned into a lump sum by taking a certain number of years' purchase.
2.15 Section 3 of the Administration of Justice Act 1982 amended the 1976 Act so as to insert a new s1A, which provides that an action under the Act may consist of or include a claim for damages for bereavement in the case of causes of action accruing  after 1 January 1983.
Section 1A(2) provides that a claim for damages for bereavement shall only be for the benefit of the wife or husband of the deceased and, where the deceased was a minor who was never married, for the benefit of his parents, if he was legitimate and of his mother if he was illegitimate.
Section 1A(3) originally fixed the sum to be awarded under this head at £3,500.
This sum was increased to £7,500 for causes of action accruing on or after 1 April 1991 by the Damages for Bereavement (Variation of Sum) Order 1990 and can be further varied by the Lord Chancellor by order made by statutory instrument (s1A(5)).
2.16 There are, then, on Lord Wright's dictum, three stages to the calculation: first of all, one has to ascertain the earnings of the deceased, less his personal and living expenses.
This gives what Lord Wright calls the "datum figure" , but it is also known as the annual dependency or the multiplicand.
This figure is multiplied by a number of years' purchase, which is commonly known as the multiplier.
The whole figure is subject to the element of reasonable future probability and this factor is commonly reflected in the multiplier (but sometimes is reflected in a reduced multiplicand).
2.17 This exercise has been described in a different way by Lord Diplock in Mallett v McMonagle [1970]AC 166 at p174: The purpose of an award of damages under the Fatal Accidents Act is to provide the widow and other dependants of the deceased with a capital sum, which, with prudent management, will be sufficient to supply them with material benefits of the same standards and duration as would have been provided for them out of the earnings of the deceased had he not been killed by the tortious act of the defendant, credit being given for the value of any material benefits which will accrue to them (otherwise than as the fruits of insurance) as a result of his death.
To assess the damages it is necessary to form a view upon three matters each of which is in greater or lesser degree one of speculation:(1) the value of the material benefits for his dependants which the deceased would have provided out of his earnings for each year in the future during which he would have provided for them had he not been killed:(2) the value of any material benefits which the dependants will be able to obtain in each such year from sources (other than insurance) which would not have been available to them had the deceased lived but which will become available to them as a result of his death:(3) the amount of the capital sum which, with prudent management, will produce annual amounts equal to the difference between (1) and (2)(that is "the dependency" ) for each of the years during which the deceased would have provided material benefits for the dependants had he not been killed.
2.18 The purpose of the award is not to give the dependants such sums as would give them an annual income equal to the  dependency.
This would clearly be unfair on the defendant because at the end of the period of the dependency the whole of the capital sum would remain.
Lord Pearson expressed the way in which the courts approach this aspect very clearly in Taylor v O'Connor [1971]AC 115 at p143 when he said: The fund of damages is not expected to be preserved intact.
It is expected to be used up gradually over the relevant period—15 or 18 years in this case—so as to be exhausted by the end of the period.
Therefore, what the widow receives annually—£3,750 in this case—is made up partly of income and partly of capital.
As the fund is used up, the income becomes less and less and the amounts withdrawn from the capital of the fund become greater and greater, because the total sum to be provided in such year—the £3,750—is assumed…to remain constant throughout the relevant period.
The multiplicand
2.19 Approaching the calculation at the first stage, valuing the dependency or the multiplicand, is to some extent an arithmetical exercise.
The multiplicand is normally based on the net annual value of the dependency at the date of the deceased's death.
However, if, by the date of trial, it can be shown that the deceased's income would have risen since his death, then the dependency will be calculated by reference to what he would have been earning at the date of trial, rather than what he in fact was earning at the date of his death.
This aspect is something that has increased in importance with the rise of inflation because there are very few cases where the deceased would not have been earning more by the date of trial than he was earning at the date of his death.
The courts will not take the incidence of future inflation into account in calculating the dependency, but if it is established that the deceased would have increased his income in the future for reasons other than inflation (eg because he would have been promoted if he had remained in his job or because he would probably have attained higher and better paid skills or a better paid job if he had lived) this might give grounds for increasing the multiplicand.
However, it is quite common for this factor to be reflected by an increase in the multiplier.
2.20 From a practical point of view there are three ways of approaching the valuation of the dependency.
The first is quite simply to take each item of expenditure by the deceased on the dependants and add them up, and this will provide the annual dependency figure.
A second way of doing this is to take the  deceased's net income and deduct his estimated expenditure on himself.
Any other sums in respect of fringe benefits the deceased had that have been lost by his dependants on his decease must be added to the figure arrived at in either of the two ways described above.
For example, a sum should be allowed if he had a company car, or because he had a cheap mortgage, or because he had received free accommodation (on account of his employment).
The third way of calculating the multiplicand and now the one that finds most favour with the courts is to deduct a percentage from the deceased's net income figure to represent what he would have spent exclusively on himself.
Each case must be decided on its facts but the percentages have become conventional in the sense that they are used unless there is evidence to make the conventional figure inappropriate.
Where the family unit is husband and wife the conventional figure is 33 per cent.
The rationale of this is that broadly speaking the net income was spent as to one-third for the benefit of each and as to one-third for their joint benefit.
Clothing is an example of several benefit, rent an example of joint benefit.
No deduction is made in respect of the joint portion because, for example, one cannot buy or drive half a motor car.
Where there are children the deduction falls to 25 per cent(see the judgment of O'Connor LJ in Harris v Empress Motors Ltd [1983]3 All ER 561 at p565 e—h).
However, as was pointed out by the Court of Appeal in Coward v Comex Houlder Diving Ltd (1988)(reported in Kemp & Kemp, Section M, para27-322) the conventional percentage does not necessarily apply where the wife had been earning a considerable sum herself prior to her husband's death or presumably where she had a substantial private income: see also Davies v Hawes (1990) reported in Kemp & Kemp, Section M, para27-323.
The fact that a deceased's widow would have given up work to start a family but for the deceased's death is not a matter to be taken into account so as to increase her dependency on the deceased from the date that she would have given up work (Malone v Rowan [1984]3 All ER 402).
2.21 Further sums should be added for any services that the deceased provided for the benefit of his dependants (eg gardening to produce vegetables for the family, decorating and any simple repairs around the house).
The multiplier
2.22 The calculation of the multiplier is even less precise and arithmetical than the computation of the multiplicand.
The figure that is used as a multiplier is not a figure intended to replicate the number of years that the dependency would have continued.
Still less is it intended to mirror the expectation of life of the deceased or his dependants.
It will, of course, depend on his age.
It will also depend on his occupation.
In the case of a young man of 25 in a managerial or professional occupation with good job prospects one could reasonably expect a multiplier of 17 or 18.
This compares with actuarial figures of expectation of life of 45 years and an expectation of working life of 37 years.
The multiplier is never close to the actuarial figures, certainly not in the case of a young man.
2.23 Once the deceased is over the age of about 40, the multiplier will probably start to come down.
2.24 This type of person can be compared with a younger man in a less promising position, or perhaps someone in a hazardous occupation such as a steel erector or a steeplejack.
A man of 25 in that position may only get a multiplier of 13 or 14.
No one pretends that the calculation of the multiplier is a scientific operation and no hard-and-fast rule can be laid down for calculating it.
All that can be done is to point to the factors that the courts commonly take into account when calculating the multiplier.
In effect, the question of calculating the multiplier is left to the discretion and experience of the judges.
The best that a practitioner can do is to have regard to the sort of multiplier which has in the past been adopted by judges in similar circumstances to those with which he is concerned.
For tables showing multipliers which have been adopted in Fatal Accidents Acts claims, see Kemp & Kemp, The Quantum of Damages (Sweet & Maxwell).
2.25 Various factors should be taken into account when considering what is the appropriate multiplier in any particular case.
Before 1971 the prospect of remarriage in the case of a widow was often an important factor in considering what the appropriate multiplier would be.
Under s3(3) of the Fatal Accidents Act 1976 both remarriage and the prospects of remarriage must now be ignored in the case of a widow's claim.
It was long believed that remarriage and the prospects of remarriage must be taken into account when considering a widower's claim but this must be in some doubt following the wide interpretation given to s4 of the Act in Stanley v Siddique [1992]1 QB 1: see Kemp & Kemp  (Sweet & Maxwell) 22–004 et seq.
The prospect of marriage should be taken into account when assessing damages to be awarded to parents for the death of an unmarried child who was contributing to their financial support.
There is always in such cases the possibility that the contributions would be reduced or cease on marriage.
2.26 The most important factor to take into account when considering the appropriate multiplier to apply is, of course, the age and probable working life of the deceased and the expectation of life of the dependants.
The future prospects of the deceased may give rise to a higher multiplier if the deceased has good prospects (see paras 2.22–2.24 above).
2.27 There must also be a discount for the uncertainties of life: the fact that the deceased might have been run over by another bus on the following day or that he was involved in a particularly hazardous occupation.
Discount must also be made for the fact that the dependants will receive an accelerated benefit in the form of a lump sum rather than smaller benefits over a number of years.
Because of these uncertainties the appropriate time for selecting the multiplier is at the time of death and the number of pre-trial years for which special damages are awarded should then be deducted from the multiplier (Graham v Dodds [1983]1 WLR 808).
(For a discussion by the House of Lords on the selection of multipliers on Fatal Accidents Acts claims see Graham v Dodds above.)
Particular claims
2.28 Most of what has been said so far has related to the loss of the principal breadwinner of the dependants.
The relevant factors to consider in the case of other claims, the most important of which is the claim on the death of the wife, must now be considered.
Here, of course, as has been noted above, the prospects or fact of remarriage of the widower must be taken into account when considering what is the appropriate sum for the award.
The wife is commonly, these days, a secondary source of income to the family and the loss of her income is something that should be taken into account when the claim comes to be made, together with, most importantly, the loss of the services the wife has gratuitously rendered to her family.
It is well established that the loss of such services can be the basis of a claim under the Fatal Accidents Act 1976.
2.29 The assessment of a husband's claim is made in a not  dissimilar fashion to the way in which a wife's claim is approached.
It is therefore necessary to calculate the husband's annual net pecuniary loss, taking into account the loss of the wife's earnings and the cost of employing a housekeeper or other help to provide the services the wife was formerly providing.
This would include a sum, if necessary, for any board and lodging provided for the substitute housekeeper.
Any additional schooling costs would be included in the claim and, of course, the loss of the normal services provided by a wife: cooking, mending and any other tasks that she might perform around the home (eg decorating).
The next stage is to deduct any pecuniary gain that the husband might receive as a result of the death of the wife (eg it will no longer be necessary to support the wife).
The final stage is to calculate a suitable multiplier.
The normal factors are to be taken into account in assessing what the appropriate multiplier should be: the ages of the husband and wife, the ages of any dependent children, the uncertainties of life and the accelerated benefits provided by the lump-sum payment.
2.30 More often than not the loss of the wife's services is assessed by reference to the costs of employing a housekeeper to provide those services, and there have been comparatively recent developments in this area.
We have already pointed out that there can be no claim by dependants for grief or for loss of society of the deceased nor can there be any claim on behalf of the children for loss of a mother's love, guidance and influence.
Mr Harvey McGregor has said in McGregor on Damages,(15th ed Sweet & Maxwell 1988, para 1588): It may be argued that the benefit of a mother's personal attention to a child's upbringing, morals, education and psychology, which the services of a housekeeper, nurse or governess could never provide has, in the long run, a financial value for the child difficult as it is to assess.
This statement was quoted with apparent approval by Lord Edmund-Davies in Hay v Hughes [1975]QB 790 and Watkins J took it into account in Regan v Williamson [1976]1 WLR 305.
In the latter case the judge thought that the term "services" had been too narrowly construed in the past and that allowance should be made for the fact that a wife and mother does not work set hours and that she is in constant attendance on the home.
He thought that a sum should be awarded for the instruction given to the children with regard to their upbringing and perhaps their homework and that services of this kind were as much a service as other  matters conventionally regarded as such.
In that case he raised the weekly dependency on this basis from £12.50 to £20.00 a week.
It can be seen that this view can give rise to a substantial increase in the dependency.
This special qualitative factor has now received the approval, at least by implication, of the Court of Appeal in Spittle v Bunney [1988]3 All ER 1031 at 1041, a case in which guidance is given on the method of assessment of the value of a mother's services to a young infant.
2.31 Another development in this area concerns the way in which the services are valued.
In Mehmet v Perry [1977]2 All ER 529, a decision of Brian Neill QC sitting as a deputy judge of the Queen's Bench Division, the plaintiff widower had, as the judge found, reasonably given up work to look after his children.
It was decided that the damages for loss of housekeeping services should be assessed by reference to the plaintiff's loss of wages and not by reference to the cost of providing a housekeeper, since his loss of wages represented the cost of providing the services of a full-time housekeeper and substitute for the wife.
Obviously in that case the loss of earnings that the plaintiff had suffered was greater than the cost of employing a housekeeper would have been.
However, the supplementary benefit that he was receiving was deductible from the figure awarded as damages.
In addition in Mehmet v Perry, on the lines of Watkins J's decision in Regan v Williamson [1976]1 WLR 305, £1,500 was awarded for the loss of the mother's individual care for the children and £1,000 was awarded to the husband for his loss of his wife's individual care and attention.
2.32 This decision can profitably be compared with that of Peter Pain J in Bailey v Barking and Havering Area Health Authority [1979]Law Society Gazette, 2 August, p793.
In that case the husband, who had given up work to look after his children, sought to recover the cost of a housekeeper.
It was held that the proper measure of damages was the husband's actual loss (ie his loss of earnings), which was in fact less than the cost of employing a housekeeper.
2.33 Something must be said next about claims by parents for the death of their adult children.
Such a claim is most likely to be instituted where the deceased son or daughter was unmarried and was contributing substantially to the maintenance of his or her parents.
In these cases the dependency is usually relatively easy to calculate, especially if the child was contributing a fixed periodical sum.
2.34 When calculating the multiplier, the principal factor to  take into account is the prospect of marriage of the child.
There is an assumption that at some stage the child will marry and that he will either cease to contribute or that his contributions on marriage will be greatly reduced, and therefore it is usual to apply a low multiplier in cases of this kind.
2.35 In claims for the death of an infant child there is rarely any actual dependency but there might be prospective loss and it is well established that prospective loss is sufficient to found a claim by the parents.
In Taff Vale Railway Co v Jenkins [1913]AC 1 at p7 Lord Atkinson said: All that is necessary is that a reasonable expectation of pecuniary benefits should be entertained by the person who sues.
It is quite true that the existence of this expectation is an inference of fact—there must be a basis of fact from which the inference can be reasonably drawn.
In the case of causes of action accruing after 1 January 1983 the parents of an infant child have a claim for damages for bereavement (see para 2.15 above).
2.36 Claims on behalf of dependent children for the death of their parent will usually be assessed with surviving parent's claim but there can be occasions where separate assessments of the child's claim is desirable.
As the fact of remarriage does not appear to be a relevant consideration (see 2.25 above), remarriage alone would not warrant such a separate assessment.
Apportionment between dependants
2.37 Only one action can be brought on behalf of the dependants; see s2(3) of the Fatal Accidents Act 1976.
Section 3(1) of that Act provides that in the action such damages, other than damages for bereavement, may be awarded as are proportioned for the injury resulting from the death to the dependants respectively, and the amount so recovered, after deducting the costs not recovered from the defendant, is to be divided among the dependants in such shares as may be directed.
2.38 There is no authority on the appropriate principles to be adopted in apportioning the amount recovered, but the practice in widows' claims is to award the greater part of the total sum awarded to the widow on the assumption that she will maintain the children as long as they are dependent and to award comparatively small sums to the children themselves.
Usually a younger child is awarded more than an older child because the period of  expected dependency is greater.
A table showing how the courts have apportioned damages in various types of case will be found in Kemp & Kemp, The Quantum of Damages (Sweet & Maxwell) Vol 1 at 23–004 and 23–005.
Taylor v O'Connor
2.39 Finally, many of the factors that arise in assessing damages on death were considered by the House of Lords in Taylor v O'Connor [1971]AC 115.
The plaintiff's husband was killed in July 1965 as a result of a car accident caused by the defendant.
The deceased was 53 years old at his death and his widow was 52.
He was a partner in a firm of architects, devoted to his work and in good health, and had always expressed the intention of working as long as he was able.
His actuarial expectation of life was about 19 years.
In 1964–65, the last year before his death, his earnings were £14,890.
It was agreed that during the next 12 years his earnings would have been £21,000 per annum, which would have given him £7,500 after tax.
Out of that income he would have put £1,500 per annum back into the firm, so he would have had £6,000 a year to spend or save.
The trial judge (Lyell J) held that the annual dependency of the plaintiff and her daughter, who was aged 18, amounted to £4,000 a year.
The plaintiff inherited £10,000 on the death of her husband and Lyell J deducted £250 from the multiplicand to give credit for the acceleration of the receipt of that sum.
The judge applied a multiplier of 12 years; and he said that he would have given a multiplier of ten, but he gave 12 to protect against the possibility of future inflation.
The total award made was £54,196.
Lord Reid delivered the leading opinion in the House of Lords and he stated the general principles in fatal accidents claims as follows at p217: They [the dependants]are entitled to such a sum as will make good to them the financial loss which they have suffered and will suffer as a result of the death.
But future loss is necessarily conjectural.
If all had gone well the husband would have earned very large sums for a long period so that he could have maintained them at least at their standard of living at the time of his death, and made other provisions for the future.
But all might not have gone well.
Any of them might have died prematurely, he might not have been able to earn these sums, and other misfortunes might have occurred so allowance must be made for this.
2.40 The interesting thing about this particular case is that all the members of the House of Lords adopted a different approach  from each other in assessing damages.
They also adopted a different approach to that adopted by Lyell J, but they all came up with more or less the same figure at the end of the day, around £54,000.
Lord Reid concluded that the deceased would have continued to have spent £1,000 a year on himself and £3,000 on his wife and daughter.
He concluded that he would either have saved £2,000 a year or that £2,000 a year would have gone towards any increase that there might have been in the cost of living or any increase in the standard of living of the family.
2.41 He went on to say that it should not be assumed that the wife's dependency ought to be calculated on the footing that it would have ceased when her husband ceased earning before he reached 65.
He would have been able to make ample provision for the future whether or not he survived.
The dependency should be taken on the basis that the wife would be maintained at the same rate of expenditure throughout her life.
He thought that the discount for contingencies should be comparatively small and that the £10,000 the widow received from the estate should give rise to a deduction of £200 from the annual dependency for the accelerated benefit that she received by obtaining it on his death.
2.42 As regards the savings that would have been made by the deceased, Lord Reid thought that the widow and daughter would have had an interest in any capital that the deceased might have accumulated before his death, but he concluded that the widow might have died before her husband whereas the daughter would almost certainly have survived him.
He calculated that by the age of 65 the deceased would have put £18,000 into his firm in working capital; this would have been repayable and would ultimately have come to the widow and her daughter.
Allowing a discount for contingencies, Lord Reid valued the loss of that (possible) £18,000 savings at £6,000.
He concluded that a further £20,000 savings would have been accumulated by the age of 65.
The loss of this figure he valued at £5,000, allowing for contingencies.
Lord Reid also referred to the additional factor, the incidence of taxation.
He said (at pp128, 129): The respondent will have the £10,000 to which I have referred as damages in respect of(a) loss of her dependency and (b) loss of her interest in the savings which her husband would have made.
Damages for the loss of dependency ought to be such that she will have available to her to spend each year, free of tax, a sum equal to the amount of the dependency.
But if the damages are calculated without reference to income tax that will not be so.
Suppose the damages are sufficient to buy an ordinary annuity  for her life of that amount.
Part of each year's annuity payment will be a return of capital and will not be taxable but that part which is truly income will have to bear tax.
So the amount available to her to spend will fall short of what it should be by the amount of that tax.
The damages will therefore have to be increased by an amount necessary to counteract the shortfall.
2.43 Lord Reid would have added £500 on the annual dependency to allow for the shortfall created by the incidence of taxation and that, of course, is a factor that should be taken into account when assessing what the dependency is.
Lord Reid thought that the multiplier of 12 years was low, but in that he differed from some of his brother judges who thought that it was high but that it should not be interfered with.
2.44 Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest valued the dependency at £3,750 on the basis of an annual dependency of £4,000, less £250 per annum for the accelerated receipt of £10,000 from the deceased's estate.
He agreed with Lord Reid that the incidence of taxation would have to be allowed for by increasing the multiplicand but he thought that ten was the right multiplier in the case.
2.45 Lord Guest thought that the dependency of £4,000 awarded by Lyell J was on the high side, but could be justified when allowing for possible future increases in earnings and for the effects of inflation.
He would have applied a multiplier of 12.
2.46 Viscount Dilhorne took the view that the dependency of £4,000 was too high.
He would have awarded £3,250.
He would have deducted £200 from the dependency for the accelerated receipt of £10,000 from the deceased's estate, but would have added £500 for the incidence of taxation.
He too thought that a multiplier of 12 was not excessive.
2.47 Lord Pearson would have awarded a multiplicand of £4,000 from which he would have deducted £250 for the accelerated receipt of the £10,000.
He considered that a multiplier of 12 was substantially too high for the ordinary case of a man dying at age 53, leaving a widow of 52 and a child of 18.
He did not think that an increase in the multiplier was a suitable method of protecting against inflation.
He thought that protection from inflation should be sought by adopting an appropriate investment policy.
The lump sum of damages should be assessed on the basis that it would be invested with the aim of obtaining some capital appreciation to offset the probable rise in the cost of living.
2.48 It can thus be seen from their lordships' views in Taylor v O'Connor [1971]AC 115 that there is no judicial unanimity when  damages come to be assessed under the Fatal Accidents Act 1976.
Although the basic rules are always applied, the figures that are eventually arrived at depend to a considerable degree on the rule-of-thumb approach adopted by the judiciary.