

3 Damages for Non-Pecuniary Loss
David Kemp QC
Contents
Introduction
3.1 The only mechanism by which a court can seek to compensate a person who has suffered damage or loss in consequence of a wrong done to him is to award him monetary compensation, whatever the nature of the damage which he has in fact sustained.
In personal injury cases that element of damage which is common to all, physical injury, cannot as such be eliminated or ameliorated by an award of money.
Nonetheless, the objective of the courts in the assessment of compensation in a personal injury case is the same as in any other case.
The principle was stated by Lord Blackburn in Livingstone v Rawyards Coal Company (1880) 5 App Cas 25, an appeal to the House of Lords from Scotland, thus:
I do not think there is any difference of opinion as to its being a general rule that, where any injury is to be compensated by damages, in settling the sum of money to be given for reparation of damages you should as nearly as possible get at that sum of money which will put the party who  has been injured, or who has suffered, in the same position as he would have been in if he had not sustained the wrong for which he is now getting his compensation or reparation.
The principle applies just as much in English law as in Scots law.
Viscount Dunedin expressed it in the following words:
…the common law says that the damages due either for breach of contract or for tort are damages which, so far as money can compensate will give the injured party reparation for the wrongful act (Admiralty Commissioners v SS Susquehanna [1926]AC 655 at p661).
The application of the rule in the case of financial loss presents no conceptual difficulty, although in practice the exercise may prove to be complicated.
 "A money award can be calculated so as to make good a financial loss" : per Lord Morris in West v Shephard [1964]AC at p345.
3.2 The problems in applying the rule arise when the damage which has been suffered is not financial.
In such cases the judge cannot simply replace an amount of money lost or an asset having an ascertainable money value with an equivalent amount of money.
The problem was recognised by the Earl of Halsbury LC in The Mediana [1900]AC at p116:
You very often cannot even lay down any principle upon which you can give damages…
Take the most familiar and ordinary case: how is anybody to measure pain and suffering in moneys counted?
Nobody can suggest that you can by any arithmetical calculation establish what is the exact sum of money which would represent such a thing as the pain and suffering which a person has undergone by reason of an accident…
But nevertheless the law recognises that as a topic upon which damages may be given.
What then is the court to do?
It recognises that the injured person is entitled to compensation, but can find no logical basis upon which to evaluate that compensation.
The answer reached by the court is that it awards a sum which is in the nature of a conventional award.
Megaw LJ described the process, in his judgment in Fuhri v Jones Court of Appeal, 30 March 1979:
It will be appreciated, of course, though it is not always fully understood by persons who are not directly concerned with the law, that the law cannot attempt to attribute any particular figure of damages to any particular physical injury, serious or trivial.
There is no way in which it can be said that such-and-such an injury is worth so much in terms of money.
Indeed, in most cases for most injuries, anybody would say "I would rather have avoided this injury than have any amount of money whatever in compensation" .
But the court has to do the best it can by way of what are  really conventional figures in relation to injuries, the court assessing, of course, on the individual facts of the case, what is sometimes called the tariff, making adjustments for particular facts of the particular case.
How are the amounts to be awarded as "conventional" amounts arrived at?
As the award is conventional in its nature and cannot in fact compensate for the injury suffered there is no logical reason to take one figure rather than another.
However, it is recognised that awards for comparable injuries should be comparable and in practice in an individual case the amount of the award is much influenced by the amounts of awards in previous cases in which the injuries appear to have been comparable, adjusted as appropriate in the light of the fall in the value of money since such awards were made.
Diplock LJ in Every v Miles, Court of Appeal in 1964 explained the process by which a decision as to the amount of the appropriate award in a particular case was made as follows:
Any such decision involves an attempt to equate the incommensurable.
Such an equation is insoluble, and in the logical sense there is no answer which is right.
But since justice is not justice unless even-handed, so that one man gets roughly the same treatment from the courts as another in comparable circumstances, and since the law requires that compensation be awarded for physical injuries, and the only kind of compensation which the courts can award is money, the courts are compelled to make a pragmatic solution.
They have done so by fixing arbitrary standards of monetary compensation which…are not susceptible of analysis.
These standards have been evolved from such current consensus of damage-awarding tribunals as is manifested by the amounts they have in fact awarded in broadly similar cases.
Again, in Wright v British Railways Board [1983]2 AC 733 Lord Diplock said of non-pecuniary loss:
Such loss is not susceptible of measurement in money.
Any figure at which the assessor of damages arrives cannot be other than artificial and, if the aim is that justice meted out to all litigants should be even-handed instead of depending on idiosyncracies of the assessor, whether jury or judge, the figure must be "basically a conventional figure derived from experience and from awards in comparable cases" .
3.3 While it may be sufficient, in practical terms, to know that the assessment of damages for pain and suffering or other non-primary loss, is, in any particular case, going to depend largely upon the amounts awarded in previous cases which are perceived to be similar, or at least, where there are no such cases, upon the generality of awards of compensation for injury of that general type, that is unsatisfactory as a conceptual basis of compensation.
The approach also provides no explanation or key to an explanation as to why, for example, awards of damages in the United States of America tend to be dramatically higher in personal injuries cases than in England.
Although it has rarely been the subject of judicial pronouncement the conceptual basis of the "conventional" sums awarded by the courts in respect of non-pecuniary losses appears to be that such sums are what are considered fair and reasonable compensation in the social, economic and industrial conditions which prevail in England and Wales.
That the appropriate award for non-pecuniary loss may vary in differing social and economic conditions in different parts of the world has been stated by the Privy Council in Jag Singh v Toong Fong Omnibus Co [1964]1 WLR 1382, per Lord Morris:
to the extent to which regard should be had to the range of awards in other cases which are comparable such cases should as a rule be those which have been determined in the same jurisdiction or in a neighbouring locality where similar social, economic and industrial conditions exist.
It would seem to follow that awards in England and Wales have been and are to be made by reference to social, economic and industrial conditions there.
3.4 To say that awards of damages in respect of non-pecuniary losses should be of amounts that are fair and reasonable having regard to the social, economic and industrial conditions in England and Wales merely raises the question what, in any particular case, is fair and reasonable.
That brings one back to previous awards, for in the absence of any other yardstick the principle of fairness requires that awards in comparable cases should be comparable.
The result is that, however unsatisfactory it may be, the court in any particular case is constrained to assess damages for non-pecuniary losses by reference to previous awards in comparable cases or, at least, by reference to the general level of awards where there are no cases which are really comparable.
It is clear that the general level of awards must be increased to take account of the decline in the value of money, per Lord Diplock in Wright v British Railways Board [1983]2 AC at p785:
If judges carry out their duty of assessing damages for non-economic loss in the money of the day at the date of the trial—and this is a rule of practice that judges are required to follow, not a guideline from which they have a discretion to depart if there are special circumstances that justify their doing so—there are two routes by which the judge's task of arriving at the appropriate conventional rate of interest to be applied to  the damages so assessed can be approached.
The starting point for each of them is to ascertain from the appropriate table of retail price indices covering the period between service of writ and trial what would have been the equivalent of those damages in the money of the day at the date of service of writ, reckoned in pounds sterling at the higher value that they then stood at at the very beginning of the period for which simple interest is to be given.
That figure represents both the real value, and what was then the nominal value also, of the sum of money for the loss of use of which the plaintiff is to be compensated by interest.
Such interest, like the damages on which it is to be given, is to be calculated in the money of the day at the date of trial, the real value of which has been depreciated by the full amount of the inflation that has taken place since the date of service of the writ [Emphasis added].
The logic of this passage from Lord Diplock's speech clearly requires that judges, when having regard to previous comparable awards, should ascertain from the appropriate table of retail indices what has been the decrease in the value of money since the date of a particular comparable award in order that their award "in the money of the day" may be truly comparable in real terms with the earlier award.
(A table of retail indices together with a table showing the value of the £ at various dates will be found in Appendix E.)
3.5 But what of the general level of awards itself, ignoring inflation?
How is that to be adjusted, whether up or down?
That is a function of the Court of Appeal, as Lord Diplock stated in Wright v British Railways Board:
The Court of Appeal, with its considerable case-load of appeals in personal injury actions and the relatively recent experience of many of its members in trying such cases themselves is, generally speaking, the tribunal best qualified to set the guide-lines for judges currently trying such actions.
That court certainly exercised such function in Housecroft v Burnett [1986]1 All ER 332.
The court in effect decided that certain types of award made in the 1970s, up-lifted as they must be to take account of the subsequent decline in the value of money, were too high.
A new standard was set.
As at April 1985 the guideline figure for damages for pain and suffering and loss of amenities in an average case of tetraplegia was set at £75,000.
Current awards now have to fall in line with that figure, always, of course, taking into account any subsequent decline in the value of money.
The figure of £75,000 updated to December 1992 is roughly £110,000.
The deliberate adjustment of the general level of awards, or of  any particular category established within that general level, is, however, the sole prerogative of the Court of Appeal, or conceivably of the House of Lords.
It is not the function of a trial judge, as the Court of Appeal stated in Alsford v British Telecommunications PLC 30 October, 1986.
In that case the trial judge had regarded the general level of awards in the class of case with which he was dealing as "unacceptably low" , and had made an award above the generally accepted bracket.
The Court of Appeal held that in so doing the judge fell into error, per Lloyd LJ:
…£15,000 for pain and suffering in this case is out of line with…awards upheld by this court…
The judge himself recognised as much.
He said that he regarded the awards in those cases as being "unacceptably low" …
But that would be to introduce into this branch of the law an element of uncertainty which I, for one, would regard as undesirable.
Apart from any sense of injustice which it might create between one plaintiff and another, it would make it even more difficult for counsel to advise on the correct figure for settlement.
Everybody accepts that awards of damages in this field are necessarily conventional, and that they are based on a scale of comparative seriousness which is also conventional.
I do not suggest that the scale is immutable.
It may change gradually over time, as indeed may the level of damages generally.
If judges consistently award damages for a particular type of injury at the top of the range, then that type of injury may gradually move up the scale of relative seriousness.
But in my judgment it should not be open to a judge to award damages outside the range because he regards the range as being too low.
That is what, as I read his judgment, the judge has done here.
Balcombe LJ agreed.
Having quoted from Lord Diplock's speech in Wright's case that the figure must be "basically a conventional figure derived from experience and from awards in comparable cases" , Balcombe LJ continued:
As Lord Justice Lloyd has said, if that were not the rule, no one would safely be able to advise litigants in personal injury cases to settle claims, or know what to pay into court.
There is also, it seems to me, a need to maintain the balance between these conventional awards for damages for pain, suffering and loss of amenity for different types of injury.
If one judge at first instance decides to increase the level in one type of case, that balance will be disturbed.
Time as at which Damages are to be Assessed
3.6 In the case of a claim for damages for personal injury damage is suffered by the plaintiff, and the injury is actionable, at  the time the physical harm is done.
When the court comes to assess damages for an injury, however, it will look at the position as it is at the date of the trial.
This is a convenient practice as it avoids the need, for example, for speculation as to how the injured person's condition will develop from the time of the initial injury or for speculation as to what his financial loss up to the date of trial at least will be.
In a slightly different context, that of the attitude to be adopted by an appellate court where there has been a change in the circumstances of the plaintiff since the trial at first instance, Harman LJ enunciated the principle that, "the court should never speculate where it knows" : Curwen v James [1963]1 WLR at p753.
That principle is the guiding principle in the assessment of damages in personal injuries cases.
Failure of the court in making its assessment of damages to take into account all the information available at the time of the trial could lead to illogical and unjust results.
In Jobling v Associated Dairies Ltd [1982]AC 794 the plaintiff was injured at work in 1973 in consequence of a breach of statutory duty on the part of his employers, the defendants.
He sustained injuries to his back and was thereafter only able to undertake light work.
In 1976 he was found to be suffering from a spinal disease which was unrelated to the accident but which rendered him totally unfit for work.
At the trial of the action in 1979 Reeve J declined to take into account the supervening spinal disease and awarded damages on the basis that the plaintiff had been capable of light work, not on the basis that he had been incapable of work since 1976 in consequence of a disease for which his employers were in no way responsible.
Both the Court of Appeal and the House of Lords held that damages should have been assessed on the basis of the known fact that the plaintiff would in any event have been totally incapable of work as a result of spinal disease from 1976.
The making of the assessment of damages in the light of all facts known at the date of the trial enables the court to take into account, if it be the case, the fact that the consequences of the plaintiff's injuries were more serious than at first thought; the fact that the expenses to which the plaintiff would be put in consequence of his injuries were higher than was first thought; the fact that the plaintiff has died; or the fact that the plaintiff has, since the accident, volunteered to be made redundant.
This list of examples is not intended to be exhaustive.
The Principal Heads of Non-Pecuniary Damage
Pain and suffering
3.7 The expression "pain and suffering" is almost a term of art in so far as the expression embraces different concepts.
 "Pain" , it is suggested, is used to describe the physical pain caused by or consequent upon the injury, while 'suffering"relates to the mental element of anxiety, fear, embarrassment and the like.
Suffering is used in this sense in s1 of the Administration of Justice Act 1982 which provides that where a plaintiff's expectation of life has been reduced the court in awarding damages for pain and suffering shall take into account the suffering caused or likely to be caused by awareness that his expectation of life has been so reduced.
Similarly, suffering would include the social embarrassment felt by a woman with a disfiguring facial scar.
An award under the head of pain and suffering depends as Lord Scarman said in Lim Poh Choo v Camden and Islington Area Health Authority [1980]AC at p188, upon the plaintiff's personal awareness of pain and her capacity for suffering.
Accordingly, no award can be made under this head where the plaintiff has been rendered permanently unconscious.
As will be seen below, the position is different with regard to loss of amenities: in such a case damages are awarded for the lost amenity even if the plaintiff is not aware of the loss.
3.8 In practice judges tend to use the expression "pain and suffering" without distinguishing clearly between the two elements.
Usually when assessing damages in respect of non-pecuniary loss a court will award one lump sum in respect of "pain and suffering and loss of amenities" and in such cases it is generally impossible to say how much relates to "pain and suffering" and how much to "loss of amenities" .
There must be some evidence on which the court can find as a matter of probability that the injured person has established a claim for pain and suffering: here speculation is not enough.
A practical example of this situation was provided in Hicks and Others v Chief Constable of the South Yorkshire Police [1992]PIQR P 433, and [1992]2 All ER 65, HL.
In that case the personal representatives of persons who were crushed to death at the Hillsborough Stadium claimed damages under the Law Reform (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1934 for pain and suffering alleged to have been sustained prior to their death.
The trial judge rejected this claim.
His decision was upheld by the Court of Appeal and the  House of Lords.
The period of consciousness, while the victims were being crushed prior to their death, lasted some 30 minutes at most.
Lord Bridge said:
It is perfectly clear law that fear by itself, of whatever degree, is a normal human emotion for which no damages can be awarded.
Those trapped in the crush at Hillsborough who were fortunate enough to escape without injury have no claim in respect of the distress they suffered in what must have been a truly terrifying experience.
It follows that fear of impending death felt by the victim of a fatal injury before that injury is inflicted cannot by itself give rise to a cause of action which survives for the benefit of the victim's estate.
The Court of Appeal applied this passage in Nicholls v Rushton (1992) The Times, 19 June, CA.
In that case the plaintiff had been involved in a car accident.
She had been badly shaken up and obviously distressed by the experience.
But she had suffered no physical damage or identifiable psychological illness.
The circuit judge had awarded £175 for 'severe shock and shaking up".
The Court of Appeal held that "unless there is a physical injury, no question of damages for mental suffering, fear, anxiety and the like arises" , and disallowed the damages awarded for the shock and shaking up.
3.9 It has of course long been recognised that a person who suffers an identifiable psychiatric illness or psychological condition, often referred to as nervous shock, can be awarded damages without the necessity of showing direct impact or fear of immediate physical injuries for himself where another dies or suffers personal injury.
Leading cases considering the circumstances in which such awards can be made are McLoughlin v O'Brian [1983]AC 411 and Alcock v Chief Constable of South Yorkshire Police [1992]1 AC 310 (another series of claims arising out of the Hillsborough disaster).
For a case in which a plaintiff sustained relatively trivial physical injuries, but a severe mental illness reference can be made to Brice v Brown [1984]1 All ER 997 which also illustrates that once causation is established a tortfeasor must take his victim as he finds him.
An award of damages will no more be denied to a person vulnerable and predisposed to mental illness than it would to the victim of physical injury with an eggshell skull.
Courts now accept that accident victims, particularly those involved in disaster incidents, may suffer "post traumatic stress disorder" and the syndrome is recognised as a psychiatric illness.
3.10 Although the law recognises pain and suffering as a separate head of damages from loss of amenities, the general  practice is to award a global sum for "pain and suffering and loss of amenities" .
This makes it difficult to form a view as to how much has been awarded for pain and suffering simpliciter, except in cases where a complete, or almost complete, recovery has been made.
In such cases virtually the whole award would have been for pain and suffering.
The court must take into account, in making its assessment in the case of any particular plaintiff, of the pain which he has actually suffered and will suffer and the suffering which he has undergone and will undergo.
Pain and suffering are not measurable by any absolute standard and it is not easy, if indeed possible other than in the most general way, to compare the degree of pain and suffering experienced by different people.
However, the individual circumstances of particular plaintiffs clearly have a significant effect upon the assessment of damages.
For example, in cases of scarring some plaintiffs are much distressed by their scars, while others are largely unperturbed.
The question of the attitude of the particular plaintiff, a woman aged 37 years, to a scar on her forehead arose in Dimmock v Miles, a decision of the Court of Appeal on 12 December 1969.
In that case Phillimore LJ said:
…the real difficulty here is that she was not asked about her own feeling with regard to the scar and that is a much more serious matter in this sort of case.
After all, some may treat a scar on the forehead as comparatively trivial, but to another it would be a source of serious worry.
Again, the age of the plaintiff and his expectation of life are of critical importance in all cases in which pain and suffering will continue for life, for they determine the length of time for which he is likely to suffer pain or experience suffering.
In cases in which pain and suffering is not expected to continue for life the court has to form a view as to how long it is likely to continue.
3.11 When there is some particular feature in a case which aggravates the degree of suffering it need not arise from the plaintiff's concern about himself.
In Rourke v Barton (1982) The Times, 23 June the plaintiff was a woman whose husband was suffering from terminal cancer.
She sustained an injury to her hip which prevented her from caring for her husband when he was at home.
That disability distressed her and McCullough J took such distress into account in assessing damages for her injuries.
Similarly, in Jefferson v Cape Insulation Ltd (3 December 1981) Farquharson J awarded substantial damages to a woman who knew she must soon die of mesothelioma for her evident distress in being parted from her family: per Farquharson J: I have also to bear in mind…that the major misery this woman is going to sustain is not the pain, serious and terrible as that is, but the prospect which must be continually in her mind of being parted from her family, and particularly her youngest child.
3.12 In considering pain and suffering shock should be taken into account.
Per Sachs LJ in Kaufman v Ocean Steamship Co (a decision of the Court of Appeal in 1969):
…it can sometimes be overlooked that reasonable damages should always be assessed in respect of that initial period of shock and suffering.
In this case the reports show clearly that this was fully of the degree to be expected when somebody has a really severe blow from a heavy block swinging against the face.
By virtue of the Congenital Disabilities (Civil Liability) Act 1976 a child who is born disabled as a result of injuries suffered en ventre sa mρere has a cause of action inter alia in respect of pain and suffering.
This Act only applied to births which took place after 22 July 1976.
However, the Court of Appeal decided in Burton v Islington Health Authority [1992]3 WLR 617 that at common law a child en ventre sa mρere and unborn at the time of the defendant's negligence has a cause of action for injuries caused by that negligence.
However, there is no cause of action in a child for pain and suffering consequent upon being born disabled on account of any negligent failure to abort the foetus before birth: McKay v Essex Area Health Authority [1982]QB 1166.
On the other hand, where a woman undergoes an operation for sterilisation which is negligently performed and she subsequently becomes pregnant she can recover damages in respect of the pain and suffering endured in carrying and giving birth to the child: Udale v Bloomsbury Area Health Authority [1983]1 WLR 1098.
3.13 The best way to form a view on the current level of damages for pain and suffering simpliciter is to study recent awards for minor injuries, where there has been a complete or almost complete recovery.
The reader is referred to Section K of Vol 3 of Kemp & Kemp, where a large number of such awards will be found.
Loss of amenities
3.14 There is a head of damage which is sometimes called the loss of amenities; the man made blind by the accident will no longer be able to see the familiar things he has seen all his life; the man who has had both legs removed and will never again go upon his walking excursions—things of that kind—loss of amenities  (per Birkett LJ in Manley v Rugby Portland Cement Co Ltd, a decision of the Court of Appeal in 1951).
3.15 This head embraces everything which reduces the plaintiff's enjoyment of life considered apart from pain and suffering and from any material or pecuniary loss which may be attendant upon the loss of amenity.
What matters is the fact of deprivation of an amenity or amenities, not whether the injured person is aware of such deprivation.
A plaintiff who is rendered permanently unconscious or whose awareness of his loss of amenities is otherwise impaired is thus entitled to a full award under this head.
In Lim Poh Choo v Camden and Islington Health Authority [1984]AC 174 the defendants sought to persuade the House of Lords to exercise their freedom under the Practice Statement [1966]1 WLR 1234, to reverse two rules that had been laid down by the majority of the House of Lords in West & Son Ltd v Shephard [1964]AC 326, namely:(1) that the fact of unconsciousness does not eliminate the actuality of the deprivation of the ordinary experiences and amenities of life (see the formulation used by Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest at p349); and (2) that, if damages are awarded upon a correct basis, it is of no concern to the court to consider any question as to the use that will thereafter be made of the money awarded.
In West's case [1964]AC 326 it was pointed out that there is a clear distinction between damages for pain and suffering on the one hand and damages for loss of amenities on the other hand.
The former depend upon the plaintiff's awareness of his condition and his capacity to feel pain.
The latter are awarded for the fact of deprivation—a substantial loss in itself, whether the plaintiff is aware of it or not.
The House of Lords upheld the law laid down in West's case, Lord Scarman stating at p189:
If the law is to be changed by the reversal of West's case, it should be done not judicially but legislatively within the context of a comprehensive enactment dealing with all aspects of damages for personal injury.
3.16 Loss of amenities will extend to loss of the pleasure and pride of a craftsman in his work: Morris v Johnson Matthey & Co (1967) 112 SJ 32.
Loss of, or reduction in, the prospects of marriage would come at least partly under this head; in such case there may also be a pecuniary loss; see para 5—009/6 in Vol 1 of Kemp & Kemp for a more detailed consideration of this topic.
Loss or  impairment of the enjoyment of a holiday as a result of personal injuries is compensated under this head: Ichard v Frangoulis [1977]1 WLR 556.
As in the case of an award for pain and suffering, the assessment of damages for loss of amenities is based upon the level of awards in previous cases which appear to be comparable or, failing such awards, upon "impression based of necessity in large measure on the combination of intuition and experience" : per Bridge LJ in Hughes v Goodall, a decision of the Court of Appeal on 18 February 1977.
Whatever the nature of the amenities lost the court has to assess the effect of the deprivation of those amenities upon the particular plaintiff.
In assessing the appropriate award of damages for loss of amenities an important consideration is how long the plaintiff will be deprived of those amenities.
3.17 In Bayley v Bloomsbury Health Authority (Kemp & Kemp, Vol 2, para E3-012, Henry J said, in making an award to a student nurse who had suffered a prolapsed lumbar disc at the age of 20, that there was a world of difference between such an injury happening to a victim at that age as opposed to the age of 33, the age of a plaintiff who had suffered a comparable injury in a case to which he had been referred.
If loss of amenities is for the rest of the plaintiff's life the court will need to take into account in assessing damages his age and his expectation of life.
That applies as much in the case of an unconscious plaintiff as in the case of one who is sentient: compare, for example, Wise v Kay [1962]1 QB 638 with Andrews v Freeborough (1966) 110 SJ 407.
However, it is not necessarily the case that the shorter the period during which the plaintiff is likely to be deprived of amenities the lower the award of damages under this head.
The loss of amenities caused to an elderly person as a result of his injuries can be more severe precisely because he is old and has already suffered some impairment of his activities on that account.
In Frank v Cox (1967) 111 SJ 670, the plaintiff was aged 77 years.
The principal injury which he had suffered was to his hip.
In his judgment Sachs LJ said:
It is perhaps as well to remember at the outset that the main injury in this particular case was a hip injury which, if it had occurred to a younger man, would have produced an arthrodesis operation.
In other words, the injury was such that the degree of pain which it produces from day to day throughout the years is at any rate sufficient for experienced medical men to say that the rather drastic operation of arthrodesis would normally be  the best thing in the circumstances.
Owing to the plaintiff's age, however, medical experience shows that that operation is not advisable in this case—so the pain continues.
The trial judge later went on to deal with other and more serious injury: amongst other things he mentioned the question of arthritic changes.
The important passage that I would quote in regard to this injury is as follows: "Undoubtedly, this is a very severe deterrent on his" (the plaintiff's) "movements and activities." 
I take the view myself that when one has a person in advancing years, in some respects an impairment of movement may perhaps be more serious than it is with a younger person.
It is true, as Mr Chedlow has stressed, that he has not got as many years before him through which he has to live with this discomfort, pain and impairment of movement.
But it is important to bear in mind that as one advances in life one's pleasures and activities particularly do become more limited, and any substantial impairment in the limited amount of activity and movement which a person can undertake, in my view, becomes all the more serious on that account.
It seems to me that this is a very substantial and serious impairment of Mr Frank's movements.
He came into the witness-box today, and I gather it is his normal mode of locomotion, using two elbow crutches in order to get about, and from the reports it is quite plain that the pain is more or less continuous—I do not say without any intermission at all, but there is constant pain in his hip.
It is a very serious and crippling injury which, in his later years, Mr Frank has had imposed upon him.
I think he is entitled to substantial damages for an injury of that kind.
3.18 The consideration that loss of amenities may be more serious for someone already disabled than for someone who is not does not only apply to the elderly.
In Mustard v Morris, a decision of the Court of Appeal on 21 July 1981 it was argued that the award of damages for loss of amenities to a man who was already quite seriously disabled should be less than that to a previously fit person who had suffered equivalent injuries.
Watkins LJ dealt with that argument thus:
With respect, I think that argument is misconceived.
If a man who is a diabetic and who has arterial disease to the extent that this plaintiff had, is severely injured so that life is much more difficult to bear than otherwise it would have been, a defendant is in my view, quite unable, with justification, to say that a reduction in damages should thereby be brought about.
Indeed, an argument to the contrary might well be made.
To impose upon a man who, through natural causes, has been made ill to a certain extent, very grave injuries such as were sustained by this plaintiff and which reduces his capacity to bear natural ill health, is in my judgment more likely to increase than reduce damages.
That I take to be the situation here.
It is a consideration which I should have applied myself to the assessment of general damages to favour this plaintiff.
The Current Level of Awards for Non-pecuniary Loss
3.19 As already stated, the tribunal best qualified to set the guidelines for judges trying personal injury actions is the Court of Appeal.
The decision of that court in Housecroft v Burnett [1986]1 All ER 332 has had the effect of substantially reducing the damages for non-pecuniary loss in the most serious cases.
Updating the court's guideline figure of £75,000 for an average case of tetraplegia set for April 1985 produces a figure of about £110,000 for December 1992.
If one has a case of tetraplegia aggravated by exceptional features such as an exceptional degree of pain, the guideline figure will be increased.
In Brightman v Johnson (1985) The Times, 17 December an award made in December 1985, Tudor Price J increased this figure to £95,000 to take account of the circumstances which made the plaintiff's injuries more serious than the average case of tetraplegia (see Report in para A2-001 of Vol 2 of Kemp & Kemp).
Updated, that award would come to about £140,500 in terms of the £ in December 1992.
This writer has personal knowledge of negotiated settlements made in 1992 where the damages for pain and suffering and loss of amenities were agreed at £125,000.
As well as putting a ceiling on cases of average tetraplegia, the effect of the decision in Housecroft's case has meant that awards in less serious cases have to bear a proportional relationship to the guideline figure for tetraplegia.
Guidelines for the assessment of general damages in personal injury cases
3.20 An interesting and important recent development in the assessment of general damages for pain and suffering and loss of amenities has been the publication of "Guidelines for the Assessment of General Damages in Personal Injury Cases" .
This is the report of a Working Party set up by the Judicial Studies Board with the objective of "Facilitating a more uniform approach to the assessment" of such damages.
The Guidelines have the blessing of Lord Donaldson, the former Master of the Rolls.
Nevertheless, they are essentially a composite analysis of previous judgments made by a body of practitioners with great experience in this field.
As such, the analysis lacks the constitutional authority of awards made by the Court of Appeal which, as Lord Diplock stated in Wright v British Railways Board [1983]AC 773 at p785 is "the tribunal best qualified to set the  guidelines for Judges currently trying such actions" .
The practice of the Court of Appeal (Civil Division) is to confine its judgments to the facts of the instant case.
Sometimes a decision such as Housecroft v Burnett has wider implications by setting a standard with which less serious cases must proportionately comply.
But usually a practitioner has to look to decisions where the material features are fairly comparable with his particular case.
The brackets given in the Guidelines should be of value to practitioners and judges by indicating the area within which an award is likely to be upheld on appeal.
But to decide where a proper award lies within a given bracket will still, we believe, require consideration of previous awards in similar cases.
We are confirmed in this belief by a passage contained in a Judicial Studies Board paper issued to Circuit Judges and Recorders in June 1991 where the Honourable Mr Justice Wright stated: It is impossible to over-rate the contribution made by Kemp & Kemp: The Quantum of Damages to this branch of the law and every Judge who has to deal with personal injury litigation will undoubtedly have to have access to it.
3.21 The Working Party's Guidelines are expressed to be based upon an analysis of cases reported up to September 1991.
As time passes, they should be updated by practitioners to take account of subsequent inflation.
The Guidelines are reproduced at the beginning of each comparable section of Vols 2 and 3 of Kemp & Kemp both in their original form and also suitably updated.
The nature of the Guidelines can be illustrated by taking some examples: The Guidelines also set out various features intended to indicate the position which a particular injury should take within the suggested brackets.
It is here that reference will be required to particular previous awards and especially to those assessed or affirmed by the Court of Appeal.
Exemplary and Aggravated Damages
3.22 In practice, the distinction between these two kinds of damages is not altogether clear, although in theory exemplary damages are to punish a defendant whose conduct has been outrageous or scandalous, and aggravated damages are to compensate the plaintiff for any aggravated harm done to him, such as injury to his feelings, as a result of the special circumstances of the case.
Exemplary damages
3.23 Exemplary damages will now only be awarded if the claim passes two tests:(1) It has to be in respect of a cause of action for which prior to 1964 such an award had been made; and (2) It has to fall within one of the two categories identified by Lord Devlin in Rookes v Barnard [1964]AC 1129 namely,
(a) Where there has been oppressive, arbitrary or unconstitutional action by the servants of the government, or (b) Where the defendant's conduct has been calculated by him to make a profit for himself which might exceed the compensation otherwise payable.
The Court of Appeal laid down the law in these terms in Gibbons and Others v South West Water Services Ltd [1992]PIQR P 224.
The Court of Appeal held that the first test had been stated, albeit obiter, in the speeches of four of their Lordships in Broome v Cassell & Co Ltd [1972]AC 1027.
In Gibbons the cause of action was founded on public nuisance.
The allegation was that the defendants had supplied contaminated water to the plaintiffs thereby causing them personal injury.
The exemplary damages were claimed on the footing that the defendants had acted in an arrogant and high-handed manner by asserting that the water was fit to drink.
The Court of Appeal held that there was no case prior to 1964 in which exemplary damages had been awarded to a plaintiff who proved particular damage resulting from public nuisance, and on that ground struck out the claim for exemplary damages.
The court also held that the claim did not fall within Lord Devlin's two categories.
The writer knows of no case prior to 1964 in which exemplary damages were awarded in a personal injuries claim.
If that is the position, it would follow that no such award can be made.
However, if the incident in which the personal injuries were sustained also involved, for example, wrongful arrest by government servants who had acted unconstitutionally and oppressively, a claim for exemplary damages could be included in the action.
A claim for exemplary damages now has to be expressly pleaded, reversing the rule stated in Broome v Cassell & Co Ltd (RSC Ord 18, r8(3)).
Aggravated damages
3.24 A case in which aggravated damages were awarded in a personal injuries claim was Westwood v Hardy (1964) The Times, 24 June.
The defendant was guilty of malicious and unjustifiable conduct in the course of which he unintentionally struck the plaintiff with an autoscythe.
Havers J's award of £550 (1993 value  £5,500) for comparatively minor injuries included an unspecified amount in respect of aggravated damages.
Provocation on the part of the plaintiff may disentitle him to aggravated damages.
But such provocation cannot reduce the plaintiff's damages below the real amount due for the injury done (Lane v Holloway [1968]1 QB 379, CA).
In Kralj v McGrath [1986]1 All ER 54 which concerned a particularly unacceptable case of medical negligence at a childbirth, Woolf J reviewed the authorities and concluded that "it would be wholly inappropriate to introduce into claims of this sort, for breach of contract and negligence, the concept of aggravated damages." 
Although there is no rule requiring a claim for aggravated damages to be expressly pleaded, the facts relied upon for the claim should be pleaded and it would be wise to plead expressly that aggravated damages are claimed.
In Gibbons v South West Water Services Ltd the Court of Appeal struck out the claim for aggravated damages, stating that, if the nuisance continued for longer than it should have done, the plaintiffs would be compensated by normal damages for having drunk more contaminated water.
4 Damages for Past Pecuniary Loss
David Kemp QC
Contents
Introduction
4.1 There is no difference in principle between the damages awarded for past pecuniary loss and the damages awarded for future pecuniary loss.
In each case the court seeks to assess and award damages that are equivalent to the loss sustained by the plaintiff—in each case the same heads of damage are recoverable and in each case similar deductions have to be made.
4.2 Past loss comprises special damage and is separately assessed.
It had always been customary to assess the special damage separately for convenience.
Now, since the decision of the Court of Appeal in Jefford v Gee [1970]2 QB 130, separate assessment is mandatory in order that interest can be awarded on the special damage.
Future loss, on the other hand, comprises part of general damages.
It, too, must now be separately assessed in order to distinguish it from that part of general damages that bears interest—namely, damages for pain and suffering and loss of amenities (Pickett v British Rail Engineering Limited [1980]AC 136).
Obviously, damages for future loss bear no interest; on the  contrary, their assessment involves a discount for the early receipt of a lump sum representing successive future losses.
4.3 The real difference between the two categories of damage is that past loss is certain, or largely certain, whereas future loss is, by its very nature, uncertain.
This difference results in a different approach by the courts to the assessment of the two categories of damage.
The assessment of past loss is relatively simple whereas the assessment of future loss involves varying degrees of difficulty.
That is why the two categories of damage are dealt with separately.
(For future pecuniary loss, see Chap 5.)
4.4 As has been stated, the principles of assessment are the same for both categories.
The principles of assessment, the heads of damage and the deductions that have to be made are dealt with in this chapter.
Practitioners should bear in mind the obligations under the rules to serve a statement of special damages with the statement or particulars of claim, as the case may be, and the Practice Note (QBD)(Personal Injury Actions: Special Damage)(1984) 1 August ([1984]1 WLR 1127) which requires the service of particulars of special damage, in the form of a schedule if appropriate, so that the extent to which special damages are agreed may be indicated by the other parties to an action in advance of the trial.
Basic Principles of Assessment of Pecuniary Loss
4.5 In Lim Poh Choo v Camden and Islington Area Health Authority [1980]AC 174 (per Lord Scarman giving the main speech with which the rest of their Lordships agreed) the House of Lords re-affirmed what Lord Blackburn had said over 100 years ago: "the principle of the law is that compensation should as nearly as possible put the party who has suffered in the same position as he would have been if he had not sustained the wrong" (Livingstone v Rawyards Coal Co (1880) 5 App Cas 25, 39).
4.6 In relation to past loss the court will usually know all the factors relevant to the assessment of the loss.
If it is a loss of earnings the court has only to ascertain and add up the net earnings lost, and if it is loss caused by out-of-pocket expenditure the court has only to ascertain and add up the total expenditure.
But even here there may be elements of uncertainty.
The plaintiff might claim that during the period between the accident and the trial he would have been promoted and received earnings higher than his pre-accident earnings.
The plaintiff might be an author who is prevented by his injuries from writing or completing a book or  there might have been high unemployment in the area and large redundancies in the company that had employed the plaintiff.
In all such cases the court must estimate as best it can what would have happened if the plaintiff had not been injured and on that basis must assess his loss.
Usually, however, there is little difficulty in assessing past pecuniary loss—indeed, in most cases it will have been agreed as special damage before the trial.
Accordingly, the way in which past pecuniary loss is calculated will not be dealt with here.
The sections below are concerned with heads of recoverable damage commonly encountered.
Deductions which have to be made in some cases are considered in Chapter 6, "The Incidence of Benefits" .
Expenses
4.7 There is a general rule applicable to expenses of all kinds; only reasonable expenses can be recovered.
This is a question of fact in every case and two examples may be taken.
In Cunningham v Harrison [1973]QB 942 the plaintiff claimed that he required the services of a living-in housekeeper and two nurses at a total cost of almost £6,000 a year (about £36,000 a year in terms of the pound sterling in 1992).
The court rejected this claim.
Similarly, in Cassel v Riverside Health Authority (1990) The Independent, 22 December the Court of Appeal disallowed the cost of a small swimming pool, which had been allowed by Rose J, the trial judge, in the sum of £30,000.
Provided that it is reasonable to incur the particular expense, however, it is immaterial that the expense may be very large.
Some particular heads of expense commonly encountered will now be considered individually.
Medical expenses
4.8 Section 2(4) of the Law Reform (Personal Injuries) Act 1948 (see Appendix C) provides that in an action for damages for personal injuries there shall be disregarded, in determining the reasonableness of any expenses, the possibility of avoiding those expenses or part of them by taking advantage of facilities available in the National Health Service.
In so far as past medical expenses are concerned, the application of this subsection gives rise to no difficulty.
While on this topic, it is convenient to anticipate part of the next chapter where future pecuniary loss is considered.
The question sometimes arises whether in fact the plaintiff will be able for the rest of his life to obtain outside the National Health Service the facilities that he requires.
If the court concludes that a plaintiff  will take advantage of National Health Service facilities because no other suitable facilities will be available, it will not award him damages for the cost of notional private facilities that he will not in fact use.
In Lim's case [1980]AC 174, at pp187F-188D the House of Lords affirmed a ruling of the Court of Appeal to this effect given in Cunningham's case [1973]QB 942 at p957 per Lawton LJ.
However, on the facts of Lim's case the House of Lords upheld the decision of the lower courts that it would be possible to obtain the required facilities outside the National Health Service and that it was reasonable to incur that expense.
For an instance where the medical expenses claimed were held to be unreasonably high, see Roberts v Roberts (1960) The Times, 11 March; for cases where very high medical expenses were held to have been reasonably incurred, see Winkworth v Hubbard [1960]1 Lloyd's Rep 150 and Hamp v Sisters of St Joseph's Mount Carmel Convent School Bar Library Transcript No 305B of 1973 (Kemp & Kemp D2-011 and D2-100 (Sweet & Maxwell), The Quantum of Damages, 2, para 5–011).
If the medical expenses are incurred in a foreign currency, a sum in respect of those expenses may be awarded in that foreign currency (see Hoffman v Sofaer [1982]1 WLR 1350 and see para 4.20 below).
4.9 Provided the medical expense was reasonably incurred, it is immaterial that the particular treatment should transpire to have been unnecessary, or even mistaken: per Lord Collins in Clippens Oil Co Ltd v Edinburgh & District Water Trustees 1907 SC(HL) 9 at p14:
The wrong doer is not entitled to criticise the course honestly taken by the injured person on the advice of his experts, even though it should appear by the light of after-events that another course might have saved loss.
The loss he has to pay for is that which has actually followed under such circumstances upon his wrong.
Lord Patrick followed this dictum in Rubens v Walker 1946 SC 215 at p216.
And Lord Dunedin said much the same in SS Baron Vernon v SS Metagama 1928 SC(HL) 21 at p28:
The pursuer is entitled to act on the advice of his experts, and the defender must pay the costs of that acting…
It is a reasonable and probable consequence of a wrongdoer's breach of duty that a person hurt will incur expenses in following the treatment prescribed by reputable experts employed by him to cure him.
Each case must be decided upon its own merits.
The result might be very different if the injured person acted on the advice of a quack, or if, considering all the advice he had received no reasonable person would have taken the course he did.
Although the two cases mentioned above are both Scottish cases, the law of England is the same on this point.
4.10 Medical expenses may be reasonably incurred even though a less expensive alternative was available to the plaintiff.
In Rialas v Mitchell (1984) 128 SJ 704; Kemp & Kemp, 2, A2-100, the Court of Appeal upheld an award for the continuing cost of caring for an infant plaintiff at home, although care in an institutional home would have cost less.
4.11 Medical expenses cover any form of service, treatment, medicine or appliance reasonably required.
The services need not be only professional medical or nursing services.
Attendance or help by paid lay persons can also properly be the subject of a claim for expenses.
Moreover, it is now well established that an injured plaintiff can recover for the unpaid services of a friend or relative.
The Court of Appeal has decided in Roberts v Johnstone [1988]3 WLR 1247, that where a plaintiff requires care and attendance as a result of his injuries, the cost of persons providing that care up to the date of trial is special damage, even if no one is in fact employed, and that interest is payable on the notional cost at the rate appropriate to special damages (see para 1.67).
Whether the appropriate measure will be nearer to a full commercial rate or to a nil rate (as with NHS services) will depend on the facts of each case (see Housecroft v Burnett [1986]1 All ER 332).
Numerous instances of awards for unpaid help will be found in Vol 2 of Kemp & Kemp.
4.12 There are many advanced and expensive appliances now available to assist the disabled and an injured plaintiff's advisers should consult medical experts to ascertain whether any such appliance should be acquired to mitigate the plaintiff's particular disability.
Not only the capital cost of such an appliance, but also its running expenses are recoverable.
For example, the cost and keep of a guide dog would be recoverable by a blind or partially sighted plaintiff.
4.13 It should be noted that s5 of the Administration of Justice Act 1982 provides that:
In an action under the law of England and Wales or the law of Northern Ireland for damages for personal injuries (including any such action arising out of a contract) any saving to the injured person which is attributable to his maintenance wholly or partly at public expense in a hospital, nursing home or other institution shall be set off against any income lost by him as a result of his injuries.
Special living accommodation or other capital asset
4.14 Normally, the measure of damage will be the sum expended to obtain the appliance or facility required plus its current running expenses.
But sometimes the expenditure will result in the plaintiff acquiring an asset of a type that he would have required even if he had not been disabled, although he would not have required one with the special attributes of the asset in question.
For example, a disabled plaintiff may require a motor car equipped with special devices to enable him to get in and out of it or to control it on the road.
In such a case the plaintiff could recover the extra cost of the special equipment, but could not recover the basic cost of the car if he would have needed one in any event.
4.15 In Povey v Governors of Rydal School [1970]1 All ER 841 the plaintiff was awarded £8,400 to cover the cost of renewing over a period of 25 years the special hydraulic lifting appliance required to lift his wheel-chair in and out of a motor car.
This example really falls within the scope of the next chapter, being an award for future pecuniary loss.
4.16 Similarly, a disabled plaintiff often requires special living accommodation (eg a bungalow equipped with doors suitable for the passage of a wheel-chair) or requires special appliances to be installed in his existing accommodation.
In the latter case the special appliances are unlikely to have increased the value of his property, and so he can recover their cost in full.
But in the former case the plaintiff will have a capital asset in his hands, and he is only entitled to recover damages to compensate him for the additional expenditure involved.
There are various ways of assessing the damages recoverable for such extra expenditure.
Sometimes the court will approach the problem by awarding damages to cover the extra mortgage which would be paid on the new accommodation, as in Fowler v Grace (1970) 114 SJ 193.
For another instance of the courts' approach to this problem see George v Pinnock [1973]1 WLR 118 at pp 124–125.
(These cases also are examples of future pecuniary loss and are considered in this chapter as a matter of convenience.)
Sometimes the court will assess damages on the basis of the "wasted capital expenditure" (ie that part of the expenditure that would not be recovered on a resale in the open market).
Each case will depend on its own facts.
For example, if the plaintiff moves from rented accommodation to a house that he has bought, he would have to take into account  against any extra cost the saving achieved by no longer paying rent.
Chambers v Karia (see Appendix A), a decision of O'Connor J, illustrates how the court can deal with a quite complicated set of facts, approaching the matter on a broad basis.
4.17 In Roberts v Johnstone [1988]3 WLR 1247 the Court of Appeal laid down a general rule for assessing damages where a plaintiff has to purchase special accommodation.
The annual additional cost of such accommodation should be taken as 2 per cent of the difference between the capital cost of the special accommodation, and the net proceeds of sale of the property in which the plaintiff had previously lived.
To this annual cost a multiplier appropriate to other forms of continuing future expense should be applied.
This general rule should solve most of the problems raised by this subject-matter.
The calculation will, of course, vary, depending upon the plaintiff's circumstances and the nature of the new accommodation.
Certain expenditure may result in no capital benefit.
For example, the cost of ramps and other modifications to enable a paraplegic to get about the house may even reduce the capital value of the house.
Such expenditure should be regarded as special damages and recovered in full.
A calculation of this sort may be illustrated by the following hypothetical example.
The plaintiff is aged 30 and has a normal expectation of life.
A conventional multiplier to apply in such case to expenses continuing for life would be 16.
These modifications in fact reduce the value of the new property on the open market to £95,000.
The plaintiff has incurred "wasted" capital expenditure of £15,000.
This is recoverable in full as special damages.
The plaintiff has a capital asset worth £95,000.
Subtract value  of previous capital asset, £60,000.
ERROR? 2 per cent of this is £700.
Apply multiplier of 16.
Damages should be:
Extra expenditure of a normal nature
4.18 Often a disabled plaintiff will have to incur extra expenditure on normal items.
For example, a paraplegic might require extra laundry or extra clothing.
In Povey's case [1970]1 All ER 841 at pp844h and 846b Crichton J awarded the plaintiff £1,900 to cover the extra cost of clothing and £4,200 to cover the extra cost of laundry and bedding (again, these are instances of awards for future pecuniary loss).
A disabled person might have to pay more for his holidays because he has to go to places where there are additional facilities available.
In Povey's case at p846b Crichton J awarded £900 under this head (again an instance of an award for future pecuniary loss).
No useful purpose would be served by attempting to set out here an exhaustive list of items that have been held to be an admissible claim for damages.
In every case the court must decide whether it was reasonable to incur the expense in question, and that will depend upon the facts of the particular case.
In Brown v Merton, Sutton and Wandsworth AHA (Kemp & Kemp, 2, para 1–154) a report from the Spinal Injuries Association setting out and costing the various requirements of a quadraplegic plaintiff was relied on by Taylor J in his assessment of damages.
Such a report can prove very useful in indicating the sort of expenditure a seriously disabled person might be likely to incur, such as nursing care, alteration to accommodation and suitable appliances.
4.19 It is important to remember that all items of special damage must be specifically pleaded.
4.20 In most cases expenditure will have been incurred in pounds sterling, but sometimes the expenditure may have been incurred in a foreign currency.
In such cases the English court now has power to make an award in that currency if such an award would most fairly compensate the plaintiff for his loss (The Despina R [1978]3 WLR 804, HL).
In Hoffman v Sofaer [1982]1  WLR 1350 Talbot J held that where a foreign plaintiff suffered his injuries in Britain, his damages should be assessed in the currency most closely linked with the loss, namely the currency in which the loss was suffered or the expense incurred, with the exception of damages for pain, suffering and loss of amenity which should be assessed in sterling.
Where a plaintiff's injuries have rendered him incapable of managing his affairs, Court of Protection fees are recoverable as an expense caused by the injuries (see Kemp & Kemp, Vol 1, para 5/008/11).
Where a plaintiff's injuries prevent him doing DIY work, which he had previously done, the extra cost of such work is recoverable as damages.
Loss of Earnings or Profits
4.21 This is the second main head of past pecuniary loss.
In the ordinary case of a man earning a regular wage or salary, there is little difficulty in assessing damages under this head.
One takes his net loss from the date of the accident up to the date of the trial and awards him that sum.
If the net loss was incurred in a currency other than pounds sterling and if an award in the currency would most fairly compensate the plaintiff for his loss, the court will award the damages in that currency (The Despina R [1978]3 WLR 804, HL).
In Hoffman's case [1982]1 WLR 1350 Talbot J awarded the American plaintiff his lost earnings in US dollars.
It is important, particularly when a considerable time has elapsed between the accident and the trial, to "update" the plaintiff's wage or salary.
With current inflation most wage-earners or salaried employees have regular increases in basic remuneration.
The plaintiff's advisers should be sure that the particulars of his special damage take note of all increases in remuneration which the plaintiff would have enjoyed if he had remained in his pre-accident employment.
If the plaintiff has been unable to work at all up to the date of the trial, his loss will be the entire net remuneration which he would have earned; if for a period he has been able to earn something, but not as much as he would have earned had he not been injured, his loss for that period will be the net difference between what he has earned and what he would otherwise have earned.
4.22 So much for the straightforward case.
There can be varying degrees of complication.
The plaintiff's remuneration may have  been based partly or even wholly on commission on orders obtained, or in the case of more senior employees upon the turnover of the business or some part of the business.
In such cases the court will have to estimate what the net commission would have been and award damages accordingly.
The plaintiff might be self-employed in some business or profession and the court's task in assessing his net loss might then be more difficult.
Even in the case of a regular wage-earner or salaried employee, there might be complications; for example, the plaintiff might claim that he would have been promoted to a more remunerative post (in which case the court must assess his prospects of promotion and award damages accordingly) or the defendant may claim that the plaintiff's employer had suffered severe business setbacks that necessitated redundancies and that the plaintiff would have lost his employment (in which case the court must consider all the circumstances and award as damages what it estimates to have been the plaintiff's net loss).
These complications must be mentioned in order to avoid over-simplifying the position.
But in the vast majority of cases the assessment of past pecuniary loss is in fact simple and usually special damages under this head are agreed without difficulty.
Past loss of earnings or profits must be specifically pleaded as special damage.
4.23 The lost earnings must be a real loss.
Thus, a plaintiff who receives 'sick pay"equivalent to his ordinary pay has suffered no loss and cannot recover damages (Turner v Ministry of Defence (1969) 113 SJ 585).
Likewise, a plaintiff whose contract entitles him to his wages during incapacity has suffered no loss of wages and so cannot recover damages for lost wages.
The position is different where the employer advances to a plaintiff who is incapacitated from work a sum equivalent to his usual earnings upon the understanding that such sum should be repaid to the employer in the event of the plaintiff successfully suing the author of his injuries.
(This topic is dealt with at greater length in Kemp & Kemp, 1, 5–009 et seq.)
In such a case the plaintiff has lost his earnings and is entitled to damages.
A further illustration of the principle that only a real loss of earnings is recoverable is provided by the decision of the House of Lords in Dews v National Coal Board [1988]AC 1.
The plaintiff was obliged under his contract of employment to contribute a percentage of his weekly wage to a pension scheme.
His employer was obliged to match that contribution.
As a result of injury he was off work for 31 weeks.
He claimed for his loss of earnings during this period and contended  that damages should be based on his entire wages, ie including his pension contribution.
(A claim to recover his employer's contribution was dismissed by the Court of Appeal.)
The fact that no contribution was made to the pension fund during the 31 weeks by the plaintiff would not result in a diminution of his pension.
For that reason the House of Lords held that he could not recover.
Lord Griffiths, at pp14-15 stated:
In my view the key to the solution of the present problem is to be found by recognising that in present day society people generally work with two principal aims in view; the first is to provide themselves with an income available for current spending and the second is to provide money that will be put into a pension scheme to provide them with an income after their retirement.
When a plaintiff is injured and as a result is paid no wages his immediate real loss is that part of his net earnings that were available for current expenditure.
In respect of this part of his earnings the object of which is to provide income available for current expenditure the tortfeasor is, subject to sums necessarily spent to earn the income, entitled to no credit for expenditure saved as a result of the injury; the principle that it is no concern of the tortfeasor how the plaintiff chooses to spend his income applies.
Different considerations, however, apply to the contributions to a retirement pension.
This money is not intended to provide any immediate benefit and the plaintiff suffers no immediate loss as a result of the loss of his wages.
He may, of course, as a result of a failure to pay contributions to the pension scheme suffer a future loss of pension.
This loss he is entitled to recover.
The measure of the loss will depend upon the terms of the particular scheme to which the plaintiff is contributing.
Loss of Other Material Benefits
4.24 Sometimes employments or occupations carry with them the enjoyment of material benefits other than monetary remuneration—for example, free board and lodging in the case of a domestic servant (Liffen v Watson [1940]1 KB 556), free coal for a miner, free or concessionary travel facilities for railway or airline employees, free farm produce for agricultural workers or the free use of a car for travelling salesmen, etc.
In all such cases the plaintiff is entitled to damages to compensate him for the lost benefit.
In Ashley v Esso Transportation Co Ltd (1956) The Times, 8 February the plaintiff claimed as part of his damages for injury suffered whilst working in a ship the extra expense incurred since the accident in having to buy his cigarettes ashore instead of on board free of duty.
The claim was dismissed on liability and so the question of damages was not dealt with; in principle, however, the claim seems to have been well founded.
4.25 Other types of loss under this head are the following:(1) Loss of opportunity of grammar school education (Jones v Lawrence [1969]3 All ER 267).
(2) Loss of status through inability to complete an apprenticeship (Dunk v George Waller & Son Ltd [1970]2 QB 163).
(3) Loss of an opportunity to make or enhance one's reputation.
For example, the case of an actor (Marbé v Edwardes (George) Daly's Theatre [1929]1 KB 269; Herbert Clayton and Jack Waller Ltd v Oliver [1930]AC 209; the claims in these cases were for breach of contract but the same principle applies in tort) and the case of a professional golfer who had been prevented from taking part in competitions by his injury (Mulvaine v Joseph (1968) 112 SJ 927).
(4) Loss of a craftman's joy and pride in his work (Morris v Johnson Mathey & Co (1967) 112 SJ 32).
Tax
4.26 It is not possible to deal fully with the question of tax.
For a more detailed consideration, see Kemp & Kemp, 1, Chap 9.
4.27 In calculating a plaintiff's loss of earnings or profits the incidence of income tax must be taken into account.
This is the rule established by the House of Lords in British Transport Commission v Gourley [1956]AC 185.
4.28 Liability to pay national insurance contributions must also be taken into account (Cooper v Firth Brown [1963]1 WLR 418).
4.29 Only the cases where the relevant tax is UK tax will be considered.
The incidence of foreign tax, however, is no more remote a factor in assessing the damages of a plaintiff whose earnings are subject to foreign tax than is the incidence of UK tax where that is relevant.
Foreign tax must be proved by expert evidence, if the relevant rates etc cannot be agreed.
It is the plaintiff's duty to plead his net loss of earnings, and accordingly the incidence of all relevant taxes (Phipps v Orthodox Unit Trusts Ltd [1958]1 QB 314).
4.30 When dealing with past loss there is no problem as to the rate of tax to be applied.
The lost earnings should be calculated tax year by tax year and the appropriate rates of tax adopted.
For each tax year the net earnings after tax that would have been received by the plaintiff if he had not been injured should be calculated, and from this net figure should be deducted the net  earnings that the plaintiff has in fact received: the difference is the plaintiff's loss during the tax year.
4.31 It is convenient here to anticipate part of the chapter on future pecuniary loss (Chap 5).
One of the uncertainties of the assessment of future loss of earnings is the future rate of tax.
The courts approach this problem broadly, following the guidance given by Lord Goddard in Gourley's case [1956]AC 185 at p209 in his model direction to the jury: "No one can foresee whether tax will go up or down and I advise you not to speculate but to deal with matters as at present." 
The same approach is adopted with regard to other statutory provisions affecting the calculation of tax (eg allowances and reliefs in respect of tax).
The courts make their calculations on the basis of the current provisions and do not speculate on future changes.
4.32 If a plaintiff's loss of wages has resulted in his getting an income tax rebate, the amount of the rebate must be taken into account against his loss of wages (Hartley v Sandholme Iron Co [1975]QB 600).
4.33 Similarly, when lost earnings have meant that on return to work the plaintiff is free of tax for a period, having fallen below the level of earnings on which tax is payable, the tax that he has escaped during that period is a compensatory gain that must be taken into account in the assessment of his lost earnings (Brayson v Wilmot-Breedon [1976]CLY 682).
4.34 Where a plaintiff loses only part of his earnings, this part will always be "the top slice" for the purposes of taking tax into account (Lyndale Fashion Manufacturers v Rich [1973]1 All ER 33 at p37g-h).
It is submitted that in so far as Wynn-Parry J decided the contrary in Re Houghton Main Colliery Co Ltd [1956]1 WLR 1219 at pp1224-1225 he was wrong.
4.35 When calculating future loss of earnings and the incidence of tax upon them, it is proper to take into account steps which the plaintiff could and would have taken to minimise his tax liability (Beach v Reed Corrugated Cases Ltd [1956]1 WLR 807 at p814).
This action was for wrongful dismissal but the same principle applies in a claim for damages for personal injury.
As Pilcher J said in Beach's case at p809: "I have to approach the assessment of damages in this case in the light of…
British Transport Commission v Gourley."
4.36 It is the plaintiff's duty to plead his net loss of earnings.
Accordingly, he will be required to give particulars of the factors affecting his tax liability (Phipps v Orthodox Unit Trust Ltd [1958]1 QB 314).