

The SFA Rulebook
John Bonham
Overview
Introduction
This chapter considers the UK regulation of futures transactions.
It discusses the regulatory system set up under the Financial Services Act 1986 (FSA or the Act), and the position of futures under that regime.
The principal regulator of futures business is the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) and the process of application for membership to SFA and the Rules of SFA by which a member is bound will be discussed.
At the outset, it should be stated that the regulation of the futures markets poses a particular challenge for regulators.
The potential volatility of the markets and the multiplication of risk through gearing coupled with the complexity both of the transactions themselves and market procedures, mean that investors, particularly those with little experience, can be placed at considerable risk in the futures markets.
A significant degree of protection is therefore needed for them.
Conversely, where the futures markets are used purely for hedging purposes or by sophisticated investors who are able to assess the risks they are taking and to integrate those risks into an overall investment strategy, there is less need for stringent regulation.
The regulatory system therefore seeks to cater for these divergent situations by tailoring the degree of regulation to the degree of investor protection required, having regard to such factors as the sophistication of the particular investor, whether transactions are executed on exchanges (which have their own investor protection mechanisms), whether the particular transaction can lead to contingent liabilities and whether margin is taken in support of a transaction.
Tailoring the extent of regulation to the particular circumstances aims to give protection where it is necessary without  interfering with the efficient operation of the market where it is not, but it does so at the expense of adding to the complexity of the regulations 
SFA's status as regulator
The aim of the Financial Services Act 1986 (FSA) was to introduce self-regulation within a statutory framework.
To that end, powers were vested by the FSA in the Secretary of State (the relevant department being originally the Department of Trade and Industry and subsequently the Treasury), some of which powers could be delegated to a "designated agency" , a non-statutory body.
The Securities and Investments Board (SIB) was established as such a designated agency and various powers under the FSA have been delegated to it.
In turn, the SIB has recognised a number of self-regulating organisations (SROs) which carry out much of the day-to-day regulation of firms involved in investment business.
Firms undertaking investment business in the UK require authorisation or exemption under the FSA.
The requirement for authorisation
Under the FSA, investment business means the business of engaging in one or more of the activities specified in the Act in relation to the investments specified in the Act, as long as these activities are not excluded.
Investment business
For present purposes it suffices to say that futures contracts undertaken for investment purposes (as opposed to commercial purposes) are investments subject to the FSA.
The distinction between those done for commercial and those done for investment purposes is complex and often unclear.
However, contracts traded on a futures exchange recognised under the FSA, such as the London International Financial Futures and Options Exchange (LIFFE), are deemed to be for investment purposes.
Although there is no express statutory provision to this effect, contracts traded on other futures exchanges would also be treated as for investment purposes, and hence are investments for the purposes of the Act.
The relevant investment activities include dealing, arranging deals, managing investments and giving investment advice.
They  include, in each case, offering or agreeing to do so.
A future investment activity not specifically relevant to the current context is the establishment, operation or winding up of collective investment schemes.
Although a number of exclusions under the Act exist, there is none which is of general relevance to a UK-based futures dealer, broker, manager or adviser.
Authorisation, therefore, will almost certainly be required.
Overseas investment firms dealing in the UK will generally not need authorisation if they do not have a UK office and deal only with other professionals and large institutional clients.
Investors in futures will not normally require authorisation provided that they deal as principal and with or through an authorised futures broker or dealer.
The SFA Rulebook as applying to futures
Arrangement of the SFA Rulebook
The SFA Rulebook presents the Statements of Principle as a separate section.
The Core Conduct of Business Rules and the third tier are, however, combined although the core rule element is distinguished by being printed in bold type and cross-referenced to the appropriate core rule.
A number of SFA Rules are specifically aimed at "derivatives" (which term includes futures as well as options and contracts for differences) and/or "contingent liability" transactions.
A contingent liability transaction is one where the investor may have to pay an additional amount on settlement (other than charges).
For example, a futures transaction where the contract price is payable on settlement and a written option where the underlying property or an appropriate cash difference must be paid on settlement, will be contingent liability transactions.
Conversely, a purchased option where the investor is free to allow the option to lapse if it is not in his interest to exercise it will not be a contingent liability transaction.
For the purposes of the SFA Rules, a futures contract is both a "derivative" and a "contingent liability transaction" .
Accordingly reference to any of those terms includes a futures contract.
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to give a full summary of the SFA Rules.
What is discussed are those rules specifically dealing with futures transactions as well as those rules which, whilst of more  general application, have specific significance in the context of futures.
The SFA Rules recognise that futures trading is a legitimate and often very beneficial strategy for an investor and therefore seek to prevent abuse without inhibiting legitimate operation of the futures markets.
In particular, the following distinctions are drawn in determining the extent of regulation:(1) Is the transaction on- or off-exchange?
Given that many futures exchanges are closely regulated either under the FSA or applicable foreign legislation, on-exchange transactions (which includes matching back-to-back contracts between an exchange member and its client) are less regulated than off-exchange contracts.
In order for an exchange to become a recognised investment exchange, it must demonstrate to the SIB that, inter alia:(a) it has financial resources sufficient for the proper performance of its functions;(b) that it has rules and practices which ensure that business conducted by means of its facilities is conducted in an orderly manner, affording proper protection to investors;(c) it limits dealings on the exchange to investments in which there is a proper market;(d) where relevant, issuers of investments dealt in on the exchange are required to comply with such obligations as will, so far as possible, afford to persons dealing in the investments proper information for determining their current value;(e) it has its own arrangements for ensuring performance of transactions effected on the exchange or ensures their performance by means of services provided under clearing arrangements made by it with a recognised clearing house;(f) it has (or secures the provision on its behalf of) satisfactory arrangements for recording the transaction effected on the exchange;(g) it has adequate arrangements and resources for the effective monitoring and enforcement of compliance with its rules and any clearing arrangements made by it;(h) it has effective arrangements for the investigation of complaints in respect of business transacted by means of its facilities; and  (i) it is able and willing to promote and maintain high standards of integrity and fair dealing in the carrying on of investment business and to co-operate by the sharing of information and otherwise with regulators.
There are similar requirements for overseas exchanges to become "designated investment exchanges" .
For all of these reasons, transactions on recognised or designated investment exchanges are considered to require less regulation by the SFA Rules than off-exchange transactions.
(2) Private or non-private customer: Chapter 2 considers in detail the types of customer recognised under the regulatory system and identifies in particular, market counterparties, non-private customers (including expert investors and trade customers) and private customers.
Private customers receive more protection under the Rules than do non-private customers since the latter are deemed, to some extent, to be better able to look after their own interests.
Further, market counterparties receive still less protection as they are regarded as fully capable of looking after their own interests and understanding the risks inherent in what they do.
(3) Margined and non-margined contracts: Specific rules relate to margined contracts.
(4) Hedging or speculation: A contract undertaken for hedging rather than speculative purposes is, in some respects, less regulated than a pure speculative transaction.
(5) Discretionary management or merely broker/dealing: Greater protection is given to a customer whose assets are managed on a discretionary basis than where the customer is consulted and authorises (or initiates) each transaction.
With these distinctions in mind, the following paragraphs summarise the relevant SFA Rules.
Unsolicited calls
Section 56 of the FSA prohibits marketing or dealing (including, but not restricted to, futures transactions) in the course or in consequences of an unsolicited call (i.e. a personal visit or oral communication made without express invitation).
Calls are permitted, however, to the extent specified by the Common Unsolicited Calls  Regulations set out in Appendix 9 to the SFA Rulebook.
These regulations permit calls to be made on non-private investors generally.
In the case of private investors, only certain types of investment may be the subject of a cold call.
There is no specific exemption for cold calls in relation to futures transactions although calls on existing customers may be made where the investor has indicated in writing before the call is made that he envisages receiving such calls.
Such written indication would typically be contained in a customer agreement (see below).
SFA's Rulebook regulates the conduct of permitted calls on private investors.
Rule 5–17 requires a firm to give the SFA seven business days' notice before commencing making unsolicited calls on private investors in respect of, inter alia , futures and options funds.
The firm must provide evidence of appropriate compliance procedures and its ability to exercise adequate supervision.
The people who will actually make the calls must be identified.
SFA guidance recommends that such calls be tape recorded and regularly monitored.
Calls, whether in respect of futures and options funds or any other product, must be terminated immediately if the investor makes it clear that he does not wish the call to continue.
The call must not be made before 8 am or after 9 pm (local time for the investor) except with the investor's specific agreement.
Reasonable steps must be taken to ensure that the investor understands the purpose of the call (which must not be disguised) and the kind of investments or investment services which are to be discussed.
Follow up calls are not permitted if the investor has recently made it clear to the firm that he does not wish to discuss the matter.
Advertising
Statutory control of investment advertisements
Subject to certain exemptions, s 57 of the FSA provides that investment advertisements must be issued or approved by an authorised person.
In the current context any advertisement inviting the reader to buy or sell a future (or refrain from doing so) or which contains information calculated to lead to him doing so is an investment advertisement.
In issuing or approving an investment advertisement, an authorised person is obliged to comply with the rules of his SRO.
SFA's rules impose certain restrictions on the types of investment advertisement that may be issued, require due diligence to be taken in preparing the advertisement and also prescribe certain mandatory contents.
Direct offer advertisements (eg newspaper advertisements inviting investors to apply for an investment by filling in a clip-out coupon and returning it with their cheque), may not be issued or approved in respect of futures or other derivatives or warrants.
An SFA member must apply appropriate expertise and be able to show that it believes on reasonable grounds that an advertisement that it issues or approves is fair and not misleading.
Investment advertisements that relate to a particular investment or investment services must, unless they are only being issued to non-private customers, contain specific contents.
The matters directly relevant to futures include the following:(1) Fluctuations in value: A statement must be made that prices or values may fall or rise against the investor's interest.
(2) Investments carrying contingent liability: A statement that the investor may not only lose all of the amount originally invested or deposited, but may also have to pay more later.
The requirement to "be able to show" that a firm believes on reasonable grounds that an advertisement is fair and not misleading might imply no more than that the burden of proof is on the member, but on balance it seems to imply that hard evidence should be maintained to justify a particular advertisement.
That may be achieved either by retaining formal verification notes or simply by retaining the source material from which the document was produced (or indications of where that information was derived from).
SFA's rules on advertising
Prohibited adverts
Responsibility
Mandatory content
Practical compliance
Customer agreements
Under early SRO Rules, written customer agreements or terms of business letters were required in relation to most services.
These documents were intended to set out clearly the basis on which services would be provided to a customer, to inform him of his rights and to give him the opportunity of allowing or prohibiting certain types of transactions such as off-exchange transactions, borrowings on his behalf and illiquid investments.
In practice, firms took the opportunity to insert in those agreements lengthy provisions of a commercial nature for their own protection.
This in turn led to criticism of the length and complexity of documents that customers were being asked to sign.
The new SFA Rules take account of this criticism by limiting the circumstances in which customer agreements are required.
Rule 5–23 requires a written agreement in only two circumstances, namely where investment services are provided to a private customer involving contingent liability transactions (such as futures), and where discretionary management of a customer's assets is undertaken.
However, no written agreement is needed for customers ordinarily resident outside the UK who are reasonably believed not to want one.
Where a firm does provide services to a private customer on written contractual terms (whether a two-way customer agreement required by the rules or a non-mandatory one used for commercial purposes), the agreement must set out in adequate detail the basis on which those services are provided.
The firm must not, however, in any written communication or agreement, seek to exclude or restrict any duty or liability to a customer which it has under the Act or under the regulatory system.
Similarly, unless it is reasonable to do so in the circumstances, a firm must not, in any written communication or agreement, seek to exclude or restrict:(1) Any other duty to act with skill, care and diligence which is owed to a private customer in connection with the provision to him of investment services in the course of regulated business; or (2) Any liability owed to a private customer in connection with regulated business for failure to exercise the degree of skill, care and diligence that may reasonably be expected of it in the provision of investment services in the course of that business.
The reason for the two limbs of this rule is purely technical to ensure  that there is neither an exclusion of damages for breach of duty, nor an exclusion of any duty which exists in the first place.
Table 5—23(4) (a) in the SFA Rulebook sets out the required contents of a two-way customer agreement.
Items of particular relevance to futures trading are as follows:(1) A statement of the customer's investment objectives (unless included in a separate document): If futures trading is to be undertaken otherwise than for purely hedging purposes, it would be necessary to document that the customer's investment objectives were speculative.
(2) A statement of any restrictions on the investments which the firm may acquire for the customer or a statement that there is no such restrictions.
The circumstances in which, and the purposes for which, futures transactions may be undertaken should be specified and it should be indicated whether positions may be off-exchange as well as on-exchange.
(3) A statement as to whether the firm will undertake transactions with or for the customer in investments which are not on-exchange or which are not readily realisable investments.
(4) Where the portfolio or account is not specifically established for the purpose of carrying on derivatives business, a statement, if relevant, that the firm may enter into transactions which may result in the customer having a short position.
(5) A statement of the basis on which the customer will incur any contingent liability, including margining requirements, such as rights to fund margin calls and the maximum limits placed on such funding.
(6) Where any part of the portfolio or account is to be available for investment in contingent liability transactions (such as futures), the maximum amount or percentage so available.
In addition to the matters that are required to be included in a written customer agreement, certain required disclosures and consents relating to client money and property may be dealt with in the customer agreement or in separate documentation.
The customer must be notified or warned of the following where applicable:(a) That collateral will not be registered in his name;(b) That that part of the proceeds of sale of his collateral that exceeds the amount owed by the customer to the firm will be subject, on the firm's default, to the pooling rules under the  client money regulations.
The broad effect of this should be explained.
The customer's prior written consent must also be obtained in the following circumstances:(1) Before the firm deposits collateral with, pledges, charges or grants of security arrangement over the collateral to a third party;(2) If the firm reserves the right to return collateral other than the original collateral or original type of collateral.
However, this does not preclude the firm from returning cash equivalent where the collateral matures;(3) If the firm wishes to use the customer's collateral to support its own (or another person's) obligations:(4) If the firm holds or intends to hold client money with an approved bank which is in the same group as the firm.
The firm must identify the bank concerned;(5) Before a firm undertakes margined transactions through an intermediate broker who is neither an authorised person nor an overseas person whose regulatory system requires segregation of client money;(6)(In most cases) where the firm wishes to contract out of the client money regulations and is entitled to do so;(7) If the firm wishes to hold client money of a private customer in a free money bank account outside the UK it must identify the country concerned and state whether the bank concerned has given the required acknowledgement as to client money status and that, if such acknowledgement had not been given, client money held with that bank might not be protected as effectively as in the UK.
The client must consent in writing to his money being placed in such an account after a proper opportunity to consider that information;(8) If the firm has any ground (other than the absence of an acknowledgement as described above) for believing that client money held in a particular bank account outside the UK will not be protected as effectively as it would be if held in a free money bank account in the UK;(9) If the firm proposes not to pay interest on client money in accordance with the client money regulations.
If interest payable under any such agreement or notification is less than it would be under the client money regulations, that fact must be prominently stated in the relevant written consent.
In the case of non-private customers, prior written notification is sometimes acceptable in place of the customer's written consent.
Although, as has been seen, a written agreement is required under the new SFA Rules in only a limited number of cases, firms may find that the use of a written agreement is useful for commercial reasons.
It may set out the general terms on which the firm will be prepared to deal, its right to refuse to deal and the fact that any deals that it undertakes will be on the customary terms of the market concerned.
Provisions may be inserted for the indemnification of the firm and, subject to Rule 5–24 (discussed above), its exemption from liability.
The remedies that it may pursue against the customer upon his default may also be specified including security interests over assets held by the customer.
Additionally, although the Rules no longer require a written agreement, there are certain instances where the Rules require that disclosures must be made to the customer or the customer must consent to the firm acting in a particular way.
For example, as will be seen below, customers must be made aware of the margin requirements in respect of a margined transaction and the consequence of margin calls not being met.
Customers must also be given sufficient information about the risks involved in a transaction adequately to assess the merits of that transaction.
In the case of warrants and derivative transactions (including futures), the standard derivatives risk warning notice required by the rules (see below) must be provided.
Risk warnings
One of the principal concerns of the regulators is the volatility and gearing of futures contracts, which mean that an investor can quickly lose his entire investment and also incur unlimited further liability.
These risks may not be fully appreciated by private investors and SFA Rules therefore require appropriate warnings to be given to such investors of the risks concerned.
Rule 5—30(1) provides that a firm must not recommend a transaction to a private customer or act as a discretionary manager unless it has taken reasonable steps to enable the private customer to understand the nature of the risks involved.
Additionally, Rule 5—30(2) requires that in respect of a warrant or derivative, before a firm:(a) recommends a transaction;(b) arranges or executes a transaction (even if it has not recommended it); or (c) acts as a discretionary manager; it must have sent the private customer a Warrants or Derivatives Risk Warning Notice and obtained a copy signed by the customer so that the firm is satisfied that the customer has had a proper opportunity to consider its terms.
As in the case of a Customer Agreement, there is an exemption dispensing with the need for a signed copy from a private customer ordinarily resident outside the UK where the firm believes on reasonable grounds that he does not wish to receive it or to consent in writing.
The Derivatives Risk Warning Notice which must be sent is a standard document prepared by the SFA.
This notice warns customers that they should not deal in derivatives unless they understand the nature of the contract they are entering into and the extent of their exposure to risk.
They are also warned of the need to be satisfied that the contract is suitable for them in the light of their circumstances and financial position.
It is pointed out that whilst derivative instruments can be used for the management of investment risk, some investments are unsuitable for many investors.
The warning notice then goes on to address specific risks involved in particular types of transactions such as futures, options (including both buying and writing of options) and contracts for differences.
It also highlights the additional risks arising in off-exchange transactions and transactions on foreign markets.
In addition to explaining the risks of financial loss, the warning notice also explains a number of key aspects of the operation of futures markets which may not be readily apparent to the private investor such as:(1) The treatment of collateral and the fact that a customer may lose a proprietary interest in the collateral and not receive back the same assets that he deposited.
(2) The possible suspension of trading on exchanges where conditions become volatile and the consequent risk that it may not be possible to close out a position even where a stop-loss order has been placed.
(3) The fact that clearing house protections generally apply only to members of the exchange and not to customers.
(4) The fact that a broker's insolvency may lead to a customer's position being closed out without his consent.
It is important to note that the sending of the appropriate Derivatives Risk Warning Notice will not necessarily be sufficient disclosure to satisfy the requirement of Rule 5—30(1).
If there are special risks relating to a particular transaction which are not brought out in the Risk Warning Notice, these must be specifically disclosed.
From the compliance point of view, it is important to ensure that any warnings given to customers under this Rule are appropriately recorded either in writing or, at least, through the routine taping of dealers' telephone lines.
Experience indicates that when investors lose money they are often unable to recall being warned of the risks involved and indeed may question whether the transaction was suitable for them at all(see "Suitability" below).
Alternatively, a client who has been treated as an expert investor on the grounds of his experience may claim that, in fact, he was a private investor, that he should have received warnings as to the risks and that, had he received them, he would not have entered into this type of transaction at all.
Allegations such as these are easy for the investor to make and, if they cannot be disproved, may give an investor a right of action for any loss he has suffered under s 62 of the FSA, which provides a direct right of action to a private investor who has suffered loss as a result of a contravention by an SRO member of the conduct of business rules.
Suitability
A firm must take reasonable steps to ensure that it does not make any personal recommendation to a private customer of an investment or investment agreement, or effect or arrange a discretionary transaction with or for an customer, unless the recommendation or transaction is suitable for him, having regard to the facts disclosed by that customer and other relevant facts about the customer of which the firm is or reasonably should be aware.
There is no guidance as to the meaning of suitability or what level of information should have been obtained from the investor.
However, the suitability will depend upon both the investor's wealth and the reason for undertaking a futures transaction.
A hedging transaction will be much easier to justify than an outright speculation.
Where a firm enters into speculative trades for a customer it would be well advised to document any evidence that the customer has the financial ability to absorb any losses which he may incur without undue detriment to his standard of living.
Off-exchange transactions
Rule 5–44 provides that a firm must not effect, arrange or recommend a contingent liability transaction with, for or to a private customer unless:(a) the transaction is made on-exchange; or (b) the firm believes on reasonable grounds that the purpose of the transaction is to hedge against currency risks involved in a position which the customer holds.
This rule derives from the SIB Core Rules and is one which the SFA does not have power to derogate from without the SIB's consent.
The rule operates as an almost complete bar on over-the-counter (OTC) futures transactions for a private customer.
SIB's concern appears to be that the OTC market is almost completely unregulated and, perhaps more important, that OTC futures are non-standard contracts which cannot therefore easily be closed out.
Where the dealer acted as counterparty to the contract he may be willing to unwind the contract with a customer but there is no incentive for him to do so at a competitive price.
Whilst these are certainly legitimate concerns, it does mean that a private customer is deprived of the extra flexibility of the OTC market with its ability to tailor the maturity and other critical terms of the contract to a customer's exact needs.
Nevertheless it is probably fair to assume that a private customer's needs will be for "standard" investments.
All but the smallest corporate investors will be non-private customers and hence outside the scope of this rule.
Further, even smaller corporates may be treated as non-private under Rule 5—5(4) where they:(a) are carrying on a main business which is not investment business;(b) enter into a futures transaction as an integral part of its main business;(c) have, in the firm's reasonable belief, sufficient experience and understanding to waive protections provided for private customers; and (d) have received a clear warning of the protections under the regulatory system which they would lose, including a statement of its rights to request to be treated as a private customer.
Accordingly producers or consumers of raw material who wished to hedge against price movements in those raw materials through the futures markets need not be restricted by Rule 5–44.
Margin
Rule 5–28 imposes various requirements in relation to margined contingent liability transactions.
A firm must require the customer to provide any margin which is payable both at the outset (initial margin) and subsequently (variation margin) and take reasonable care to satisfy itself that the customer is aware of the consequence of not paying it.
This rule means that a customer will generally be kept informed of his position.
If a customer was unaware of the need to provide variation margin from time to time and had insufficient available funds to meet margin calls, then he may be forced to liquidate his position at a loss even though, had the contract been allowed to run to maturity, it may have closed at a profit.
To avoid customers being prejudiced in this way, a firm must not effect a contingent liability transaction unless it can show that it believes on reasonable grounds that the customer understands:(1) The circumstances under which he may be required to provide any margin;(2) Particulars of the form in which the margin may be provided;(3) Particulars of the steps which the firm may be entitled to take if the customer fails to provide the required margin;(4) That failure by the customer to meet a margin call may lead to the firm closing out his position after time limits specified by the firm, and that the firm will be required to close out the position in any event after a period of five business days; and (5) That circumstances other than failure to provide margin may lead to the customer's position being closed out with prior reference to him.
It is important to note that the obligation is for the firm to be able to show that it believes on reasonable grounds that the customer understands the relevant matters.
Depending on the sophistication of the customer it is not necessarily sufficient that the matters are covered in an agreement even if that agreement has been signed by the customer.
If the customer can demonstrate that the critical aspects were not brought to his attention or were "hidden in the small print" , he may be able to demonstrate a breach of this rule and (in the case of a private customer) sustain an action under s 62 of the FSA.
Accordingly, it would be good practice to ensure that the customer's attention is drawn to the salient points of any agreement or written document given to him.
In relation to on-exchange transactions the amount of margin demanded must be at least equal to the exchange's own requirements.
Presumably, this means the requirement which the exchange or clearing house would have in respect of a customer's position if that were the only open position which the dealer has with the exchange.
One of the more controversial obligations relating to margin is the requirement that a firm must close out a customer's open position where he fails to meet a margin call after a period of five business days.
With effect from 1 January 1993 this rule only applies to private customers.
Prior to that date, it applied also to non-private customers.
As an exception to this rule, secured or unsecured loans or credits may be granted to a customer by the firm to fund a margin requirement provided that a credit assessment is made of the customer by an employee of the firm who is independent of the trading or marketing functions of the firm (eg the compliance officer), and the maximum amount of the loan or credit to be granted has been notified to the customer and, in respect of a private customer, has been set out in writing and agreed by the customer in accordance with Rule 5–27 (customer borrowing).
For a private customer the borrowing must also be "suitable" for him.
The five-day grace period should allow rectification of any administrative delays and give the customer time to make any necessary borrowing arrangements or realise assets to fund margin calls.
Dealing rules
SFA has certain rules governing dealings which apply to all transactions whether in futures or otherwise.
These include restrictions on a firm dealing ahead of a research publication, dealing with orders fairly and in due turn, prompt execution, best execution (which in the case of exchange-traded futures is normally ensured by the exchange's best price rule), allocation of transactions, aggregation and allocation of orders and a prohibition against churning.
The latter, although not confined to futures, merits separate consideration.
Churning
Rule 5–43 provides that a firm must not make a personal recommendation to a private customer to deal, or arrange a deal in  the exercise of discretion for any customer, if the dealing would reasonably be regarded as too frequent in the circumstances.
Except in relation to discretionary management, the rule as such only applies to a private customer and thus, to some extent, non-private customers are left to make their own judgement as to the frequency of dealings.
However, it must be borne in mind that action in relation to a non-private customer which would, in the case of a private customer, have breached the churning rule may nevertheless infringe the SIB statements of principle (in particular principle 1, which provides that a firm should observe high standards of integrity and fair dealing).
It should not be assumed, therefore, that it is legitimate to recommend excessively frequent dealing to a non-private customer.
The prohibition against churning is, in theory, no more applicable to futures transactions than any other type of investment although in practice the "churn and burn" and hard sell tactics of some of the more disreputable futures brokers have, in the past, given a misleading impression of the futures industry generally.
One particularly difficulty in applying the rule against churning to the futures markets is that, because of their volatility, an active investment strategy is likely to be necessary.
Accordingly, the rate of turnover of a portfolio investing significantly in futures may quite legitimately be much higher than one would expect of a portfolio investing solely in stocks and shares.
Even upon a close analysis, it may not be easy to determine whether churning has occurred or not.
Large volumes of speculative investments leading to losses for the customer might be thought to imply churning.
Indeed there may have been churning—but that is not necessarily the case.
A high turnover may well have been justified in view of volatile markets.
Accordingly, monitoring the churning rule in practice poses significant difficulties for regulators.
Contract notes
SFA Rules require contract notes to be sent whenever a sale or purchase of an investment is made.
The contract note must contain the essential details of the transaction and these are specified in the Tables to Rule 5–34.
Special rules apply in relation to closing out of futures and other derivatives positions, in which case it is necessary to give all details not only of the closing trade but also of the existing trade which is being closed out and the profit or loss arising on the closing out.
Periodic information
A firm that acts as an investment manager for a customer must send a report at suitable intervals stating the value of the portfolio or account at the beginning and end of the period, its composition at the end and, in the case of a discretionary portfolio or account, changes in its composition between those dates.
Special provisions apply to portfolios which contain futures and other derivatives.
Valuation reports must be sent at least monthly (whereas in non-derivative portfolios only a six-monthly statement is required) although in each case a customer may advise the firm in writing that he wishes to receive them less frequently.
In addition to the standard required contents of periodic statements, statements relating to portfolios including futures and other derivatives must include additional matters including:(1) Each payment received or made by the firm in respect of the account during the relevant month.
(2) In relation to each transaction effected during that month to close out a customer's position, the resulting profit or loss to the customer after deducting or adding commission in respect of that transaction.
(3) In relation to each open position of the customer at the close of business on the last business day of that month, the amount of the unrealised profit or loss attributable to that position before deducting any commission that would be payable on a closing out of that position.
(4) The aggregate of each of the following in, or relating to, the customer's account at the close of business on the last business day of that month:(a) cash;(b) collateral value;(c) unrealised profits attributable to open positions;(d) unrealised losses attributable to open positions; and (e) any management fees.
Client money
In order to protect investors against an SFA member's default, Client Money Regulations have been made by the SIB as "designated rules" .
These Rules may be disapplied by agreement in the case of non-private investors but where they apply they require that money is only held with certain approved banks and that the  money in the account is, to the bank's knowledge, a trust fund.
This has the effect that the bank will be unable to combine that account or set it off against any amounts owed to the bank by the SFA member firm and, in the event of the insolvency of the SFA member firm, the funds in the account will not pass to the liquidator but will remain subject to the trust in favour of the clients contributing the money.
Where several bank accounts are used, provision is made for the pooling of those accounts so that any losses are spread among all the investors.
Accounts are not pooled, however, if specially "designated" accounts are used.
For example, where particular clients agree that their money may be placed with a particular bank with a view to earning a higher rate of interest but correspondingly accepting a greater risk of default by the bank, those clients' claims will form part of a separate pool consisting of the assets placed with that bank or (in the case of a designated fund account) with a group of such banks.
In the context of futures trades on recognised or designated investment exchanges, money received by a member firm must often be passed on to an intermediate broker or to the exchange or clearing house concerned where it will be combined in an account with funds attributable to other clients.
In those circumstances, money received by a firm must be paid into an on-exchange margined transaction bank account.
When it is passed on, the Client Money Regulations will cease to apply, although before passing the money on the firm must:(a) notify the exchange or clearing house that the firm is obliged to segregate clients' money in a margined transaction bank account;(b) instruct the exchange or clearing house to credit the margin into the firm's client transaction account (and not to its office account); and (c) require an acknowledgement that the client transaction account may not be combined with any other account and that no right of set off may be exercised.
Subject to that, money with a recognised or designated exchange or clearing house will be dealt with in accordance with the rules of that exchange or clearing house.
The firm will also need to reconcile the funds held together with any equity balance with the broker, clearing house or exchange to ensure the integrity of the client's funds.
Conclusion
As has been seen, the futures market presents a particular challenge to the regulator to ensure that investors are given adequate protection from the potentially high risks and volatility involved in the futures market whilst at the same time ensuring that the efficient operation of the markets is not unduly impeded.
Professor Gower noted in his review of investor protection, which ultimately gave rise to the FSA, that the aim should not be to protect fools from their own folly but merely to ensure that ordinary people were not made fools of.
SFA's rules relating to futures follow this tenet by application of the relevant rules only to circumstances where they are required, for example by limiting them to private investors, to contingent liability transactions or to margined transactions.
Although this makes the rules more complex, on the whole the SFA have achieved a fair balance between the needs for investor protection and the need for an efficient futures market.