

The Role of the Exchange
A.R.G. Frase
What is an exchange?
Historically, an exchange was a physical thing; a room or building where people met to gather information and strike bargains.
Now that traders no longer have to meet face to face, and can communicate by telephone or computer, the exchange is not so easy to identify.
Many facilities that are seen as key characteristics of an exchange, such as standardised contracts, transparency, liquidity and screen-trading, all can and do exist in off-exchange markets, such as forex and Brent.
What then does the exchange offer which telephone or screen-based trading systems do not?
In the UK, "exchange status" is largely equated with being a recognised investment exchange (RIE) under the Financial Services Act 1986 (FSA).
The FSA lays down certain criteria which must be met before recognition is granted.
The main requirement is for the exchange's affairs to be conducted in an orderly manner, in order to afford proper protection to its investors.
This includes ensuring that a proper market and proper information exist for the products that the exchange trades; and that transactions are properly recorded.
If it meets these requirements the exchange may obtain RIE status under the FSA.
This status exempts it from the need to obtain full FSA authorisation, but only while its FSA-regulated business is limited to "arranging deals in investments" .
Other FSA activities, such as "advising" on or "dealing" in investments, would require the same authorisation as a futures broker or dealer.
This exemption aside, there are surprisingly few perks for the RIE.
There is no monopoly of a particular type of business, and only qualified tax concessions, statutory powers, and protection from civil prosecution.
RIEs do not even have an exclusive right to describe themselves as an "exchange" .
The RIE does escape the financial resources requirements which would apply to an ordinary authorised firm, but for futures exchanges, capital matters are in any case delegated to the London Clearing House.
The Securities and Investments Board (SIB) also took a rigorous approach to the original RIE recognition process.
Exchanges found themselves having to make material amendments to their rules and practices, in order to secure recognition.
In the case of the London Metal Exchange (LME), still recovering from the collapse of the tin market in 1985, this involved a major restructuring, including the introduction of new transparency and clearing systems.
One putative RIE—the Association of International Bond Dealers (now the International Securities Markets Association) found the system unacceptable, and persuaded the government to create a special exempted status for it.
This was as an International Securities Self-Regulating Organisation (ISSRO), and took the AIBD outside both the RIE and FSA-authorisation requirements.
Similar proposals are occasionally made for exempting other internationally-orientated markets, notably the oil cargo markets.
Reuters, the centre of foreign exchange dealing in the UK, is directly authorised by the SIB.
Why does an exchange go to the trouble of becoming an RIE, rather than lobbying to become an ISSRO, or simply joining the Securities and Futures Authority (SFA) or the SIB?
SFA or SIB membership has the advantage of not being limited to "arranging deals" , but of covering all potential investment business activities.
And, if the SFA or SIB does not have a regime that meets the exchange's needs, the exchange can move offshore and deal in the UK electronically or by telephone.9
Exchanges accept the RIE package for various reasons.
At the time the FSA was being implemented, the exchanges were not really offered any alternative.
In addition, the SIB "high pressure" regime has been modified over the years.
Ongoing regulation of RIEs is now very low key, to the point where, when a major trading scandal broke on the London Commodities Exchange (then known as"London Fox, in 1991, SIB indicated that it had no responsibility for the way the exchange operated.
This came as something of a surprise since most people had assumed that SIB, as the recognising authority, was exercising some sort of supervisory control.
It also appeared to contradict the SIB's acceptance that it was, to some degree at least, involved in the regulatory problems highlighted by the Robert Maxwell scandal.
Despite some problems, however, the low-key regulatory approach is appropriate, given the wholesale and trade-based nature of most UK futures exchange business.
It is an approach that encourages the exchanges themselves to stay within the system rather than moving offshore.
In the US, in contrast, exchanges are more orientated  towards domestic retail business, and this encourages more extensive government supervision.
Another attraction in being an RIE is its "status" , in the eyes both of exchange participants and government authorities; here, RIE and exchange status are indeed much the same thing, both in theory and practice.
Any market may claim to be an exchange and may provide some or all of the key features of an RIE such as liquidity or transparency.
But a formally established exchange can also claim to have made a formal (and, in the case of an RIE, a legally binding) commitment to establish and maintain such features.
Unlike a trade association or informal market, an exchange is expected to carry out regulatory as well as trading functions.
The exchange structure enhances, or is at any rate available to enhance, "investor confidence" , by its special "market integrity" .
In addition, RIE recognition imports a public body quality, together with any advantages that attach to this status.
This situation has only evolved gradually.
The original exchange brought traders together on a single floor.
In a pre-computer (still more in a pre-telephone) age, this physical concentration offered maximum liquidity and (if the members chose) transparency as well.
It also had many of the features of a private club, operated and run for the benefit of its members.
As exchanges assume a more formal role, and seek new means to distinguish themselves from off-exchange business, they increasingly have to take note of a wider spectrum of interests, including off-exchange traders, customers, financiers, and the public interest itself.
All these issues take concrete form in the exchange's rules and regulations.
As trading becomes less and less directly connected with physical trading floors, or even a particular trading system, the rulebook becomes more and more the key determinant of the exchange's identity and objectives.
There is no fixed boundary to the scope of the rules, apart from the natural limits of contract law.
Conventionally the rules should be confined to what are conceived as the exchange's affairs.
But they can still be drawn very widely.
LIFFE, for example, has rules that impose capital requirements on its members, prescribe the content of customer agreements, and provide for inspection and monitoring visits to members' premises, even though these functions are primarily dealt with by the SFA and the clearing house.
Under LME rules, any business done by a member "under the rules" is treated as exchange business, even where this takes place away from the exchange floor on a bilateral basis between a member and a third party.
Nature of exchange rules
In the UK, exchange rules are a commercial contract between the parties.
The exchange itself is a limited company, with its own distinct legal identity, and enters a contract in its own right.
The exchange is owned by its shareholders, who form a separate membership.
Where this "owning" membership is not synonymous with the "trading" membership, the results can be complicated.
On LIFFE, for example, shares are used chiefly to create and transfer floor trading rights or "seats" .
There is therefore a fairly close correlation between the owning and trading memberships.
Shareholders also have rights under normal company law which can have a significant residual impact on how the exchange functions, but the implications of this are not discussed further in this chapter.
The rules as a "multilateral" contract
An exchange's rulebook, and the exchange's function generally, is distinguished from most commercial contracts by its multilateral nature.
The exchange's rules are a set of standard terms entered into between the exchange on the one hand and each individual member on the other.
The contract is executed when the prospective member, as part of his application for membership, agrees to abide by the rules.
This means that the exchange is normally involved in every application of its rules, even with a rule couched in terms of the bilateral rights between buyer and seller.
If there is a potential claim of this sort, for example for late delivery or mishandling an order, action will often be taken in the first instance by the exchange, as guarantor of market standards.
This may be because the disputes are subject to exchange arbitration.
Or it may be for rule breach, such as a late delivery under the LIFFE Bund contract.
Even if there is no material breach as between buyer and seller there may still, at the multilateral level, be a breach of the exchange's standards of conduct, actionable by the exchange.
Multilateral rules are usually enforceable as between the exchange and each member, rather than generally across the whole membership.
However, in some circumstances, such as the old unincorporated association, a contract may indeed exist between one member and another, as well as between the exchange and each member.
Such an arrangement is unlikely to be favoured by the exchange except in special circumstances.
Other derivatives markets, such as the financial swaps market  with its standard documentation, or the forex market, with its common computer equipment, may also appear to operate on a multilateral basis.
Mostly though, they lack the characteristics of a "common association" , and/or the central focus provided by the exchange.
The credit risk of each individual counterparty has to be assessed separately, and dealings are largely caveat emptor.
There is little assurance as to how individual participants or the overall market will behave.
Others, such as oil cargo traders, have no central body of any kind, but operate on a strictly bilateral basis.
The exchange may take this multilateral system a step further and contract with individual traders, as well as the member firms that employ them.
This raises the question of who is responsible if the individual trader breaks the rules.
Is it just the individual or is the member firm also implicated?
Most industry regulators would regard it as fundamental that a member may be called to account for the conduct of its registered traders.
As an absolute minimum they will hold the member liable for any failure to supervise.
The extent to which the member firm is responsible on a strict liability basis, regardless of any intention or negligence on its part, is a moot point.
A contractual obligation, such as an exchange rule gives rise on the face of it to strict liability.
However, the exact liability of the member will depend on the wording of the relevant rules, and associated factors such as the extent to which the member is responsible for the actions of others, the seriousness of the breach, and the degree of fault or negligence required.
The main alternative to the multilateral contract described above, is the statutory system found on some European exchanges.
Where an exchange is given power to make its rules by statute, those rules will normally have statutory status as well.
Statute takes precedence over contract and other legal obligations.
It is binding without any need for agreement on the part of the parties affected.
Statute-based rules thus tend to be both more powerful and also more rigid.
It is more difficult to keep within the powers they confer, to change them or interpret them on a pragmatic basis.
Rather, the literal words of the statute have to be relied on and followed.
Making rules and exercising powers
Before it makes a new rule, an exchange must ensure that the relevant rule is within the scope of any statutory controls that apply to it, and covered by the exchange's own objects and purposes.
There must also, normally, be a procedure for making the new rule or  amending an old one.
Except (possibly) with the consent of all its members, an association has no inherent power to alter its rules.
If a procedure is prescribed for making the rule it must be followed, unless the procedure is directory rather than mandatory.
The need to act consistently and give effect to legitimate expectations, means that far-reaching and abrupt rule changes should generally be avoided, in favour of proper consideration and consultation.
There is no inherent power to take an action, or exercise a power, which has not been created by a rule or other contract provision.
When the power created by the rule is exercised, the act of exercise must be in accordance with the terms of the enabling rule.
Action which the exchange purports to take under existing rules will not be valid if, on the facts, the action amounts not to the exercise of an existing power contained in the rules but to the creation of a new rule.
On this basis, a notice issued under a procedure relating solely to general board notices but which operates de facto as a rule change could be open to challenge.
Communicating the changes
New contractual rules, and any changes in those rules, should be communicated or published to the membership to ensure that they are binding.
Even if the rules give the exchange an absolute discretion to make changes, the effectiveness of such changes will depend, to some extent at least, on notice being given to the members.
Similarly, where rules are incorporated by reference to some other document, there should be adequate reference to draw them to members' attention.
If the rules are of an unusual or onerous nature, for example allowing the exchange to alter dates of performance, the purchase price, or delivery obligations at will; then a higher standard of notification may be required.
This does not mean that a member can claim not to be bound by a rule merely because he has not bought a rulebook or not read it properly.
But problems could arise if an exchange adopted a rule at board level but failed to publish it, or if a member joined the exchange after rules bulletins 1–50 had been issued, was not then supplied with those bulletins by the exchange, and such bulletins were not readily available on request.
What if a rule change, such as the introduction of a new settlement date, is formally communicated to members, but the traders on the floor do not "register" that the change has taken place and carry  on trading on the basis of the old date?
There seems a good case for saying that, until the new date is drawn again to members' attention, the old date continues to be valid.
The exchange member will be bound by the rules to which he has consented.
Prima facie these are the rules in force at the time when he became a member.
Purely procedural rules may be binding by reference to the rules in force at the time when the procedure is applied.
Generally though, if the member is to be bound by future rule changes, this must be specifically provided for in the contract terms.
Similarly, a rule will not normally have retrospective effect unless this is clearly provided for.
Even where a rule appears to allow the exercise of a power at the sole and subjective discretion of the exchange, a duty to act reasonable or fairly will frequently be implied.
This is discussed in more detail below.
Written rules: the "general" and "specific" approaches
Exchange rules may be brief and generalised.
This general approach to drafting carries the risk that the rule will be difficult to interpret.
Alternatively a rule might be long and particular, such as detailed rules on how an order slip or trading card is to be completed.
The particular approach runs the risk of being too specific, resulting in purely technical rules, which miss the substance of the problem and/or create loopholes and inconsistencies.
However for technical matters, such as detailed contract terms or the way in which client money or collateral is to be handled, detailed rules are almost certainly needed.
A clear example of the general approach is a rule that prohibits exchange members from "bringing the exchange into disrepute" .
As a broad principle of conduct it seems irrefutable.
It also seems to be so wide in scope that it could encompass almost anything.
However, identifying a breach of the rule may not be so easy.
The rule has a flavour of seriousness which suggests some moral culpability.
Actual or reckless intent, or intent to deceive, may be needed to bolster the severity of the charge.
This may need to be supported by actual action likely to undermine public confidence in the exchange.
A court or tribunal, trying to apply such a charge, might rely on its gut feeling as to what was and was not proper.
It might well view a particular action as "clearly disreputable" .
On the other hand, could mere negligence, or carelessness, or innocent action, be enough to prove liability under such a rule?
At  this point the nature of the rule must be decided.
If the rule contemplates a particularly serious form of misconduct, mere fault or negligence may not be enough to ground a breach.
If, on the other hand, it was felt that liability could somehow be imposed for an innocent breach of the rule, mitigation could be pleaded, with a corresponding reduction in any penalty.
In making decisions such as these, "market practice" (as discussed below) my assume particular importance, overriding the direct second-by-second control of the exchange itself.
In particular, any intention to deceive, or recklessness or negligence, must be assessed by reference to general market standards and behaviour.
Nor could the exchange avoid these sort of issues by simply granting itself a general power to do whatever it wanted.
There would be enormous difficulties in trying to operate a general rule that had not been made sufficiently specific at a proper point beforehand.
Written rules: precedence and priority
The rules usually start with a formal, printed rulebook, succeeded by amendments and interpretation.
In the absence of disagreement or uncertainty, a court is likely to rely on the exchange's own interpretation of its rules.
The less clear the rules, the more difficult they will be to enforce.
But these are complicated markets, and total clarity is often difficult to achieve.
Under contract law, a specific rule will normally take precedence over a generalised rule on the same subject.
Where two rules are inconsistent, a court will lean towards resolving the conflict in a way that gives effect to the commercial intention of the rules.
Any statutory rules will of course take precedence over contractual rules.
Overall there are few general principles on whether one rule will take precedence over another.
It becomes a matter of construction.
A provision may be a substantive rule: it may be optional; illustrative; mandatory; or procedural (a means by which the substantive rules are to be implemented).
Generally, the rulebook is to be construed as a whole.
This may include sections that are not part of the main rulebook, eg as contract terms.
The more extended the rulebook, the more onerous this task will be.
For example, devolution of control over different sections of the rules to different committees may result in inconsistencies of style or approach.
Where the status of a provision is not made clear, for example in a notice or bulletin, it may be difficult to tell whether it is a rule, guidance, a recommendation, or a general comment.
Similar difficulties are likely to arise where a provision has more than one status; eg where a procedure is treated, for some purposes, as also being a rule.
A provision that is written informally, or is described as a "procedure" or "code of practice" is, regardless of technical factors, likely to be interpreted as a lesser obligation rather than a "rule" or "regulation" .
Unwritten rules: the factual matrix
It is a basic principle of interpretation that ordinary words are given their ordinary meaning.
Where the wording of a written rule is clear, there are therefore no grounds for introducing further evidence of what it really means.
However, where a term of a contract is unclear, is capable of having more than one meaning, or is specific to a particular trade or market, there is considerable scope for looking at the factual background or "matrix" known to the parties, in order to clarify how it should be applied.
This is a general principle which is of particular relevance to exchange rules.
These, more than other commercial contracts, are written and applied against a live background of business being done.
Indeed, on an exchange, rules may often evolve out of practice, rather than vice versa.
Those who are not familiar with this background, or wish to take some advantage of it, be they customers, arbitrators, or the exchange's own employees or members, are often suspicious about claims as to the form this business background takes, and its relevance to the matter in hand.
Accordingly, claims by a member firm as to the nature of market practice may not be accepted.
One of the parties may be unfamiliar with a particular practice.
He may not believe that it applies in his particular case.
It may not suit his case to believe that it applies.
The practice then has to be "proved" by evidence as to the intention of the parties, expert evidence on a trade practice or usage, a trade or technical gloss on the meaning of a particular term, or even as a separate term implied into the rules.
By these means a court can look at the purpose or function of a rule.
For example, a rule that prohibits bringing the exchange into disrepute cannot be read cold from the rulebook.
Some background knowledge is needed.
Front running usually does bring the exchange into disrepute.
Inaccurate completion of trader cards usually does not.
In other cases it may be an issue of terminology.
 "Closing out" implies the liquidation of two equal and opposite positions on most exchanges.
On the LME, however, it may mean no more than the  matching of positions, since LME contracts are not "closed" , in the sense of being liquidated, until their prompt date.
In a "live market" , such as an exchange, understandings of this sort are a normal part of business.
In contrast, a "dead market" , such as the 1988 SIB rules, had no underpinning of actual practice.
There was therefore very limited understanding as to how such rules should be interpreted or enforced.
This approach is reflected in the courts' attitude to business contracts generally.
Such contracts are to be interpreted in a commonsense and practical manner, bearing in mind the purpose or intention of the rules, their authorship, and the readership to which they are addressed.
Where the rule is not completely clear the court may also look at the factual background, including the genesis and objective aim of the "transaction" .
The court should thus give effect to the rules wherever possible, while at the same time seeking to avoid legalistic interpretation, particularly if this produces arbitrary or irrational results.
One issue of interpretation is the extent to which the exchange, given its central role, shares or acknowledges a particular market view of what its rules mean.
How much actual, constructive or imputed knowledge does an exchange have of what goes on on its own trading floor?
How aware is it of the trading data that is collected, the way in which trading or order cards are filled in, or the pit trading practices that go on in front of its pit officials?
The answers must be matters of fact, though disclaimers in the rules would have to be taken into account.
The exchange may on occasion wish to maintain that it was not previously aware of a specific floor practice which it now considers undesirable.
The exchange's acquiescence in a practice which it could reasonably be expected to have been aware of could amount to a waiver or estoppel; enough at any rate to deter the exchange from taking disciplinary action against members who have followed the particular practice.
It would always be open to the exchange to introduce new rules to prevent such conduct in the future, or to clarify the situation.
But it would have much more difficulty in applying those new rules retrospectively.
Unwritten rules: implied terms
So far we have discussed ways of interpreting express rules.
Similar principles are relevant where the issue goes beyond the express rules to imply additional terms, based on public policy, or the presumed intention of the parties.
Terms may be implied into the rules from the conduct of the parties, the nature of the rules themselves, business efficacy, trade usage, or a previous course of dealing.
(They may also be implied by public policy or statute.)
For instance, in Shearson Lehman v Maclaine Watson it was held that even if the exchange had no power in its rules to suspend dealings on the tin market, such a rule should be implied, since it would be self-defeating if the exchange's power to carry on business did not include, in certain circumstances, a power to cease part of that business.
Some terms are implied because of the nature of the contract concerned.
For example, there is often an implicit duty to act with reasonable care and skill, to act within a reasonable time, and not to obstruct the other party's performance of his obligations.
Other terms may be implied by trade usage.
A trade usage will be imported if it is widely known and followed, and is sufficiently certain, binding and reasonable.
Generally, an exchange's rules are themselves usages, not least because they should be followed by all the exchange's members.
However, a practice does not have to be reduced to a rule before it can be a usage.
Though the rules will normally take precedence, usages may be highly relevant to the interpretation of the rules.
In Cuncliffe-Owen v Teather & Greenwood (a Stock Exchange case) Mr Justice Ungoed-Thomas said: "it is suggested on the one hand that this rule excluded usage of wider scope and, on the other hand, with the support of expert evidence, that it was a particular instance reflecting a wider usage.
There certainly appears to me to be no such necessary exclusion of usage as suggested by reason of there being a rule.
The contract itself recognises usages as well as rules and it seems more likely to me that the rules may, in some cases at any rate, have developed out of and given partial expression to usages rather than that they should indicate the absence of usages beyond what is contained in the rule."
Where a practice is reasonably common and sensible in its market context, the courts will often uphold it as an implied term in the main contract.
It does not need to be a trade usage, and may be upheld on what amount to commonsense or market practice grounds.
Express rules will generally override an implied term if they are clearly contrary to it.
Implied terms can thus supplement express rules, or introduce new rules, but cannot directly contradict an existing rule.
The only clear exception to this is rules that are imported  by statute.
However, this still leaves the court a good deal of scope for readjusting the express rules.
If an exchange had a rule that required members to state that every contract was intended to go to physical delivery, notwithstanding the fact that since the rule was made the exchange had introduced a number of cash-settled contracts; this would almost certainly be subject to some sort of variation.
The court might hold that the rule was directly inconsistent with other exchange rules relating to the existence of cash-settled contracts, and order rectification.
It might look at the purpose of the rule, and imply a term which, though not amending the rule, supplemented it sufficiently to change its emphasis—perhaps by holding that it was not meant to apply after the introduction of the cash-settled contracts.
A trade usage that had changed since the rule was originally written might not be sufficient to alter the rule directly, but would change the factual matrix within which the rule was to be construed.
The situation would be even more complicated if the member had followed the rule, and was then subject to a claim by a customer who had been misled as a result.
Would the member be covered by the fact that he had followed the exchange's rules?
Or should he have realised that an implied term, or some other interpretation, would have been brought in to alter or anticipate the true meaning of the rule?
Duties of "fairness" 
Although English law has no general duty of fairness or good faith, the concept is of considerable importance.
For example, where a party to a contract has a power or discretion, and this affects the rights of other parties, a term is frequently implied that the power will be exercised in a reasonable manner, or at any rate not arbitrarily or capriciously.
This is particularly likely to apply to multilateral contracts; ie, where one party exercises powers over a number of others.
In the case of exchanges it usually translates into a general contractual duty to act fairly.
A similar principle exists in statutory law.
The court presumes that Parliament, when granting powers, intends them to be exercised in a right and proper way.
This principle is usually described as natural justice, and the procedure by which it is enforced as judicial review.
In recent years the concepts of natural justice and judicial review have been extended beyond the purely statutory sphere.
This is helpful in situations where, as in the Takeover Panel  cases, no statutory or contractual remedy is otherwise available.
However, UK exchange law is so thoroughly contract-based, that it seems unnecessary to redefine the existing contractual duty of fairness in terms of a new, quasi-statutory, remedy.
For present purposes, natural justice is therefore treated as an implied contractual term rather than a floating, self-contained principle.
The exchange's duty to act fairly means without arbitrariness or capriciousness, and on the basis of relevant considerations.
Normally, for an exchange to be arbitrary or capricious, it would have to behave in a way which no reasonable person in its position would have done.
Such a situation will be rare, but might arise if, say, the exchange required all floor traders to have their mnemonics printed on their trading cards, failed to accept delivery of the cards by the member to the trading floor, and then brought an action for breach of the original requirement.
Fairness also means acting impartially and without bias.
The governing board and committees of exchanges are usually composed of market participants.
They must exercise their powers in the interests of the exchange, rather than for their own benefit.
For instance, a board member whose own firm is on the wrong side of a squeeze should not misuse his board position to try and break the squeeze.
At the very least he should declare his interest.
If necessary, he should withdraw from the relevant meeting, or abstain from voting.
Where the board of an exchange is also the board of directors, similar obligations arise by virtue of the director's duty of good faith to his company.
Finally there is a general duty of procedural fairness.
This is most relevant in relation to disciplinary proceedings.
In relation to ordinary exchange business, it is discussed, in some points, under "Making rules and exercising powers" above at page 77.
In return for meeting these standards the exchange has insulation from liability for negligence to specific persons.
If the exchange has a contractual duty of care, it is probably limited to acting with reasonable care and skill in the best interests of the market as a whole, and for legitimate reasons.
This may require the exchange to carry out a balancing act between competing interests.
It does not require it to take care of particular individual or sectional interests, since these will often conflict.
This is both for practical reasons and as a matter of public policy.
Nor (in many cases) is it necessary for the exchange to ascertain all relevant facts before taking action, provided it does so in good faith.
The exchange's rules are subject to the general statutory checks  and balances associated with commercial contracts.
Under the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 any exemption clauses in the rules must be reasonable.
The Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982 also imposes broad standards of reasonableness.
In the light of the above comments on duties of care, such reasonableness seems unlikely to extend beyond a general duty to act in the interests of the market as a whole.
Other legislation, such as the doctrine of restraint of trade, the Restrictive Trade Practices Act and Arts 85 and 86 of the Treaty of Rome (monopoly and abuse of a dominant position), all have potential application, but might be expected to take account of similar public policy principles.
Relationship with non-members
Persons who have not contracted directly with the exchange, and this includes most customers, are not generally bound by the exchange rules, nor is the exchange itself liable to such persons.
However, there are exceptions.
A customer may contract with an exchange member expressly on terms that the customer agrees to be bound by the rules of the exchange.
This is particularly relevant in the LCH-based back-to-back trading system, where the customer/ member contract matches the exchange/member contract.
If the exchange then changes the terms of the exchange/member contract, this can also affect the customer/broker contract (depending on exactly what the customer has agreed to).
Where there is no express agreement, non-members are bound by rules or resolutions made under the rules that relate to the mode of business on the exchange.
If a customer asks a broker to deal on an exchange it is usually an implied term of their contract that the broker will do so in accordance with the usages of that exchange.
The customer is thus likely to be bound by both usages in the rules and any other usages of the market.
This does not, however, enable the exchange to legislate as to substantive rights between broker and customer, which are the domestic concern of those parties.
The situation is frequently reinforced by customer contracts or confirmation notes stating that all business is subject to the rules of the exchange.
This does not make the exchange itself a party to the agreement.
If a usage is particularly unreasonable it is possible that the customer may not be bound.
It is rare for usage which is in the form of the exchange's actual rules, as distinct from other trade usage, to be considered unreasonable.
If the non-member does not have a contractual relationship with the exchange it will be unable to take any action against the exchange for breach of an implied duty of fairness.
It may, however, have a remedy under general principles of natural justice.
This was indicated in both Shearson Lehman v Maclaine Watson and (in the context of SRO Rules) R v Lautro, ex p Ross.
It seems unlikely that a tortious duty of care or fiduciary duty would ever be applied for the benefit of non-members, since this would hinder the exchange's performance of its overriding duty of fairness.
For similar reasons it will be difficult to argue that action taken by the exchange in good faith in the interests of the exchange as a whole is intended to induce a breach of contract, merely because this is an incidental side-effect.
The position might be more delicate if, say, a central purpose of the exchange's action was to affect a particular non-member, or the way in which it was carrying on its business.
Content of the rules: the commercial objectives
To attract business, an exchange has to meet participants' business needs in the same way as any other market.
Exchanges are distinctive, however, in the high level of control that they can apply through their rules and to some extent their RIE status, in meeting (or attempting to meet) such needs.
Two issues of particular importance here are liquidity and transparency.
Liquidity
The SIB defines "liquidity" as the ability of a market to accommodate transactions of reasonable size at acceptable price spreads in a short space of time.
Liquidity is normally an important element of RIE status.
The SIB says that there should be a sufficient range of participants on a market to bring adequate opposing forces of supply and demand to that market.
Willing buyers and sellers should be able to transact business at prices that reflect supply and demand.
The market should not be arbitrary or non-existent.
Nevertheless, every exchange has its illiquid contracts, and from a regulatory point of view, liquidity is not essential.
From a commercial point of view, however, liquidity is fundamental.
The greater the volume of business on a particular exchange, the greater the ability to trade freely on it and the more business it  should attract.
Prices are more competitive and counterparties more widely available.
To attract participants, the exchange's contracts must meet a genuine commercial need and strike a proper balance between traders and customers, so that one side is not unduly discouraged from doing business.
Liquidity can also be stimulated in other ways.
Members may be encouraged to act as counterparties to strengthen the depth of the market.
This may involve special categories of trader, such as the market maker, who is under an obligation (by the exchange rules) to quote a price in a given contract whenever asked; the designated broker, who agrees to promote a particular contract without giving a binding commitment to deal; and the "local" , who trades his personal account on the exchange floor.
Ideally, market forces alone would be enough to encourage members to assume these various roles.
Sometimes this is indeed what happens.
On the LME a number of firms hold themselves out and behave as market makers without the legally enforceable obligation to quote prices described above.
However, market forces do not in themselves guarantee the success of the market, and often there needs to be fine-tuning under the exchange's rules.
In market making systems, for example, there are regular controversies about who is a genuine and who a fair weather market maker.
Market makers may also complain that they provide liquidity (and transparency too) without receiving the benefits.
Other market participants are able to act in a dual capacity.
They can use the market makers' quotes to price their own business (ideally at a mark-up) and then hedge with the market maker, who is left to unwind the open position.
Similarly locals cannot normally support the weight of regulation carried by the larger trading firms.
The extent to which the exchange should intervene, through its rules, to fine tune this sort of relationship is a matter of continuous debate.
If the incentives are too low they may not be enough to sustain the market structure.
On the other hand, if the incentives are too high, they may themselves distort the market, by giving the beneficiaries an unfair advantage or enabling them to operate in a way which does not reflect genuine supply and demand.
At present an obligated market maker may be encouraged by fee rebates.
Locals have the benefit of special low capital and regulatory requirements.
Equity options market makers have a special tax exemption for their stock bonusing activities.
These are legitimate practices.
However, an arrangement where the trader's losses are met by a third party, not for commercial  reasons but solely to encourage the trader to keep trading, is not legitimate.
A form of this non-commercial trading occurred on London Fox in 1991, when the exchange itself opened an account with a trader and directed him to enter into trades on one of its own markets.
This also created a fundamental conflict between the exchange's role as guardian of the interests of the market as a whole, and its position as a participant in that market.
Other methods of stimulating volume might include controlling trading hours (by concentrating liquidity in a particular time frame, as on the metal and cocoa rings) or by lengthening the hours, to attract business from other time zones.
Capital and clearing requirements can be used to similar effect.
Capital requirements that are higher than necessary will almost certainly reduce the number of participants.
However, this must be balanced against the increased risk of default which would come with excessively low capital requirements.
Transparency
 "Transparency" —ie, the rapid publication of prices quoted and/or traded—is seen as one of the main benefits of on-exchange business.
It offers price discovery for market participants and, if coupled with liquidity, will encourage them to use exchange prices as a marker or bench mark for other business.
The first issue is publication.
An exchange can publish the quotes that are being made for future business, or the price at which historic business has been done.
Most exchanges publish both in some form.
In market maker systems the time at which historic trades are published is of considerable importance, since this gives away the market maker's position.
In other markets, the main issue may be the extent to which the prices are genuinely exchange-determined.
This leads to the second issue of open outcry.
The development of the exchange, from a meeting place for buyers and sellers, to futures trading in a pit or ring leads logically to the assumption that every member of the floor should be aware of the prevailing price of business being done and have an equal opportunity to participate in it.
This also means that all prices are determined by competitive trading rather than private agreement.
On UK futures exchanges this is still achieved primarily by the open outcry system, though similar transparency principles are to be found in order matching systems.
(Transparency in this situation may relate both to bids and offers made, and the historic prices of trades executed.)
The competitive trading principle is highly transparent, based as  it is on centralised and competitive pricing.
It offers both traders and customers a high level of certainty as to exactly what is on offer.
At first glance it also looks like the perfect market of classic economic theory, where all potential buyers and sellers are simultaneously in touch with each other and able to agree the most acceptable price to meet their requirements.
However, even where this basic principle is accepted, there are a variety of exceptions.
Some of these are largely administrative.
For example, if a trade is wrongly allocated, it may be necessary to transfer it to the correct account.
Or a trade may be used not to do new business, but to transfer a credit balance between accounts.
Other exceptions are more substantive.
If a broker/dealer wishes to deal with his own customer he must generally first offer the trade to the floor.
If no one on the floor wishes to take the other side of the trade then he can deal with his own customer.
This is known as "crossing" an order.
However, the broker/dealer may well complain that this rule will allow the floor to take good trades off him, leaving him with the trades that are not worth having.
Accordingly, there are a variety of exceptions to the standard crossing rule.
On LIFFE the 50% cross allows the broker/dealer to pre-match half the order, provided he has not taken one side of the cross himself, and he has filled the other half of the order in the pit.
On IPE and Fox, in the case of futures trades, the rules are more relaxed and allow the whole order to be filled off the floor provided it is within the minimum fluctuation in the pit at the time.
The cross has to be announced to the pit.
Again, it will not normally be acceptable for two pit brokers to agree a price at which they will trade with each other before going into the pit.
This is known as pre-arranged trading.
Conversely such restrictions may not apply to the desk broker back in the office, and will certainly not apply to non-member customers.
A customer could, therefore, ring round the booths seeking preliminary quotes, before going through the form of putting two traders out into the pit to effect the execution.
In other cases essentially off-exchange business may be brought on-exchange.
Futures exchanges are linked to the underlying physical markets, so that the option of doing the same or similar business in an off-exchange market is an ever-present reality.
Linking this directly to the exchange system is no more than logical.
The IPE, for example, makes extensive use of EFPs (exchange of futures for physicals).
These can be used both to complete an on-exchange contract by substituting an off-exchange contract, and to bring an  off-exchange contract on-exchange, to be completed by immediate offset or through the exchange clearing system.
The LME, operating a different system, treats bilateral telephone deals between members as on-exchange.
In such transactions, trades negotiated away from the exchange's central pricing system are turned into on-exchange trades.
Such trades are commercial, in that they represent genuine business transactions, but have not been effected through the exchange's competitive trading system.
They must therefore be distinguished from on-exchange competitive trades for any publication or price reporting purposes.
On the IPE, the EFP is distinguished by a special mnemonic.
On the LME inter-office trades are registered for clearing as a house cross.
The SIB, for its part, takes the view that there should be trading and price determining systems which ensure that all qualified participants have equitable access to the market; and so that market prices can adequately reflect prevailing forces of supply and demand.
The regulatory focus here is on the need for genuine commercial trades.
Bilaterally negotiated commercial dealing can still fit within this system.
Transparency itself is left as a relatively flexible concept: more of a commercial decision for the exchange than a matter of regulatory principle.
Content of the rules: integrity and malpractice
The fair and orderly market
At another level, there are rules that are designed to promote the integrity of the market.
Although they overlap with the matters discussed above, they may be characterised as having a more regulatory flavour, ensuring that the market operates according to predictable and consistent procedures, and offering a "level playing field" for participants.
SIB lists a number of requirements of this sort in its guidance on proper markets.
The exchange should lay down the forum or medium of communication through which trading takes place.
There should be a sufficient range of participants, and rules and procedures that lay down how trades are executed.
A trade must normally be exposed to the exchange's established pricing mechanism, such as open outcry or an electronic matching system, unless the rules contemplate otherwise.
All qualified participants should have equitable access to  the market.
The terms of the contracts should be precise enough for there to be an understandable relationship between the contract and the underlying physical.
There should generally be convergence between exchange and physical prices as the contract moves towards expiry.
There must be procedures for determining the market price for a contract at regular intervals, even in a thin market.
The exchange has a continuing obligation to monitor markets and to identify and address potential abuses.
If the exchange suspects that a trade has been effected for improper purposes it must investigate this.
Front running
Breaches of these and similar standards may directly disadvantage a particular customer.
One example of this is "front running" ; the nearest futures equivalent of "insider dealing" .
Front running involves a broker/dealer using his control over a customer's order to deal ahead of that order for his own benefit.
If a customer places an order to buy with a price limit of 24, and the market is 22 and rising, the smart front runner buys at 22 or 23 and sells back to his own customer at 24.
Front running is not always easy to detect.
Instead of front running his customer the broker/dealer may pass the information about the customer's position to another trader, such as a local, who makes a profit and then splits the difference with the broker/dealer, or pays him back in some other way.
Or he may pass the information to a non-member of the exchange, who then deals through another broker or in the over-the-counter (OTC) market.
Pre-arranged trading
In other cases misconduct may not be aimed at a specific customer, but may impact on the integrity of the market as a whole.
In particular, it may prevent the market's price discovery mechanism operating as a genuine indicator of supply and demand, creating in turn a misleading impression of the value of a particular contract.
Pre-arranged trading is one of the main instances of this.
A trade that purports to have been executed in the exchange's competitive trading system is in fact pre-arranged by bilateral negotiation.
This may mean that, though the trade took place across the floor, it had been covertly agreed beforehand.
Consequently, other market members (and their customers) may not have had a proper opportunity to participate in the trade.
Moreover, the pre-arranged trade is reported and perhaps published as a competitively-determined transaction, when it is not in fact a genuine product of the competitive forces of supply and demand on the exchange.
In extreme cases this may involve a deliberate distortion of the exchange price, or a means to profit at the expense of customers, typically where the broker fills the customer's trade at a price that is worse than he could have obtained by competitive trading, in order to benefit another trader.
These are sometimes described as "accommodation trades" .
Wash trading
A pre-arranged trade can still be a commercial trade, in the sense that actual profit and loss is involved.
In the case of "wash trading" however, a trader carries out a pre-arranged trade which is essentially fictitious.
The trade is either with himself, or by arrangement with another trader, on the understanding that a matching trade or indemnity will "wash out" the first trade, eliminating any profit or loss as between the parties.
The normal commercial risk is thus completely avoided.
Wash trading is, of its nature, unlikely to affect individual customers directly.
But it does give a distorted picture of the level and nature of business in the market.
A false impression of this sort was at the heart of the London Fox property futures scandal.
SIB Guidance Release 1/93 discusses the concept of proper trades largely in terms of this distinction between wash and commercial trading.
Manipulation and distortion
 "Manipulation" can be described as conduct intended to distort the natural forces of supply and demand in order to create an artificial price.
A manipulator who has gone long seeks to force the price up; and to force the price down if he has sold short.
Methods of manipulation include the spreading of false rumours, or buying (or selling) at a price that is more (or less) than is commercially necessary.
Manipulation in the full sense generally requires actual intention on the part of those involved; in particular an intention to deceive.
In addition to anything in the exchange rules, the FSA created a criminal offence of manipulation, describing it as the creation of a false or misleading impression as to the state of the market.
In other circumstances the market may be "distorted" without any deceit or false or misleading impression being involved.
A trader may  cause a squeeze for bona fide trading reasons.
He may deliberately set out to corner the market, but do so by buying at legitimate market prices.
Or he may simply be taking a highly speculative position.
There may be no moral turpitude or manipulation as such.
A misleading impression may be unintended.
In 1991, in order to support the price of his company's shares, Robert Maxwell wrote a large put option in favour of his brokers.
This put a floor under the price that the brokers would obtain on liquidating their long positions.
They were thus encouraged to stay long when they might not otherwise have done so.
This was, on the face of it, legitimate.
However, the effect was not dissimilar to a wash trade, if we assume that the option writer was not acting for bona fide commercial motives, but solely to support the share price.
Nor, at that time, was there a mechanism by which the existence of the put option could generally be disclosed.
The London Stock Exchange has since introduced new rules which require an appropriate disclosure to be publically made.
In situations of this sort the exchange may need special rules, or even powers, which allow it to act for reasons of market integrity alone, and in order to preserve investor confidence, regardless of whether the parties involved are at fault.
Steps that can be taken include imposing a ceiling on further price rises, or on the opening of new positions, or on the price charged for rolling over a position.
Generally, UK exchanges intervene in the pricing mechanism only exceptionally.
They tend to avoid US-style controls for damping sudden speculative movements by closing down a market for a particular period.
This is at least partly influenced by the fact that, if the exchange closes, wholesale customers can often find the means to carry on trading amongst themselves.
Enforcement and discipline
The impact of general principles of fairness and natural justice on the exchange's affairs should not be overstated.
The courts are unlikely to want to second-guess the exchange on matters of policy or its approach to its functions; not least because the courts are rarely qualified to judge such issues.
Natural justice issues come more into prominence where disciplinary matters are concerned; particularly if they may affect the freedom of an individual member to do business in the market, or otherwise affect his livelihood.
The exact requirements of natural justice can vary depending on the particular situation.
For example, emergency action, such as the suspension of a firm from membership pending investigation, may be permissible without holding a formal hearing.
Generally, however, the normal considerations of fairness would be expected to apply.
The exchange should have a mechanism by which to enforce its members' compliance with the rules.
This means a disciplinary process and a scale of penalties that can be imposed.
A member is entitled to a judgment that is free from any extraneous or ulterior motive.
The role of judge cannot be left to the exchange prosecutors, but must be given to an independent adjudicator or tribunal.
The members of the tribunal should not have any other personal interest in the proceedings (though on an exchange that is of its nature run by practitioners, this requirement may not be treated as strictly as it would in an ordinary law court).
The member must be clearly informed what the charges against him are, including the facts on which the charges are based, and given a proper opportunity to answer them.
When the tribunal is making its decision, the prosecuting officials should not be present.
If the member is found guilty, he is entitled to make submissions on the question of any penalty.
As in other situations, the general duty not to act arbitrarily or capriciously will apply.
Thus, a judgment that discriminates against a specific member would probably be a decision no reasonable tribunal could have taken.
For example, the tribunal may have been motivated by resentment at a particular member's share of the market, or have suspended the member, not for bona fide reasons, but because of the opportunity it gave their firms to acquire some of the suspended member's customers.
However, this level of unreasonableness is hardly the norm, and even if it does exist would be difficult to prove.
A member who considers that such principles have been breached should be careful that he does not waive or condone the breach.
The mere fact that the member appeals should not in itself amount to a waiver.
However, a properly conducted appeal (on the facts and not merely on a point of law) would be capable of curing any defects in the original hearing.
Apart from natural justice principles, the exchange is free to establish its own disciplinary and arbitration procedures.
Although it is operating under contractual rules, it is not under any general obligation to follow High Court procedures, such as discovery or the strict rules of evidence.
Since an exchange's rules are a civil contract, the prosecution only needs to meet the civil law standard of proof.
This is balance of probability rather than the criminal law standard beyond reasonable doubt.
However, the seriousness of the charge is itself part of the circumstances that the court should taken into account in deciding if the standard of proof has been met.
Thus, if the charges are serious enough to merit expulsion or suspension, a high standard of proof will be needed.
Exchange and SRO disciplinary procedures are a hybrid between civil and criminal procedure.
This can cause some confusion, since there is as yet no clear standard as to how the hybrid should operate.
Rather, in order to meet the requirements of fairness, there is a tendency to work by analogy, sometimes from criminal procedure, sometimes from civil, and sometimes from specific forums such as arbitration or the industrial tribunal.
In view of all this it is perhaps not surprising that current practice often includes a system of settlement, under which the member is asked to admit some or all of the charges without a formal hearing.
Incentives to do this may include avoiding the costs of a full hearing, and an opportunity to agree the level of fine and the wording of any press notice.
Heavy reliance on settlement, however, does mean that if formal proceedings occur the procedures and conduct required may be unfamiliar to the parties and their advisors.