

Futures Clearing and Settlement in London
Peter Ottino
Futures and options
Any attempt to define a futures contract is likely to be unsatisfactory in some respect.
One need look no further than s 1a of the Commodity Exchange Act in the US and Sched 1 to the Financial Services Act 1986 in the UK (FSA), to find two very different monuments to the difficulty of the task.
There are two fundamental reasons for the difficulty.
One reason is simply that the futures industry has never been precise in its thinking on the question; indeed, it has never found a definition necessary for commercial purposes.
The other reason is that futures contracts are in a state of continuous evolution.
The bounds of what are perceived as futures are both blurred and expanding.
When, in the same context, we speak of an option, we are sure, generally of only one element—the right of the taker to exercise or abandon an option.
What results when the option is not exercised is not in any sense preordained, except by the terms of the option contract itself.
It is sufficient here to treat as a futures or option contract any contract whose terms contemplate future performance and which is made on or under the rules of a market cleared by a clearing house.
The clearing house: independence and evolution
In London all the recognised futures and options markets are cleared by one major clearing house, the London Clearing House Limited (LCH).
LCH is a company owned not, as one might think, by the futures market or by futures brokers and dealers, but (at the time of writing in 1993) by clearing banks.
Ownership of LCH is quite independent of the markets and it deals with the markets on a commercial basis.
LCH was incorporated as a company in 1888 and has been  providing market services continuously for more than a century.
Its relationship with the markets has throughout that time been one of independence, and the clearing procedure has evolved over the years.
In 1988 LCH undertook a major review of its clearing system.
It did this partly in support of its application that year for statutory recognition as a clearing house, and partly in response to developments in insolvency law.
This chapter examines a number of legal aspects and incidents of the present clearing operation.
Statutory recognition
LCH is recognised as a clearing house under s 39 of the FSA.
As such it is exempted from the need to be an authorised person in respect of its investment clearing services.
It is obliged, on pain of losing recognition, to provide clearing services "which would enable a recognised investment exchange to make arrangements with it that satisfy the requirements of Schedule 4 to this Act" .
Those arrangements are required by Sched 4 to be clearing arrangements by means of which an exchange may "ensure" the performance of transactions effected on the exchange.
This statutory concept of ensuring performance underlies LCH's current regulations.
It replaces a former scheme under which LCH purported to guarantee the fulfilment of contracts.
In some respects that was a real, though limited, guarantee.
Now, it is by becoming and remaining the counterparty to contracts that LCH ensures performance by its own commercial strength and integrity, under the supervision of the Securities and Investments Board (SIB), the regulatory agency under the 1986 Act.
Membership
LCH is a company limited by shares, so, in the strictest sense, its members are the holders of those shares, ultimately the clearing banks.
Its articles of association do not use the term "member" in any other sense.
However, these shareholders are not the persons generally meant when one speaks of membership of the clearing house.
One is referring then to those brokers, dealers and traders who are permitted by LCH to submit contracts for registration and clearing in their own name.
In the regulations and procedures of LCH, these brokers, dealers and traders are called "members" , yet they are clearly not members of LCH the company.
They are members instead of a clearing house, the London Clearing House, owned and managed exclusively by LCH and under whose regulations the members enjoy certain rights from, and owe certain obligations to, LCH.
They may be described as clearing members, or members of the clearing house administered by LCH.
In addition to his rights and obligations under the regulations, each clearing member is party to a standard bilateral clearing agreement with LCH.
It will be apparent from this that in the event of LCH's liquidation the clearing members would rank not as members but as creditors or debtors.
There is another concept of membership—market membership of a futures and options market.
Market membership is not an absolutely necessary qualification for clearing membership of LCH, though virtually all clearing members are in fact members of one or more markets.
On the other hand clearing membership is a necessary qualification for certain trading rights on the markets.
Until recently this was a simple proposition.
To be entitled to trade on the floor of a market by the process of open outcry one had to be a clearing member, a natural enough requirement bearing in mind that all contracts made on the floor had to be registered with LCH.
In recent years the practice has developed, on the initiative of the financial futures market, of allowing members onto the floor who are not themselves clearing members.
Instead, such a member may enter into a clearing agreement with a clearing member whereunder all contracts made on the floor by the non-clearer are registered with LCH in the name of the clearing member.
So the invariable requirement now is that a market member trading on the market floor or its equivalent (eg an automated trading system) is required by market rules either to be a clearing member or to have a clearing agreement with a clearing member.
Further, LCH has in recent years agreed with most, if not all, of the London markets that it will only accept contracts for registration from clearing members who are members of the relevant market.3 A financial futures contract will be registered only if the clearing members in whose names it is submitted are members of the financial futures market.
There is therefore little or no scope for the clearing member who is not also a market member.
All market members trading on the floor, and thus most clearing members, are also authorised persons under s 7 (authorisation by membership of a self-regulating organisation) or, in one or two cases, s 25 (authorisation by SIB) of the FSA.
The majority of those authorised under s 7 are members of the Securities and Futures Authority Limited (SFA), and are bound by its regulatory rules.
LCH clearing member agreements
As mentioned above, each clearing member is party to a bilateral clearing agreement with LCH.
The agreement declares that the member is admitted to clearing membership; this requires the member to notify LCH of such events as a petition for liquidation, loss of authorisation under the 1986 Act, the imposition of any disciplinary measure by a regulatory authority or a change of control of the member.
It requires the member to enter all registered contracts as principal and not as agent, and provides that LCH will register such contracts in accordance with its regulations and keep a record of them for six years.
It also provides for the termination of clearing membership and other usual matters.
LCH general regulations
The regulations of LCH, the General Regulations for London Markets, directly govern the registration and clearing of contracts.
As noted above, the regulations were substantially revised in 1988.
The following are their main provisions, resting on the proposition that when a contract is registered with LCH, LCH becomes counterparty to it.
Obligations of LCH
In respect of a registered contract the obligations of LCH are declared to be, as counterparty, to perform the contract as principal in accordance with the regulations, but subject to certain specified restrictions.
LCH is to perform such obligations "so as to ensure the performance of all open contracts in accordance with these regulations" (reg 1), a clear echo of Sched 4 to the 1986 Act.4 It is added, to put beyond doubt what has always been LCH's position, that the benefit of LCH's performance is conferred upon clearing members as principals "and upon no other persons whatsoever" .
Thus the client of a clearing member has no contractual rights against LCH.
Novation
Upon registration of a contract by LCH: "such contract shall be replaced by novation…novation occurs when, with all the parties' consent a new contract is substituted for one that has already been made…by two open contracts, one between the seller and the Clearing House as buyer, as principals to such contract, and one between the buyer and the Clearing House as seller, as principals to such contract." 
This is the means by which LCH becomes the exclusive counterparty to both seller and buyer in respect of a contract made between them on the market.
Accounts
LCH may open any number of accounts in a clearing member's name, and the member may designate one or more of them as client accounts.
The balance on a client account may not be set off against a sum owed to LCH on any other kind of account.
This provision against set off enables clearing members to comply with reg 3.04 of the Financial Services (Client Money)(Supplementary) Regulations 1991,5 which requires the opening of a client transaction account6 (money credited to which must be segregated) with every exchange or clearing house with which a futures broker authorised under the 1986 Act registers client transactions.
Presentation of contracts
Particulars of every contract to be registered must be presented to LCH "by or on behalf of" the clearing member making the contract on the market or the clearing member with whom the market member has a clearing agreement (reg 6).
In practice the particulars are in most cases presented to LCH by the futures exchange, on whose market the contract is made, on behalf of the clearing member by an electronic trade registration or clearing processing system.
The particulars must also be confirmed by or on behalf of the clearing member, and again this is usually done for him by the exchange's electronic system.
The clearing member must designate whether the contract is for his client account or another account with LCH.
If no designation is made LCH may determine the question itself.
Registration of contracts
When particulars have been presented and confirmed on behalf of both seller and buyer, and subject to the payment of initial and variation margin, LCH will register the contract.
By novation under the regulations, as explained above, the contract will thereupon be replaced by two separate contracts, to each of which LCH will be party as principal.
It is those contracts that will remain on the register.
The original contracting parties no longer have privity with each other.
Cover and margin
LCH has discretion under reg 12 to require a clearing member "to furnish it with cover" in respect of all contracts for the time being registered in his name.
Cover is simply an amount of cash or other acceptable security for performance of the member's contractual obligations.
Additional cover may be demanded by LCH from time to time in respect of initial or variation margin, as new contracts are presented by the member for registration, as the market price moves in relation to subsisting open contracts or when something occurs that might affect the member's performance.
The cover most readily acceptable to LCH in place of cash is a banker's guarantee, but a fixed charge of certain securities will also be accepted on standard terms stipulated by LCH.
Such a charge is not registrable against the clearing member under s 395 of the Companies Act 1985.
So far as cash is concerned, LCH relies on a right of set off, following the view upheld in Re Charge Card Services Ltd that a mere deposit of cash by way of security is not a charge.
Daily settlement and revaluation
LCH has authority under reg 15A to "effect the settlement or revaluation of open contracts…in accordance with a clearing processing system" adopted by the relevant exchange.
A clearing processing system has been adopted by each exchange for which LCH clears, except the metal exchange.
Settlement is effected under such a system at the end of each business day.
The contract price of each of a clearing member's open (ie, unsettled) contracts is altered by reference to the day's official closing quotation on the market, and the resulting excess or deficit of margin is accounted for the following morning between the member and LCH.
In this way, reflecting movements in market prices, a clearing member's net profits will accrue and be paid or credited to him daily, and his net losses will  accrue and be payable by him to LCH daily.
This process is known as marking to market.
At the same time, where a member has opted for a method known as settlement to market, all matching sale and purchase contracts are netted off and resulting gains and losses accounted for, leaving in the member's account with LCH the following morning only a net long or short position in respect of each commodity or instrument for each delivery month.
In contrast to other commodities, metal futures contracts remain open at their original prices until their respective prompt dates.
There is no daily settlement.
At a prompt date, a member's matching open contracts for that date (where he has not indicated an intention to make or take delivery of metal) are automatically settled against one another by LCH and the resulting price differences are posted to his account.
Obligation to make and accept tender
A contract settled by one of these processes is thereby fully discharged.
A contract remaining open (ie, not settled) after the cessation of trading in respect of the delivery month or prompt date, falls to be performed by the clearing member and LCH according to its terms.
The terms of most commodity futures contracts in London (eg, those for cocoa, copper and gas oil) and many financial futures contracts (eg, those for long gilts and German government bonds) provide for delivery of the commodity or instrument in a specified month or, in the case of metals, on a specified day.
They lay down the procedure by which delivery is to be made.
Some contracts provide instead for performance without delivery, generally by payment of differences by reference to a published price or index.
Examples are the crude oil and FT-SE stock index futures.10 The LCH regulations simply require members and LCH to fulfil their obligations under such contracts according to their terms.
With regard to contracts for delivery the regulations are more explicit.
Regulation 19 requires a member who is seller under a contract awaiting performance, to give a tender to LCH (the buyer) by the time specified in exchange rules and accompanied by such documents as my be required by those rules.
LCH is required, in turn, to give a tender to a member who is buyer under a contract awaiting performance.
The regulation provides further that LCH has no obligation to check a tender or documents received from a selling member, and that its act in passing the tender or documents to a buying  member is not to constitute acceptance.
Thus if the buying member properly rejects the tender or documents, LCH may in turn do the same and return them to the selling member.
The regulation also provides that any member who is buyer under an open contract for the current delivery month must accept LCH's tender and documents if they comply with the contract terms.
There are a number of additional provisions, some more complex than others, allowing tenders to be made against contracts which, though made on the market, have not yet been registered by LCH; and providing for unusual contracts under which delivery has to be initiated by the buyer.
Regulation 20 deals with payment against delivery.
Briefly it provides that this must be done in accordance with the contract terms.
It adds that a tender and documents given by LCH to a buying member are deemed to comply with the contract terms unless the buyer notifies LCH to the contrary by 10 am the next day, in default of which he must pay for them.
On receiving notice from the buyer that the tender or documents do not comply, LCH may promptly notify the selling member to similar effect.
Delivery and payment
Although LCH is a principal party, buying as such from the selling member and selling as such to the buying member, reg 21 entitles it to direct the selling member to make delivery to a buying member appointed by LCH and to direct such buying member to pay the contract price to the selling member.
Performance in accordance with such directions constitutes due performance by LCH.
LCH may thus avoid direct involvement in the handling of financial instruments and commodities, though in some cases, notably the gilt financial futures and other government bond contracts, LCH does receive and make delivery itself.
Restrictions on liability
Regulation 22 declares that LCH will have no liability in respect of a tender, documents or delivery, or any matter arising under a contract, unless:(1) The member claiming against LCH gives notice of his claim by 5 pm in the afternoon of the seventh business day after that on which documents are to be taken up and paid for by the buyer; and  (2) That member refers any dispute to arbitration under the market rules and an award is made in his favour.
Arbitration
If such a claim is referred to arbitration, LCH will of course be the respondent.
It will normally make an identical claim against the other member with whom it dealt—ie, against the selling member if, as one might perhaps expect, the claim against LCH is made by a buying member—and it will refer that claim to arbitration.
In such a situation a serious risk might arise that two arbitration tribunals could make contrary findings, but that risk is disposed of by a remarkable provision in reg 23 allowing LCH to call for consolidation of the two arbitrations.
The procedure is that: LCH gives notice of its decision to consolidate to the relevant exchange, the selling member and the buying member; the seller is charged with the conduct of LCH's case against the buyer; and the buyer is charged with LCH's case against the seller; copies of all pleadings being supplied to LCH and LCH retaining the right to submit its own arguments to the arbitrators.
The arbitrators are required to issue two awards, one between seller and LCH, and one between buyer and LCH.
Other provisions
The LCH regulations contain a number of further provisions, including provision for the invoicing back of contracts in trade emergencies and cases of force majeure.
Provision is also made for the amendment of the regulations themselves by notice to exchanges and clearing members.
The regulations are governed by English law.
Disputes under them are to be referred to arbitration, where contracts made on a particular exchange are in issue, and otherwise to the English courts.
Default rules
The regulations are supplemented by LCH's Default Rules, a corpus of provisions having effect pursuant to s 156 of and Sched 21 to the Companies Act 1989.
As their name may suggest, the rules provide for what may happen in the event of a clearing member "appearing to the Clearing House to be unable, or to be likely to become unable, to meet his obligations in respect of one or more Contracts" .
Guidance is given for recognising the existence of such circumstances, including of course a member's breach of the LCH regulations.
In such circumstances LCH may take certain steps that appear to be best calculated to discharge the member's rights and liabilities under registered contracts and, upon such discharge, to certify two net sums: one the amount of the member's net resulting liability or entitlement in respect of client account contracts; and the other the amount of his net resulting liability or entitlement in respect of other registered contracts.
The steps that may be taken by LCH are extensive and diverse.
They include the compulsory closing-out or invoicing back of the defaulting member's contracts, the liquidation of his collateral security and the substitution of a settlement amount (to be determined by the relevant exchange) for the member's rights and liabilities in respect of an uncompleted delivery contract.
All are designed to convert pre-existing contractual rights and obligations to net monetary rights and obligations, which may be set off against one another to produce the net sums referred to above.
The default rules and their statutory background are extremely interesting.
Section 159 of the Companies Act 1989 expressly upholds their validity, and that of the LCH general regulations, notwithstanding any inconsistency with the general law on the distribution of assets in the event of insolvency.
Calculation of the net sums required by the rules cannot, therefore, be challenged on grounds of the public policy enunciated in British Eagle International Airlines Ltd v Compagnie Nationale Air France.13 Further, by s 164 of the same Act, the power of a clearing member's liquidator to disclaim onerous contracts is not available in respect of contracts registered with LCH; and by s 165 the provisions of insolvency law concerning transactions at an undervalue, preferences and transactions to defraud creditors are not available in respect of such contracts or dispositions made pursuant to them.
Other sections give appreciable protection to LCH with regard to collateral security in its hands: eg, s 175 removes from LCH the restrictions on enforcement of security which would otherwise apply, under the Insolvency Act 1986, in the event that a defaulting member's affairs were placed in the hands of an administrator; and s 177 allows collateral lodged with LCH to be realised and applied notwithstanding a prior equitable interest or right of which LCH did not have notice at the time the collateral was received.
At the time of writing these radical provisions of the 1989 Act have  not been tested by experience, but this is unlikely to remain the case for long.
Conclusion
Today, by its modern clearing system, LCH is not simply clearing other people's transactions, but is engaged directly and personally in futures and options trading, taking the counterpart to every registered contract—in effect every contract made on the market floor.
It is a principal seller and buyer of commodity and financial futures, and a principal granter and taker of commodity and financial options.
However, it trades on special terms, which this chapter has attempted to describe.
In those terms LCH seeks to preserve the neutrality of its position.
For every long contract to which it becomes party there is a matching short, for every dispute with a seller (though disputes are so rare as virtually never to occur) there will be an equal dispute with a buyer, and for every case of force majeure in delivery there will be an invoicing back from buyer to LCH and from LCH to seller.
This balance—this neutrality—is not carefully preserved simply for LCH's comfort and well-being.
It is fundamental to an effective and reliable clearing system.
Every clearing member and every exchange using LCH relies on the system's continued and uninterrupted functioning.
The system can function only so long as the financial stability of LCH's position is preserved so that the risks normally inherent in futures and options trading are effectively balanced.