

BUILDING A PROFITABLE PRACTICE
1 Business planning
The know-how needed by today's practising lawyer extends beyond legal know-how and skills, to business and managerial know-how.
The first part of this book therefore looks at the broader business objectives and implications of being involved in a personal injury practice.
Business planning, practice development, office systems and marketing are all reviewed.
With pressures on legal aid funding and lawyers' fees generally, cuts in eligibility, Legal Aid franchising, the Law Society's practice management standards and the Lord Chancellor's drive towards standard fees for civil legal aid work, there can be no more crucial time for personal injury lawyers to take a good look at the way they practise.
The insurance industry is also facing pressure to cut its costs.
Whichever side of the fence personal injury lawyers are on, it is now much harder to court and land personal injury work, and to make a profit out of it.
But although it is tough and likely to get tougher, there are still opportunities: these require a longer term, strategic approach to the practice, and considerable steps towards achieving greater efficiency and productivity.
Introduction
Planning is more important than a plan
Do not regard business planning as a quest for the right answers, since there may not be any.
The key is not so much to end up with the right plan as to engage in strategic thinking.
Planning is a process, and it need not necessarily result in a product.
In today's changing legal and economic climate, business focus should be on market position (not to be confused with market share) and differentiation, and a personal injury practice raises some fundamental issues that require strategic thought.
Do not let the reactive nature of contentious practice prevent the forward thinking that is necessary.
Put the status quo on trial
Thinking strategically requires you to acknowledge that what has worked before may not be successful in the future.
Don"t stifle new ideas with judgemental comments.
Challenge your assumptions.
Don"t expect the marketplace to buy what you want to deliver.
Instead, find out what your current and prospective clients want, and then recreate the firm to deliver it.
The practice of law is not what you want it to be, it is what your clients want it to be.
Look outside
Too many firms begin their planning by looking internally"indeed, some never look beyond internal issues.
In fact, the starting point is to look outside the firm, at the environment for personal injury practice, and at the trends and conditions that will affect future practice.
This process should not take more than three months.
(1) Identify your clients, their type, their location, the types of work you do for them, the amounts they spend with you on personal injury matters: look for trends or patterns that will help your future thinking.
How did they choose the firm (eg the reputation of the firm, of a practice area, or of a particular lawyer; personal association; referrals from current or former clients, or professional agencies)?
What are they looking for?
What do they think of the service they receive?
The best way of answering many of these questions, and others that follow, is to ask a cross-section of your clients and referral sources.
(2) Analyse your referral sources (eg former clients, Citizens' Advice Bureaux, local law centres, the local medical and health care profession), their background, effectiveness and future potential.
(3) Identify existing and potential markets or niches that offer opportunities to you (eg insurance defence, medical negligence, accidents at work (see Part III).
Examine relevant factors affecting those markets (eg the success and profitability of insurers; proposals for arbitration within the NHS; local employment trends) to estimate the potential volume of work for the future.
The opportunities will usually arise in some way from your existing client base, so make sure you do enough homework: it is not sufficient merely to wish, or to hope, that you can diversify  into a new area.
You need to understand the niche in depth.
For example, in maximum severity cases, defendants often used to ignore claims and hope that they would go away.
Now, driven by cost issues, they may take a more active stance, based on business considerations, and propose rehabilitation or care packages in order to reduce their potential exposure.
Such changes in practice will have an impact on plaintiff personal injury lawyers already acting or trying to act in maximum severity cases.
(4) Outline the services and expertise needed by each market (eg the ability to take a high volume of claims from a bulk work provider, familiarity with medical practice, specialist knowledge of health and safety regulations).
(5) Assess your significant competitors for the different types of work you undertake (or would like to undertake), their distinctive features, their market representation and legal specialisation.
Look inside
Having established from an external examination what your best business opportunities are likely to be, you can now look internally at your ability to capitalise on them.
This part of the process should be carried out in conjunction with the external assessment described in paragraph 1.2. (1) Assess your strongest and weakest areas of legal and market expertise.
Identify how you can build on the strengths and eliminate or improve the weaknesses.
(2) Study the profitability of your personal injury work over both the short term and long term.
Look at different lawyers, types of personal injury work and types of clients.
(3) Consider types of work currently undertaken by the firm that should not be (because of limited expertise, inadequate experience or cost); and consider types of work you are not currently undertaking that you should be.
(4) Consider individuals who are doing work that they should not be; and consider what work each member of the firm is capable of if properly trained and supervised.
What should your market position be?
With information obtained from the external and internal assessments, you are now able to identify the strategic issues that require debate among partners.
Force yourselves to address them: they will not go away, and they do not become any easier with the passage of time.
This part of the planning process should not take more than three months.
As you discuss strategy, address the following three dimensions.
What makes sense to clients?
(1) What market position should you adopt that makes sense to those who buy or may buy your services?(a) Should you adopt a niche approach to certain aspects of personal injury work (eg paraplegia, brain injuries, disaster litigation)?(b) Will plaintiff personal injury work preclude defendant or insurance defence work?
Will there be too many conflicts?(c) Will plaintiff personal injury work preclude other types of work you are or wish to be engaged in, such as corporate and commercial business?
It is generally difficult for litigation-dominated firms (whether plaintiff or defendant) to build corporate practices: differences of attitudes between parts of the client base, as well as different attitudes among lawyers and different economic considerations, all play their part.
Many litigation firms also suffer from the transactional"nature of their practice and find it difficult to build institutional, long-term relationships with clients even where this is possible, particularly where the practice is dependent on referrals from agencies such as Citizens' Advice Bureaux and law centres where staff changes make relationships difficult to build and maintain.
(2) Will conflicts like the following restrict you?(a) Conflicts of client interest (the traditional conflicts): in many firms with mixed practices, the partners' interest in maintaining work from insurers or corporate clients nearly always takes precedence over their interest in private plaintiffs.
(b) Business conflicts: if you represent too many clients of one  type (eg plaintiffs, insurers) or in one industry, you may find increasingly that clients of other types are reluctant to use you.
(c) Position conflicts: the position you take in one piece of litigation may be at odds with the position you want to take in a subsequent action (for example, in advancing the cause of a plaintiff you may adopt a position that puts you in difficulty with some defence clients who are less than impressed with the vigour with which you espouse the plaintiff's cause).
To the extent that conflicts exist, choices have to be made.
They should be decided in the context of the firm's overall strategic thinking and not left to be resolved ad hoc.
Future growth may well be constrained more by conflicts than by any other factor.
(3) Will there be cultural differences between clients?
The needs of private personal injury clients may be very different to those of insurers and corporate clients.
They think differently, have different economic needs and sources of finance, have different expectations of lawyers and may even dress differently.
Can you accommodate both cultures without offending either and without giving private clients (particularly) the feeling that they are paying for things that they do not want (eg plush meeting rooms)?
If you cannot accommodate them, stop talking about or expecting cross-selling—it simply cannot happen.
What makes sense to partners?
(1) Will there be cultural differences between lawyers in a mixed practice?
Plaintiff lawyers tend to be more the "lone ranger" types who focus on getting a result for their client.
Insurance defence lawyers, however, tend to concentrate more on the legal process and procedure.
Does each think that the real money is on the other side?
Do defence lawyers resent the media promotion of plaintiffs more than of defendants?
Do corporate and commercial lawyers understand litigators—particularly personal injury litigators?
Again, differences of internal culture can destroy all prospects of cross-selling. (2) Are there economic differences?
Emphasising profit-centre accounting, charge-out rates and chargeable hour comparisons  will create problems for firms that try to integrate personal injury work with other practice areas.
Increasing financial pressures also require personal injury practices to refine their economic assumptions.
This will usually mean encouraging greater leverage to allow the work to be performed profitably.
Leverage will come in the form of additional assistants and legal executives (with consequent training and partnership expectations that must be dealt with), and through better use of technology.
Profit-sharing systems may need to be changed to reflect differences, though if a firm is committed to a practice area it should not penalise those lawyers who pursue it.
How can you improve the delivery of legal services to clients?
One of the most challenging issues here is the staffing of work.
The economics and efficiency of a personal injury practice in the future will be determined by the people doing the work.
The work required to implement recommendations under this heading may take longer than the overall planning process.
Timetables for implementation should be established, setting out specific goals and actions that allow responsibility to be allocated and achievement monitored.
In addition, the firm should address:(a) practice area organisation (departmental structure, work allocation etc.);(b) communication and responsiveness;(c) timeliness and billing;(d) procedures (eg for case acceptance, conflict checking, initial client interviews, file opening, limitation dates, reminder systems, case management, instructing counsel, retaining experts, locating and dealing with witnesses, starting and defending actions, discovery, pre-trial procedures and trial preparation);(e) training, precedents and know-how;(f) quality management.
Always try to view your structure and procedures from the clients' perspectives.
For instance, does your "off-the-street" procedure for dealing with enquiries make the prospective clients feel wanted, well treated and leave them with an impression of an efficient, sympathetic firm capable of providing an expeditious service?
Staffing of work
Find the lowest level of competence
The most effective way of working is to delegate work down to the lowest competent level at which it can be handled.
Unless this happens, the time and expertise of senior people is often wasted doing things that can perfectly well be done by others; more senior or sophisticated tasks are not tackled; and the talent of more junior people is never sufficiently developed or groomed for senior and more challenging roles.
Failing to delegate is ultimately a recipe for professional stagnation.
It is also not the most cost-effective way to handle a matter.
The use of legal executives, paralegals and litigation support staff, as well as other partners or assistant solicitors, should be part of your staffing decision.
Bringing it all together
Build on practice areas
Strategic thinking should focus a practice area on the needs of its clients, what it does best (and why) and the flexibility it will need to respond to new opportunities.
It should result in a clear statement of that practice area's intended position in the marketplace and how it can differentiate itself from its competitors.
Its lawyers should also understand how to compete before they decide where to compete.
Conclusion
The planning process should be based on fact and analysis rather than partners' assumptions and personal agendas.
Each practice area strategy should also be consistent with the firm's overall strategy.
The strategy should guide the allocation of resources, the recruitment of lawyers, and investment in technology and other capital items.
Implementation should focus on clear goals, specific timetables, the allocation of responsibility and the expectation of accountability.
Depending on the size of the firm and its commitment, the entire process should take between three and six months.
2 Practice development
Introduction
Most high street practices will undertake a certain amount of personal injury litigation.
This can be doing running down actions for existing private clients or as an adjunct to one of their other areas of litigation.
Some practices may already have small departments, possibly of one partner and a fee earner, whose principal work is in the area of personal injury.
It is a valuable source of work for any practice and with statistics telling us that 80 per cent of people entitled to claim do not do so, there must be every possibility of expanding this area of work.
This section is concerned with how you can achieve that expansion.
Specialisation
There can be no better way to ensure a successful personal injury (PI) practice than by doing the work well; there is no better source of advertising than a satisfied client.
The ability to do this arises from the fee earners' specialist knowledge of the field, the aquisition and development of which must be the starting point for any firm wishing to increase its volume of personal injury work.
Specialisation can be developed and expanded in two ways: by recruiting a specialist or through staff development.
Recruiting specialists
Recruiting a specialist practitioner is often a less time-consuming and more successful exercise than starting from scratch with your existing staff.
The major legal recruiting agencies will all have people on their books who wish to move either firm or area and who may be able to offer you the immediate facility of calling yourselves specialists in a particular field.
When looking to recruit specialist practitioners be very wary of  claims that they will have a large client following that they can bring with them.
If moving area, clients, though seemingly supportive, can often find that travel and lack of personal contact prove substantial disincentives to remaining with the solicitor.
Existing employers and partners can also have a lot to say on this point and do not take kindly to large chunks of their work being removed by an exiting employee.
If recruiting a specialist practitioner, therefore, bear in mind that you will often have to carry him or her for a reasonable period until they have been able to build their workload up.
If you have not undertaken much personal injury litigation in your firm before, also ensure that a specialist secretary is employed by way of support.
Moving an otherwise redundant conveyancing secretary is not the answer, at least, not without paying proper attention to their training needs.
Staff development
We all need training and it is the key to starting or sharpening up your personal injury department.
How you train will depend very much on the area of the country in which you are practising.
If you are fortunate enough to be in one of the large metropolitan areas training will be available without the additional burden of travel.
If, as will often be the case, you are in a country area miles from London, Birmingham or Manchester, the cost of training can prove a severe burden on a practice.
This will also be at a time when the practitioner who is going through the training is not creating a lot by way of billable hours.
Accordingly, look out for College of Law courses which go round the country, and give good basic training and updates.
Some of the larger training establishments now run consortia, and it may be that you will have the opportunity to join a consortium and have some say in the training which is undertaken in your area.
Increasingly local Law Societies are either undertaking training or can be persuaded to do so, and bringing down an experienced personal injury practitioner or trainer from London may not seem too horrendous an idea if the local Law Society is funding and arranging it.
There are now two television and video training companies, both of whom offer personal injury training, which may have some attractions for the partners in your firm, as training can be done outside normal business hours.
Recruiting and training the right people
If you are seeking to create a specialism from within the firm it is necessary for the specialist to understand, have a feel for and, most particularly, want to do personal injury work.
If he or she does so, then they will take on their new role with enthusiasm, and will not shirk the training and self-discipline that is necessary to create a good personal injury lawyer.
Specialist practitioners need not just be solicitors.
Many legal executives and paralegals with no formal qualifications at all have acquired a wealth of experience in personal injury work over the years.
As long as you have solicitors who can be admitted to the Personal Injury Panel or who can apply to take a Legal Aid Board franchise, there is no reason why they should not have experienced legal executives working under their control.
There is also a wealth of specialists in other fields who can be very helpful to a PI practitioner.
If you do medical negligence work the employment of a nurse, perhaps only on a part-time basis, can save hours of wasted time and be very cost effective.
Someone who can understand and collate medical notes is worth their weight in gold.
Someone with accountancy training can be extremely helpful in the preparation of Schedules of Special Damages and if your department is large enough to need some form of dedicated management, this can often best be provided by someone from outside the law as solicitors do not make the best managers.
When organising training do not forget your support staff.
The work of the secretary has been revolutionised by the advent of the word processor and secretaries are now far more able to take on a more substantial support role.
Though there is always the danger of a little knowledge being a dangerous thing, some time and money on training your secretaries in basic personal injury principles will be well spent.
Identifying areas of work
In deciding in which areas you will actively seek to expand your personal injury practice, you need to be aware of three things; your capacity to offer a service, the local market for personal injury services and the competition to offer those services.
If there are already  five or six firms of solicitors in your town with well-established reputations for traffic work it might not be the best idea to pursue that when trying to increase your market share.
However, if there are no firms which are dealing with employment-related claims, then that is an area well worth targeting.
How do you find out what everyone else is doing?
Lawyers often love to tell you about how good they are.
It is not difficult to tell from casual chat at court who does what and after dealing with a few claims you soon get to know who is on the other side acting for the insurance companies.
Keeping your eye on court lists can also tell you something about the firms appearing and if a firm consistently acts for the plaintiff against health authorities you can be fairly sure that their specialism lies in medical negligence.
Similarly, if a firm's name keeps on appearing on behalf of plaintiffs against major local factories, you can be fairly sure that they are retained on behalf of a union.
It does not do any harm to have a look and see what firms say about themselves in the various directories, including The Legal 500, The Chambers Directory of Solicitors and Barristers and The Law Society Directory.
A word with your local Citizens' Advice Bureau manager may well give you an idea who is doing what and whom they would recommend.
Getting the work in
Introduction
Having worked out what you are going to do and being satisfied that you can do the work as well, if not better, than everyone else, how do the public get to find out about you so that you can start putting your specialism into practice?
Advertising
Solicitors are now entitled to advertise and many do so regularly.
You are now entitled to call yourself a specialist as long as you can justify the use of that term.
As long as any advert does not bring the profession into disrepute nor is in bad taste then it is permissible.
Advertising has a distinct place in the marketing of personal injury work.
There are many occasions when you will have a specific type of claim which you wish to promote.
Recent examples where advertising proved worth while are the Benzodiazepine claims and the Myodil litigation.
Local newspapers are widely read and relatively cheap to advertise in.
Deals are always there to be struck, especially with new advertisers, and a regular though small advertisement will gradually establish your name in the minds of people locally.
Local radio should also be considered.
It is widely listened to and remarkably cheap, with an impact that is greater than can often be obtained in newspapers.
There can be very good discounts for new advertisers and, you never know, it may also lead to your being able to contribute to other programmes on an editorial basis.
If the work you wish to attract is private client based and emanating from normal households, do not forget the possibility of a mail drop.
It is possible to blitz whole areas of a town at relatively small cost in this fashion.
Some newsagents will agree for a small fee to do a mail drop with the daily or evening papers.
Alternatively, many charities or bodies such as the Scouts will be delighted to deliver through every letter box in the area for you at a very modest fee.
It does not take the profit on many claims created by this to make it a very worthwhile exercise.
Articles
What is even better than placing advertising is to be regarded by the local media as an expert and called upon to contribute editorial, either to the newspapers or to radio programmes.
Your local Law Society may well have a public relations officer, and it would be as well to speak to him or her before you embark on contacting the media and putting yourself forward as a specialist.
There is always the risk that you will be treated as a spokesperson on behalf of lawyers generally and this may not be taken too kindly by your colleagues.
However, the preparation of regular news releases circulated to the editor of your local paper and the newsroom or programme editor of your local radio may well get you into print.
The knack is to have an item of news and not a self-congratulatory comment about you or your practice.
However, something on new or developing areas of law, specific cases (if your clients agree and you believe that it may  help them) and items of genuine local interest can all bring you to the attention of the editors.
Being called upon by the media as an expert, either in print or in a programme which it is obvious you have not paid for, lends far more credence to your comments than if it is obvious you have paid to have them put in—
Personal injury brochure
When the public respond to your advertisements or because they have heard that you do personal injury work, it is not enough just to tell them that you do and expect them to come into the office.
Many clients like to shop around before they commit themselves to a solicitor and like to feel that they can find something out about you before they are committed to the payment of fees.
Never underestimate how terrified many people are when faced with the prospect of going into a solicitors' office.
Your firm may already have a brochure which gives details about how the firm works, its personnel and hopefully its charging rates.
It does no harm at all to have a specialist brochure dealing with personal injury work, addressing the common questions which clients ask about Legal Aid, recovery of costs, length of time the case is likely to take to proceed and the great unknown for the public, what constitutes damages.
The more information they have about you before they come through the door, the more comfortable they will feel about that process.
You may find your firm's response to the suggestion of printing another brochure is an immediate "We can" t afford it".
Something which is professional and informative, however, does not need to be glitzy and much of the cost in preparing a brochure is in unnecessary glamour.
So, before your idea is rejected, find out how much it is likely to cost, if necessary by one of the high street printing chains.
You will probably find you are very surprised by how little that cost may be.
(For an example of the sort of materials that can be produced without undue expense see Chapter 5.)
ALAS
The Law Society's Accident Legal Advice Service (ALAS) started some years ago as a way of promoting personal injury work.
Relaunched on a regular basis, its intention is to bring to the public's attention the fact that many who would otherwise have valid personal injury cl aims never proceed with them.
The only down side for the solicitor is that you have to give a free half-hour interview to anyone coming to see you under the scheme, though most firms of solicitors nowadays will give this service in any event.
You can join by contacting the Law Society in London, and from time to time the Law Society arranges national media campaigns and an annual insertion in the local Yellow Pages to which you can subscribe.
You can identify yourself as an ALAS member and advertise the fact that under the scheme you offer a free interview.
At times when there is a national advertising campaign and the Law Society is sending out leaflets, they are returned with requests for advice to a local co-ordinator who then allocates the work around local ALAS members.
There is no better way to make the public feel comfortable than offering free initial advice.
Citizens' Advice Bureau and other advice agencies
Many would-be claimants are so afraid of going into solicitors' offices that they try the local Citizens' Advice Bureau (CAB) first.
Though bureau managers are not permitted to favour any particular firm of solicitors, they are often able to recommend a number from which the client can make a choice, or if there is a firm offering a specialism which nobody else does there is no reason why they should not point this out.
Depending upon the size of your area and the arrangements with the local CAB they will sometimes carry brochures and it is worth asking if you can leave your specialist personal injury literature.
Make sure that you contact your local manager and explain what it is you can do.
Often they will want to be able to telephone solicitors when somebody in the CAB has a problem they need help with.
Nine times out of ten you will not be paid for this advice, but do take the call and deal with it because it rapidly establishes your credibility with the CAB and will prove fruitful in the future.
Many bureaux rely upon local solicitors to give free advice sessions at the CAB on a monthly or bi-monthly basis.
If your bureau does this it is no bad idea to volunteer to be included on the rota.
The same holds true for all the other advice agencies in your area.
Most law centres will seek to refer on any personal injury work and  you should make sure that the advisers know who you are and think well of you.
A busy advice centre can be a valuable source of work and should be cultivated in the same way as an important client.
Community health councils
If your specialism veers more towards medical negligence work, each area has a community health council, the secretary of which will keep a record of solicitors in the area who deal with that sort of work.
Again, they are prevented from recommending any particular firm, but many will allow you to put a brief piece in their list of referral solicitors saying what your particular area of work is.
The details of your local council will be in the telephone directory and the secretary should be able to assist.
Doctors and hospitals
If you have a friendly GP or know somebody at your hospital ask them whether they would be prepared to carry a poster or your brochures advertising your personal injury work.
Some hospitals and doctors are very happy to do this, and there are some hospitals which even have a firm of solicitors within the hospital itself.
Hospital advertising is popular and getting ever more sophisticated so you need to find out what is on offer and who is using it.
It is worth remembering that nursing staff can be very influential in making recommendations.
Some local Law Societies negotiate a protocol for such advertising with the local doctors and it may be sensible to speak to your local Law Society secretary before you embark on any enquiries.
Solicitors
A large but untapped source of work lies within the profession itself.
If you know you do something which other solicitors cannot, then there is absolutely no harm in telling them and inviting them to recommend clients with that problem to come and see you.
You need to establish trust with solicitors which means that you never poach the client, and it is possible to prepare and sign a protocol to that  effect.
Liverpool Law Society have introduced an inter-firm referral scheme.
Trade unions, AA, RAC
These three sources of work are bulk providers with well-established lawyers in most centres of population.
Trade unions will be placing with their lawyers a large amount of employment-related personal injury work and the lawyers already doing that work will be highly specialised.
However, that does not mean that the union will not wish to spread the work more widely around, nor that it is entirely happy with the service it is already receiving.
It should be possible with a reasonable amount of investigation to find out who the local trade union officials are and who it is who is responsible for the placement of work.
There is never anything to lose by asking whether or not they would be interested in putting some of the work your way, especially if you have acquired an expertise that will be useful to them.
The AA and RAC will be dealing with claims emanating from road traffic accidents.
Both motoring organisations provide a personal injury service.
The AA tends to provide this through one major firm of solicitors which then instructs others around the country on an agency basis.
The RAC tends to have local firms dealing with their matters and can always be approached as stated above to see if they are prepared to allow you some introductions.
These bulk providers of work, however, are not without their down side.
The fee basis for unsuccessful claims can often be extremely meagre as can profitability in general for a significant proportion of the work.
Also, heavy reliance upon one client is not without risk when building up a practice.
Legal expenses insurance
This is undoubtedly a burgeoning source of work for the fledgling personal injury practice.
An increasing number of car insurance policies include an uninsured loss recovery insurance, either free of charge or for payment of a small supplement.
Often this will only be  the recovery of an insurance excess where the accident was caused by the third party.
However, in many instances there will also be an element of damages for personal injuries of varying severity.
Though the down side of uninsured loss recovery work is undoubtedly the proscribed costs where there is no personal injury element, a commitment to computerisation can mitigate the effects of that on the practice while giving the personal injury department a substantial boost.
Though the leaders in the field will have appointed solicitors in the varying areas, almost all legal expenses policies include the right to your own solicitor and inevitably you will come across a legal expenses insurer during the course of your personal injury practice.
This is an opportunity to be built on when it occurs as the insurer's preference for its own panel members is bound to be an initial issue; at the same time as asserting the client's right to choose, panel membership can be discussed.
In any event many contracts for the provision of the service come up for regular renewal, giving you the chance to tender when they do.
Do not forget that many household policies now also include this insurance, as do the nationwide policies of some of the larger employers and organisations.
Where in the past unions used to pursue claims on behalf of employees, the decline in union membership has now often been replaced by an employee-based legal expenses insurance, offering a valuable source not only of work but also of funding.
Car hirers
The pursuance of damages through car hire schemes was held not to be champertous by the House of Lords in Sanders v Templar (Times Law Reports, 13 January 1993) and an increasing percentage of personal injury claims relating to motor accidents will come through this source in the future.
It is never too late to pursue this source of work, and it is an excellent example of a new and very wide area opening up and being ripe for the picking by the well-organised practice.
Panels
Specialist practitioners are obtaining membership of the Law Society's Personal Injuries Panel.
A Medical Negligence Panel is also  due to be set up in 1994 (see Appendix 2B for the Medical Negligence Panel criteria).
The Personal Injury Panel is administered by the Law Society at Chancery Lane and the membership fee is £254 (1993).
Admission is obtained by written application, proving that you fulfil the set criteria.
An appeals procedure to local committees provides for those who believe they may have been unfairly excluded.
It is likely that the panel requirements will be under regular scrutiny and in particular it is likely that there will be an increasing tendency towards ongoing monitoring of those who are panel members.
An early knowledge of the panel requirements is essential when starting up your personal injury department.
Even if you are not going to apply for a Legal Aid franchise, membership of the panel will be important for anyone putting themselves forward as a personal injury specialist (see Appendix 2A for the Personal Injury Panel criteria).
Legal Aid Board franchise
Despite the vulnerability of Legal Aid to government cut-backs it will still remain a very valuable source of funding for personal injury claims.
Whatever the government allows in due course by way of contingency arrangements which it intends to permit in the first instance in personal injury cases, it is unlikely to sweep away the need for Legal Aid.
Accordingly a detailed knowledge of the Legal Aid franchising requirements will also be required when setting up your department or when gearing it to expand.
Not only in this case will knowledge of the work itself be required, but the necessity for case management and monitoring will also need to be addressed (see further Chapter 3).
Only those who are able to demonstrate the two elements of ability to do the work and ability to manage their cases properly will get the franchise.
(See further, Winning a Franchise, Law Group UK, Longman.)
AVMA panel
The only group to have come close to this sort of vetting of its members is the charity Action for Victims of Medical Accidents (AVMA).
Set up by Arnold Simanowitz over ten years ago, the charity provides a support service for any lawyers who subscribe, in particular in the areas of recommending experts.
However, it also has its own panel to whom it recommends people wishing to pursue a medical negligence claim.
Admission to the panel comes by the provision of detailed case histories, together with supporting documents, showing that you are capable of doing the work, and that you do so in an efficient and proper manner.
For work that is referred there is ongoing case management control, demanding a three- or six-monthly update on progress.
If your interest lies in medical negligence work, being a panel member is obviously a way of increasing your market share.
It is also a very helpful discipline if you are considering applying in due course for a Legal Aid Board franchise.
It is anticipated that anyone who has been admitted already to the AVMA panel will either be automatically admitted to the Law Society Medical Negligence Panel or will certainly receive something by way of an exemption.
Appendix 2A—Personal Injury Panel criteria
1 Name of panel
Personal Injury Panel.
2 Scope of panel
To cover all work undertaken by solicitors arising out of any alleged act of negligence and/or breach of statutory duty as a result of which the victim has sustained personal injuries or fatal injuries.
3 Qualifications
(i) State those eligible to join the panel Solicitors and suitably qualified Fellows of the Institute of Legal Executives.
(ii) Is a practising certificate required?
Yes for solicitors.
(iii) Is there a minimum qualification period and, if so, how many years?
Three years.
4 Knowledge required
Areas of law
(i) Common Law of Negligence and Vicarious Liability.
(ii) Statutes concerned with liability.
(iii) Knowledge of the interrelationship between personal injury work and social security benefits.
(iv) The rules of insurance as they relate to personal injury work.
(v) The rules concerning limitation of actions.
(vi) Relevant European Community legislation.
(vii) Rules of the Supreme Court and County Court.
(viii) Claims arising from death.
Procedure
Familiarity with the Law Society's Civil Litigation Committee's Guide to Good Practice and other guidance (eg on medical reports and structured settlements) as published.
Ethical issues
(i) Use of expert witnesses, eg editing statements and leading questions.
(ii) Conflict, eg —acting for a client when previously acted for that client's employer who is a party to the proceedings.
—instructing an expert witness who was previously a client albeit in a matter totally unrelated.
—receiving opponent solicitors' papers by mistake.
—insurance company indicated they would be prepared to increase their offer if it was inadequate.
However, clients want to accept.
—acting for a driver and his/her passengers in connection with a road accident.
Professional skills
(i) General skills (as appropriate) Negotiation Interviewing Advising clients Drafting Advocacy Appraisal of issues Supervision (ii) Specialist skills Drafting of pleadings Investigation and other research Assessment of damages and calculation of interest Case management Utilising expert witnesses DSS claims/benefits procedure 
5 Experience
(i) Is the applicant required to have recent experience in this field?
If yes, state nature and extent of the experience required.
The following work carried out (or directly and actively supervised):(a) either at least 60 personal injury instructions in the 5 years prior to the application or at least 36 personal injury instructions in the 3 years prior to the application—in either case, no more than half of the instructions should be in medical negligence cases;(b) at least one personal injury case where the award or settlement was approved by the court because the plaintiff was under a disability, eg a child; and (c) at least ten cases set down and ready for trial, of which at least two must have involved a dispute over liability.
(ii) What provisions are there for applicants without the requisite experience?
If applicants are unable to comply with 5(i) then they may still be admitted to the panel if able to demonstrate a suitable level of experience.
(iii) Is advocacy experience required?
Not essential, but might be useful as demonstrating the applicant's experience.
6 Training
(i) Is the applicant required to attend a training course, and if so, how many?(a) The application form for panel membership will ask for details of training courses applicants have attended over the past two or three years.
This information will be used as background information and could be used to help decide whether or not other methods of assessment, such as an interview, are required.
(b) In some circumstances, individual solicitors may be required to attend a relevant training course as a condition of acceptance on to the panel.
(c) For reselection purposes Panel members will be expected to have undertaken appropriate training courses to update their knowledge, and to be in a position (eg by training records) to demonstrate this.
7 Transitional provisions
There are no transitional provisions.
All applicants qualify under the same criteria.
8 Methods of assessment
(i) Detailed questionnaire
A detailed questionnaire would enable some applicants to be approved or refused on the basis of the information supplied in the questionnaire leaving only borderline applicants requiring further assessment.
The questionnaire will test knowledge and experience as they are applied under the following headings:(1) Collecting the relevant evidence.
(2) Identifying the relevant issues.
(3) Assessing the prospects of success.
(4) Assessing quantum.
(5) Pursuing the case expeditiously. (6) Readiness to go to trial if need be.
(7) Client care.
(8) Review system.
(9) Cost effectiveness.
(10) Selection of and verifying sub-contractors. (11) After care and follow-up.
(12) Training.
(13) Supervision.
(14) Reference material.
The questionnaire will be divided into matters relating to the applicant personally and matters relating to the firm within which the applicant works.
(ii) Interviews
—conducted by the Casework Committee or specially selected interviewers in borderline cases.
—cover applicant's experience and knowledge.
(iii) File inspection
Applicants who are called for interview may be asked to supply a list  of files of particular types from which the Casework Committee can require them to produce samples for inspection.
It is the responsibility of the applicant to obtain the client's permission.
(iv) References
References may be requested in borderline cases.
9 Reselection
How often is reselection carried out and what are the criteria?
(i) Reselection is every five years for a further five year period:(a) If panel members are with the same firm they would be expected to supply details of relevant experience over the previous five years, and to have attended a number of updating courses, accumulating at least 20 continuing education points (or hours) from courses related to personal injury work.
(b) If the panel member is not with the same firm then reselection is by way of reapplication.
(ii) If the panel member moves to another firm during the five-year period of membership he/she would be required to undergo reselection (unless moving to a firm which is currently approved, ie already has a panel member).
Reselection would be for the balance of the original five-year term and on the basis of the new firm's details.
(iii) If the panel member's firm merges or splits during the five-year period of membership the member would be required to undergo reselection for the balance of the original five-year term.
Reselections would be on the basis of the reconstituted firm's details.
10 Personal undertaking
Is there a personal undertaking attached to this Panel?
No.
Practice Rule 15(2) (a) says, however, "Every solicitor in private practice shall, unless it is inappropriate in the circumstances ensure that clients know the name and status of the person responsible for the day to day conduct of the matter and the principal responsible for its overall supervision" .
Appendix 2B—Medical Negligence Panel criteria
1 Name of panel
Medical Negligence Panel.
2 Scope of panel
All work undertaken by solicitors and suitably qualified Fellows of the Institute of Legal Executives arising out of any act of negligence, breach of contract and/or breach of statutory duty as a result of which the victim has sustained injury in the course of medical care.
(The need for this panel is for victims.
Lawyers who act solely for defendants in medical negligence will have no need to be on the panel.
Those who act for both sides will still have to satisfy the selectors that they can conduct actions properly on behalf of patients.)
3 Qualifications
Those eligible to join the panel
Solicitors and suitably qualified Fellows of the Institute of Legal Executives.
Practising certificates
Required for solicitors.
Minimum qualification period
No qualification period is required as the other criteria cannot be fulfilled unless the applicant has been personally conducting cases for at least three years.
4 Knowledge required
Areas of law
(i) Common Law of Negligence and Vicarious Liability.
(ii) Statutes concerned with liability.
(iii) Knowledge of the interrelationship between personal injury work and social security benefits.
(iv) The rules concerning limitation of actions.
(v) Relevant European Community legislation.
(vi) Rules of the Supreme Court and County Court.
(vii) Claims arising from death.
Additional knowledge
(i) Structure of the NHS. (ii) Relevance of NHS (Crown) Indemnity.
(iii) Rules relating to complaints to hospitals, the Family Health Service Authority (FHSA), the General Medical Council (GMC) and the Health Service Commissioner.
(iv) Different considerations when dealing with private health care.
(v) Role of the medical defence bodies.
(vi) Role of the community health councils.
(vii) Professional rules of the medical profession.
(viii) Adequate medical knowledge to read medical records and know what should be there, to understand the implications of medical reports and assess their objectivity, and to assess the legal relevance of the medical issues of the case.
(ix) Knowledge of support agencies and their rules.
4.3 Procedure
(i) Pre-litigation—hospital complaints procedures, complaints to the FHSA, the Ombudsman and the GMC. (ii) The rules relating to inquests and the Court of Protection.
(iii) Legal Aid.
(iv) Special directions—exchange of medical reports, timetable, evidence of defendant doctor.
(v) Structured settlements.
(vi) The general procedure pertaining to civil litigation and personal injury litigation including a knowledge of the Green and White Books, and the Civil Litigation Committee's "Guide to Good Practice" .
Ethical issues
(i) Awareness of the ethical issues and problems arising in medical negligence litigation, particularly in relation to the disclosure of medical experts' opinions to their clients.
(ii) Awareness of the medical ethical code and the general professional relationships between members of the medical and nursing professions, as well as the delicate position of doctors who give expert evidence against their colleagues.
Professional skills
(i) General skills Relating to and handling clients who have suffered trauma Negotiation Interviewing Advising clients Drafting Advocacy Appraisal of issues
(ii) Specialist skills Drafting of pleadings Investigation and other research Assessment of damages and calculation of interest Case management Selecting and using expert witnesses
5 Experience
(i) An applicant should have a basic grounding in personal injury work as well as basic grounding in medical negligence work.
(ii) The applicant will need to have the following experience:(a) Personally run at least 36 medical negligence cases over the previous 3 years; and  (b) had at least three cases set down and ready for trial in the three years prior to panel application.
(iii) In (a) or (b) above the experience must include:(a) at least one case where the award or settlement was approved by the court because the plaintiff was under a disability; and either (b) at least two cases of maximum severity; or (c) at least four cases where the value of the claim exceeded £100,000.
(iv) If the applicant is unable to comply in full with (ii) or (iii) above then they would be expected to demonstrate a suitable level of competence and experience.
6 Training
(i) An applicant will have to have attended at least one major conference on medical negligence and one medical course for lawyers devoted specifically to enhancing the lawyers' understanding of medicine generally in the three years prior to the application.
(ii) In addition, the details of training courses applicants have attended over the previous three years will be used as background information and will be relevant to demonstrate interest in medical negligence litigation, commitment and willingness to learn.
They could be used to decide whether or not other methods of assessment, such as an interview, are required.
(iii) For reselection purposes panel members will be expected to have undertaken appropriate training courses to update their knowledge, and to be in a position (eg by training records) to demonstrate this.
(iv) In some circumstances, individual solicitors may be required to attend a relevant training course as a condition of acceptance onto the panel.
NB Lecturing, distance learning, Legal Network TV, etc will also be considered relevant.
7 Transitional provisions
There are no transitional provisions.
(The start-up of the Medical Negligence Panel should not pose the  same problems as for the Personal Injury Panel.
The speciality is much smaller and the leaders in the field are probably acknowledged by most if not all practising in the field.)
8 Methods of assessment
Application form
It is envisaged that the majority of applications would be decided on the application form alone.
This would not only be detailed but would require the submission of a number of "case report" forms relating to cases dealt with (but anonymised) which would demonstrate how the applicant had dealt with certain types of specified cases.
The questionnaire will be divided into matters relating to the applicant personally and matters relating to the firm within which the applicant works.
It will test knowledge and experience as they are applied under the following headings:(i) Client care.
(ii) Identifying the relevant issues.
(iii) Understanding of the medical issues.
(iv) Collecting the relevant evidence.
(v) Assessing the prospects of success.
(vi) Assessing quantum.
(vii) Pursuing the case expeditiously. (viii) Readiness to go to trial.
(ix) Review system.
(x) Cost effectiveness.
(xi) Selection of and verifying sub-contractors. (xii) Use of medical experts.
(xiii) Use of other agencies.
(xiv) Training.
(xv) Office support systems.
(xvi) Supervision.
(xvii) Reference material.
(xviii) After care and follow-up.
Interviews
Medical negligence is not only a new speciality but the nature of the work, touching as it does the breakdown of the special relationship  between patients and doctors as well as the trauma of the injury itself, means that lawyers dealing with the cases must have special experience and skills in handling clients in this field.
This can be crucial to the outcome of the case and the satisfaction of the client.
Sometimes this ability can be judged without interview but it is likely that a number of applicants will need to be interviewed.
In any event, applicants who are on the border insofar as technical skills and experience are concerned will be interviewed.
References
References may be sought from appropriate persons or bodies.
9 Reselection
(i) Reselection is every five years for a further five-year period:(a) If panel members are with the same firm they would be expected to demonstrate at least the same level of competence covering their experience, skills and knowledge as when they initially joined the panel, and to have attended a number of updating courses, accumulating at least 20 continuing education points (or hours) from courses related to medical negligence work.
(b) If the panel member is not with the same firm then reselection is by way of reapplication.
(ii) If the panel member moves to another firm during the five-year period of membership he/she would be required to undergo reselection (unless moving to a firm which is currently approved, ie already has a panel member).
Reselection would be for the balance of the original five-year term and on the basis of the new firm's details.
(iii) If the panel member's firm merges or splits during the five-year period of membership the member would be required to undergo reselection for the balance of the original five-year term.
Reselections would be on the basis of the new firm's details.
3 Office systems
Introduction
This chapter deals with office systems for personal injury work.
Particular emphasis has been placed on the Law Society's practice management standards, the Legal Aid Board's franchising specification and BS5750 which are referred to collectively as quality standards.
While the debate about "quality" continues it is anticipated that these standards are going to have an impact on all personal injury lawyers.
They are not prescriptive and it is open to you to implement them in the way that best suits your firm.
Differences of approach due to the size of firm are inevitable.
It is likely that you already have many systems in place, even if you do not identify them as quality systems.
All existing and new systems need to be documented.
Not all aspects of the quality standards belong in this chapter.
Strategic and personnel management, and many aspects of financial management are obvious exceptions.
Systems are relevant to how you run your office, not how you run your cases and there is little reference to the transaction criteria.
However there are many references to improved communication, greater interchangeability, efficiency and responsiveness to client needs.
In addition to reading the quality standards it is useful to refer to Best Practice, published by the Law Society and its current Office Manual (which is intended to be sufficient to enable small firms to comply with the practice management standard).
Case allocation
Introduction
There are various needs which have to be satisfied.
The firm
The firm needs to make a profit.
Legal Aid cases can be interim billed at specific times and rates.
Most billing on other cases is done at the  end of the case.
Personal injury cases take time to conclude because medical problems take time to resolve or to get to the stage where future prognosis is meaningful.
This gives work-in-progress figures that are likely to be higher than other areas of work and which need to be financed by the firm.
Cases need to be brought to a conclusion quickly within the limitation of the work type, and case allocation must be made with this in mind; overloading is not necessarily efficient or profitable.
The firm should also recognise the needs of their lawyers and their clients.
Unhappy lawyers mean low morale and higher staff turnover.
Unhappy clients are not a good advertisement for the firm.
The lawyer
Each lawyer needs a workload that is within their capacity.
This is a requirement of all quality standards.
Capacity relates both to the number and the type of case involved.
If either is unmanageable it will create stress and lead to mistakes and delays.
Billing targets become hard to achieve.
There does, however, need to be variety and stimulation within the caseload as part of the lawyer's ongoing career development, so the question of supervision will also be a factor in the decision.
The client
The client wants the case to be progressed efficiently and competently and, usually, as cheaply as possible.
A client also needs to establish a relationship with the lawyer and different members of staff will be most suitable to work with different clients.
Who should allocate?
New cases
These do not need to be allocated by one lawyer.
It is common for bulk work providers to have a lawyer assigned to them as a contact point.
This lawyer should also allocate the cases.
You will be obliged to progress a case until you have formed a view on liability whether or not it has been vetted by the work provider.
This does not apply to  one-off instructions, which should be vetted particularly when taking over the case from another firm.
One lawyer should allocate all one-off instructions, provided this is practical given the numbers involved.
This ensures the consistent application of vetting criteria.
The lawyer should ascertain the reasons why the client chose your firm and send an acknowledgement to recommending sources, if appropriate.
Monitoring caseloads
It is essential that one lawyer has an overview of the caseload of every personal injury lawyer.
Caseloads are contained in manual lists or on the computer which is accessed by printouts.
Review monthly or quarterly.
Keep archiving up to date so that the total number is not distorted.
Take account of short-term problems within total numbers such as a rash of trial dates.
Who gets the cases?
Levels of expertise
In a small firm the lawyers who do personal injury are readily identifiable.
In a larger firm the choice is greater.
You should establish experience and expertise by reference to the number of years the lawyer has done personal injury work and the type of cases they have handled.
Are they capable of handling the case alone or will they require significant supervision?
Ascertain what type of case each lawyer prefers and whether the lawyer has any interests outside work that assist.
If the obvious person to handle the case is busy will it be possible for them to delegate enough of the work for them to take it?
Consider the needs of the client and their importance to your firm.
Choose teams for bulk work providers that are large enough to include lawyers at different levels, and small enough for expertise and client contact to build up.
Capacity
At any given time the monitoring of caseloads is likely to show that some lawyers have capacity while others are overloaded.
A client  may well request a particular lawyer, but should not mind if the fact that there is a system for allocation is explained.
How many cases should a personal injury lawyer have?
There is no magic formula.
Between 275 and 325 is common for routine personal injury, jumping to 500 for uninsured loss recovery and dropping to 50–100 for medical negligence or catastrophic injury cases.
Multi-party cases are notoriously difficult to analyse as individual cases benefit from standardisation, but generic work can take up a whole caseload.
While views on numbers differ from firm to firm it is important to adopt guidelines within your firm that are reviewed at least once a year.
3.2.5 Transferring cases between lawyers If you have a team of lawyers then transferring cases is an immediate solution to an imbalance in numbers.
The disadvantages include unsettling the clients and duplication of work which is unrecoverable.
This solution should be used sparingly.
Transfers are inevitable when a lawyer leaves the firm.
The caseload does not need to go in its entirety to any replacing lawyer.
Examine each case.
If you have trainee solicitors doing personal injury cases then transfer every 6–12 months is inevitable.
Consider whether any cases need continuity and transfer these to a permanent member of the team.
A client may request a transfer, usually to a more senior lawyer.
Establish the reason for the request with the client and discuss this with the lawyer concerned.
Make sure that a transfer is the correct solution to the problem.
File management
Introduction
All quality standards place heavy emphasis on file management.
This concerns the stages a case goes through from initial instructions to its conclusion and the physical appearance of the file throughout that time.
There will always be room for individual styles, but file management systems inject some standardisation to  assist the lawyer conducting the cases and others who have to work on the case on a temporary or permanent basis.
This will occur in all firms.
File opening
You should not take on a case if you or your firm has a conflict of interest.
Quality standards require a system to identify any such conflict, but this is notoriously difficult to achieve.
If you have a computerised database or computerised accounting, search against the name of any potential defendant.
If cases are not computerised ensure that every department has a list of the firm's major clients which is kept in a secure place.
This will not detect all conflicts but it is a start.
Quality standards also require a case reference system.
This routinely takes the form of file numbers which are allocated centrally, by the accounts department, when the file is opened.
Different files for the same client are given linked numbers.
Keep a separate record on the computer, or manually, of the work type involved.
This should include codes to cover bulk work providers.
The Legal Aid Board will require you to identify all Legal Aid cases opened during the term of the franchising contract.
The file opening form can also deal with the source of the work, and statistics can be used for practice development and marketing.
Anatomy of a file
Use file labels to show the file number and client details, and essential information such as limitation and other vital dates, case progress and next step.
Within the file it is common to work in chronological or reverse chronological order within sections such as client correspondence, party and party, financial transactions and pleadings.
In complex cases have a strategy section that you can refer to at a glance which includes any plan of the case.
This can be used as the case plan for quality standards and therefore should be agreed with the client.
A large number of sections makes it easier to locate paperwork only if it is correctly filed.
Mark the correct destination of the section within the file on any loose filing.
Costs draftsmen indicate that taxing masters do not like sectioned files and will often reconstitute a file by putting all correspondence together if a file goes to taxation.
Undertakings are given from time to time in personal injury cases.
Quality standards require undertakings to be monitored and visible.
Ensure that every undertaking is approved by a partner and kept in a prominent place on the file such as the inside front cover.
This can also be used to locate checklists or review lists.
These can be designed to deal with taking the initial instructions, recording the requirements of the client and recording matters as the case progresses.
Sections and documents on a file must be maintained in an orderly manner.
If this is done then the status of the file and the action that has been taken can be easily verified by others.
Lever-arch files are useful for medical records, discovery documents and trial bundles, and can be embossed with your firm's logo.
Locating the file
Quality standards require documents and correspondence on a case to be properly stored and readily accessible.
Also, you should never waste time and money searching for files or papers.
Files are usually located in slings in filing cabinets.
If a file is not in its sling you need to be able to locate it, particularly if it is required for an audit.
When dictating tapes use a top sheet to name the files with the tape.
Ensure that files are replaced quickly after typing.
If the file is likely to be out of the sling for a long period put a note in the sling itself to show the new location.
File closing
Every file that is opened can have a completion list on the inside front cover that is checked before the file is closed.
This will have a list of common matters such as the need to account to the client for any outstanding monies, and arrangements for storage and retrieval of papers.
It will also have specific matters such as the need to return original documents and photographs, to record experts and quantum details on the appropriate registers and to extract useful documents for the library.
Adopt and record a firm-wide policy for storage dates which will usually be six years.
Remember to increase this for minor plaintiffs or in provisional damage claims.
Recording key dates
Recording system
Quality standards require you to record key dates.
In a personal injury action these are limitation, date of issue of writ (if it is not being served immediately) and the automatic striking out date (ASO).
None of the quality standards require the records to be computerised; manual recording by a secretary in a diary is adequate.
Whichever method is used the record is a central one.
Each lawyer may well record key dates on their own cases as backup.
You can also record the limitation date on the outside of the file or preferably as part of the file label.
This means that it also appears on any computer printouts that you receive.
The limitation date can, in due course, convert to an ASO date if the case is issued in the county court and eventually a disposal or provisional damages review date.
You need to be reminded of key dates in sufficient time to take the appropriate action.
Ensure that limitation and ASO reminders are produced three months before the deadline.
If you are manually recording in a diary a secretary should check the dates three months in advance on a daily basis.
Case management system
Many larger personal injury firms have augmented key date systems by generating reports at various intervals from the opening of a case (say after one, three, five, seven and ten years).
These forms are designed to deal with relevant issues at that stage of a case.
The secretary who dealt with the recording and reminders becomes the case manager.
The case manager passes the reports to the lawyer who completes them and passes them to a supervisor.
Every lawyer in the team is a supervisor for another lawyer and is in turn supervised, although not by the same lawyer.
A supervisor can request a file after reading the form.
All manner of steps can be built into the system, such as requiring permission for issue, settling or discontinuance.
Quantum and costs information can be collected on specially designed forms.
Starting this system with cases that are at different stages is time consuming and it is a suitable task for a student to perform during a summer holiday.
File reviews
Review by the lawyer handling the file
Reviews are a necessary part of the conduct of the case.
If you review cases manually date-stamp the outside of the file cover every time a review takes place.
You can then go through the filing cabinets to locate the files that have not been stamped within a given period.
If the files are on computer then the printout should indicate the time that has elapsed since the last time entry on the file.
Again, files that have not been worked on in a given period can be selected.
All the quality standards require arrangements for files to be reviewed by a lawyer who has not been involved in the day-to-day conduct of the case.
This is partially achieved by the case management system referred to previously.
Consider reviewing computer printouts or lists of cases with another lawyer.
Inspection of all of the files is time consuming and it will take the inspecting lawyer a couple of days to review an average caseload.
You could choose to inspect a sample of cases that are chosen by the inspecting lawyer.
The franchising proposals indicate that where there is only one lawyer the board will seek evidence that files are being reviewed on a regular and objective basis by that lawyer.
All reviews need to be recorded on the file and centrally for future reference and particularly for file audits.
Review by another lawyer
File audits
Quality standards are monitored by internal and external auditors.
Their role is not to review the work on the files, but to assess whether the files comply with quality standards.
Adopt and record a written plan for undertaking internal reviews which states the frequency of reviews.
Six months would be appropriate.
Keep a written record of the outcome of internal reviews so that you can target problem areas and then assess the effectiveness of any corrective action taken.
For external audits identify someone within your firm who can act as a contact point and be present throughout the audit.
These normally take one or two days and you will usually get notice of the inspections in order to alert your team.
Problem cases
File reviews identify problem cases which must then be tackled.
Some problems cannot be solved by the fee earner responsible, either because of a specific difficulty or because of a general mental block.
Consider allowing every lawyer to exchange one case per year.
This provides a fresh approach and a challenge to the lawyer who inherits the case.
Hold team meetings to discuss problems with information provided in advance.
There must be no criticism, only constructive proposals.
Problem cases are often resolved by talking to other lawyers inside or outside your firm.
Make contact through APIL special interest groups and local Law Society litigation groups.
Consider taking counsel's advice.
By the time you have dictated the brief and asked the relevant questions you will have started to form some idea of the answers.
When you actually tackle the problem case it will not be as bad as you had thought.
Updating and research
Know-how files
There should be a simple, well-organised system for collecting and updating useful information to which everybody in the firm can contribute.
One person should be responsible for collecting newspaper law reports and case summaries.
In addition all newspapers carry articles of interest such as stories on medical developments, health and safety, the environment and transport.
Order a selection of non-tabloid newspapers for weekdays and the weekend.
A member of your support staff can then go through the newspapers extracting cuttings on a daily basis.
You should provide them with a list of topics of general interest and also a list of any specific cases in which the firm is involved.
The cuttings can then be vetted by a lawyer.
Cuttings of general interest can be stored under different categories in box files.
Cuttings that should come to everybody's attention quickly can be pinned to the library noticeboard or contained in a monthly newsletter.
Published material
Members of the Law Society will receive the Gazette.
You should also subscribe to some general journals such as the Solicitor's Journal, some litigation journals such as the Litigation Letter and Supreme Court News, and some personal injury journals such as the Personal and Medical Injuries Law Letter, Quantum and the APIL Newsletter.
References to relevant articles can be contained within your newsletter if you have one.
It is possible to subscribe to an updating service, but adopting your own scheme is perfectly adequate and is not expensive.
Newsletter
If there are more than a handful of lawyers doing personal injury work get a member of the support staff to compile and distribute a monthly newsletter.
This will include newspaper cuttings and the references referred to above, although taking care not to breach copyright laws.
It can also include information that any lawyer wants to share with the rest of the team.
This avoids copious memos which may not be easy to trace in the future.
Do not go too narrow in your scope because many litigation matters affect personal injury.
If there are a small number of personal injury lawyers in your firm then consider a newsletter that covers several areas of law such as other litigation matters.
Library
Purchasing
Operate a central purchasing service for books through a librarian or a member of your support staff.
That person will have contacts with library services and publishers, and will be able to negotiate discounts and obtain books on approval.
They will also receive publishers' lists and can send details of any interesting books to the appropriate lawyers.
Contents
Your personal injury library may be housed in a large library or in a separate section near to the personal injury lawyers.
Do not store the library in an individual lawyer's room.
It should contain law reports, books on personal injury, journals, box files of the newspaper cuttings and videos.
Create lever-arch files with in-house material  on subjects such as costs, structured settlements and fatal cases.
Make sure that people attending outside courses contribute their lecture material.
Put a noticeboard by the library.
Use it for newspaper clippings and to announce new additions, local Practice Directions and lists of the timetable for judges sitting locally.
You should be able to join any nearby public library free of charge.
Consider joining the local Law Society's library depending on the fee which is often determined by the size of the firm.
Consider how you can best get access to any local university library for specialist journals.
(See the appendix for a list of useful books and journals.)
Operation
Wherever there is a library there should be a full library list showing the location of all books.
Each book should have a card within it, and when you take the book you sign and date the card and put it in a box at the location of the books.
Any lawyer who cannot find a book will be able to look at the card and see who has taken it.
When returning the book the card is signed once more and replaced in the book.
The same applies to lecture material and lever-arch files but becomes too onerous if it is applied to thin journals.
BS5750 places particular emphasis on the successful operation of all documentation, including the library system.
Lexis
This is a useful litigation tool, but it is expensive and both cost and demand need to be researched before it is installed.
It no longer provides a separate quantum library, making it useless for searching for quantum for common injuries such as a broken limb.
Unusual injuries such as a detached retina can still be searched for without being swamped with references.
It is possible to arrange demonstrations and to see literature describing its various libraries.
To get the best use from Lexis you need to be trained over three levels and use it on a regular basis.
This means that you should carefully consider the number of people who undergo Lexis training.
Prepare before carrying out any searches.
On-line time will be charged in addition to the search itself and it is not an item that is routinely recovered on a taxation of costs.
The Lexis search may  refer you to source material that you have in your library but it also contains unreported cases.
If you require a printout of the case you should be aware of the different printing options which vary in speed and expense.
TV networks
This is a new trend and the quality of contributions appears very high.
These projects have accompanying newsletters and being fairly new ventures welcome feedback.
It is possible to obtain a high percentage of your continuing professional development hours by this method.
The percentage varies according to whether there have in addition been discussion sessions or an examination on the subject matter.
Research
You will carry out the activity of research at least once on all cases.
While necessary it can be time consuming.
It is essential to ensure that research is not duplicated.
Maintain a research register with entries indicating the subject of the research, the case on which it was carried out and the lawyer handling the case.
No further information needs entering as anybody using the register can obtain details from the lawyer concerned.
Research is often carried out by trainee solicitors and the rapid turnover of support at that level reinforces the need for the index.
Quantum register
Divide up a lever-arch file into different parts of the body.
Put references to reported cases into the relevant section.
Kemp and Kemp, Current Law and Quantum are good sources of this information.
Equally important are notes of cases that you have settled in-house as these tend to give a more accurate picture and are particularly helpful for smaller awards.
Cases over five years should be treated with caution as applying a multiplier is not particularly useful.
You need to be aware of the guidelines published by the Judicial Studies Board.
These are widely used by judges, and clients are becoming aware of them.
Using the services of experts
The need for good advice
In personal injury cases you obtain the advice of experts "doctors, engineers and barristers" on a daily basis.
All quality systems recognise the significance of this advice.
It is no use trying to bring quality standards to lawyers if there is no way of examining the quality of the advice that lawyers receive from others.
All quality standards require you to adopt selection criteria for experts, taking into account such factors as their expertise, speed of response, flexibility and value for money.
Quality standards differ as to whether or not barristers are deemed to be experts for this purpose.
How to achieve this
The quality standards refer to the maintenance of central records of experts which must comply with the data protection laws.
You should therefore maintain an experts register divided into medical, non-medical and counsel.
Divide up the first two by speciality and the third by region.
Consider having a non-approved list.
Have a copy of this register in every library in the firm.
Updating is easier if the information is contained on a word processor but manual records are adequate.
Information technology
Introduction
Lawyers have been slow to embrace the technological revolution.
The advantage of this is that there is now a great deal of choice at competitive prices.
Even so the decision whether or not to invest in technology is an important one, and there are significant resource implications involved in planning, purchase, training and support.
You do not need to invest in technology to comply with the quality standards, but they concede that a computerised accounts system is really the only cost-effective way to deal with the financial management requirements.
Other systems in this chapter such as case allocation, case management and the experts register benefit from computerisation but it is by no means essential.
The size of  investment in the hardware, the software and all the add-on facilities is going to be determined by the size of your firm.
The needs of other departments including accounts and administration must also be considered.
Do not think of the personal injury work in isolation.
There are economies of scale to be made and you may want to communicate with others.
You may never find a system that is perfect for your needs, but you should be able to find one that satisfies most of them.
Sources of advice
Within the profession
The Law Society is able to assist in a variety of ways.
Every year since 1984 it has published its Directory of Computer Systems and improvements are made in every edition.
There are helpful tables and indexes to assist you through the mass of information offered.
The Legal Practice Directorate has a special unit dedicated to providing assistance to the profession and enquiries should be directed to Clive Baldon at the practice support unit, LDE 56.
All general legal journals cover the subject but the office technology section of the Gazette is particularly thorough and the Information Technology Editor, Charles Christian, is happy to answer queries, as is Neil Cameron of KPMG, the Solicitor's Journal technology editor.
The Society for Computers and Law (SCL) holds workshops and exhibitions and has recently published a booklet "A Lawyer's Guide to Litigation Support" price £5.00 for members and £10.00 for non-members.
For further details contact Ruth Baker, the administrative secretary, on DX 37017 Clifton (Bristol).
In addition many local Law Societies have technology committees and there is a lawyers' PCW Club for Amstrad PCW users.
Friends in other firms who have invested in technology are a particularly useful source of information.
In addition, remember that within your own firm there will be people who have come from other law firms, who have an interest in technology or who may have contacts in the business.
Outside the profession
Many suppliers have open days or roadshows that travel round the country.
Of particular note is the Solicitors and Legal Office  Exhibition held at the Barbican over three days in June.
Legal systems suppliers have recently formed a trade association that has been welcomed in the profession to encourage liaison and co-ordination.
This could lead to the implementation of recommended standards and a degree of regulation.
Many software houses sell consultancy, and disappointing product sales from 1988–91 have driven the major hardware suppliers into the services market.
Systems are available from software houses to teach UNIX and DOS operations.
Management consultancy divisions of accounting firms tend to be strong on business advice and professional codes of conduct.
Many sources outside the profession have a significant cost attached with average rates for IT consultants in 1992 at £320 per day.
The investment in advice will be determined by the size of the investment in technology.
What are you looking for?
You will be able to define your needs without knowing the solution.
You should consider the type of technology you require.
This could include word processing, a database, case management and optical character recognition.
Consider who is going to have access to a terminal.
(In a recent survey of large law firms 88 per cent said they intended to have a computer on every fee earner's desk.)
Consider the need for communication between those who are doing personal injury work, others in the office, and between your office and other offices.
Consider the need to stick to market standards such as buying an IBM-compatible personal computer.
Consider how easy it is to expand the system both in terms of users and in terms of extra facilities.
Consider if you can utilise any existing hardware.
Find out the terms of available service contracts for the equipment.
Most needs can be met by products available on an off-the-shelf basis and you will rarely need to design your own software.
This is particularly true if it is your first investment.
The advantage of working with a software house to design your own package is that the end product is tailor-made.
The disadvantage is that it is a time-consuming process and you will have a lot more teething problems when first running the system.
You should consider how to restrict other firms using the package without you getting some benefit.
At all times think about ease of access, quality of information and flexibility.
Different types of information technology
Word processing
Word processing has many advantages over the electronic typewriter and with systems available under £500 you need to think very carefully before you reject the word-processing option.
Word processing enables you to edit and amend stored material, and to make maximum use of personal injury precedents.
The most popular option is the DOS-based WordPerfect system which has launched version 6.0, being the first significant enhancement since 5.1.
The new version has involved a complete rewrite of the software to give advanced features which are usually only found in Windows and desk-top publishing programmes.
Windows word processing is provided by WordPerfect, Microsoft Word or Lotus Ami Pro.
It is now possible to buy fax systems that run within the word-processing applications to enable faxes to be sent and received on personal computers or work stations.
It is also possible to buy forms which you complete on screen to add up VAT, interest and other sums automatically.
Portable computers are good to access information while travelling.
Database
Word processors have some database facilities, but these can be enhanced to contain client and related party (courts, defendants, doctors) information that is inputted once, and then retrieved in letters and other documents.
Standard letters look anything but standard due to the varying information brought into the letter from the database.
The system produces daily action sheets and reminders such as limitation reminders.
In addition, letters sent out generate reminders or other documents and in this way the whole case is driven forward.
The format is particularly useful for multi-plaintiff cases but standardisation of other cases is becoming more popular.
Optical character recognition
Optical character recognition (OCR) systems electronically read typewritten text into a word-processing system rather than it having to be keyed in manually.
The documentation can then be viewed  on a screen.
Such systems have greatly improved the scanning and storing of original documents.
These systems are well suited for large-scale discovery and enquiry work, when daily transcripts can be entered.
However the cost of such systems has put them out of reach of most firms, particularly if the use will only be sporadic.
It is possible to use the fax send-and-receive software referred to.
You can transmit the documents internally from a conventional fax machine to the PC which has the fax-with-OCR software.
The alternative is to use a litigation support bureau which operates in a similar way to external photocopying bureaux.
Others
Voice writers allow you to speak into a machine and the text will then appear on the screen.
Such systems are still being refined, but they could revolutionise the way in which lawyers work.
Electronic time recording can be done on terminals or through Psion's Series 3 pocket computers.
These combine time recording with an agenda, diary, alarm system, calculator and other useful functions.
You simply type in the case code, activity code and the time spent before confirming the entries.
This is then downloaded into the main system and any odd entries are recorded manually by the accounts staff.
There has been a recent announcement of a child-care maintenance system which runs on a Psion and further applications are likely.
Equitrac operate automated cost-recovery systems aimed at all sizes of practices.
A common application is their attachment to photocopiers and fax machines, so that file numbers have to be keyed in before the machine will operate and thereafter the cost incurred can be electronically tracked and shown on printouts.
This is of limited use in personal injury work where these items cannot be recovered separately on a taxation.
Training and maintenance
Investment in technology without investment in training is not cost efficient.
Consider who needs training.
If the technology is not firm-wide train an extra secretary to cover for others who are on holiday or sick leave.
Think about training for lawyers.
Training on word processing is useful to edit precedents, alter work outside office hours and to type confidential memos.
Consider whether lawyers  need to improve their typing skills.
If the technology is used for more than word processing then lawyers will certainly need to be trained.
Consider how much training needs to be done by the supplier or other external source and how much can be passed down within the firm.
Appoint a systems manager from among the secretaries as a central point of contact between the firm and the supplier.
Invest in training for the systems manager who will then be able to deal with a lot of problems that arise.
Ensure that an adequate system for taking backup files is established and maintained.
Standardisation of forms, documents and questionnaires
Introduction
There are many stages of a personal injury case that cannot be standardised.
However it is important to standardise wherever possible.
This saves time and money.
It also ensures that omissions are not made simply because you have dictated the letter so often that familiarity has bred contempt.
Opt for central purchasing of forms that are not on the word processor.
Adopt a system that alerts to you the fact that you are running out of forms before you actually do so; put a note in the drawer ten forms from the bottom for this purpose.
Court forms can be purchased from law stationers, but most of these can be stored on your word-processing system as precedents.
Photocopying
If size permits it then adopt a central facility for photocopying as it is not an efficient use of your secretary's time.
Instruction forms should accompany the order indicating the size required, whether it is one sided or double sided and the urgency of the task.
Care needs to be taken with medical records and old original documents that do not copy well.
These photocopies are likely to be seen by your counsel, experts and even the judge if contained in a trial bundle.
Quality of photocopying machinery varies and even costly machinery can struggle in such a paper-intensive environment.
Maintenance contracts are therefore a prudent investment.
Colour facilities are of very limited use in personal injury cases.
Precedents
Introduction
You need to create a precedent bank of letters, application forms, affidavits and other documents for all lawyers doing personal injury work.
Even if only one person uses that document it should be in the precedent bank.
One lawyer needs to work on the collective ideas and draft the documents.
It does not require much effort to get in excess of 150 documents.
Once the precedents have been drafted they need to be inputted into the system and spaced correctly.
This process is done by a secretary and is time consuming.
You can personalise standard documents by adding a few sentences in your own language.
Once created then incorporation into your work saves time.
The lengthier the document the more time is saved.
Standard letters
Standardisation is ideal for repeat letters such as applications for police reports and for advice that is detailed but standard such as advice on a payment into court.
Quality standards and Rule 15 place great emphasis on the first letter to the client.
That letter should cover as much as possible because it is a useful source of reference to progress later in the case.
It should detail the person handling the case, any supervisor, the scope of the client's instructions, timescale for resolution, secretary's details, the action taken, the action that will be taken, costs and the complaints procedure.
If the client is legally aided then you should incorporate an explanation of Legal Aid into the letter and under the draft franchising specification you should send the form "Legal Aid: A Quality Service" which is available from the area office.
Quality standards also require you to report on the progress of the case but this is not likely to be standard advice.
Other standard documents
Court applications lend themselves well to this format.
Do not forget the Estimated Length of Service.
Short affidavits such as affidavits of service are well suited.
Lengthier ones such as those in support of specific discovery are not suited and the standard part becomes little more than the top and tail.
Time recording
Introduction
Quality standards require firms to have a system that ensures that time spent on case work can be properly recorded and attributed.
An additional requirement for the franchising specification is that the firm should keep a running record of the costs incurred for each Legal Aid case because the Board is increasingly putting costs conditions on certificates.
A common condition is that you should report to the area office on Form CLA30 if profit costs, disbursements and counsel's fees exceed £2,500 (inclusive of all VAT).
If an extension is not obtained subsequent profit costs may be deferred.
In addition quality standards require information on costs to be given to clients at least every six months, with clients to be notified when an agreed limit on costs is approached.
You should therefore have a time-recording system.
This system can be a manual one but with computerised time-recording packages available at under £500 it is preferable to make some investment in technology.
It is possible to have lawyers' time recorded on Psions or directly into a terminal but a compromise is for lawyers to complete time sheets manually that are then inputted by a member of the accounts team on to computer.
You can buy packs which you complete manually with exact timings taken from a digital clock, but it is more common for standard pads to be completed operating on a six-minute unit.
Investment in some technology can be justified as it leads to more efficient billing.
You can also conduct profit forecasts, identify profitable work and problem areas.
If you are not time recording then you are not only falling short of the quality standards but you are also likely to be under-billing.
Billing targets
Fifteen hundred chargeable hours is a common target for personal injury lawyers.
On a full caseload this is not too difficult to achieve.
The danger is that the pressure to reach target leads you to exaggerate chargeable hours.
This should be avoided.
It gives an inflated work-in-progress figure.
It will also lead to difficulties at the conclusion of the case when you come to bill.
You are entitled to be paid for the proportion of the work that you have done and that it was  reasonable for you to do.
The starting point is your recorded time and if this has been exaggerated and the defendants refuse to pay it will give the appearance that you are under-settling your costs.
Recording on the file
If you have computerised time recording then at the conclusion of the case you will be able to request a billing guide.
If you have manual time recording then you will need to complete a list on the file showing the time and activity code which can then be used as your billing guide.
Under either system you still need to ensure that the areas where the time was spent are adequately recorded on the file itself.
A taxing master/district judge will pay little attention to your billing guide and will look at the file.
If they cannot see where the time has been recorded the time will not normally be allowed.
Letters speak for themselves.
Notes of telephone calls can be handwritten, but you should indicate the name of the caller, the date, the reasons for the call and the number of units involved.
Other notes can also be handwritten provided they are legible and you should make a note of preparation time, including instructing counsel and perusing documents, travelling time and waiting time.
Notes of the contents of meetings and conferences should also indicate the time spent and include any unusual feature which could affect mark-up.
Even if your usual practice is to use handwritten notes there will be times when typed notes are preferable such as a difficult telephone conversation that you want on the record or a list of action points arising out of the meeting.
The taxation review of Brush v Bower Cotton & Bower (1992) before Mr Justice Brooke sitting with Chief Master Hurst and Mr Tony Girling as assessors (see para 4.8, p 70 for reference) is useful reading on all principles of recovery of costs.
In relation to recording on the file it was held that time spent in preparing typed file and attendance notes should be recorded, and will be recovered, provided that the time spent is not excessive.
4 Costs
Contents
4 Costs
It is quite incredible how many files lie on office floors after the case is settled waiting for costs to be dealt with.
Once you know that you have achieved a result then obtaining your costs from the opposition should be a priority.
Personal injury practitioners can only make any sort of profit at all if they achieve a realistic cash flow and this can only be obtained by ensuring that payment is made as soon as the case is settled.
Legal Aid costs
Many practitioners continue to throw away thousands of pounds a year by failing to comply with the basic rules of Legal Aid.
Costs can not be claimed before Legal Aid is granted or beyond the Green Form limit or any limitation on a Legal Aid certificate.
File management systems can and should be directed to ensuring that no work is done that will not be paid for by the Legal Aid Board.
Full advantage should also be taken of the payment on account scheme and all eligible disbursements should be claimed as soon as they are incurred.
Costs forthwith order
In a case where liability is not disputed or is resolved during the course of the case, either by an admission or on a summons for judgment, try and obtain some costs from the defendant.
Order 62, r8 provides that in the normal course costs will only be paid at the end of a matter, but there are exceptions.
This order (and CCROrder 38) demands the most careful reading.
In particular, if you have disposed of liability either by virtue of a split trial or on a Summons for judgment, there is a powerful argument in favour of your having your costs to that date.
You are going to be getting them at the end of the case in any event and why should you be kept out of them?
Your client who is having to pay for the  action would otherwise find himself in the position of being the loser financially despite an order on liability.
Similarly you may have combined with your application for judgment one for an interim award and it would be absurd that the benefit of that award should be lost in providing the costs of the action thus far.
Costs draftsman
If your bills are always sailing through taxation as drawn, it may be that your draftsman is getting it spot on, but equally it may be because the bills are being constantly understated and therefore are found to be unobjectionable.
On the other hand, if you have had a number of unsuccessful taxations it may be that your draftsman is being too optimistic, especially if payment is on the basis of a percentage of the costs as drawn—If you want to test out your costs draftsman, having received a bill back, send the file off to someone else and see how they draw it.
Though you will be wasting one costs draftsman's fee, it may be a very small penalty to pay to test the accuracy of those who are dealing with your bills.
Equally, if, in a particular case, you suspect that your costs draftsman may not have been particularly brave where care and control is concerned, or may not fully appreciate what has been involved, do not hesitate to increase the care and control element to the level you think is justified.
Although it may require attendance before the district judge or taxing master, if it is a big case with costs of £10,000—£20,000, an extra 5 to 20 per cent is not to be thrown away lightly.
Disbursements
Your opponent will almost certainly require you to produce receipted accounts for the disbursements in respect of which you are seeking payment.
Although you may be able to fob off your opponent by letting them have a copy of your accounts ledger, you should not be in a position where you have to write off for copy receipts; all these documents should be properly filed.
The opposition will want copy fee notes, certainly in respect of major disbursements such as experts' fees and counsels' fees.
They  will need to see exactly what work is being charged for.
Where you think that one of your disbursements is likely to be challenged you should get the expert to produce a breakdown of how it was that the fees came to be charged, whether on a fixed rate basis or an hourly charge basis, and this should be available to disclose to the opposition and to be used on taxation.
Defendants are often very keen to say that they will not pay for a disbursement in respect of a report that they have not seen.
Where you have settled the case prior to trial, it is possible that you may have a report that you would have disclosed and which would have formed part of the proceedings at trial had the case gone ahead.
In these circumstances there is no reason at all why the defendant should not pay the fee.
Profit costs
How should you put a figure of profit costs to the defendants?
The first thing you should do is to prepare a breakdown.
Count up all the letters out and assess the hours that you have spent on each aspect of the case.
Separately, calculate the hours that you think you will be allowed on taxation.
These two may not necessarily be the same figure.
The taxation procedure is a method of assessing a reasonable rate of overall payment for the task carried out.
Those taxing bills, whether district judges in the county court or taxing officers in the High Court, rely on their experience to know what sort of figures are reasonable for each particular task performed.
Where there are attendance notes on the file to show accurately how much time has been spent on a particular task then that time will be allowed on taxation.
Where there is no attendance note but it is nevertheless clear that the particular task had been done, then the taxing officer will have to assess how long the particular job is likely to have taken.
Your opponent will be familiar with these going rates and it may be possible to settle costs advantageously on this basis.
When preparing a suggestion for costs to your opponents you should run through a checklist of the following tasks which are likely to have occupied your time during the case and assess how long you have spent on those tasks or how much time you think you should charge for having completed those tasks: Letters out, miscellaneous telephone calls.
Attending the plaintiff, attending members of the plaintiff's family to give background information or evidence, attending witnesses, attending the defendants, perusing police report and liability documents.
Considering liability.
Perusing medical reports.
Attending medical specialist.
Perusing experts' reports.
Attending experts.
Attending site inspection with or without engineer.
Perusing documents re special damages and future loss.
Calculating special damages and future loss.
Preparing documents for counsel.
Preparing instructions to counsel.
Attending counsel on the phone, in person or in conference.
Perusing counsel's advices and checking pleadings.
Preparing court documents.
Attending court to issue proceedings, on interlocutory matters or attending trial.
Preparing bundles for counsel or for trial.
Perusing defendants' discovery.
Preparing bundles and documents for trial.
General unrecorded perusals and preparation.
Against each one of these headings, you should have an estimate of the number of hours that you propose to charge the defendants.
In respect of the last item the figure will inevitably be an estimate.
At least one taxing officer takes the view that as a rule of thumb he would be prepared to allow one hour's perusals for each month of the litigation.
Therefore, in addition to specifically charged items, one could recover 24 hours' general perusals on litigation which had taken 2 years from issue of writ to trial.
However, this is not an approach which all taxing officers would necessarily encourage.
This, then, will give you a number of hours.
In a case that you have settled without litigation within nine months for a relatively modest amount it is unlikely that you would achieve more than four or five chargeable hours in a case where liability was never really disputed.
On the other hand a case lasting 2 years which went to trial where both liability and quantum were both heavily contested could easily rack up between 30 and 50 hours without too much difficulty.
Broad average direct cost
Much has been written recently about hourly rates of charge.
In the High Court it seemed that the "going rate" for personal injury matters in 1991 was about £65 per hour and in the county courts in London in 1991 between £55 and £60 per hour.
The solicitor is entitled to charge the broad average direct cost of doing the work.
That is not the same as what it actually costs them to run their practice, but what the taxing office or county court perceives as the overall rate for solicitors in the area.
To assist the debate many local Law Societies, notably Birmingham and Manchester, have agreed with the local county court what the appropriate rate of charge should be for any particular area, for any particular year, and the courts apply those rates.
In London a survey has recently been carried out of Holborn and Westminster area firms and the High Court taxing officers have accepted for 1992/3 the broad average direct cost for carrying out litigation in an area will be £88 per hour.
In a particularly difficult matter which necessitated a partner dealing with it throughout then the rate would be £108 per hour, and in a simple matter which was dealt with by a legal executive or newly qualified solicitor, the rate will be about £75 per hour.
The Supreme Court taxing officer takes the view that on the basis of the evidence that they have seen these figures are probably accurate and it is therefore for the paying party to show why the rates should not be applied.
At the time of publication the county courts in London have yet to adopt this rate, but it is submitted that there can be little real argument that the same rate should not be applied.
Consider the need for a concerted approach on costs in your area.
It is always almost impossible for a single practitioner to obtain more than the other firms in the area are obtaining and you do not want to be in a position of being undersold because your colleagues in other firms have an unrealistic view about what should be charged.
Get together and ensure that there is an agreed approach to be put to the local courts.
Mark-up
The courts seem to take the view that the minimum mark-up is usually in the region of 50 per cent of the hourly rate, and can rise  in personal injury cases to 75 per cent in a very big, difficult case, and could go up as far as 100 per cent or more for cases of the greatest difficulty or where quantum is huge and complex.
Negotiation of costs
The scope for disagreement between plaintiffs and defendants has been narrowed by the move by district registries to publish hourly rates going back at least five years.
While there is still room for some argument on the mark-up, most cases will fall into the "run of the mill" category with an uplift of 50 per cent.
The hours that you put into a case are therefore of the utmost importance.
As mentioned earlier (see para 3.8.3, p 61), the guidelines in Brush v Bower Cotton and Bower (QBD 26 November 1992, reported in the Litigation Letter Vol 12 March 1993) should be read carefully.
You should be able to negotiate an agreement of costs in most cases.
If the case has been issued take out a consent order so that interest runs on the costs.
If the case has not been issued, but the defendants are slow to agree costs, consider issuing solely for the interest provisions and argue that the defendants caused this course of action.
Whether you use an internal or external costs draftsman taxation is time consuming and most plaintiff lawyers will accept discounts in order to avoid it.
From 19 April 1993 the Supreme Court taxing office has been experimenting with a pilot scheme and a set of draft rules is contained within Practice Direction 1 of 1993.
The principal objective of the new scheme, which does not apply to Legal Aid cases, is to encourage settlement of costs at an early stage.
The procedure encourages parties to tax on only those issues that are the subject of dispute between them.
This was also the reason why Practice Direction 2 of 1992 called for matters in issue to be identified in advance, with the paying party outlining the reasons in disputing the item and giving the suggested reduced figure.
The pilot scheme can only be used by consenting parties which consent cannot be withdrawn without leave of the court.
If the scheme is successful it will be applied to district registries from April 1994 and could become mandatory with an amendment to RSC, Ord 62.
Taxation is an occasion when someone in judicial office will see your file and this will be a reflection on your firm.
There is, moreover, a move towards the paying party's seeing your file and this makes it increasingly important  for you to think carefully about the costs and uplift information contained in your first letter or standard terms of business appended to your first letter, and also the standard of time recording on which your bills are based.
Always mark letters on the subject of costs "without prejudice" .
If you have undercharged yourself when putting your proposals to the opposition and you have not marked the letter without prejudice then you will not be able to charge more when the matter comes to taxation.
You will also be held in respect of any particular area of your breakdown to what you have put in your original letter.
If you mark the letter without prejudice then taxation will be on the basis of what you put in the bill.
Managing the Client and the Case
Client care and good practice
Introduction
When a client comes to see you, having been injured in an accident, they will be seeing you following what will probably have been the most traumatic event of their life.
They may still be in a considerable amount of pain and shock, they will undoubtedly have financial worries and they may well be experiencing difficulties in coming to terms with the implications of the accident for themselves and their families.
In addition, they may be anxious about dealing with a solicitor for the first time.
It is vital that these needs and emotions should be acknowledged and that the solicitor should accept that professional responsibility stretches beyond the immediate legal issues of the claim, and includes a duty to proceed in a way that is comprehensible to the client and consistent with their wider needs.
So, for instance, you should be in a position to refer the client to sources of further help and advice, whether that be for other types of professional services, counselling or a victim support group.
Client care is not just a question of professional responsibility however; it is also the most effective marketing tool available to your business.
It is still the case that the vast majority of potential clients who come through your door will do so because of a recommendation.
Getting the right result has not lost its importance, but it is no longer enough and attention has to be given to the wider service.
The Law Society introduced a new practice rule in May 1991 setting minimum standards of client care with regard to information and the handling of complaints.
Systems for compliance with the rule are part and parcel of the quality management systems that are already beginning to dominate legal practice.
The rule, Rule 15 (Client Care), and the Law Society guide that interprets it, is intended to ensure that the client is properly informed at all times, as to who is dealing with the matter, as to the available complaints procedure and as to how the action is progressing.
The rule applies  unless the solicitor can establish that it was inappropriate in the circumstances.
The guide discusses circumstances where the rule might not apply such as regular clients, commercial clients and cases of urgency.
5.2 Rule 15(a)—Information as to who has conduct of the case The client needs to know who within the solicitors' office will be dealing with the claim and, if more than one person, who those people are.
The person having overall responsibility for the case should be identified.
The client should be informed if the identity of any of those persons changes.
The client will need to be told how to contact you, whether there are any prefered times for calls to be made and who they can expect to speak to.
Whether and when you can see the client if he or she "pops in" should be dealt with very clearly.
The client does not know what to expect and it is your responsibility to ensure that he or she does not waste time trying to contact you at inappropriate times.
Most clients will readily understand why you cannot be available all the time, so long as you tell them when you will be available.
Rule 15(b)—Complaints
Under the rule clients should know "whom to approach in the event of any problems with the service" .
The interpretation of the rule makes it clear that a complaints procedure must be established.
The client must be told that if at any stage he or she is anxious about the conduct of the matter, they should communicate immediately with the fee earner who is handling the case.
If the matter cannot be resolved in that way then another person, usually the senior partner within the firm, must be identified by name as the person to whom complaint can be made.
Finally, the client should be told that if all else fails, the Solicitors' Complaints Bureau exists to deal with complaints about the conduct of solicitors.
Rule 15(c)—General information to be given to clients
In addition to information about who is conducting the case and as to complaints procedures the Law Society's guide suggests further information that should be given to the client at appropriate times.
The guide provides three simple checklists of what information should be given at the first appointment, during and at the end of the case.
The client should be kept informed on the following matters:(a) how the matter will be handled;(b) the timescale involved;(c) progress of the case;(d) delay;(e) transferring the case;(f) advocates and counsel.
Information about costs
The Law Society stopped short of incorporating the rules about provision of information about costs into the new Practice Rule 15.
Instead they retain the status of written professional standards.
Serious or persistent breach of the standards could amount to professional misconduct.
Any departure from the standard must be justified by the individual circumstances.
It is vital that the costs position is made clear to the client right from the start.
The implications of commencing and losing court proceedings must be faced.
Nor can the solicitor discharge this responsibility by talking in vague terms of the risk of having to pay a "substantial sum" to the other side.
The client is entitled to have the risk quantified in broad terms on the same basis as the information about the solicitor's own charges.
As much information about charging as is practicable should be given at the outset.
It should be confirmed in writing.
The client should understand, in broad terms, the likely cost of the case.
You should be able to give a rough estimate of how much work each stage of the case is likely to entail.
This is notoriously difficult to do but the difficulty should be yours not the client's.
The same information is vital for business planning and should be available within the firm.
If not, talk to your costs draftsman.
The client must be told the  hourly rate charged and the extent of the mark-up for skill, care and attention.
It may be considerably easier to give the client an inclusive figure rather than explaining why anyone should want a service provided without skill, care and attention.
The position as to tax and disbursements should be made clear.
A "not more than" sum should be agreed with the client pending updating and further instructions.
Guidance as to the cost of the next stage should be given, although this becomes progressively more difficult.
If you require payments on account of costs or in advance of disbursements, or you reserve the right to raise hourly rates during the lifetime of the case, the client must be told at the outset of the case.
If the position changes during the course of the case the client should be informed at once.
The client should also be reminded of the advice, where appropriate, throughout the lifetime of the case.
The client should be given regular information about the costs to date and the likely cost of the next stage.
Unusual or substantial disbursements should always be authorised specifically.
All such information should be confirmed in writing.
The solicitor is under a duty to consider eligibility for Legal Aid and if granted to advise on costs, contributions, the statutory charge, and the client's rights and responsibilities under the scheme.
Wherever relevant the legally aided client is entitled to the same information as to costs as the private client.
All other potential sources of funding should be considered (see further Chapter 6).
Many solicitors never overcome their own embarrassment about the amount that they charge, though few go on to lower their fees.
Instead a pattern of undercharging, half-hearted billing and poor cash flow is established.
Ironically the amount eventually charged is still likely to come as a nasty shock for a client who has not yet confronted the financial realities of litigation.
For these reasons alone the issue must be dealt with from the outset with as much information as is possible.
How and when to give information
The checklists in Client Care: A Guide for Solicitors require the same information to be given to every client at various stages of every case.
As a result the need for a comprehensive range of standard form  letters is obvious.
If you are looking for models there are some specific examples in the guide.
Further examples are given in the appendix to this section.
Standard correspondence can greatly improve the quality of your communication with clients and repays careful drafting.
The module on people and communication in Best Practice, the Law Society practice management kit, is useful and includes an exercise for judging the clarity of your letters.
Any system for producing standard form letters can easily be extended to supply a complete file management system (see further Chapter 3).
The same materials, properly presented, can become a cheap but effective marketing tool for the firm.
Consideration can be given to producing a leaflet or, for virtually no cost, standard letters can be adapted into information sheets to be given to new and potential clients (see Chapter 2).
In working towards a high standard of client care, quality of service should not be confused with quantity.
The need to keep the client informed does not necessarily include a need to send out a copy of every item of correspondence.
To do so may increase costs without necessarily increasing comprehension.
Nor is it necessarily good practice to see a client as often as possible or whenever the client wishes.
The client should be told that if he or she wishes to discuss the claim, this will generally be welcomed but that they must make an appointment first.
The client should be made aware of the benefits to both of you of using your time as cost effectively as possible.
Generally you can tell pretty quickly if the client has a problem with the way you are handling the case because things start to go wrong.
Misunderstandings and "difficult behaviour" are good reasons to check through the quality of your client care.
It is also a good idea, occasionally, to ask the client whether they had any difficulties with the way in which the case was conducted.
A follow-up questionnaire can be used.
Once the client has received his or her compensation, they are often prepared to be quite candid about the way the case was handled.
Further help and reading
The materials illustrated in the appendix to this chapter are offered as no more than an example.
You will already have your own  materials, your own "know-how" , to be adapted to the purpose.
Information about the firm, about other services offered and about quality standards and complaints procedures can be added.
A modest investment in design and printing can produce extremely impressive and high quality materials.
Appendix 5
Specimen letter to client
An example of a typical initial letter to the client would be as follows:
Dear [Name]
RE: ACCIDENT ON [DATE]
Following your recent appointment, I confirm that this Firm will be pleased to act on your behalf in connection with your claim for damages arising out of the incident.
[Op]I have begun the investigation of your claim along the lines that we discussed/I have applied for Legal Aid on your behalf.
I enclose a copy of a statement that I have prepared for you.
Please read it carefully and make any amendments necessary.
When you have done so please sign it and return it to me immediately in the pre-paid envelope provided.
Please read this letter carefully and keep it for further reference as it explains a number of important points relating to your claim.
[Op paras]I enclose with this letter, the following:(a) a leaflet explaining the position regarding costs and the funding of your claim;(b) a leaflet explaining your entitlement to Legal Aid;(c) a leaflet explaining entitlements to welfare benefits;(d) a brochure briefly explaining what happens next in Personal Injury cases;(e) a short brochure explaining something about the Firm's other services.
[Op para]The cost of investigating your claim will depend on the amount of work required.
My hourly charge is currently £X per hour.
Where work can be done by a less senior collegue it will be charged at a lower rate.
From my experience of other, similar cases I would expect the cost of investigating your claim, including the cost of a full medical report and VAT, to be approximately £X.
If your case proves to be more complex or difficult than usual then the costs would be more but I would not proceed without consulting you further.
[Op para]I would ask that you give your close attention to the document relating to Costs and Funding, and let me have your instructions as soon as possible.
I look forward to receiving your payment in advance of £X.
I confirm that I will be dealing with your claim personally.
I am a in the Firm.
If, for any reason, one of my colleagues needs to take over the file at any stage, you will be consulted.
I will keep you informed of all important developments but please feel free to write to me or telephone me if you have any questions regarding the progress of your claim.
If I am not available when you telephone, my secretary,[Name], will take a message and can make an appointment if necessary.
As the brochure on the procedure in these cases explains it is not always possible to conclude a claim as quickly as you or I would like.
However, wherever possible, within this firm we aim to be in a position to decide whether to issue proceedings, if an acceptable offer of settlement has not been made, by the end of 12 months.
In every case taken on by this Firm we appoint a Supervisor who has overall responsibility to the client for the way the claim is handled.
A Supervisor is appointed even where the case is being handled by our most senior staff.
The Supervisor for your case is.
We are committed to providing a service of the highest quality to all our clients.
So please let us know if you have any problems at all so that we can put things right.
Problems should be referred in the first instance to the Supervisor.
The Law Society Rules also require us to operate a complaints handling procedure in the event of there being a serious complaint.
If you are dissatisfied with our professional service our complaints handling procedure entitles you to refer your complaint to the Senior Partner,[Name].
As an additional safeguard, you may refer your concerns to the Solicitors' Complaints Bureau, whose details can be obtained from us.
Yours sincerely
Leaflet 1 Costs and funding
The cost of litigation is high.
This leaflet is designed to help you understand what you can be asked to pay and when.
By instructing us you will become responsible for the payment of the costs and disbursements involved in pursuing your claim.
If you decide not to continue with the claim or if it is unsuccessful, you will still have to pay our bill.
However, if your claim is successful, and damages are paid by the  Defendants, we would normally expect to recover all or most of our costs and disbursements from them.
In this case you will only be responsible for the balance, if anything.
Costs
Our charges are calculated by reference to an hourly rate.
The rate varies according to the experience of the person dealing with the work.
There are higher rates for work that is very complicated, difficult or urgent.
The rate is reviewed each year and you will be informed in advance of any changes.
It is our usual practice to ask for a payment in advance of costs and thereafter to submit an interim bill every six months.
Interest will be charged on all bills remaining unpaid 30 days after you received them.
Interest will be charged at the rate of 1 per cent above the Bank base rate prevailing for the relevant period.
At present you cannot be asked to pay the Defendant's legal costs, even if you decide to abandon your claim.
However this position will change if it should become necessary to issue court proceedings.
You will be advised further on this point if it should become necessary.
Disbursements
The additional expenses of investigating your claim are known as disbursements.
These expenses usually include fees for an expert medical report and can include other expert reports, such as an engineer's report, Barristers' fees and court fees.
These necessary costs can be substantial and need to be paid as they arise.
There are a number of ways in which this can be done.
(1) It may be that your financial circumstances would entitle you to State Legal Aid to cover costs and disbursements.
The entitlement to Legal Aid is based on both income and capital resources, and we can give you further details about this, should you wish.
(2) You can provide us with such sums from your own resources on account of costs, to defray the expenses, as and when they occur.
We would initially require a payment of £X and further payments might be necessary as the case progresses, as further bills are incurred.
(3) You can obtain a Bank loan or a loan from other resources for the above purposes.
We are able to effect an introduction for you to the Firm's Bank who may be able to make such funds available.
The Bank providing the loan may require an undertaking from us to remit your damages straight to them, when the case is completed, in order that they may recoup their loan.
(4) This Firm can pay the disbursements, as they arise, on the basis that the interest charges incurred by us on the expenditure on your behalf would be your responsibility, to be paid out of your damages before payment to you.
We would levy the charge at 1 per cent above the Bank base rate prevailing for the relevant period.
We are not able to recover such interest payments from our opponents.
(5) We can send you an account for each item of charge, as it arises, for you to pay direct.
Please consider these options and let us know which method of funding you wish to adopt.
Leaflet 2 Legal Aid
The Green Form
You completed a Green Form at your first interview.
This covered the cost of that interview and will cover the cost of applying for Legal Aid.
The amount of work that can be done under a Green Form is strictly limited by the Legal Aid Board and so very little work can be done until Legal Aid is granted.
Legal Aid covers the cost of investigating your claim, including contacting witnesses, obtaining medical reports and negotiating with the Defendants.
Usually we will not be given permission by the Legal Aid Board to issue proceedings and go to court until the investigation is finished.
You may be granted Legal Aid subject to the payment of a financial contribution, usually payable by instalments.
If you fail to keep up with these payments you may lose your Legal Aid.
You can also be made to pay all or part of your legal costs out of your own pocket.
If you cannot afford the contributions you should contact the Legal Aid Board and let us know.
You must report any change in your financial circumstances.
You must also report any change of address.
Again, failure to do so could result in you losing your Legal Aid and having to pay your own legal costs.
If you are successful and recover compensation  the Legal Aid Board will have first claim on the money.
This is called the "Statutory" charge or the "Legal Aid Act" charge.
The Legal Aid Board will take as much money as is necessary to repay your legal costs.
However, in practice, if your claim is successful we would expect to recover all or most of your legal costs in addition to the compensation and so there would be little or no shortfall.
Legal Aid
Contributions
What changes must I tell the Legal Aid Board about?
What happens if I win?
If the Defendants pay your legal costs in full you will be refunded any contributions that you have made.
If they pay most of your legal costs the contributions will be used to make up the difference and you will be refunded anything left over.
If your claim is unsuccessful the Legal Aid Board will keep your financial contributions but you will not be asked to pay anything more towards your own legal costs.
If proceedings have been issued you may be required to contribute to the Defendants' legal costs, but this will usually be limited to the same amount that you contributed to the Legal Aid Board in respect of your own legal costs.
What happens if I lose?
Leaflet 3 Benefits following an accident
(1) If you are absent from work as a result of the accident for more than 3 days you are entitled to receive Statutory Sick Pay from your employer during your absence and for periods of up to 28 weeks in total.
If you go back to work before the end of 28 weeks and are then absent again, Statutory Sick Pay will be payable for each period of absence until your 28 weeks' entitlement has been exhausted, provided you have not been back at work for more than 8 weeks.
(2) If you are not entitled to Statutory Sick Pay for some reason, you are entitled to receive State Sickness Benefit from the Department of Social Security (DSS).
This will be paid for a total of 28 weeks.
(3) If you are still unfit for work after this period of being paid either Statutory Sick Pay or Sickness Benefit you will transfer to Invalidity Benefit which will be paid for as long as you remain unfit for work.
(4) From 15 weeks after your accident, you will also be entitled to claim and may be awarded Industrial Disablement Benefit if you are still suffering from a continuing disability.
Disablement Benefit is paid as a weekly pension but you will only be paid  if you are assessed as at least 14 per cent disabled.
Industrial Disablement Benefit is payable whether or not you are back at work.
Even if the accident does not seem serious at the time, but you think it might have some ill-effect in the future you should apply to the DSS for a decision that it was an industrial accident.
This will help if, later on, you are unable to work or you are disabled as a result of the accident and claim Disablement Benefit.
(5) While you are in receipt of Industrial Disablement Benefit you may also be entitled to:(a) Constant Attendance Allowance if you have been severely handicapped and are in need of constant care and attention and you are in receipt of 100 per cent Disablement Benefit Assessment;(b) Exceptionally Severe Disablement Allowance if you qualify for both 100 per cent Disablement Benefit Assessment and Constant Attendance Allowance and your exceptionally severe condition is likely to be permanent.
(6) The procedure for obtaining Statutory Sick Pay will be dealt with by your employer who should also be able to advise you on the procedure for obtaining Sickness Benefit.
In order to claim disablement and the related benefits you will have to obtain a Form from your local Social Security Office.
Leaflet 4 What happens next?
NAME Solicitors have been instructed to act for you in claiming damages to compensate you for your injury.
This brochure outlines the broad principles governing awards of compensation, relates the basic steps we will take and suggests a few of the things you can do to help us present your case.
We will pursue a claim against those responsible for your accident.
You may also be entitled to claim compensation under a personal accident insurance policy arranged by you or your employer.
It is possible that you may be entitled to claim Department of Social Security benefits which will affect the amount you will recover in compensation.
Initial steps
You may be asked for information concerning the facts of your accident so that we can consider the issues relating to liability and  conduct any further investigation that may be necessary.
You will also be asked about your medical condition.
We need to know the effect the injury has had on you so that we can determine what type of medical evidence we need and when.
We will take the steps necessary to obtain reports and you do not need to approach any doctor yourself for that purpose.
You will, of course, need to continue seeing doctors for treatment.
We have to show that your accident was caused by the negligence of another, which, broadly speaking, means showing that somebody else was at fault.
If we can establish that your injury was caused by another's fault then we can usually recover damages to compensate you for the effects of the injury and for any financial loss.
We recover the compensation from the person at fault or their insurer.
How much?
You can expect to receive compensation for all direct expenses arising out of the accident, including the cost of private medical treatment, extra travelling costs and other expenditure directly related to your injury.
You should keep expenditure to a reasonable minimum as excessive expenditure may not be recoverable.
It will help if you keep a note of such expenses, preferably in diary form, specifying the amount, the date and the nature of the expenditure.
Loss of regular, bonus or overtime earnings while off work is recoverable.
Normally we check with your employer and calculate any losses.
An important element of any compensation payment is the damages intended to compensate you for the injury itself, and the effect it has on you and your lifestyle, both today and in the future.
This aspect of the claim is supported by medical evidence.
If you are likely to incur any losses in the future, particularly if your injury is so serious that you are unable to continue in normal employment, then we will undertake the investigation necessary to recover appropriate compensation.
Time factor
Each case varies a great deal.
Where you are fortunate in making reasonably rapid recovery, or where your medical condition stabilises  quickly, then we may be able to conclude your case within 12 to 18 months of the your instructing us.
One source of delay is obtaining medical evidence.
We usually instruct doctors who specialise in producing medico-legal reports and who have proven themselves in giving evidence in the past.
These doctors are busy and it can take time to arrange examinations.
The more serious your injury, the longer your case will take.
We cannot finalise it until your condition has sufficiently stabilised for us to be reasonably sure that no unforeseen deterioration may occur.
Once your case is concluded you cannot, except in very rare instances, return to seek further compensation.
Court action
Where we are unable to deal with a case by negotiation we will issue court proceedings.
Civil court proceedings are notoriously slow.
Although we will use every endeavour to bring your case to a rapid conclusion, most causes of delay are out of our hands.
We can do no more here than set down general guidelines.
If you have any specific queries you should feel free to contact the solicitor who is dealing with your claim, who will be happy to respond.
Funding
By Ian Walker
The solicitor's duty to advise the client about the financing of their claim stretches considerably beyond simple consideration of eligibility for Legal Aid.
Other alternative and often prior sources of funding must be considered.
The client should be asked whether they are a member of a trade union which may have a legal assistance scheme or whether they have any form of legal fees insurance.
If the client is unsure about the extent of their cover, they must be told to check their insurance policies.
Many people have some sort of legal fees insurance without realising it.
Some, although few, home contents policies have a reverse indemnity clause which may cover costs and damages in some cases.
A reverse indemnity clause provides that if the policyholder obtains judgment against a third party in circumstances where, had the positions been reversed, the main policy would have indemnified the policyholder, then the insurers will pay any unsatisfied judgment and costs.
The main exclusions of the policy still operate and such a clause may be of limited use, but its existence is worth investigating.
If the client has AA or RAC membership then those organisations should be consulted to ascertain the extent to which the client can obtain free legal services.
It must of course be realised that any funding organisation may wish to appoint their own solicitor to handle the case, particularly if a trade union is involved, but as always, the client's interests must come first.
It remains to be seen whether the introduction of conditional fee arrangements will have any significant effect on the number of accident victims who are able to pursue a claim.
Limitations of actions
By Ian Walker
The most common cause for solicitors having to claim on their professional indemnity insurance in personal injury work is the missing of time limits and allowing cases to become statute barred, either by failing to issue in time or failing to serve in time.
Every office must maintain an appropriate system of file management (see Chapter 3).
Solicitors must be prepared to deal with instructions given just before the limitation period expires (see Chapter 13.7).
Solicitors need to be aware of claims where different or additional rules apply (see Part III).
If limitation appears to be an issue, appropriate questions must be asked concerning date of knowledge, plaintiffs under a disability and grounds for exercising the discretion under Limitation Act 1980, s 33.
Remember that a writ can be issued by fax in an emergency (RSCOrder 6, r 7), that the day of the accident does not count for limitation purposes, that if the limitation expires on a Sunday you can issue on the Monday and that if the plaintiff is deceased, limitation runs from the date of death.
If a limitation period has just been missed, one useful argument is the fact that it is possible to issue proceedings one day before limitation expires and then to hang on to them for four months before they are served.
If proceedings can be issued and served within three years and four months, you have a strong argument that the defendants are in no worse a position than the rules allow.
Also consider whether the defendant can be said to have waived limitation, raising an estoppel.
If all else fails, remember there is a longer limitation period for non-personal injury losses and that that part of the claim can proceed in any event.
If you have just missed a limitation period do not panic, get a second opinion, and keep your firm and your insurers informed.
8 Expert evidence
Contents
8 Expert evidence
General evidence
8.1 Finding the right expert You may need experts to give you an expert opinion in a number of areas:(a) accident reconstruction (road accident or factory accident);(b) more specialist engineering evidence (metallurgists, road construction etc.);(c) experts regarding particular equipment (cranes, boats);(d) experts re particular substances (glues, fixing devices, gases);(e) employment consultants regarding your client's position on the open labour market should they have lost or are likely to lose their employment;(f) medical evidence;(g) nursing and rehabilitation specialists in serious cases;(h) ancillary services in severe cases (gardening, home help, home improvements);(i) accountants (in complicated future loss/special damage cases).
It is false economy not to get the right expert, even though getting the right expert may be more expensive.
It will also often be counterproductive to go to your second-choice expert simply because they may be in a position to do the report more quickly.
None the less, there is a trade-off between getting it now and getting it right.
Try and find out from your expert exactly how long it is likely to be before the report is available.
See if you can get a similar report significantly quicker elsewhere and then make a decision as to whether a less powerful but quicker report will do.
It must be remembered that you do not just want someone whose opinion is going to carry weight but someone who is also going to provide persuasive evidence both in their report and at trial.
The two do not always go together and experts who combine the two are in short supply.
Most practitioners will have their own list of preferred specialists  and the aquisition of such important know-how must not be left to chance (see further Chapter 3).
However, there are a number of organisations to whom a practitioner can turn for guidance as to the best expert to instruct in a particular case.
(1) Ask counsel.
Experienced personal injury counsel will have seen good and bad witnesses preparing reports and giving evidence.
(2) The same advice applies to solicitor colleagues in your own and other plaintiff firms.
(3) The Association of Personal Injury Lawyers' (APIL) database contains over a thousand experts who have been recommended by APIL members around the country.
The database is open only to members of APIL.
Enquiry is made by letter or fax and immediate response given.
The response will give particulars of the expert and the APIL member(s) who put them on to the database and who can be contacted for a more personal recommendation.
(4) The British Academy of Experts has its own list of members who hold themselves out as being experts in particular fields and available for compiling reports.
(5) UK Register of Expert Witnesses.
This is published by JS Publications (latest edition March 1992) and, again, lists witnesses in all areas according to geographical location.
No assessment is made of the qualifications or expertise of the witnesses.
(6) The Law Society.
(7) Organisations such as the Consumers' Association, the Royal Society for the Prevention of Accidents and television programmes such as Watchdog may possibly have dealt with a similar problem to yours in the past.
A phone call or a letter to them may set your investigations off on a completely new heading and give you further experts whose evidence would be helpful to you.
Cost
The cost of your expert will depend very much on the type of expert you are instructing and the type of report that you request.
Even charges by experts in the same field can differ widely; it is possible to obtain a more than adequate employment report for under £500, whereas some agencies in the area will quote £1,500.
You must give your client some indication of the likely cost of a report before you  commission it.
Always get an estimate first.
Many doctors have a standard scale of fees which they can send you.
Always get authority from your client and, where appropriate, from the Legal Aid Board.
The authority from the client should be fully informed as to the cost and purpose of the report, and should be confirmed in writing.
The client must be made aware that you will not necessarily recover the full amount of your expert's fees on taxation and the authority should be obtained on this basis.
This can be so even where you have not had to shop around for a more favourable report.
There are some experts whose advice you may seek, and whose fees you will not recover, but who easily justify their fee by the increase that they obtain in the damages awarded.
This is particularly so with expensive experts such as accountants.
You may have to convince your client that it is worth bearing part of the cost of an expensive expert if their input into the case is going significantly to increase your chances of success or the amount of the award.
If you have relied too heavily on a particular expert then part of the costs may be disallowed or, more likely, your own charging rate will be reduced.
When to instruct
If you need to instruct an expert, then do so early.
Quite apart from the need to serve medical evidence with the writ, there is no reason to delay in asking vital questions concerning liability.
To do so can only waste costs if the report is unfavourable.
There is little tactical advantage in commissioning and serving reports late in the case, as this is only likely to delay the outcome.
Be careful not to rely on your expert preparing the report quickly without having agreed when the report is to be delivered.
Enquire by telephone whether any delay is likely and deal with the matter specifically in your letter of instruction.
The letter of instruction
A proper letter of instruction is vital.
In simple terms your expert's report will only be as good as the questions you ask and the information you supply.
Depending on the expert and the case you may  need to do all or any of the following: summarise the facts of the case and the legal issues; ask specific questions and indicate their legal significance; ask whether any further evidence is likely to be available, so that this can be sought on discovery; and whether any further enquiries, tests or reports are necessary.
The expert should then be invited to make any further comments that they feel to be necessary.
It is often a good idea to remind the expert that if their report is to be relied on it must be disclosed to the other side.
You can ask for any particularly bad points against the plaintiff to be discussed over the phone or in a covering letter as they may well fall outside the expert's evidence in chief.
Send the expert all the available evidence.
In addition to all previous expert reports obtained or received, non-medical experts should see all the background information that you have collated including plaintiff and witness evidence, party and party correspondence where relevant, previous reports etc.
The expert should be asked to write in plain English and to explain all technical terms used.
Propositions and conclusions should be justified, where necessary, from standard authorities in the field.
This is to ensure that you and your client, as well as the court, can understand the report.
Experts want to be paid immediately.
If you cannot pay them immediately, then you must tell them so when they are instructed in order that they can decline to accept the instructions if they wish.
Nothing is guaranteed to make an expert less sympathetic to your case than having an argument about when they are likely to be paid.
Finally the letter must confirm the agreed date by which the report will be delivered.
Understanding the report
The need for the report to be intelligible to the client, and to the judge, is obvious.
If you do not understand the report you must get the expert either to redraft it or to explain it.
In complex cases it may be useful for your counsel and your client to meet with the expert to discuss the report.
In deciding whether to have such a meeting you need to consider whether you can claim the cost back on taxation.
If the court takes  the view that the meeting was not a reasonable step in the action but was merely done for the client's benefit, then the costs will be disallowed as against the defendants.
Client's comments on the report
Quite apart from the plaintiff's right to see the report, it is vital to obtain their commentary.
Any omissions, misunderstandings or disagreements must be identified quickly and dealt with.
This is something that must be discussed with the client rather than be dealt with in correspondence.
It is a good idea to get the client to discuss the report with a partner, or other close relative or friend first, especially with medical reports.
Again these comments should be passed on to the expert.
If it is a simple misunderstanding as to fact then the expert will usually be willing to change the report.
If it is a fundamental matter of opinion you may have to "shop around" for a more favourable expert at the cost of the plaintiff.
To get a second opinion for a Legally Aided client you will need to get the authority of the Legal Aid Board.
Their authority is unlikely to be given because, in most cases, the costs of the second report will not be recovered on taxation.
You will have to explain exactly why the first report was useless, why the particular expert was chosen and why you think that a new expert would come up with a case-winning report.
Disclosing the report
Your client should be told that they should not, without your authority, show the report to anyone else.
It is not uncommon for clients to show their report to their employers or to defence experts, whether to be helpful or to justify themselves.
Having discussed the report with the client and explained the procedural rules relating to expert evidence, you must obtain the client's express consent to its disclosure to the other side.
This should be confirmed in writing.
This is necessary because complaints and allegations of negligence relating to expert reports and their disclosure are a common source of dispute.
Medical evidence
Introduction
Medical evidence is the cornerstone and foundation of the evidence on quantum.
It must not be forgotten that the first person to give evidence about the injuries is going to be the plaintiff.
In preparing the initial proof of evidence of the plaintiff, a detailed history must be taken of the injuries, their symptoms and consequences, their treatment and the progress of recovery.
This statement should be enclosed with the letter of instruction.
The plaintiff should be asked for their views on the treatment received to ensure that there are no areas which may involve allegations of medical negligence.
If there are, they should be dealt with in a separate statement, bearing in mind the requirement for exchange of witness statements.
Selecting the right doctor
In addition to careful selection of the individual expert, attention must be paid to the type of expert who is instructed.
General practitioners
Most lay clients assume that you will get a report from their GP, although this is not usually necessary or desirable.
GPs' reports are rarely of much help, if only because they do not have the time or the experience to write useful reports and usually resent doing them.
They are necessary in cases where the plaintiff's symptoms or motivation are in issue.
In a minor injury case where a full recovery has been obtained, it will of course be appropriate to get a GP's report which may constitute the whole of the medical evidence.
They can also be very useful in the most serious cases to describe in sympathetic detail the daily course of the plaintiff's symptoms and treatment.
But in most cases a referral to, say, a registrar in the accident and emergency department of the local hospital will produce a much more powerful report.
GPs' records, on the other hand, will always be highly relevant and copies, along with copies of all other relevant records, should be enclosed with the letter of instruction to your chosen expert.
The  solicitor should look at the notes, as well as the medical expert, and keep copies on file.
Some GPs are very resistant to producing copies of their records and can cause considerable delay.
In extreme cases do not hesitate to write formally, threatening an application for non-party person discovery.
Consultants' reports
In a more serious case a report from a consultant, usually an orthopaedic consultant, will be necessary.
It is suggested that this should not be from the treating surgeon.
The treating surgeon may not necessarily be able to view the results of the treatment given with the necessary objectivity to provide a helpful medico-legal report.
It is suggested that an orthopaedic surgeon at a different hospital should be instructed.
The orthopaedic secretaries at that hospital should be telephoned to see which of the consultants is happy to do medico-legal reports and how quickly they can see patients.
If the right surgeon is picked then a report ought to be available within six weeks or so.
It is often a good idea to try and get a continuing working relationship with an orthopaedic surgeon who can provide reports quickly.
Non-consultants' reports
There are a number of independent physicians and general practitioners who are more than happy to conduct interviews for the purpose of medico-legal reports.
In minor cases these people can produce reports fairly quickly and will cover the matter in such a comprehensive manner that further reports should be unnecessary, particularly where there is a full recovery within a relatively short time.
Such people should obviously only be used in very straightforward cases or where an urgent preliminary report is needed for the purpose of issuing proceedings.
Initial reports in ser ious cases
In very serious cases, where it is highly likely that a series of medical reports will be necessary, the first report can be obtained from the treating surgeon.
Although it is unlikely that you would rely on this person for the totality of the medical evidence, they will be in the  best position, where the plaintiff is in the early stages of recovery, to give a comprehensive report on the injuries sustained, the treatment given and the present position.
No prognosis would be possible in a serious case for at least two or three months from the accident and the treating surgeon's report can thus be used as quite a good foundation for the independent reports which will follow later.
Similarly, in a case of maximum severity, it may be necessary to issue proceedings very quickly.
Given the requirement that medical evidence has to be served with the proceedings, and given the long waiting lists that now apply for very senior surgeons, it might be a good idea either to get an initial report from the treating surgeon or to use one of the independent physicians mentioned above.
Multiple injuries
There will be cases where it will be necessary to obtain reports from consultants in different areas of expertise.
It may be necessary to get reports from an orthopaedic surgeon, a neurologist and perhaps a plastic surgeon.
Lay clients do not like continuing medical examinations and continuing reports.
If there is any chance that the three consultants can examine the person on the same day, then it will avoid much of the trauma for the lay client.
It is important that each surgeon should know who else has been instructed so that they can concentrate on their own area of expertise and ignore areas which are outside their province.
Instructing medical experts
With a medical expert who is not the treating doctor you will need to include an authority from your client that they can see the hospital notes and the general practitioner's notes.
It is vital that these documents should be perused by any medical expert as well as you.
If your client is to be examined the letter of instruction should give full contact addresses and telephone numbers to enable an appointment to be made.
You should ask for a copy of the letter of appointment so that you can check that your client is going to be there, but also so that you can withdraw instructions if the appointment is too far ahead.
Unless there are very strong reasons to the contrary, the client is  entitled to see the report.
Although most doctors will be aware of this, it should still be referred to directly in the letter of instruction so that the doctor can indicate if there is some aspect of the report which should be withheld from the client, such as where the client is suffering from a non-related and serious illness or, in a psychiatric case, where disclosure of the report would exacerbate the symptoms.
Do not necessarily accept the doctor's word for this, you have your own duty to the client and the doctor may not have taken into account the importance of the case itself to the client's best interest.
It may be possible to rewrite the report without weakening it.
If this is not possible you may have to forget the whole report unless your client will accept that you have read it, or a separate part of it, and they cannot.
Defendant's medical evidence
Examination of the plaintiff
The defendant is only entitled to have your client examined by their medical expert.
There is now good authority that the plaintiff can decline to be interviewed by an employment consultant (Larby Thorogood (1992) 136 SJ (LB) 275).
However it may be prudent in such a case to offer the defence expert the facility to administer questions in writing to which the plaintiff can respond if they so choose.
Prior to the appointment there are a number of issues that should be raised with the client.
Usually a standard letter will be sufficient.
Most consultants are very resistant to anyone else being present during the examination.
The client has no right to insist and should be prepared for this.
In the USA it is common practice for personal injury firms to have a nurse on the staff who accompanies the plaintiff to the defendant's examination and takes notes.
You should tell the plaintiff anything that you know about the defendant's doctor from previous occasions.
You should point out the necessity of co-operating with the doctor but you should warn the plaintiff that this is limited to matters relating to his or her medical condition.
Tell the plaintiff that the doctor will be keen to detect signs of malingering and that no attempt to exaggerate the plaintiff's symptoms should be made.
Mention that doctors like to play tricks on  plaintiffs to test their symptoms and that they must assume that they will be under close scrutiny at all times.
Explain to the client that they will need to sign an authority so that the defendant's doctor can find out their entire medical history and that refusal will result in a stay of proceedings.
Warn them too that the defendant will only have to release their report if they intend to rely upon it and that therefore they may never see the report.
An example letter to the defendants agreeing full facilities for a medical examination can be seen in Appendix 8C.
Defendant's medical tests
It is occasionally the case that a defendant will wish not just to have the plaintiff examined, but that tests should be administered by their medical expert.
The authorities tend to show that if a test is bodily invasive and/or unpleasant or dangerous then the court will not stay an action until the plaintiff submits him or herself to the test.
The test itself has to be carefully looked at.
Even where it is not bodily invasive it may be inappropriate for the plaintiff to undergo the test; for example there is a non-invasive body scan which involves the patient being fed through a machine in very claustrophobic circumstances.
Up to one-third of people cannot force themselves through this procedure, even for the best of diagnostic reasons, and the court would never enforce a complete stay of the action in these circumstances (see further RSC Order 25, r 6).
Engineering evidence
Introduction
Engineers are the next most frequently used experts.
Consulting engineers are expensive.
An accident reconstruction can cost up to £1,000.
For this reason very few unassisted clients will be in a position to commission a report just to see if a case can be made out.
There are some cases that you simply cannot investigate properly without an engineer's report.
If this is true then the client should be told this.
If the client cannot afford it then the sensible way to  proceed would be to continue to press the insurers to form a view on liability.
If they continue to deny liability then you will have to evaluate the case as best you can without the benefit of expert advice.
If you do not feel that you can properly advise without an expert's report then you must say so clearly.
It is vitally important that the engineer should be given as much information as possible and should not be merely invited to turn up at the site and work things out alone.
The engineer should be supplied with all available statements and, unless it is vital to get an expert on the scene quickly, perhaps where the locus quo is likely to change, with the police accident abstract or equivalent report.
Given the expense of engineering reports it is all the more important to check out the expert's fitness before commissioning the report.
Instructing the wrong engineer can be a horribly expensive mistake.
Not only will you have got a report which is useless, but you will also have to get another one.
The strain on the client's finances will be huge.
Defendants' refusal to co-operate
It is common for defendants to resist allowing the plaintiff's engineer access until the case is pleaded on the grounds that it is a "fishing expedition" .
What in fact they want is to find out the basis upon which the plaintiff is making the claim, to tie the plaintiff down to a particular set of allegations before the engineer goes in.
It means that if the engineer comes up with a different story they can use this to embarrass the plaintiff at trial.
The problem for the unassisted plaintiff is that the expert's fee and the cost of any application makes for a very expensive gamble on liability.
The strategy must be to seek to ensure that the defendants bear the costs, at the end of every successful case, of every application for inspection made in the face of an unreasonable refusal of access.
Appendix 8A
Sample letter to client
Dear [Client name],
RE: YOUR CLAIM
I have now received the medical report from [specialist/consultant]and enclose a copy for your attention.
Please treat this report as confidential.
In particular, please do not disclose it to your doctor, employer or insurer without first discussing the matter with me.
I say this because if you raise any objections to the contents of the report we may choose not to disclose it to the other side.
If you show it to other people it could form part of their records which they may later be obliged to disclose.
Would you please read through the report and let me have your written comments.
Do you disagree with any of the points raised or has anything been left out?
It may be helpful to discuss this with a member of your family or someone else who knows you well.
Unless you have any objections I intend using the report as evidence to support your case.
As damages are paid on a full and final settlement basis, you will appreciate that we must be sure that the report is full and accurate before I begin any negotiations to try and settle the case.
Yours sincerely 
Appendix 8B
Sample letter to consultant
Dear [Consultant]NAME: ADDRESS: TELEPHONE NO: DATE OF INCIDENT: HOSPITAL ATTENDED: INJURY SUSTAINED:
We are acting for the above named in connection with a claim for damages in respect of injuries sustained in a []accident.
We enclose copies of the following documents for your attention:(a) client statement of accident and injuries;(b) GP records/client authority;(c)[Other records/client authority];(d)[Other reports].
Please examine our client and let us have a report dealing with the initial injuries sustained, treatment received, present condition and your prognosis.
Our client has to be fit for his/her occupation as a [].
Please could you let us know if you consider that this injury may affect our client's working capacity and, if so, for how long.
We also require your opinion as to whether there is a chance that our client will suffer any disease or deterioration in his/her physical or mental condition in the future as a result of his/her injuries.
Liability is contested in this case and we should be grateful if you would consider whether the injuries sustained by our client are consistent with his/her version of events.
It is also quite likely that allegations of malingering will be made and we would be grateful for your comments.
Please let us know if you have any doubts as to the medical treatment our client received after the accident.
It may be appropriate for these matters to be dealt with in a covering letter as they do not necessarily have to be disclosed to our opponents.
Please  telephone us if you anticipate any difficulties in this or any other matter.
As the report must be read and understood by our client, please avoid the use of jargon wherever possible and explain all terms used.
We have asked our client to keep any appointment which you make and we suggest that you send notification of the appointment to our client's home address.
Please send us a copy of your letter confirming the appointment.
We confirm that we shall be pleased to pay your reasonable fee for the report and that, as discussed, it will be delivered in approximately X weeks.
Yours sincerely 
Appendix 8C
Sample letter to defendant agreeing full facilities for medical examination
Dear,
RE:[Client name]v [Defendant name]
We confirm that we have no objection to your request that our client be examined by [].
However, we would impose the following conditions.
(1) The Consultant you have chosen must not have been involved in our client's treatment.
(2) The date, time and place of the proposed examination must prove to be convenient to our client.
(3) Our client is reimbursed travel, loss of income and other out-of-pocket expenditure incurred when attending upon your Consultant.
(4) A copy of the relevant appointment letter is sent to this office for our reference.
The original may go to our client at his/her home address.
(5) Neither our client nor this Firm be in any way responsible for the professional charges levied by your Consultant.
Please acknowledge receipt of this letter and confirm that you agree to the above conditions.
Yours faithfully 
Appendix 8D
Sample letter to expert
Dear [Expert]
RE [Client name]Date of Accident: Place of Accident:
We act for [Client name]in connection with a claim for damages for injuries suffered as a result of the above accident.
We enclose copies of the following documents for your attention:(a) client's statement;(b) police accident abstract;(c) witness statement.
Liability in this case is disputed.
It is our client's contention that the accident was caused by X [BRIEF SUMMARY OF FACTS AND ALLEGATIONS].
For this reason we would be grateful if you would carry out a thorough investigation of the accident with a view to preparing a suitable report to support our client's claim in negotiation and, if necessary, at trial.
As the report must be read and understood by our client, please avoid unnecessary jargon and explain all terms used.
We will need to disclose your report to our opponents, and so please include in a covering letter any comments you may have about any contribution our client may have made to the accident as these do not necessarily have to be disclosed.
Please telephone us if you anticipate any difficulties in this or any other matter.
Please make arrangements with our client to attend with him/her at the scene of the accident.
He/she can be contacted at [Client address/telephone].
Please send us a copy of your letter confirming the arrangements.
If necessary, please include a scale plan of the accident site and any photographs that are required.
We confirm that we shall be pleased to pay your reasonable fee for the report and that, as discussed, it will be delivered in approximately X weeks.
Yours sincerely 
9 Witnesses
By Ian Walker
Witness checklist
Witnesses are often your most valuable resource.
They are also as much a potential source of recommendations as the client.
The following checklist raises issues that must be addressed to ensure that witnesses and their evidence are properly handled.
(1) Does the witness understand why you need their help and how their evidence will help your client obtain justice?(2) Does the witness understand and accept that they may be required to give evidence in court and under oath?(3) Have you done all that you can to ensure that the witness is put to as little trouble and expense as possible?
Have you made proper use of initial questionnaires and will the interview be properly prepared and structured?(4) Have you considered if and when to issue witness summons or subpeonas?(5) Have you or your client prepared a thumbnail sketch of the witness for counsel?(6) Have you tested the witness's evidence as vigorously as the opposition will?
How much of what they say is fact and how much is opinion?
Are they too eager to help the client?(7) Do you have a system for keeping the witness informed of the progress of the claim where trial is likely to be delayed?(8) Do you know dates when the witness may not be available to give evidence?(9) Do you have sufficient information to contact the witness at short notice on the eve of trial?
Does the witness know how to contact you if they are going to be late?(10) Do you do enough to help the witness get to court; proper notice, instructions, map etc?(11) Do you have a system for thanking witnesses regardless of whether they have to give evidence?(12) Do you have an explanatory leaflet to give the witness?
Contacting witnesses
Always contact witnesses as soon as their identity is known.
Civilian witnesses are notoriously unwilling to assist unless pressed, particularly if they have already been obliged to give evidence in criminal proceedings.
If their identity can be discovered then a friendly, informal letter should be written to them explaining who you are acting for and why their help is needed.
Enclose an initial questionnaire, together with some guidance as to what sort of information you require.
Alternatively, it might be worth making an appointment to go and see them.
In a case where liability at the outset looks to be difficult or where there are many unanswered questions, a personal visit will be almost always essential.
Consider who should see the witness—you, a junior staff member or a reputable enquiry agent.
Contacting the other s ide's witnesses
There is no property in a witness.
It does not matter that you may perceive a witness to be a witness for the opposition; although it will happen rarely, if they are prepared to see you, go and see them.
Even if they have already been interviewed by the other side, if their evidence raises any unexpected points, there can be no objection to your approaching them to seek clarification.
You will at least be able to test the strength of the case against you.
Nor is there any bar against seeing someone against whom you have made or are likely to make allegations of negligence, provided that you make this clear and the fact that they are not under any obligation to talk to you.
How you approach this sort of witness will depend very much on the circumstances.
If it is someone associated with your client in the workplace, such as a foreman, then you will probably want to make a tactful approach through a fellow worker or a trade union official.
If they are a member of the public in a road accident case, then you could just approach them direct as you would any other witness.
If your client knows the defendant's witnesses they should be asked to give a character sketch of them.
While these sketches tend to be exaggerated at the witnesses' expense they may provide useful cross-examination material, particularly if you can obtain corroboration from other witnesses.
Examples would be where the witness can be shown to be unreliable, biased or prejudiced.
The same information is equally useful when negotiating.
If witnesses have already given evidence at the magistrates' court the Crown Prosecution Service might be persuaded to discuss the impression that they made.
Such approaches are best made by telephone rather than in writing and will only rarely be successful.
Tracing witnesses
Unfortunately, in road accident cases, advertising for witnesses rarely produces results.
It does no harm to write to the nearest local residents and businesses, but generally this is a long shot.
By contrast, in tripping cases and any other case where the condition of the road or roadside is relevant, it will almost always be necessary to circularise the neighbourhood (see Chapters 29 and 33).
In cases involving accidents at work, and in factory cases in particular, your own client or a close work colleague may be able to ask around to see if anybody actually saw the accident itself or can give background information about events leading up to the accident.
Even if your client is not a member of the trade union structure within the works, try and contact the trade union organisers.
They will probably be fairly reluctant to assist, given that your client is not a member of their union, but they might be persuaded to part with the safety minutes which contain relevant complaints that predate the accident.
It is always worth trying to trace a specific witness if their testimony is important.
Professional investigators are often paid by result.
What questions should I ask?
What you will ask the witness will depend very much on the circumstances of each case.
If they are witnesses to fact, you will need to know where they were when the accident occurred and how good their line of sight was.
Record exactly what they actually saw, not what they believe happened.
For example, in many road accident situations, the witness will only have realised that an accident had occurred when they heard the crash, and looked round and saw the aftermath, although they will try and tell you that they actually saw the vehicles colliding.
Witnesses often need to be talked through this aspect very carefully.
Make sure you get as much information about the background to the accident as possible.
In an industrial situation, for instance, the witness can often give helpful corroborative evidence as to the process of the machinery involved in the accident, and might be able to give some useful suggestions about previous complaints and the personalities of the parties involved.
The witness should be asked if they assisted your client after the accident and if anything was said.
It is often the case that the plaintiff will have made a complaint or comment which may serve to corroborate their version of the accident later.
Following such a complaint, the witness may have looked around to investigate the cause of the accident and they should be asked about this.
It is usually better to send a witness a questionnaire for completion prior to the interview.
A comprehensive questionnaire may mean that you do not need to see the witness at the earliest stage of your investigations (see Appendix 9A).
Preparing formal witness statements
The new rules as to exchange of witness statements (CCR Order 20, r 12A, SCR Order 38, r 2A) will require some witnesses to be seen much earlier than used to be the practice.
Once a witness has been seen they should be sent a proof of their evidence for signature immediately.
A properly signed and endorsed witness statement will carry more weight than a transcript should it be necessary to admit it under the Civil Evidence Act in the event of the witness being unable to give evidence at trial.
Providing that the interview is well structured, it should not be too difficult to produce a proof of evidence that can be used directly as a formal witness statement for exchange.
However, the statement should be more than a transcript.
It is permissible, even desirable, to edit and rephrase the statement so that it is clear and well structured.
Anything that is irrelevant should be omitted.
However, the statement will be read by the witness and the client, and should not be written in legalese.
You may wish to produce your proof of evidence in two parts; one part dealing with matters that will be raised and relied upon by you at trial, which must be disclosed; and one part dealing with matters  that might be raised against you on cross-examination, that you will not want to disclose.
In a thorough interview, it will be necessary to anticipate and address the issues, such as contributory negligence, the weight of the evidence and the credibility of the witness, that are likely to be raised in cross-examination.
If they are unhelpful, the answers to these questions should be recorded in a short, supplemental statement which will not be disclosed.
While you can only rely on issues raised in the statements that you exchange, and you must not mislead the court or the other side, you are not under an obligation to give your opponent notice of any weak points in your case.
Bear in mind, though, that the witness is entitled to ask for a copy of the statement and can show it to any one they choose, including the other side.
It is not covered by legal professional privilege.
Change of story
Witnesses do occasionally change their stories.
If you discover that one of your key witnesses is going to give completely different evidence in the witness box, you must see them and find out why.
It may be that they have discussed the matter with other witnesses, or even the opposition, and reconsidered their evidence.
If the new version of events is what they are now prepared to say on oath, you must accept it and reassess your case in the light of that knowledge.
If you decide not to call the witness the other side can still call them, but you can then cross-examine on the basis of the original statement to destroy their credibility.
If anything like this occurs you may need to reinterview all the witnesses.
If it is the plaintiff who changes their story then things are even worse because you may have to replead the case.
In these circumstances the entire strategy of the case needs to be reviewed.
Poor witnesses
If you have doubts about the quality of a witness work out how important their evidence is to the issues in the case.
If they are the only witness to deal with a vital issue then you will have no  alternative but to call them.
One strategy is to take a statement from them and tender it under the Civil Evidence Act to see if the other side serve a counter notice requiring them to be called.
The advantage of this is that, given that you have got to exchange witness statements anyway, there is always a chance that your opponents may consider that the evidence is not crucial or controversial and allow the statement to go in without the witness being called.
Witness summonses and subpoenas
It is probably worth while serving witness summonses as a matter of course.
Most lay witnesses will expect this in any event and can see why they are necessary, if only to facilitate time off work and the payment of expenses.
While you will not want to overstate the coercive nature of a witness summons or subpoena you must be clear about the consequences of non-attendance.
If a witness is reluctant to come to court you need to consider whether their enforced presence will be counterproductive, but most witnesses will accept the situation in the end and give their evidence in good faith.
Expert witnesses will prioritise hearings in which they have been summonsed.
Witness summonses can be served by post, preferably by recorded delivery.
Appendix 9
Sample road traffic accident witness questionnaire
Name: Address:
Tel.
No:(Business)(Home) Age: Occupation:
PLEASE STATE ONLY WHAT YOU SAW YOURSELF
1 State exactly where you were at the time (if in a motor vehicle please give number).
2 Speed and direction of travel or position of vehicles involved.
3 Describe how the accident happened, including any signals given by drivers concerned.
If possible please draw a rough sketch.
4 Describe damage to vehicles and injury to persons if known.
5 Give details (exact words if possible) of any conversation you had with the drivers involved.
6 Describe weather and tick appropriate words for visibility and road conditions at the time of accident.
Dark Light Wet Dry 
7 Describe any other factors which may be relevant, e.g. traffic signs or road works in the vicinity.
8 Were there any other witnesses of the accident (known to you)?
Please give names and addresses if possible.
9 Do you consider any person to be to blame for the accident?
If so, state your reasons briefly.