

TAXATION PROVISIONS TO CONSIDER WHEN SETTING UP AN OVERSEAS TRUST
1 What makes a trust an overseas trust?
There are a considerable number of provisions which the taxpayer must carefully take into account when setting up an overseas trust.
This chapter examines the question of what, precisely, is an overseas trust.
Capital gains tax
For the purposes of CGT, the trustees, as a body of persons, are deemed to be resident and ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom unless: 1.
the general administration of the trust is ordinarily carried on outside the United Kingdom; and 2. the trustees or a majority of them for the time being are not resident or not ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom (TCGA 1992, s69(1)).
Professional trustees and non-domiciled, etc settlor
Under TCGA 1992, s69(2), where the settlor was not domiciled, resident or ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom when he made the settlement, then if the trustees or a majority of them are "professional trustees" they will be treated as not resident in the United Kingdom and the general administration of the settlement will be treated as ordinarily carried on outside the United Kingdom.
The Revenue's criterion for determining whether a trustee is a "professional trustee" for this purpose is whether he is carrying out his functions as trustee in the course of his business (being a business which, as a matter of fact, includes the management of trusts) rather than as a private individual.
Clearly, a bank trust corporation will qualify and so should an accountant acting in a professional capacity.
A stockbroker will qualify provided his business includes the management of trusts and any remuneration as trustee is included in his firm's trading profits.
If as a result of that provision the trustees or the majority of them are deemed, in relation to the trust, not to be resident in the United Kingdom, the provision goes on further to provide that the general administration of the trust shall be treated as ordinarily carried on outside the United Kingdom.
The trust is thus deemed to be a fully non-resident trust.
Mr X is domiciled, resident and ordinarily resident outside the United Kingdom.
He puts £100,000 into a trust which has three English professional trustees (the trustees are resident and ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom).
The general administration of the trust is ordinarily carried on inside the United Kingdom.
By virtue of TCGA 1992, s69(2) the trust will be deemed to be a foreign trust for all purposes of capital gains tax.
It should be noted that if the settlor was domiciled outside the United Kingdom when he made the settlement but was either resident or ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom at that time, this special relief for professional trustees in s69(2) would not apply.
The foreign domicile alone therefore does not enable the taxpayer to make use of these provisions.
There are those additional requirements in respect of residence and ordinary residence.
Example
If the s69(2) relief is not applicable, it will be essential to have a majority of foreign trustees and for the general administration actually to be carried on ordinarily outside the United Kingdom if the trust is to be an overseas trust for CGT purposes.
Export trap
It will be seen later (see p112) that if a UK resident trust is exported a charge to CGT can arise under TCGA 1992, s80.
If a trust is UK resident, because the trustees are all resident in the United Kingdom and are non-professional trustees, and then professional trustees are appointed to act in their places, so the situation comes within s69(2) (the settlor not being domiciled, resident and ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom) an export charge can arise.
Meaning of "general administration" 
The following may be regarded as the main factors for determining where the general administration of a trust is carried on: 1.
location of assets; 2. location of bank accounts; 3. where the trust decisions are taken; 4. where the trustee correspondence emanates from.
The fact that UK-based professional advisors are used should not affect matters, nor should the fact that trust accounts are prepared in the United Kingdom.
Concession revoked
Extra-Statutory Concession D2 ( "Residence in the UK: year of commencement or cessation of residence" ) does not apply to trustees commencing or ceasing residence in the United Kingdom after 10 March 1981.
Thus if trustees are to be changed during a tax year in order to export the trusts overseas, only gains made after the end of the tax year (5 April) in which the export took place would be gains made by a foreign trustee; gains made on or before 5 April would be taxable upon the trustees in the normal way as gains made by UK trustees.
X and Y are trustees.
The general administration of the trust is ordinarily carried out in the United Kingdom.
X and Y are domiciled, resident and ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom.
From 1 July 1993 they retire from the trust in favour of two overseas individuals who are not resident, ordinarily resident or domiciled in the United Kingdom.
The general administration of the trust is ordinarily carried on outside the United Kingdom.
The capital gains made by the trust on 31 December 1993 are chargeable to UK capital gains tax as if the trust were a UK resident.
Gains made by the trust on 1 June 1994 (ie after 5 April 1994) are taxed upon the trustees as if they were gains made by a foreign trust.
Example
Income tax
The position with regard to the residence of trustees and income tax is governed by general principles as altered by FA 1989, s110 which in general applies for the year 1989/90 and subsequent years, ie it governs the position from 5 April 1989.
Generally, the income tax code taxes "persons" .
If the persons are resident in the United Kingdom they are chargeable to tax regardless of the location of the income source.
If they are not resident in the United Kingdom then they will be assessed only if the income has a UK source.
General principles
Under TA 1988, s18(1) tax charges arise under Schedule D on persons residing in the United Kingdom regardless of the location of the source of the income.
In Dawson v IRC [1989]STC 473, there were three trustees: two were not resident in the United Kingdom but one was resident in the United Kingdom.
The trust was a discretionary trust.
With regard to UK source income it was accepted, because the income arose in the United Kingdom, that the trust was liable to tax at the basic rate and the additional 10 per cent rate (p474(h)).
However, with regard to non-UK source income the point in issue was whether the income arose to a person who resided in the United Kingdom within Schedule D, s18(1) (a)(i).
The Crown accepted that the income of the  settlement arose or accrued to the three trustees jointly and not jointly and severally so that none of them was entitled, in law, separately to any particular share or fraction of the income.
The Revenue claimed it was sufficient if one of the trustees was resident in the United Kingdom.
The House of Lords felt there was no justification for assessing one trustee, namely the resident trustee, as, for instance, he had no right or control over the income.
His only right was to ensure that the trust obligations were carried out.
The House of Lords held that as the trustees were effectively one body and not all of them were resident in the United Kingdom there could be no income tax charge under Schedule D.
Counsel for the Crown argued that if the House of Lords so held this would mean that the foreign income of an accumulation trust administered in England and governed by English law to avoid taxation on overseas source income by the simple expedient of appointing one co-trustee resident abroad.
Lord Keith in the House of Lords effectively said "so be it" .
Thus, the general principle is that one must look to the particular taxing statute.
If it requires that the person to be taxed is resident in the United Kingdom that condition of residence would not be satisfied if one or more of the trustees is not resident in the United Kingdom.
To close the clear gap in the legislation referred to by Counsel for the Crown in the Dawson case, FA 1989, s110 was passed.
This provides that, where the trustees of a settlement include at least one who is not resident in the United Kingdom as well as at least one who is resident in the United Kingdom, then for all the purposes of the Income Tax Acts: 1.
if the conditions below are satisfied the trustee or trustees not resident in the United Kingdom shall be treated as resident in the United Kingdom; and 2. otherwise, the trustee or trustees resident in the United Kingdom shall be treated as not resident in the United Kingdom and as resident outside the United Kingdom.
The conditions which must be satisfied before effectively the non-resident trustees are deemed to be resident in the United Kingdom are the settlor, or where there is more than one any one of them, is at any relevant time: 1.
resident in the United Kingdom; 2. ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom; or 3. domiciled in the United Kingdom.
The following are the relevant times in relation to the settlor: 1.
in the case of a settlement made under a testamentary disposition of the settlor or on his intestacy, the time of his death; and 2. in the case of any other settlement, the time or, where there is more than one each of the times, when he has provided funds directly or indirectly for the purposes of the settlement.
The settlor in relation to a settlement includes any person who has provided or has undertaken to provide funds directly or indirectly for the purposes of the settlement.
Finance Act 1989, s110
It should be noted that this definition of "residence" applies throughout the taxing code including the provisions in TA 1988, ss739 and 740 although there are some transitional provisions set out in s110.
Thus, Mr X may put £100,000 into a trust which has one UK resident trustee and one trustee who is not UK resident.
The monies are invested overseas so that there is a Case IV or V source of income.
Assuming Mr X is the only settlor of the trust, if Mr X when he settles the monies was resident in the United Kingdom, ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom or domiciled in the United Kingdom then the foreign trustee would be deemed to be resident in the United Kingdom and there would be an uncontroversial income tax charge on the overseas source income.
The taxing code works without difficulty and the trustees would be assessed jointly—Lord Keith in Dawson v IRC referred to the fact that if all the trustees "had been resident in the United Kingdom application of the enactment would have been such that the income would have been treated as arising or accruing to all three, and all three would have been jointly assessable to tax" .
However, if the settlor at the time when he put the monies into the trust did not satisfy the requirements of the UK residence, ordinary residence or domicile set out in s110(2) then the trustee resident in the United Kingdom would be treated as not resident in the United Kingdom and all the trustees therefore would be resident outside the United Kingdom.
They would not be a UK resident person for the purposes of income tax and any overseas source income would not be assessed on the trustees under general principles.
It should be noted, as mentioned above, that this section deeming the particular trustees to be resident in or outside the United Kingdom does apply for the purposes of TA 1988, ss739 and 740.
Thus, the income arising to the overseas trustees (whether actual or deemed) may avoid a tax charge under general principles but on the other hand may result in the settlor or beneficiaries in an appropriate case being assessed under TA 1988, s739 or under TA 1988, s740.
Protectors
The point is often raised as to whether a protector who is resident in the United Kingdom, although all the trustees may be resident outside the United  Kingdom, could have any adverse effect with regard to the place of residence of the trust.
The protector often has powers to prevent trustees from doing things and may even have the power to remove trustees.
The danger with regard to capital gains tax is not so much that the protector may be treated as a trustee, which is very unlikely in a properly drawn protectorship clause in the deed, but that he may de facto intervene in the way the trust is carried out so that the Revenue may argue that the general administration of the trust is not ordinarily carried on outside the United Kingdom.
However, in most cases that problem could be overcome, for example, in an appropriate case by the protector flying overseas to make the appropriate decisions and consider the appropriate proposals.
With regard to income tax, of course, the danger is that the powers of the protector are such as effectively to make him a trustee in which case the trust may be deemed to be resident in the United Kingdom under FA 1989, s110 if the settlor when he created the settlement was resident, etc in the United Kingdom.
On the whole, therefore, the author tends to take a cautious line with regard to protectors: ideally, they should not be resident in the United Kingdom.
If they must be resident in the United Kingdom one should seek to reduce their powers so that they stand very much in the background acting only if things are going drastically wrong with the trust or major investment changes or beneficial ownership changes are to be made.
Even in these circumstances, furthermore, the protector would ideally be flying overseas to meet the overseas trustees to consider the particular problems and to make the appropriate decisions.
Extra-Statutory Concession D2 has also been amended as far as an individual is concerned so that it does not apply to a settlor of a resident or non-resident "settlor-interested" settlement.
Assume, for example, that X is the settlor of a non-resident settlor-interested settlement and that he emigrates from the United Kingdom part way through 1993–94.
Following the date of his emigration the trustees realise a gain.
That gain would, on the basis that he was domiciled and resident or ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom at some stage during the tax year, fall as a matter of general law to be attributed to him.
If the concession applied, however, he would not be liable to tax on the gain.
The amendment to the concession makes it clear that the concession does not have that effect.
The residence of trustees: the CGT overseas settlement code
Settlement and accordingly settled property for the purposes of TCGA 1992, s87(1) are defined by reference to the definition in Part XV of the Taxes Act 1988 (see TCGA 1992, s97(7)).
It is arguable therefore that the provisions dealing with the residence of trustees as a body of persons in TCGA 1992, s69(1) are not applicable to the non-resident trust code.
That code requires only that the trustees are at no time resident or ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom.
One may argue that (although one should not expect too sympathetic a hearing in the courts): 1.
if a UK person, ie someone resident or ordinarily resident and domiciled in the United Kingdom, sets up a trust which is administered abroad with two non-resident trustees and one resident trustee TCGA 1992, s87 would not apply because that requires that the trustees are at no time resident or ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom and one of the trustees is so resident; 2.
TCGA 1992, s69(1) deems the trust to be a person who is not resident in the United Kingdom; 3. the trust is therefore outside the UK capital gains tax regime and the Revenue cannot collect tax on capital payments under TCGA 1992, s87(4).
Inheritance tax
Generally, the residence of a trust is not important for inheritance tax.
It can be important for the purposes of seeing whether the settlor is liable for tax which is not paid by the trustees (IHTA 1984, s201).
It can also be important for the purposes of the provisions which require persons who were concerned with the making of settlements to notify the Revenue when they believe that the settlor was domiciled in the United Kingdom and the trustees of the settlement are not, or will not be, resident in the United Kingdom (see IHTA 1984, s218).
For the purposes of those provisions (ss201 and 218) the settlement for IHT purposes shall be regarded as not resident in the United Kingdom unless the general administration of the settlement is ordinarily carried on in the United Kingdom, and the trustees or a majority of them (and, where there is more than one class of trustees, the majority of each class) are for the time being resident in the United Kingdom.
Stamp duty
The residence of the trustees does not generally have relevance for the purposes of stamp duty.
Under the Stamp Act 1891, s14(4) a document is liable to stamp duty if: 1.
it is executed in the United Kingdom no matter where the property concerned may be situate; 2. it relates to UK property wherever it is executed; 3. it relates to anything done or to be done in the United Kingdom, eg payment of the purchase price or the issue of consideration shares.
Settlor's power to remove trustees
There is a danger if the settlor has power to remove trustees that it can be said he controls the trust.
It is not felt that the danger is a real one because one can never control the discretion of trustees.
However, if the settlor can control the investments etc a point may be reached where the line has been transgressed.
This may cause the trust to be resident in the United Kingdom so that CGT becomes chargeable on the disposal of trust assets.
If the settlor can call for the trust funds this may reduce the trustees to nominees.
In many cases, where the settlor is domiciled outside the United Kingdom, this may not have serious tax consequences if the nominees hold non-UK assets.
The residence of trustees—a Revenue teaser
 "Settlement" and accordingly "settled property" for the purposes of TCGA 1992, ss87-96 and 97(1)—(6) are defined by reference to the definition in Part XV of the Taxes Act 1988.
It is possible that the provisions dealing with the residence of trustees as a body of persons in TCGA 1992, s69 are not applicable to the CGT non-resident trust code in TCGA 1992, s87.
That code requires only that the trustees are at no time resident or ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom.
As a Revenue teaser (and no more), one would say: 1.
If a UK person, ie someone resident or ordinarily resident and domiciled in the United Kingdom sets up a trust which it administered abroad with two non-resident trustees and one resident trustee TCGA 1992, s87 would not apply because that requires that the trustees are at no time resident or ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom and one of the trustees is so resident (see also TA 1988, s220(2)).
2.
TCGA 1992, s69 deems the trust to be a person who is not resident in the United Kingdom.
3.
The trust is therefore outside the general UK capital gains tax regime (TCGA 1992, s69) and the Revenue cannot charge tax on capital payments under TCGA 1992, s87.
Trusts that do not bear close examination
Overseas trustees must properly carry out their trustee functions.
It is extremely important that the trustees consider their discretions  otherwise these may simply be set aside as the deeds of appointment were in the case of Turner v Turner [1983]2 All ER 745 where the trustees simply did what the settlor stated without independently exercising their discretions (see also Wilson v Turner (1883) 22 ChD 521).
In the Jersey Royal Court Decision of May 1990 Rahman v Chase Bank (CI) Ltd, the settlor was given a substantial amount of de iure control over the trust funds.
The settlor had a life interest and the funds were then held for a specified class as the settlor should appoint but in default thereof for certain beneficiaries.
During his lifetime the settlor had power, with the trustees' consent, to appoint capital as he saw fit to anyone including himself and he had power, without the trustees' consent, similarly to appoint in any period of 12 months one-third of the then capital.
The trustees had an independent dispositive power to transfer the capital to the settlor and in doing so had to have regard exclusively to the interest of the settlor.
All the trustee's significant administrative powers required the prior consent of the settlor.
Thus the settlor had considerable de iure control.
However, he went beyond such extensive controls and he exercised full de facto control and the trustees allowed this.
The court stated: We were unanimously satisfied that the oral evidence, together with the documentation, established clearly that from the date on which (the settlor) purported to constitute the settlement he exercised dominion and control over the trustee in the management and administration of the settlement, including distributions of capital to himself or to others as gifts or loans, and the making and disposition of investments.
He treated the assets comprised in the trust fund as his own and the trustee as though it were his mere agent or nominee.
We are unanimously of the opinion that the settlement was a sham on the facts in the sense that it was made to appear as a genuine gift when it was not.
Thus the trust's assets were part of the deceased settlor's estate and were available to satisfy the claims of his heirs.
Lost trust losses
X dies with an interest in possession in an overseas trust with assets standing at a capital loss.
The losses may be lost.
The trust should consider appointing out the assets to, say, X's children so at least they have an argument that they (X's children) can have the losses under TCGA 1992, s71(2).
If the trust is a discretionary one the losses are not lost.
For a recent Revenue concession concerning interests in possession see Trusts and Estates, Vol 7, No 7, p50 (Legal Studies and Services (Publishing) Ltd).
The washing of gains by death by concession is to be extended to interests in possession and not just life interests in possession.
The concession does not apply to computations settled before 17 February 1993.
2 Income tax: general principles applicable to overseas trusts
This chapter looks at the way in which overseas trusts are made subject to UK income taxation.
It looks at the position of the trustees and the position of the beneficiaries under the trust.
Generally, the settlor, once he has created the trust is functus officio.
However, the settlor could be assessed under Part XV of TA 1988 or under the anti-avoidance provisions dealt with in Chapters 3 and 4.
The trustee
A trustee holds money or property for the benefit of others.
The beneficial interests are normally vested in the beneficiaries.
The trust is proprietary.
This means that it is a separate legal entity from the particular person who is the trustee.
Thus, the property held by Mr Y as trustee is not available for the payment of Mr Y's personal debts.
The trustee is not normally subject to any control by the beneficiaries.
The beneficiaries cannot normally revoke his appointment.
Trusteeship may be compared with agency.
However an agent often holds no money or property for his principal unlike a trustee; if he does receive money from or for his principal he is merely in a position of debtor to his principal in respect of it and if he receives goods he may hold them as bailee only (see Lister v Stubbs [1890]45 Ch 1).
Therefore an agent may have no trustee functions or liabilities at all.
He may well be subject to control by his principal and his authority can normally be revoked.
In appropriate circumstances, of course, a trustee may have agency powers.
The two functions are conceptually distinct.
One person, however, may have both capacities in relation to another person.
The tax system is generally concerned with persons.
Trustees comprise a body of persons and therefore a person for the purposes of the income tax code (see the Interpretation Act 1978, Sched 1 (person), Reid's Trustees v IRC (1929) 14 TC 512, Luke v South Kensington Hotel Co [1879]11 Ch 121, Kelly v Rogers (1935) 19 TC 692 and ITC for London v Gibbs (1942) 24 TC 221 at 247 and Dawson v IRC (1989) STC 473).
In many cases a distinction has to be drawn between: 1.
trustees of, say, an accumulation and maintenance trust or a discretionary trust or a life interest trust; 2. bare trustees or nominees; and 3. agents.
Trustees in 1 above are generally treated as a wholly separate entity for tax purposes; in the case of a bare trustee, nomineeship and agency, the acts of those persons will generally be treated as the acts of the beneficial owners or principals.
Thus, if the trustees of an interest in possession trust were actually to pay monies it will generally be the trustees who will be treated for the purpose of income tax as having made the payment and not the beneficiary; if bare trustees, nominees or agents were to pay monies the beneficial owners or principals will generally be treated as having made the payments.
Because trustees are rarely dealt with specifically in the income tax code, it is critical to look at the appropriate taxing section (eg TA 1988, s15 in the case of Schedule A and s18 in the case of Schedule D) in order to ascertain the particular liability in a given situation.
Thus, if a trustee of a family trust or a nominee or bare trustee or even an agent receives rent there can be a liability to income tax on him (normally just at the basic rate but sometimes at the additional rate).
In such situations the Revenue have an option under general principles as to who to charge.
Lord Moncrieff in Martin v IRC (1938) 22 TC 330 at 341 stated: That Rule (Schedule D, but the same applies to Schedule A) gives an option to the taxing authority either to assess the person receiving the income and accountable to the beneficiary for it, or to assess the beneficiary direct.
In certain cases the courts have applied a "see-through" approach to trusteeship.
These occasions are now dealt with.
In Williams v Singer (1920) 7 TC 387, the courts took a pragmatic approach to a particular trust and held that if income arises to trustees of a life interest trust but it is paid direct to the beneficiary (so it never actually comes into the trustees' hands) then the trustees are not liable to tax on the money.
Lord Sands in Reid's Trustees v IRC (1929) 14 TC 512 at 527 explained that decision thus: The income never came into the coffers of the trustees, they never touched nor handled it.
But they were the owners of the securities, and it was by their own mandate, which presumably they might have recalled, that payment was made directly to the beneficiary.
It was, therefore, open to argument that theoretically the income must be held to have been received by them.
This contention, however, was rejected.
It was found that the substance of the matter and not only mere theory was to be regarded.
That was all that was determined by the judgment in Williams v. Singer.
It was not held, and the decision does not involve, that when a body of trustees receive income of the trust estate not taxed  at the source and proceed to distribute it among beneficiaries, they are not assessable to Income Tax and are bound to pay over the income to the beneficiaries without deduction, leaving it to the Revenue to pursue the beneficiaries.
The decision of Williams v Singer dealt with the question of whether a tax liability could arise upon trustees when they did not receive money even though they were entitled to receive the money and could have revoked their mandate.
As mentioned, a pragmatic approach was taken and no liability was imposed on the trustees.
First see-through
Thus, Williams v Singer is authority for the proposition that if the trustees of, say, a life interest trust direct that trust income be paid direct to the beneficiary the trustees escape an income tax charge.
Indeed, TMA 1970, s76 provides that a trustee who has authorised the receipt of profits arising from trust property by or by the agent of the person entitled thereto (the beneficiary), shall not if:(a) that person or agent actually receives the profits under that authority; and (b) the trustee makes a return of the name, address and profits of that person be required to do any other act for the purposes of the assessment of that person to income tax.
Thus, if X, Y and Z trustees direct A Ltd, the shares of which are owned by the trust, to pay dividends to B (the beneficiary) direct, or the agent of B, and the trustees make an appropriate return to the Revenue then they are not required to take any further steps with regard to the assessment of B to income tax.
However, that is a mechanical provision: Williams v Singer is authority for the proposition that the trustees cannot be assessed where they have made such a direction.
However, the principle in Williams v Singer cannot be taken too far and Lord Sands in Reid's Trustees v IRC made the point that if the trustees were actually to receive the income which they were bound to pay over to the beneficiaries they will not avoid an assessment on themselves.
Thus, under general principles if, for instance, A, B and C—trustees of an interest in possession trust—receive £100 rent which they must pay to Z beneficiary—the life tenant—(after the deduction of their expenses) the trustees can be assessed to income tax at the basic rate on the monies they received under Schedule A. The other fundamental case where trusteeship was reduced to something akin to agency is Archer-Shee v Baker (1927) 11 TC 749.
This case dealt with a life interest in possession overseas trust which was presumed to be governed by a trust law similar to that in the United Kingdom (otherwise the decision would have been different (see Garland v Archer-Shee (1931) 15 TC 693)).
The House of Lords held that when determining the nature of the source of the income arising to the trust one looked through the trust treating the trust for all practical purposes as if it did not exist.
The income did not change its nature just because the trustees took their expenses from the same.
At p775 Lord Atkinson stated:…
I am utterly unable to understand how the retention by the trustees in their own hands of a portion of the income which they receive in order to pay lawful claims upon the fund, and charges which probably the lady herself would have had to pay or get paid for her, if she were resident in New York, and which the trustees will have to account for fully, can change the "origin or parentage" of the residue of the income received, lodged with the bankers of the beneficiaries.
This residue has no doubt lost the shape of dividends, share warrants or the like but so would the entire income of the fund if it had been lodged in the same way with the Respondent's bankers.
On the Master of the Roll's reasoning it would appear to me as if nothing can preserve the true character and origin and parentage of the income paid to the beneficiaries through their bankers unless that be done by lodging with those bankers the dividends, share warrants and the like received by the trustees but not cashed.
With all respect I am quite unable to concur in this reasoning.
I think it is misleading.
However, it seems to the author that the concept must not be taken too far.
Lord Sands in the Reid's Trustees case at p529 stated: The dicta which might be founded upon…as indicating that a trust may be regarded as a mere agency or conduit pipe, are strictly limited to the case where the circumstances are similar, viz., where there is one beneficiary and the estate is already realised and duly invested.
Lord Morrison at p531 also referred to the fact that Archer-Shee v Baker was concerned with ascertaining the income from American investments subject to tax (ie the nature of the income) and not the person chargeable to tax: These cases [Williams v Singer and Archer-Shee v Baker]raised no question as to the person chargeable to tax.
Also in Reid's Trustees The Lord President (Clyde) referred to the fact that there were dicta enunciated without apparent qualification in Archer-Shee v Baker and Williams v Singer which pointed to the complete elimination of trustees in the matter of assessability to income tax.
The dicta were not to be followed.
The Lord President referred to the fact that it had never been suggested that trustees were not assessable under the old Schedule A or under Schedule B or Schedule D.
Second see-through
At p524 The Lord President stated: In neither of the English cases referred to was it doubted that if trustees carry on a trade or business—as they not infrequently have to do, at least for a time—they are assessable under Case I of Schedule D; although again the balance of their profits and gains is theirs only in a representative capacity…
My own opinion—for what it is worth in view of the two cases above referred to—is that trustees are the proper persons to be assessed in all cases in which the income of the trust estate received by them, or to which they are entitled, is not tax-deducted at source; and that—in the case of income of the trust estate which is tax deducted at source—they could not be heard to ask repayment of the tax  on the plea that the income did not arise or accrue to them but to others, whether such others were income-beneficiaries or capital-beneficiaries.
There is nothing inconsistent with the Income Tax Acts in recognising and respecting the distinction between property owned by a person as trustee and property owned by him in his own right…
The conclusion on the whole matter seems to be that trustees, albeit only the representatives of ulterior beneficial interests, are assessable generally in respect of the trust income under Rule 1 of the Miscellaneous Rules applicable to Schedule D; but that—just because they represent those beneficial interests they may have a good answer to a particular assessment, as regards some share or part of the income assessed, on the ground that such share or part arises or accrues beneficially to a cestui que trust in whose hands it is not liable to Income Tax, e.g. a foreigner under Case V, Rules 1 and 3.
The fact that most trust income is subject to deduction of Income Tax at the source has probably obscured the speciality which attaches to the representative character of trustees as payers of Income Tax; but if the proposition now maintained for the trustees is a sound one it is incomprehensible that it should never have been advanced with regard to the very large sums of trust income which do not, and never can, reach the hands of an income-beneficiary.
The decison of Reid's Trustees was followed in Kelly v Rogers (1935) 19 TC 692 (especially at 710 (Lord Hanworth MR)).
It is clear that Williams v Singer and Archer-Shee v Baker represent two inroads into the separate nature of trusteeship.
The third inroad or principle is that if income arises to the trustees and is required to be paid to the life tenant then the life tenant is taxable upon it whether or not he receives it; his entitlement to the monies is enough.
Megarry J in Spens v IRC (1970) 46 TC 276 at p285 stated:…where a trustee who receives income from investments holds those investments on trust for a life tenant, each sum received by the trustees is for surtax purposes the income of the life tenant as soon as it is received, for it is forthwith under the life tenant's control.
The question of control of the trust income is a critical one when one comes to look at trustee expenses (a point which did not arise in the Spens case).
Third see-through
Trust expenses are not deductible in ascertaining the basic rate tax liability of the overseas trustees (Aikin v MacDonald (1894) 3 TC 306).
They (the trust expenses) do, however, under general principles reduce the amount of income which can be taxed upon the beneficiary (Murray v IRC (1926) 11 TC 133 and MacFarlane v IRC (1929) 14 TC 532).
What therefore is there to prevent a taxpayer from putting his shares in the name of a nominee and obtaining a deduction from his higher rate tax liability for the nominee's expenses of management?
In those two cases Murray and MacFarlane Lord Sands referred to this  point.
In the case of a normal life interest trust the trustee expenses will reduce the taxpayer's total income.
This would not be the case where there is a bare trust.
Lord Sands in Murray v IRC at p138 stated: Now, that would be a sound view [the view that expenses could not be deducted (author's insertion)]no doubt if any expenses that were incurred before any payment was made to her had been expenses incurred by somebody she had employed to collect the money, because then these expenses would have been her expenses if they had been incurred by someone whom she was free to employ or not to employ.
But that is not the situation.
The expenses which were deducted before any payment was made to her were incurred not by anybody she employed but by the trustees whom the truster had appointed to manage his estate and whom he had directed to pay all necessary charges of administration before any division took place.
Again Lord Sands stated in the MacFarlane case at p540: The contention of the Appellant involves that he is liable to Income Tax in respect of income which he does not handle and cannot under any arrangement handle, which is not expended under any authority conferred by him, and over the expenditure of which he has no control.
In the case of Archer-Shee, which is said to have established that such income is income of the beneficiary, it appears to have been conceded by the Revenue that it was not to be so treated as regards liability for Income Tax.
In addition, Part XV of TA 1988 may tax the monies used on trustee expenses on the settlor.
That would be the case if the settlor, for instance, set up a trust under which the settlor had only a life interest in possession: monies spent on trustee expenses may be assessed on the settlor under Part XV of TA 1988.
Summary of trusteeship and income tax and general principles
From the above it seems clear that the following principles are established: 1.
trustees comprise persons for the purposes of income tax; 2. they comprise a separate entity liable to tax on monies they receive or which they are entitled to receive; 3. the main inroads into that separateness and liability are of a restricted nature as explained in the Reid's Trustees case; these inroads are:(a) in certain cases (but not all) where a trustee mandates income direct to a beneficiary the trustee will not be liable to tax (Williams v Singer);(b) in the case of a life interest trust a see-through or conduit approach is adopted for identification of source purposes so that the origin and parentage of the income is not changed by virtue of its journey through the trust (Archer-Shee v Baker);(c) if income arises to the trustees of a life interest trust (subject to deductions for expenses) it is taxable upon the life tenant whether or not he actually takes the money (Spen's case).
Current tax rates for offshore discretionary trusts which receive income (excluding dividends) —flat rate 35 per cent Such trusts pay "the rate applicable to trusts" , ie an amount equal to the basic rate (25 per cent) of tax and the additional rate (10 per cent )(TA 1988 s686(1A).
The additional rate and, indeed, the basic rate under general principles are only payable on UK source income.
X overseas discretionary trust receives UK rent.
Out of £100 rent the tenant will have paid the Revenue, under deduction, £25 thus remitting to the trust £75.
The trust is liable to £35 tax but gets credit for the £25 deducted at source so only paying the additional £10 to the Revenue.
If the rent was from non-UK land there will have been no tax charges under general principles although the income may be assessed under TA 1988, Part XV or TA 1988, ss739 or 734 or, if it is paid out in an income form to a UK beneficiary, it may be assessed on the beneficiary under Schedule D, Cases IV or V. The position with regard to dividends received by overseas discretionary trusts where the income is then paid out to a beneficiary is complicated because of the way in which the 10 per cent additional rate charge is levied.
Example
Current tax rates for offshore discretionary trusts which receive UK dividends—flat rate 35 per cent 1992/93
The trustees may receive a dividend of £75.
The additional rate of tax is 10 per cent of £75, ie £7.50.
The result is that £67.50 is available for payment to a beneficiary.
If that sum is paid to the beneficiary he will be entitled to a tax credit of £32.50, ie the £25 credit which must be paid to him plus the £7.50 additional rate.
Before obtaining that tax credit it is necessary that trust tax returns are submitted detailing all sources of trust income and payments to beneficiaries and that the additional rate of 10 per cent is paid by the trustees (ESC B18).
In the spring 1993 Budget the Chancellor announced that the tax credit on dividends paid by UK companies was to be reduced from 25 per cent to 20 per cent for dividends paid after 5 April 1993.
1993/94
This reduction in the tax credit has important consequences for trusts.
In order to deal with discretionary trusts, UK resident trustees bear a flat rate of 35 per cent(on UK dividend income).
In the case of non-resident discretionary trusts the Inland Revenue are effectively increasing the amount of tax due as the flat rate of 35 per cent applies on the combined amount of the dividend and a notional tax credit of 20 per cent rather than simply on the net dividend as before.
The Inland Revenue Budget Press Release of 16 March 1993 dealing with the taxation of dividends, paras 24–29, reads thus: 24 Where trustees of trusts in which a beneficiary has an interest in possession receive income, they pass it on to the beneficiary with a credit at the basic rate.
Where the beneficiary receives dividends paid after 5 April 1993, the value of the credit will be at the lower rate.
25 Trustees of discretionary trusts resident in the UK are liable to income tax at the basic and additional rates on dividends.
The tax credit which accompanies a dividend matches the basic rate liability but the trustees pay additional rate tax of 10%.
The combined charge is thus 35% (25 plus 10).
After 5 April 1993, discretionary trustees will be liable at a single flat rate of 35%.
They will be able to set off the tax credit against part of this liability.
On a dividend of £80 (plus a tax credit of £20) they will have a further £15 to pay.
26 The treatment of discretionary payments to beneficiaries will be unchanged under the proposals.
Beneficiaries will continue to receive all payments with a tax credit at 35%. 27 Under current law, trustees of non-resident discretionary trusts are not entitled to a tax credit on a dividend but are taxed on the amount of the dividend received.
Under the proposals, they will be liable to tax on the value of the dividend plus a notional, non-payable tax credit of 20% which will be set off against their liability at the single flat rate of 35%. 28 Income which discretionary trustees use to meet trust management expenses will not be liable to tax at the single flat rate of 35% but at the lower rate of 20% (if the income is dividends) or at the basic rate of 25% (if it is other income).
For both discretionary and non-discretionary trusts, trust management expenses will be treated as set off against dividends in priority to other income.
29 Trust management expenses of non-resident and dual-resident discretionary trusts will be treated in a similar way except that this rule will apply only to those expenses allowed against income liable to tax in the UK.
The proportion of expenses allowed will be the same as the proportion of the trustees' worldwide income which is liable to UK tax.
It is very important that credit is given for any UK tax which may have been borne by an overseas trust.
Keeping tax credits
An overseas trust may receive a UK company dividend and bear the 35 per cent tax rate.
What happens if the income is paid to a person resident in the United Kingdom and it is paid so that it is received as taxable income in the hands of that beneficiary?
The first point is the Revenue could take the simple point that as a matter of law no credits are available to the beneficiaries.
It is not possible to apply any see-through as in the case of an interest in possession trust.
The payments pursuant to the discretionary power derive from an overseas source and come within Drummond v Collins 6 TC 525.
In this case it was held that payments from an overseas discretionary trust came within Case V of Schedule D. Lord Wrenbury at p541 stated: The test…is…whether there is such an interest in a foreign possession that the party assessed derives income from it.
The case is, I think, within the Fifth Case and whether this is so or not, it is, I think, within Sch D…the income is annual profits arising to a person residing in the United Kingdom from property situate elsewhere than in the United Kingdom.
For these reasons I submit to your Lordships that the remittances are income subject to income tax.
The point being that because the income is within Case V relief for the 35 per cent is only available or can only be available by way of concession as s687(1) states that it applies in lieu of ss348 or 349 which are Case III Schedule D payments.
That is also the basis of the argument that a UK resident taxpayer could not claim back the 35 per cent tax under s687 where the original income derived from a non-UK source and rely on the Inland Revenue to pursue the trustees.
Concession B18 is therefore a vital concession and taxpayers are warned that there is a six year cut-off period beginning from the end of the year of assessment in which the income arose.
One difficult question is what is the situation if the overseas trust went through a non-qualifying buy-back procedure?
It will have received monies from the disposal of trust capital on the purchase of its own shares but the proceeds which will be treated as distributions for tax purposes (dividends) will have borne ACT and would potentially carry with them a credit.
It is felt that the best the taxpayer can do is to seek to pay out the monies in an income form to a beneficiary.
It may be if the trustees pay the 35 per cent rate less the tax credit the Revenue will agree to apply the concession treating the entire payment as one which has borne tax as required by B18 but the situation does not come within the wording of B18.
Find the source
The Revenue only seek to charge the 35 per cent rate if the income of the non-resident trust has a UK source.
It is not always easy to ascertain the source of a particular item of income.
If a company has its registered office through which an effective transfer of shares can be made in, say, England, and is also resident in England, then dividends clearly arise from a UK source.
If a company is resident in, say, France and the registered office through  which an effective transfer of the shares can be made is in France then the source is not UK and the dividends would comprise Case V (possessions) income.
It appears that if, for example, a Cayman Islands company (under which the shares can only be effectively transferred on, say, a register in the Cayman Islands) is resident in the United Kingdom there would be a UK located source of income (see American Thread Co v Joyce (1913) 6 TC 163 and Bradbury v English Sewing Cotton (1923) 8 TC 481) but an argument may be mounted to the contrary (see Erie Beach Co Ltd v Attorney General for Ontario [1913]AC 161, Brassard v Smith [1925]AC 371, Baelz v Public Trustee [1926]Ch 863 and London and South American Investment Trust v British Tobacco Co (Australia) Ltd [1927]1 Ch 107).
The 35 per cent rate may be avoided if the overseas trust owns an overseas company with the UK dividends being paid to that overseas company (and of course the shares in the UK company being held by that overseas company).
In that case ACT would have been paid at source but there would be no additional charge.
If the settlor can benefit under the trust or his wife can benefit then it may be that the dividend would be assessed upon the settlor under TA 1988, s739 with credit being available for the ACT.
Avoiding the 35 per cent rate
No deduction for management expenses
Under general principles non-resident trustees who receive a UK source of income are liable to the basic rate of tax; they cannot obtain a deduction for management expenses from that basic rate tax charge.
In Aikin v Macdonald (1894) 3 TC 306, the trustees received £100 and were liable to pay the basic rate of tax.
£10 was payable as expenses for the management of the trust.
The question was whether the basic rate of tax was payable on the whole £100 or on only £90.
The Court of Exchequer held that the management expenses could not be deducted because: 1.
any authorised deductions should have occurred at an earlier stage than when the trustees received the monies; when the monies came to the trust they had "come home" ; and 2. there was no heading under which the deduction could be made.
Lord McLaren at p309 stated: It seems to me that in such a case the deduction would be no more claimable than in a case where an individual partner having money in many concerns chooses to employ a private secretary for the purpose of keeping an account of his income and his expenditure.
The management of the trustees is really, I venture to think, of the nature of what is described in one of the rules as a private or  domestic use, and so described for the purpose of making it clear that it is not to be allowed as a deduction.
Any expenses which are properly payable by the trustees out of income under the terms of the trust or under any applicable statutory provisions are paid in reduction of the beneficiary's total income (Murray v IRC (1926) 11 TC 133; Macfarlane v IRC (1929) SC 453; 14 TC 532).
But if the expenses in question are payable out of income to which the beneficiary has already become entitled, the expenses are not a proper deduction from the beneficiary's total income, since they represent simply the mode in which he applies his income after he has become entitled to it.
The trustees' expenses and proper management fees, therefore, are paid out of the income of the trust taxed at the basic rate, and no relief can be claimed by the trustees or beneficiaries in respect thereof.
(See also page 20).
If a UK beneficiary is entitled to the trust income because, for example, he has an interest in possession, the income may form part of his total income and he would pay tax on it in the normal way.
Beneficiaries
Fixed trusts
In the case of Archer-Shee v Baker (1927) 11 TC 749, it was held that income arising to a beneficiary from a non-resident trust where the beneficiary was the sole life tenant resident in the United Kingdom was income receivable by the beneficiary from the specific securities stocks, shares, rents or other property which constituted the trust fund.
It was not income from the interest under the trust (which would have been a foreign possession regardless of the underlying sources).
The fact that the trustees had to retain some monies to cover expenses did not prevent the income arising from the specific assets.
Lord Atkinson, at p775, stated:…
I am utterly unable to understand how the retention by the trustees in their own hands of a portion of the income which they receive in order to pay lawful claims upon the fund…can change the "origin or parentage" of the residue of the income received [and]lodged with the bankers of the beneficiary.
Thus, the origin or parentage of the money is not lost by virtue of its journey through the trust in the case of a fixed interest trust like that in Archer-Shee v Baker.
In Garland v Archer-Shee (1931) 15 TC 693, it was held that if the foreign law governing the non-resident trust vested the property in the trustees with the beneficiary taking no interest in the trust property as such but only having the right to enforce the performance of the trust in equity then, contrary to the decision in Archer-Shee v Baker, the taxpayer would not receive income from   the actual assets held by the trust but would receive income from a foreign possession.
Discretionary trust
If a beneficiary resident in the United Kingdom receives or is entitled to receive income from a non-resident discretionary trust, is the income assessable on the UK beneficiaries under Schedule D, Case III, IV or V?
It seems clear that Case III is inappropriate if Cases IV or V are also applicable.
In other words, Cases IV and V cut down Case III.
In Westminster Bank Executor and Trustee Co (Channel Islands) Ltd v National Bank of Greece (1970) 46 TC 472, a Greek bank guaranteed bonds issued in London.
The successor to the guarantor had a branch in London and deducted tax on paying sums under the guarantee.
The payee claimed that the sums were assessable under Case IV not Case III and that, therefore, no deduction should be made.
The Court of Appeal held that the bonds were a foreign source and that therefore Case IV (and not Case III) applied.
As an overseas discretionary trust gives rise to sources under Case IV or V (see p21) it is clear that Case III is not applicable.
Where it appears that an item of income falls within Cases IV or V and also Case I the Revenue can choose which Case to apply.
In The Liverpool and London and Globe Insurance Co v Bennett (1913) 6 TC 327, a UK company carried on a trade in the United Kingdom and overseas and income from investments overseas (interest and dividends) arose to the company.
The  company claimed that under the then rules this was only taxable (the interest and dividends) when brought back to the United Kingdom.
The House of Lords found that the interest and dividends comprised part of the trading income.
The business carried on by the company was one entire business and for the purposes of Case I there was only one trade.
Earl Loreburn (read by Lord Parker) at p378 stated: The only question here is whether the interest and dividends before us are profits or gains of this Company's trade, manufacture, adventure, or concern in the nature of a trade, within the meaning of the 1st Case.
I think they are, upon the facts found by the Commissioners—whatever may have been the source from which the invested moneys were originally derived…
They are, to use Lord Justice Buckley's apt expression, the "fruit derived from a fund employed and risked" in a business coming within the statutory definition.
And the Crown cannot be compelled to proceed under Case 4 or 5 if it prefers to proceed under Case 1.
The remittance basis is only applicable to Cases IV and V and capital gains tax and thus it is important to keep within the correct Case.
Mr X may be resident and ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom but not domiciled in the United Kingdom.
He may have monies in an overseas account.
He may from time to time change currencies and make gains on currencies.
Under general principles he would expect the capital gains to be taxed on a remittance basis and any income to be assessed under Case IV or V of Schedule D on a remittance basis.
However, if he is a currency speculator he may be found to be trading in currencies and as he resides in the United Kingdom it would be very difficult to show that the trade was carried on outside the United Kingdom.
The remittance basis does not help the taxpayer if he is assessed under Case I of Schedule D or possibly even under Case VI of Schedule D.
The Revenue, as already mentioned, can choose between such Cases.
In Lord Inchyra v Jennings (1965) 42 TC 388, the taxpayer was entitled to receipts from a trust governed by the law of Columbia and under that law the payments for the purposes of taxation and trust accounts were capital payments.
Is the UK beneficiary receiving income?
Income from stocks and shares
However, the payments were paid out regularly and if one were to apply the normal UK rules those payments would have taken on the form of income (see Brodie's Trust Deeds v IRC (1933) 17 TC 432; Jackson's Trust Deeds v IRC (1942) 25 TC 13 and Postlethwaite v IRC (1963) 41 TC 224).
Pennycuick J held in Lord Inchrya that one had first to ascertain the nature of the payments according to the law governing the position, ie the law of the  District of Columbia.
When that has been ascertained one must determine the nature of the receipts as capital or income in accordance with the law of England.
How the foreign jurisdiction taxes the payments is not relevant (see Associated Insulation Products Ltd v Golder (1944) 26 TC 231).
Whether the overseas jurisdiction treats the same as income or capital for the purposes of the preparation of accounts is not important.
English law must be applied.
In some cases, such as on the partial liquidation of a company in accordance with the corporation law of the State of Maryland, such payments would have a capital nature (Rea v Lazzard Investment Co Ltd (1963) 41 TC 1).
However, in the case of Lord Inchrya the payments to the beneficiary were of a periodical nature and although made out of capital (see however Stevenson v Wishart 59 TC 740) were payments of income and must be taxed as such.
In Lawson v Rolfe (1969) 46 TC 199, it was held that stock dividends paid under a particular provision in the law of California were not income in the hands of a life tenant of an American will trust.
Under California law the stock dividends were attributed to the life tenant.
However that did not affect the central question of whether those stock dividends were to comprise a capital or income receipt as far as the beneficiary was concerned.
The court held that the erratic payment of stock dividends by companies to shareholders (even though stock dividends were received in 1962/63 and 1963/64) paid out to the life tenant, was such that the payments in the hands of the life tenant were in the nature of capital.
The courts applied the normal Brodie principles to ascertain therefore the nature of the payments by the trustees to the beneficiary.
In conclusion the payments were held to be capital.
Thus, there could be no Schedule D income tax charges.
Stock dividend
Where stock is taken in lieu of cash dividends it is in practice treated as a simple bonus issue and no Case V liability is considered to arise.
Different rules, of course, apply to stock dividends from companies resident in the United Kingdom.
Under general principles if a bonus issue is made to shareholders who have no option to receive cash in lieu of the shares (otherwise special rules may apply) that bonus issue does not comprise the payment of a dividend (IRC v Blott (1921) 8 TC 101).
It is a tax-free capital receipt.
Simple Bonus issue
Preceding year basis source
It is important to ascertain the source of overseas receipts to ascertain how income derived therefrom is to be taxed.
Taxpayers should seek to have income if at all possible assessed under TA  1988, Case III or Cases IV and V rather than Case VI because in the former Cases the assessment is on the preceding year basis.
Taxes Act 1988, s64 provides that the general rule with regard to Case III of Schedule D is tax shall be computed on the full amount of the income arising within the year preceding the year of assessment and shall be paid on the actual amount of that income without any deduction.
Special rules apply to fresh sources of income: broadly, in the early years the income is assessed on an actual basis.
Taxes Act 1988, s66(3) states that if at any time a person acquires a new source of any income in respect of which he is chargeable under Case III or makes an addition to any source of any such income then in the year of assessment in which the income first arises from the source or addition and the two following years of assessment the charge shall be on an actual basis in accordance with TA 1988, s66(1).
For instance, a trust may have a bank account.
The source may be a UK source.
The trust may be a discretionary trust.
The charge would be on a preceding year basis although if additional funds are added to the account the income arising from the additional funds will be assessed on the actual basis in the early years.
In Hart v Sangster 37 TC 231, £2M was added to an account which had a credit at the time of approximately £20,000.
It was held that the income arising from the £2M was to be assessed basically as if a new source of income had arisen, ie there had been an addition to the account within s66(3) and the income arising from the addition would be assessed on an actual basis during the early years.
Lord Goddard CJ at p238 stated: As I say, I think it is argued here that the source of income was the contract [with the bank].
I cannot agree with that.
I think the source of income here was the deposit of money upon the terms of the contract.
In my opinion, if an addition is made to the amount which is desposited, the words of section [66(3)]are quite wide enough to catch it.
I quite agree that certain difficulties might be imposed on the Inland Revenue if they were to pursue every deposit account and find whether or not there had been an addition to the account during the course of the year.
That is a matter for the Inspector of Taxes or those responsible for the assessment to decide as to how they will deal with those matters.
I do not suppose that in every case it would be worth the trouble that would be caused to the taxing authorities if they were to inquire into every deposit account and find if the interest had been increased, unless it had been increased by a large amount.
Here, of course, the increase of £2,000,000 is very great.
In my judgment there is no question but that there has been a source of income in the deposit of money, and at any rate there has been an addition to a source of income here.
It may be that if there is an overseas trust with X in the United Kingdom having a life interest therein and with the trust fund comprising UK source bank deposits (for instance) that the preceding year basis will apply (with regard to the assessments made on X) although if further monies are put into the trust (and these are similarly put on deposit with the UK bank) the income  arising from the additional monies will be assessed on an actual basis in the early years as comprising income arising from a fresh addition to the source within TA 1988, s66(3).
In many cases the structure may also be capable of being assessed under TA 1988, s739 although if there is a UK life tenant it may be argued that the income is not in reality paid to a person who is resident or domiciled outside the United Kindom within TA 1988, s739.
The Revenue seem to have an option to apply Cases III, IV and V or Case VI but the author is aware of cases where the Revenue have permitted the preceding year basis to apply under Cases III, IV and V although the Revenue could have assessed under Case VI.
Discretionary trusts
In the case of Drummond v Collins [1950]AC 1011, a testator resident abroad, by his will, gave his property, which was situated abroad, to trustees upon trust for the benefit of his deceased son's children, who were minors, for life and their issue after them, there being a provision that the trustees should accumulate the income of the respective shares of the children and add the accumulations to capital until each child should attain the age of 25 years, when the child was to become entitled to a portion of the accumulated fund.
The will contained a direction for the trustees, out of the net income of the proportionate share of the estate held in trust for any child, to make such provision from time to time as they in their uncontrolled discretion might think necessary or advisable for the suitable maintenance and education of such a child.
The trustees from time to time remitted to the mother of the children, who was their guardian and who was residing with them in England, sums of money in accordance with the provision of the will for the maintenance and education of the children.
It was held that these remittances, in the hands of the mother, were assessable to income tax under Schedule D, Case V as being monies received in this country in respect of foreign possessions.
One of the arguments raised by the taxpayer was that the payments were voluntary and therefore there was no source.
Earl Loreburn stated: I do not assent to the proposition that a voluntary payment can never be charged, but it is enough to say that these were not voluntary payments in any relevant sense.
They were payments made in the fulfilment of a testamentary disposition for the benefit of the children in the exercise of a discretion conferred by the will.
There was thus a source and this gave rise to the tax liability.
Again in Johnston v Chamberlain (1933) 17 TC 706, the taxpayer sought to argue that a payment from a discretionary trust could not give rise to income tax liability on the beneficiary as it was "only when the trustees choose to exercise their discretion by making the payment that the sum gets to the children at all" .
However, Finlay J held that the matter was no longer open to argument: the law was settled in Drummond v Collins and  reaffirmed later by Rowlatt J in Lord Tollemache v IRC 11 TC 277.
If the overseas trustees validly accumulate the income, the income will not, under general principles, be taxable upon the beneficiary (although he may be taxed under anti-avoidance provisions mentioned hereafter).
Additionally if the trustees add the income to the capital of the trust fund and pay the same out to the beneficiary in a capital form, under general principles there will be no income tax charged upon the beneficiary (there could be a charge however under certain anti-avoidance provisions mentioned hereafter).
See IRC v Blackwell Minor's Trustees [1924]2 KB 351; 10 TC 235, Stanley v IRC [1944]KB 255; 26 TC 12 but note Stevenson v Wishart 59 TC 740.
Lend yourself out of Wishart
If trustees make a payment of monies to a beneficiary this may comprise income in the hands of the beneficiary thus giving rise to a tax charge.
If the payments come out to the beneficiary in a capital form then there will be no income tax charge upon the beneficiary (Stevenson v Wishart 59 TC 740).
Instead of making an outright payment to a beneficiary the trustees may decide to lend monies to a beneficiary.
It seems to be quite clear that there would be no tax charge upon the beneficiary under general principles because of the obligation of the borrower to repay the loan.
In the case of Esdaile v IRC 20 TC 700, the taxpayer who received a number of sums from her trust sought to defeat assessments under Case III of Schedule D on the grounds that the payments were really loans to her.
It was held on the facts that the trustees did not have the power to make such loans and that the payments were in fact outright payments so that she was properly assessed to income tax.
Tax credits
See page 20.
The settlor: general rule
Once the settlor has put the property into the settlement the general rule is that it will cease to be his for all tax purposes.
Thus, any income arising from the settled property will arise to the trustees not the settlor, so the settlor will not be taxed on that income.
There are, however, three main anti-avoidance provisions to consider.
These are: 1.
The Income Tax Settlement Code (TA 1988, Part XV); 2.
TA 1988, s739; and 3.
TA 1988, s740 (the charge under this section is applicable to beneficiaries who receive benefits from the trust).
3 Income tax: the income tax settlement code: TA 1988, Part XV
Generally, once a settlor has put property into a settlement he will have alienated the income therefrom for income tax purposes for the period that it is held in trust.
There are, however, a number of provisions contained in TA 1988, Part XV (ss660-689) which seek to tax the income arising from the trust property upon the settlor, even though he may have attempted to alienate that income for tax purposes.
The aim behind the sections is to prevent the settlor alienating income to the trustees, and therefore perhaps paying a lower rate of income tax than he would otherwise pay, when at the end of the day he might be able to get the accumulated income back.
The effect of the provisions is to deem the income to be that of the settlor, usually for all the purposes of income tax but sometimes only for the purposes of the higher rate of tax.
These provisions do not take away the income from the beneficiary; they merely alter the income tax payable on that income.
Lord MacMillan in Perry v Astor (1935) 19 TC 255 at p289 stated: The Section does not declare that the dispositions with which it deals are to be treated as non-existent in a question between the maker of the disposition and the Inland Revenue.
The scheme of the Section is that the income which the settlor by his disposition has diverted from himself and conferred on another shall be notionally restored to him while in fact continuing to be applied as he has directed.
The income which in fact is the income of B is to be treated for income tax purposes as the income of A. The purpose is notionally to transfer B's income to A, so that A may be charged to tax on the aggregate of his own and B's income.
The person to whom the income is payable under the disposition and the person who has made the disposition are to be treated notionally as a single taxpayer.
The incomes of the two persons are to be amalgamated.
Mr A has income of £100,000.
He transfers assets to a discretionary trust.
The trustees have the power to advance funds to him so that the settlement is caught by, for instance, TA 1988, s674.
In the year of assessment 1993/94 the trust has income of £50,000.
Mr B is the trustee of the trust.
Under general rules the income is the income of Mr B (as trustee).
Section 674 deems that income for tax purposes to be the income of Mr A. The income of £50,000 is amalgamated with  the £100,000 and Mr A is assessed accordingly.
The tax so assessed on the £50,000 is £20,000.
Mr A can recover that sum of £20,000 from the trustee (Mr B) to enable Mr A to pay the tax (TA 1988, s675(3)).
These provisions only apply to settlements but that term has a wide meaning.
It includes "any disposition, trust, covenant, agreement or arrangement" .
Example
In the case of settlements by virtue of which income is paid to or for the benefit of an infant unmarried child of a settlor, the definition is extended to include "transfers of assets" (s670).
For example, Mr X gives property to Mr Z who holds it absolutely for the infant unmarried son of Mr X. That is a transfer of an asset and a settlement for the purposes of ss663 and 664 (although the Revenue may not apply ss663 where the income is not paid to the infant).
It is difficult to prevent the creation of a settlement, although there cannot be a settlement unless there is an element of bounty.
Identification of "settlement" and "settlor" 
In IRC v Plummer [1979]STC 793, a "Reverse Annuity Scheme" was entered into under which a charity paid money to the taxpayer who covenanted to make annual payments to the charity for the period of five years or during the remainder of the life of the taxpayer whichever be the shorter.
Certain security was provided to ensure that the payments would be made.
The House of Lords held by a majority of three to two that the annual payments were deductible in computing the taxpayer's income.
One Revenue contention was that payments were made under a settlement within TA 1988, s683 because the transactions were not bona fide commercial transactions.
The taxpayer contended that it was necessary, before the Revenue could succeed, for the Revenue to show that there was an element of bounty.
The House of Lords held (Viscount Dilhorne and Lord Diplock dissenting) that the term "settlement" only applies to transactions which include an element of bounty and not to all transactions that were not bona fide commercial transactions.
Lord Fraser (at p813) stated: The Crown contended that the definition in s454(3) (now TA 1988 ss681(4)) applied to all transactions that did not have a bona fide commercial reason, and that it applied to the present transaction, the sole reason for which was to avoid tax.
The taxpayer contended that the definition applied only to transactions which included an element of bounty.
In many cases the two contentions might lead to the same result, but not in the present case.
In my opinion the true rule is that the definition applies only where there is an element of bounty.
One reason is that the commercial transaction test seems to go too far; many transactions which will be generally regarded as perfectly legitimate forms of investment, are entered into solely, or at least predominantly, for tax reasons, and I think it would be wrong to suggest that they might be taxable for that reason alone.
But the main reason in favour of the bounty test is that the word "settlement" …seems to me to be used…with a flavour of donation or bounty.
The position, therefore, can be summarised as: "NO BOUNTY, NO SETTLEMENT" .
This case was approved in Roome v Edwards [1981]STC 96 and in the cases of Eilbeck v Rawling and WT Ramsay Ltd v IRC [1981]STC 174.
In the case of IRC v Levy [1982]STC 442, the taxpayer made an interest-free loan to his company which was repayable on demand.
The company dealt in stocks and shares.
The Revenue contended that there was an element of bounty because there was no obligation upon the company to pay interest.
The Special Commissioners found as a fact that there was no element of bounty with regard to the loan.
Nourse J in the Chancery Division agreed with the finding of the Special Commissioners and felt that the Inland Revenue had failed to see the wood for the trees (p457e).
He said (at p457): The law can therefore be summarised as follows.
Before a disposition, trust, covenant, agreement or arrangement can be a settlement…it must contain an element of bounty.
For that purpose a derivative bounty of the kind conferred by the exercise of a special power of appointment may be enough.
On the other hand, a commercial transaction devoid of any element of bounty is not within the definition.
The absence of any correlative obligation on the part of him who is at the receiving end of the transaction may be material, but is not conclusive, in determining whether it contains an element of bounty or not.
If those principles are applied to the facts of the present case, in particular to the Commissioners' finding that the transaction did not involve any bounty on the part of Mr Levy, it is clear that there was no disposition, agreement, or other transaction within s454(3) of the 1970 Act [now TA 1988, s681(4)].
It was the simple case of a commercial transaction devoid of any element of bounty, and it is immaterial that [the taxpayer's company]did not assume any correlative obligation for the payment of interest or otherwise.
It is just conceivable that the Inland Revenue, thicketed about with legislation and case law, might think these provisions of the Income Tax Acts had some concern for a transaction of that nature, but that is hardly a view which could be shared by one who got out and looked at the wood as a whole.
It should be noted that the definition of "settlement" in TA 1988, s681(4) is applied to the overseas capital gains tax regime in TCGA 1992, s97(7) and it is clear that before a settlement can exist under that code (which excludes s86) there must be an element of bounty (IRC v Plummer 54 TC 1).
Bounty can also be of a derivative nature.
If Mr X gives property to his settlement there will clearly have been an element of bounty.
However, what is the position if the settlement then gives property under a power of appointment to another settlement?
In the case of Chinn v Hochstrasser 54 TC 311 at 351 and 357, the Court of Appeal held that an appointment by the trustees of a settlement under a special power did not contain an element of bounty since they were merely the agents of a settlor whose bounty had been exhausted on the creation of the settlement.
The House of Lords disagreed and it is now the law that it may be enough for the transaction to contain an element of bounty if it is of the kind conferred by the exercise of a special power of appointment.
Assets of company are not assets comprised in the settlement
It was held in Chamberlain v IRC 25 TC 317 that where assets settled by X were invested in shares in a company controlled by the settlor, the whole of the capital of which was held by the trustees themselves, the income arising in the company did not arise from property comprised in the settlement within the meaning of TA 1988, s672(1).
Lord Romer said at p335 "but I must confess that, with all respect to the Commissioners, it passes my comprehension how the structure of a company can form part of a settlement" .
The court took a very simple view: the shares in the relevant company were the assets comprised in the settlement.
If dividends were paid then the dividends would derive from assets comprised in the settlement.
However, the company was a separate entity and its assets were not the assets comprised in the settlement.
The decision in Chamberlain v IRC was followed in the case of Clark and the Langrange Trust and Investment Co Ltd v IRC 28 TC 55.
In that case assets were transferred to a company and there was then created a settlement by the transferor for the benefit of his children: the trustees were allotted shares in the company.
The Crown argued (unsuccessfully) that the transactions constituted a settlement within what is now TA 1988, s663 and that the income of the property transferred to the company should be treated as the income of the transferor (the case also involved legislation repealed by FA 1972).
The decision in Chamberlain was also followed and referred to in Vestey v IRC 31 TC 1 but Lord Reid did give a warning: The ingenuity of those who devise these schemes is such that it might be rash to say that property can never be comprised in a settlement unless it is charged with rights in favour of others, but I think as a general rule this must now be the test.
(p120)
 "Spectral settlors" 
It is important to identify the settlor because if he or his spouse has retained a benefit or interest under the settlement or can benefit under the settlement he can be taxable upon the trust income.
The case of Copeman v Coleman (1939) 22 TC 594 concerned a company which was formed in 1933 with a capital of £1,000 owned equally by the respondent and his wife.
On 18 March 1937 at an extraordinary general meeting the capital of the company was increased to £6,000 and it was provided that 25 per cent preference shares should be created at £200 each.
These were entitled to a 10 per cent preferential dividend and to participate with the ordinary shares equally in the surplus.
The rights of these shareholders could be reduced, increased or abrogated by the company in general meeting.
These preference shares were allotted to the relations of the respondent and his wife and two of them to their children in consideration of a payment of £10 each in cash.
On 31 March 1937 a dividend of 20 per cent was declared free of tax and each of the respondent's children received £40.
On the date on which the dividend was declared, a resolution was passed to call up £40 per preference share.
It was held on a repayment claim by the taxpayer on behalf of the children that, as contended by the Crown, there was an arrangement of assets constituting a settlement within what is now TA 1988, s670 and TA 1988, s663 that the transaction was not a bona fide commercial transaction.
The respondent was found to be the settlor.
He had simply used the framework of a company which he and his wife controlled to make over the necessary benefit to his children.
Lawrence J stated at p601, "I am unable to see how the word" indirectly "" can be limited so as to exclude the settlements which are made through the inter-position of a company."
Although it is only necessary to show an element of bounty to come within these provisions now, this case is important and taxpayers should bear it in mind when they are carrying out any reorganisation of share capital.
The case of IRC v Leiner (1964) 41 TC 589 involved a complex series of transactions under which a family company repaid the mother of the respondent whereupon she settled the repayment upon trust for the children of the respondent with the trustees then lending the money to the respondent at 6 per cent interest.
The respondent then lent the money interest-free to the family company.
The income arising to the trustees was applied for the benefit of the respondent's son who was infant and unmarried.
It was held that the arrangements constituted a settlement of which the taxpayer was a settlor, that he had provided income for the purposes of the settlement and the income was assessable on him under what is now TA 1988, s663.
Plowman J stated at p596: The arrangement in my view must be looked at as a whole, and looked at in this way, I find it impossible to say that the Respondent did not provide the trustee with an income…in the sense in which the word "provided" is used in [what is now TA 1988, s663]; that is to say, as importing an element of bounty.
The judge effectively looked at the overall plan and examined the position before and after the plan in order to see where the element of bounty lay.
The bounty had been provided by the respondent and therefore he was the settlor (p596).
In Mills v IRC (1974) 49 TC 367, an actress entered into a service  agreement with a company owned by her father.
Under the service agreement a small salary was payable to her each year and she was to provide her exclusive services to the company for five years.
The father settled the shares for the benefit of the actress.
Shortly thereafter the company entered into an agreement with a film organisation under which the company would provide that organisation with the services of the actress.
Substantial payments were made to the company pursuant to that agreement.
It was held that the actress was correctly assessed on the undistributed trust income obtained by the trustees from the company by way of dividend.
The actress was assessed under what is now TA 1988, s673 because she had retained an interest in the income of the settlement or in the property comprised in the settlement.
The actress was found to be the settlor of the settlement because she had indirectly provided the funds of the settlement.
In Crossland v Hawkins (1961) 39 TC 493, an actor entered into a service agreement with a company for a small weekly salary.
Eventually 98 of its 100 shares were acquired by the trustees of a settlement made by the actor's father in favour of the actor's minor children.
The actor acted in a highly successful film and the company received a substantial sum for his services, paying the actor a small fee and paying an interim dividend to the trust.
It was held that the formation of a company, the service agreement and the deed of settlement were one arrangement within TA 1988, s668.
The actor had indirectly provided the funds for the purposes of the settlement.
Thus, when the trustees applied the dividend monies for the benefit of the actor's minor children the actor was held to be taxable upon the same.
A recent case on settlorship is Butler v Wilden 61 TC 666 where shares in effectively a shell company were placed into the names of two children who paid the appropriate price for the same but with the company being built up by two brothers Graham and Gary.
It was held that the brothers "were the architects of an arrangement within the definition of s437" (now TA 1988, s663)(Vinelott J at p685) thus, when dividends were paid on the shares to the children that was income arising from a transaction which had the necessary element of bounty and the income was taxed upon the settlor (as the children were minors).
Clearly, a sale of property at full value would not result in the creation of a settlement (p684) and the Crown conceded that some of the transfers to one of the children satisfied that requirement and therefore the section did not apply.
However, others did not satisfy the requirement and the section did apply with respect to those particular transfers.
Mr Smith may set up an overseas trust for the benefit of his three minor unmarried grandchildren A, B and C, giving them life interests in the fund provided that if all the trusts should fail the funds should go to the child of Mr Smith (ie Master Smith), the parent of A, B and C. £100 may be settled and this may be used to purchase 50 per cent of the shares in an anticipated profitable company to be set up by Master Smith.
The company, as anticipated, is profitable and a dividend is paid into the trust.
Depending on the precise facts the Revenue may contend that Master Smith is really the settlor so that any income may be taxed upon Master Smith under TA 1988, s683, for instance.
Master Smith may overcome the problem by assigning the interests which he has to his children absolutely or to another trust under which Master Smith cannot benefit under any circumstances.
In this instance he need only be concerned that income actually paid out to the children during their minorities or unmarried may be taxed upon him under TA 1988, s663.
Mr Smith may set up an overseas trust for the benefit of his grandchildren.
Master Smith, the father of the beneficiaries, may own one-half of the family company, with the trust acquiring the other half.
A dividend may be paid with Master Smith having disclaimed his dividend.
Depending on the precise circumstances it may be found that Master Smith is the settlor so that if he has any interest in the trust he may be taxed upon the same under, for instance, TA 1988, s683, or alternatively, if he has no interest under the trust, any payment to his minor unmarried children could be taxable upon him (Master Smith) under TA 1988, s663.
These problems concerning the identification of a settlement and a settlor are important with regard to nearly all settlements.
For instance, one may have to identify the real settlor of an employees' trust or a trading trust.
Example
Example
The general nature of the Part XV code indicates that only an individual (as opposed to a corporate body) can be a settlor.
The four chapters of TA 1988, Part XV
The settlor, when creating an overseas settlement must make certain that he does not come within any of the provisions of TA 1988, Part XV, Chapters I—IV if he wishes to avoid tax on the income arising to the overseas settlement.
It is not sufficient that he avoids one or two of the provisions—he must avoid all of them.
There is no substitute, in the author's view, when drafting a settlement, for going through the provisions one by one to make certain that the settlement is not caught by one or more of them.
References to the settlor's spouse in these provisions include any wife whom he may marry but do not include his widow (Vestey's Executors v IRC (1949) 31 TC 1).
The general rule with regard to these provisions might be said to be that the settlor will not avoid tax on the income which arises from the capital which he has settled unless he and his wife are excluded from all possible benefit.
In addition to, the settlor's infant unmarried children must not receive any benefit from the settlement.
The Revenue, in a Statement of 6 April 1982 entitled "The interaction of income tax and capital transfer tax on assets put into settlements" , confirmed that if the settlement pays the settlors' CTT (IHT) on the transfer into trust this will not offend the income tax settlement provisions.
The statement reads thus: SP 1/82 The interaction of income tax and capital transfer tax on assets put into settlements 1.
For many years the tax code has contained legislation to prevent a person avoiding higher rate income tax by making a settlement, while still retaining some rights to enjoy the income or capital of the settlement.
This legislation, which is embodied in [TA 1988 Part XV], provides in general terms that the income of a settlement shall, for income tax purposes, be treated as that of the settlor in all circumstances where the settlor might benefit directly or indirectly from the settlement.
2.
If the trustees have power to pay or do in fact pay capital transfer tax due on assets which the settlor puts into the settlement the Revenue have taken the view that the settlor has thereby an interest in the income or property of the settlement, and that the income of the settlement should be treated as his for income tax purposes under [TA 1988 Part XV].
3.
The capital transfer tax legislation ([IHTA 1984 s201]) however provides that both the settlor and the trustees are liable for any capital transfer tax payable when a settlor puts assets into a settlement.
The Board of Inland Revenue have therefore decided that they will no longer, in these circumstances, treat the income of the settlement as that of the settlor for income tax purposes solely because the trustees have power to pay or do in fact pay capital transfer tax on assets put into settlements.
4.
This change of practice applies to settlement income for 1981–82 et seq.
Statement of Practice SP1/82 is only concerned with the trust paying the settlor's inheritance tax.
It does not cover capital gains tax.
Thus, if the settlement deed included an undertaking for the trustees to pay the settlor's capital gains tax, problems could arise.
Settlor's spouse
Trust paying settlor's CTT (IHT)
Trust paying settlor's CGT
If on the transfer of the property to the settlement no hold-over claim is possible then it is clear that if the trustees pay the settlor's capital gains tax there will have been a benefit paid by the trustees to the settlor and the Revenue would no doubt invoke TA 1988, s673 (settlements where settlor retains an interest).
If a hold-over relief claim is possible then it seems that the Revenue would take the view that the arrangement was caught by the income tax settlement code until such time as the hold-over claim is made.
Thus, any income arising in the settlement prior to the claim would be assessed on the settlor and  any income arising after the claim would cease to be taxed upon the settlor as he would then cease to have the right to receive any benefit from the settlement.
The safest course is to provide that any capital gains tax assessed on the settlor shall not be borne by the trust.
If for some reason there is such an obligation on the trustees then the hold-over claim should be submitted immediately after the creation of the trust.
Under TA 1988, s776 a capital land gain can be chargeable under Case VI, Schedule D upon a settlor if he has provided his trust with the opportunity of realising the gain.
In Yuill v Wilson [1979]STC 486 (CA);[1980]STC 460 (HL), the UK resident taxpayer provided two overseas companies, with which he was connected, with the opportunity of realising a gain and was held to be assessable on the gain.
Buckley LJ in the Court of Appeal provided some useful guidance as to precisely what rights or powers the individual must have before he can be said to have transferred or given the opportunity to another person so that the other person can make the gain.
He stated at p494: If A has the legal capacity to transfer an opportunity to make a gain and in the exercise of that capacity does transfer that opportunity to B by his own act he does so directly.
If in the exercise of his own capacity to do so he transfers or transmits the opportunity to B with the knowledge or assurance or expectation that the opportunity will consequently pass from B to C without any further act on A's part, he may be said to provide C with the opportunity indirectly.
If A lacks the legal capacity to transfer the opportunity by his own act to anyone but is in a position by persuasion to procure B, who has the opportunity, to transfer it to C, can A properly be said in this way to provide C with the opportunity indirectly?
Bearing in mind the purpose of s488 [now TA 1988, s776]as stated in sub-s(1), I think that this question should be answered affirmatively.
The possession of the legal capacity to transfer the opportunity is not, it seems to me, essential for the fulfilment of sub-s(8).
A person may, without having such capacity, be in a position to ensure that an opportunity is transferred and, depending on all the facts of the case, may be found to have provided it.
In such a case A has de facto conferred the opportunity on C through the instrumentality of B. Any other conclusion would, it seems to me, leave open so wide an escape route as to frustrate the purposes of the section.
This means that if an individual provides an opportunity to his trust to make a gain and the trust makes a gain the individual can be taxed under s776.
Tax planning
Taxes Act 1988, s776
Case I, Schedule d
Any attempt by the Inland Revenue to tax the settlor under Case I of Schedule D on gains made by the trustees merely because the settlor procured that the trustees enter into a scheme involving trading transactions should fail (Ransom v Higgs [1974]1 WLR 1594 (HL)).
If the trustees are found to be the settlor's nominees the settlor will be the person assessed on the trading or other income (Dreyfus v IRC (1963) 41 TC 441) although the Inland Revenue will usually find it difficult to establish nomineeship if this was not intended by the parties (Burman v Hedges and Butler Ltd [1979]STC 136).
It is quite clear that the provisions of Part XV apply to settlements which are created outside the United Kingdom.
Section 663(3) refers to every settlement wheresoever made.
Section 671 refers to any settlement wherever made and the same applies to ss672, 673 and 674.
Even if there is no such express statement the author feels that there is no reason why the definition should be restricted in any way to UK settlements.
Non-resident settlor and deemed income
In the case of IRC v Kenmare 37 TC 383, X who was not resident or ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom created a trust in Bermuda.
It was an accumulation and discretionary trust but X (the settlor) could benefit in the event of the revocation of the settlement by the trustees under TA 1988, s673 (revocable settlements, reversion of property).
The trust received UK source income and the taxpayer sought to argue that the arrangement was wholly outside Part XV because there was a foreign resident settlor and a foreign trust.
The House of Lords held that the settlement was within Part XV.
Taxes Act 1988, s672 refers to a settlement being within Part XV "wherever made" .
There was UK source income and this will be taxable under general principles  upon the trustees at the basic rate and there was no reason why under general principles the higher rate of tax could not be charged upon the settlor under Part XV.
Viscount Simonds stated at p408 that: The language of section 38 [of the FA 1938 (now TA 1988, s672)]and particularly of Sub-section (7), and of section 41 [now TA 1988, s681(1) (a)], makes it clear beyond all doubt that any settlement, wherever made and whatever foreign element might be imported by the residence of settlor or trustees or the forum of administration, is caught by its provisions if the income arises in the United Kingdom.
Y is resident and ordinarily resident and domiciled in the USA.
He settles dollars into a Jersey trust.
The dollars are used to purchase UK land.
Rent is paid to the Jersey trustees.
Part XV could apply to tax the income upon the American resident.
Lord Cohen at p413 in IRC v Kenmare took the following example: 1.
 "a settlement made in the United States by a person resident in the United States" ; 2. "the settled fund consisting of United States securities" ; 3. "the trustees resident in the United States and having a power to revoke the settlement" ; 4. "the settlement containing a provision that on such revocation the settled fund should revert to the settlor" ; 5. assume "that the trustees subsequently invested part of the settled fund in United Kingdom securities" ; 6.
 "Can it be that the foreign settlor is liable to pay Surtax on the income derived from those United Kingdom securities?" ; 7. that case was not before the court but the "answer must be: Yes, because the Act in plain terms so provides" .
There is however an important limitation on the application of Part XV.
The limitation was placed in the case of Becker v Wright 42 TC 591.
Stamp J held in the High Court that Part XV could not impute to a foreign resident for the purposes of the income tax legislation income which would not be taxable in his hands under the UK income tax legislation.
At p596 Stamp J asked the rhetorical question:…how can a British Income Tax Act impute to a foreign resident "for the purposes of" that Act an income of which the foreigner has divested himself under the foreign law and which in his hands is altogether outside all the provisions of the Income Tax Act?
X is resident, ordinarily resident and domiciled in the USA.
He creates a settlement in Jersey which receives Jersey source interest.
That interest is paid in  an income form to a UK beneficiary.
The income would be taxable under Case IV or V of Schedule D on the UK beneficiary.
It is not possible to argue that Part XV of the Taxes Act 1988 deems that interest to belong to the American.
This is because it is a non-UK source income which would be deemed, if the provision was relevant, to belong to a non-resident person and no UK tax would be in point.
Example
Example
Chapter I of Part XV: income settlements
This Chapter (Chapter 1 of Part XV) deals with the settlement provisions which apply to what might be termed "income settlements" , ie covenants to pay annual amounts as opposed to "capital settlements" which are, broadly, settlements where capital sums are settled to be held on trust.
Where a person enters into a covenant to pay sums to another person for a period which cannot exceed six years those amounts shall be treated as the income of the person who is paying the same and not the income of any other person (TA 1988, s660(1)).
In relation, however, to "a covenanted payment to charity" (as defined in TA 1988, s660(3)) the amount will only be treated as the income of the person making the payments if the period for the payments cannot exceed three years (TA 1988, s660(2)).
As well as covenants to alienate income the provisions will also apply to trusts, agreements or arrangements to alienate income (TA 1988, s660(3)).
Special provisions apply to adjust the tax liability as between disponer and trustees enabling the disponer to recover tax from the trustees, etc (TA 1988, s66(1)) and also where there is more than one disponer (TA 1988, s662).
Chapter II of Part XV: settlements on children
Section 663 provides that where there is a settlement, and during the life of the settlor any income is paid to or for the benefit of a child of the settlor in any year of assessment, the income shall, if at the time of payment the child is unmarried and below the age of 18, be treated as the settlor's income and not the income of any other person.
A settlement for this provision would include a transfer of assets to an infant child absolutely so that any income which arises from that property transferred will be treated as the settlor's.
The income becomes the highest  part of the settlor's income although the settlor has a right to recover the tax from the trust.
In Hood Barrs v The Commissioners 27 TC 385, X transferred a block of shares to each of his two infant unmarried children absolutely.
The Court of Appeal held that the expression "transfer of assets" in TA 1988, s670 covered such a case and thus the income derived from the assets so transferred was taxed upon the settlor.
The same point arose in Thomas v Marshall 34 TC 178.
In that case a father made absolute gifts to his unmarried minor children by way of payments from time to time into Post Office savings bank accounts and the purchase of Defence Bonds in their names.
He was assessed under Case III of Schedule D on the interest on the footing that the gifts were settlements within s663.
The expression "transfer of assets" , the House of Lords held, was not to be infused with any different meaning by virtue of the fact that it came under the definition of "settlement" .
The words were to be simply interpreted (p202).
Such an interpretation could give rise to practical difficulties in appropriate cases but the wording of the legislation had to be simply applied.
For example, if a father gives a child a motor car or jewellery and the child sells the gift and invests the proceeds, is the income from the investment paid to the child by virtue or in consequence of the gift or is it paid to him or her in consequence of the sale of an asset which belonged absolutely to the child?
Lord Morton of Henryton commenting on that example said that in each case it would be for the Commissioners to make a finding as to whether the income in question was or was not paid to or for the benefit of the child by virtue or in consequence of the settlement.
There were no difficulties in construing the section although difficulties in applying it to particular cases may arise (p202).
In d'Abreu (Arthur) v IRC [1978]STC 538, it was held that where a parent released and assigned a right to income, which she had under a trust, for the benefit of her children, there was a sufficient disposition to come within s663.
If that income is lawfully accumulated in an irrevocable settlement it cannot be taxed on the settlor.
However, if there is then an advancement to the unmarried minor out of capital, that capital is treated as income paid to the child to the extent of the accumulated income.
For these purposes a settlement shall not be deemed to be irrevocable (by virtue of TA 1988, s665(1)) if its terms provide:(a) for the payment to the settlor or, during the life of the settlor, to the wife or husband of the settlor for his or her benefit, or for the application for the benefit of the settlor or, during the life of the settlor, of the wife or husband of the settlor, of any income or assets in any circumstances whatsoever during the life of the settlor's child; or (b) for the determination of the settlement by the act or on the default of any person; or (c) for the payment of any penalty by the settlor in the event of his failing to comply with the provisions of the settlement.
Under s665(2), a settlement shall not be deemed to be revocable by reason only:(a) that it contains a provision under which any income or assets will or may become payable to or applicable for the benefit of the settlor, or the wife or husband of the settlor, on the bankruptcy of the settlor's child or in the event of an assignment of or charge on that income or those assets being executed by the settlor's child; or (b) that it provides for the determination of the settlement by the act or on the default of any person in such a manner that the determination will not, during the lifetime of the settlor's child, benefit the settlor or the wife or husband of the settlor; or (c) in the case of a settlement to which section 33 of the Trustee Act 1925 applies, that it directs income to be held for the benefit of the settlor's child on protective trusts, unless the trust period is a period less than the life of the child or the settlement specifies some event on the happening of which the child would, if the income were payable during the trust period to him absolutely during that period, be deprived of the right to receive all or part of the income.
As well as the statutory requirements the settlement must be irrevocable within the ordinary meaning of the word (IRC v Delamere [1939]2 KB 667).
The settlor transfers property to trustees to be held upon the terms of a discretionary trust for the benefit of the children of the settlor.
There is a provision in the deed enabling the trustees, in their discretion, to benefit the settlor or the spouse of the settlor.
This would amount to a revocable settlement and thus the income will be taxed upon the settlor (even if it is not actually paid to him or his spouse or children) under the provisions of TA 1988, ss663 and 664.
The latter provision (s664) will deem the income to have been paid to the children of the settlor for the purposes of s663 (IRC v Lord Delamere (1939) 22 TC 525 and Eastwood v IRC (1943) 25 TC 100).
If a grandparent were to set up such an accumulation trust for the benefit of grandchildren, then income can be paid out to a grandchild when a minor and unmarried, without the income being aggregated with the income of the grandparent or the parents of the beneficiary.
There are no general provisions which provide for the aggregation of investment income of an unmarried minor with that of his parents.
Only in one circumstance can this aggregation take place: where the parent sets up a settlement for the benefit of that child and the income arises from that settlement and is paid to the child.
Taxes Act 1988, s663 states that Chapter II shall not apply in relation to any income arising under a settlement in any year of assessment for which the settlor is not chargeable to income tax as a resident (no reference is made to domicile) in the United Kingdom.
 "Income" includes income chargeable to income tax by deduction or otherwise (UK source income) and any income which would be chargeable if it had been received in the United Kingdom by a person resident and ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom.
Example: Settlor and spouse beneficiaries under children's trust
Grandparent trusts
Aggregation
Foreign settlor and section 663
The following should be noted: 1.
if income arises in an overseas company owned by an overseas settlement the income cannot be taxed upon the settlor under this section (the "see-through" provision which is now abolished in s681(1) (b) never did apply to Chapter II); 2. no reference is made to the domicile of the settlor in Chapter II of Part XV unlike Chapter III (see s681(1)); 3. no reference is made in s663 to the Case under which the tax charge is to arise.
This contrasts with Chapter III where the charge will arise under Case VI of Schedule D. That being so it seems to the author that one must apply the appropriate Case to the particular income—Schedule A, etc.
Mr X is not domiciled in the United Kingdom but is resident and ordinarily resident therein.
He has set up an overseas trust for the benefit of his minor children.
He and his spouse are not beneficiaries.
The trustees receive £100 of dividends from a trust shareholding in American shares.
That is a Case V source.
It is paid out (say, in a capital form) to the children overseas and spent by them overseas.
Does s663 apply?
The £100 is certainly income for the purposes of Chapter II (see s670(5)).
It may be argued that although the settlor was resident in the United Kingdom within s663(5) he would not be chargeable to tax on the income because it was not remitted to the United Kingdom (see s663(5)).
It is clear that under the Taxes Act benefits received by persons which cause income tax liabilities to arise are of two different types.
Example
General distinction
The first type deals with cases where monies may be assessed on the settlor if monies are paid to or for the benefit of a particular person.
For instance, under TA 1988, s663(1) any income paid to or for the benefit of a child of the settlor may be assessed on the settlor.
It is clear that if monies are paid to X and this benefits the child then the child can be assessed (see, for instance, the line of cases dealing with TA 1988, s677 such as Piratin v IRC [1981]STC 441 at 459(g) and IRC v Wachtel 46 TC 543).
The second type of case deals with situations where the legislation refers to sums being paid directly or indirectly to a particular person (for example, see TA 1988, s677—although the expression was subsequently extended by what is now s677(10)).
In that case, the legislation has a more restrictive meaning.
Lord Normand in Potts' Executors v IRC 32 TC 211 at 229 specifically rejected the contention that the words "directly" or "indirectly" should be extended "to any payment made by the settlor's request to a third party which produces a financial benefit to the settlor equivalent to the sum paid" .
Taxes Act 1988, ss671 and 672 apply where any person has power to revoke or otherwise determine a settlement or any provision thereof, and the settlor or his spouse may become beneficially entitled to all or any part of the settled property or income thereof as the result of such revocation or determination.
A settlement for these purposes does not include a transfer of assets.
If caught by TA 1988, ss671 and 672 the income of the settlement will be treated as the income of the settlor for all purposes.
Chapter III of Part XV: revocable settlements
Revocable settlements (ss671 and 672)
In IRC v Jenkins (1944) 26 TC 264, the settlor lent monies to the trustees which were used to acquire shares in a company he controlled.
The dividends received on the shares were used towards the partial repayment of the loan.
It was held that the settlement was within TA 1988, s673, the settlor having an interest in the income by reason of the application of the dividends in repayment of the loan.
It was also held in that case that the settlor's power to liquidate the company was not a power to terminate the settlement; it was thus not a revocable settlement.
In Kenmare v IRC [1958]AC 267, it was held that a power of appointment over the entire trust fund was a power to revoke or otherwise determine the settlement.
As these powers could be exercised in favour of the settlor and his wife the whole of the fund was taxable upon the settlor.
Any tax charge under ss671 and 672 is assessed under Case VI of Schedule D, and the settlor is entitled to any deduction or relief against it as if it had been received by him as income.
The settlor is able to recover the tax paid by him from any trustee or person to whom the income arises under the settlement, subject to crediting any allowance or relief so obtained by the  settlor.
Where any power to revoke or determine cannot be exercised within six years from the time when any particular property first becomes comprised in the settlement, the subsection does not apply to income arising under the settlement from that property, or from property representing that property, so long as the power cannot be exercised.
When setting up an overseas settlement, whether for the benefit of his children or other persons, it is vital, if the settlor wishes to alienate the income effectively, that there is no power to revoke the settlement and upon such revocation trust property or income will go to the settlor or the spouse of the settlor.
If the settlor retains an interest in any income arising under the settlement or in any of the property comprised in the settlement, any income which arises from the settled property, to the extent that it is not distributed, will be treated as the income of the settlor (TA 1988, s673).
Tax planning
Retention of interest by settlor (s673)
In general terms this means that if one sets up a trust to accumulate income, and the settlor has not completely divested himself of the trust property, he will be chargeable to income tax on the trust income.
The mere possibility that the settlor or his spouse might benefit from the trust assets is sufficient to bring this section into operation.
The provisions are very wide.
There are, however, dicta in the House of Lords decision in Vestey's Executors v IRC (1949) 31 TC 1 to the effect that transactions on commercial terms between the settlor and the trustee are not caught by the section.
It is possible that the settlor may benefit under a beneficiary's will.
This possibility is not a sufficiently retained interest under the settlement to enable the section to come into operation (Walker's Trustees v IRC (1955) 34 ATC 135).
In the case of Wachtel v IRC (1970) 46 TC 543, the settlor deposited money with a bank interest-free and the bank lent money to the trust at 1 per cent.
It was agreed that the trust would repay the bank out of accumulated income, and the bank enabled the settlor to reduce his deposit to the extent of such repayment.
It was held that the settlor had retained an interest in the accumulated income because the payments of income gave him the benefit of being able to withdraw his capital deposited at the bank.
Back-to-back
Goff J at p555 stated thus:…it seems to me that the payments were for his benefit, since they enabled him to withdraw an equivalent amount of his frozen capital.
The question may be raised as to what the position would be if the trust borrowed monies and the settlor simply gave a bank guarantee for the repayment of the borrowings by the trust.
In the Wachtel case the settlor guaranteed the overdraft of the trust and was required to deposit with the bank a sum sufficient to cover the overdraft.
The release of the monies in that frozen account occurred when the trust used monies to repay the loan it took from the bank.
If there is no such frozen account the author is of the view that the legislation would still be offended.
This is because as and when the trust repayed the loan which the settlor had guaranteed the settlor would benefit from being released from his guarantee obligations which he gave bounteously in the first place.
An example showing how s673 would catch a back-to-back transaction in practice is set out below.
Mr X sets up an overseas trust under which he and his spouse are excluded from all benefit.
The trust borrows £1M from a bank and Mr X deposits £1M with the bank as security.
As the loan is repaid from property in the trust Mr X's deposit, pound for pound, is released to Mr X. Mr X will have retained an interest in the income in the trust because he benefits when the deposit, pound for pound, is released.
The settlor and his spouse should thus effectively be excluded from all possible benefit under the trust.
A clause along the following lines could be inserted in the trust deed if it is intended that the same be effective for income tax purposes: No part of the capital, capitalised income, or income shall in any circumstances whatsoever be paid or lent to or applied for the benefit of the settlor or any spouse of the settlor for the time being.
It should be noted that there are circumstances, set out in s673(3), where the settlor can retain an interest in the trust and not contravene the alienation of income provision.
These exceptions are important and consideration should be given to inserting them in trust documents although this seems to be rarely done in practice.
If and so long as the terms of any settlement are such that any person has power to pay or apply income or capital to or for the benefit of the settlor or his spouse, all income arising under the settlement shall be treated for all the purposes of the Income Tax Acts as the income of the settlor for that year and not the income of any other person (TA 1988, s674; and see Blausten v IRC (1971) 47 TC 542 (CA)).
Thus all discretionary powers to benefit persons should be clearly drafted so that there is no inclusion of the settlor or his spouse among the discretionary class.
Section 674(3), however, suspends the operation of the section where the power cannot be exercised within six years, and also the section does not apply if the discretionary power is exercisable only in the events, such as bankruptcy, specified in s673(3) (see TA 1988, s674(4)).
If a settlement has accumulated income, any capital sums paid to the settlor or his spouse directly or indirectly or through a connected company may be taxed as income to the extent that the trust has accumulated income.
The basic charging provision is TA 1988, s677.
Example
Exclusion clause and s673
Exceptions to the charge under s673
Discretionary powers exercisable in settlor's favour (s674)
Tax planning and s674
Capital sums paid to the settlor (s677)
Where a capital sum (as defined) is paid directly or indirectly in any relevant year of assessment by the trustees of a settlement to the settlor then, to the extent that there is an amount of income available (as defined) in the settlement, the settlor can be taxed on that capital sum as if it were income.
If the amount of the capital sum exceeds the amount of income available, then the settlor will be taxed in the next year and subsequent years up to the amount of income available in the next year or subsequent years but never so that the tax liabilities exceed the amount of the capital sum that was paid out directly or indirectly to the settlor.
There is a ten year cut-off period.
If the trust has £50,000 of income in year 1 and £25,000 in year 2 and £10,000 in year 3 and in year 1 £80,000 is lent to the settlor by the trust (a capital sum includes an amount paid by way of loan—see below) then in year 1 the settlor would be taxed on £50,000, in year 2 on £25,000 and in year 3 on £5,000.
The expression "the amount of income available" is defined in TA 1988, s677(2).
It means the total amount of the undistributed income arising under the settlement (therefore capital gains are excluded) but excluding any income which is deemed under the settlement provisions to be taxed on the settlor and any amount which has already been taken into account as a capital sum under the section.
Relief is given for the basic rate of tax and the additional rate of tax which was paid on the income (TA 1988, s677(2) (h)) and also to prevent other duplications of tax liabilities.
For instance, if an amount is included in a person's income by virtue of TA 1988, s421 (assessment in respect of loan from close company) in respect of any loan or advance, there is to be a corresponding reduction in the amount which can be included and taxable under TA 1988, s677 (TA 1988, s677(3)).
With effect from 1993/94 relief is given for the tax at the rate applicable to the trust (FA 1993 Sched 6)(ie 35 per cent).
Only if the capital sum is paid directly or indirectly to the settlor or the spouse of the settlor can the provision apply.
 "Capital sum" means: 1.
any sum paid by way of loan or repayment of loan; and 2. any sum paid otherwise than as income, being a sum which is not paid for full consideration in money or money's worth.
The expression "capital sum" does not include any sum which could not have become payable to the settlor except in one of the events specified in the proviso to TA 1988, s673(3) (these relate to bankruptcy, assignment, marriage and death under the age of 25).
Example
Meaning of "capital sum" 
References to sums paid to the settlor include references to sums paid to the spouse of the settlor or to the settlor (or to the spouse of the settlor) jointly with another person.
Thus, if a loan of a capital sum is made to the settlor and his brother, s677 can apply (TA 1988, s677(9) (b)).
In the case of McCrone v IRC (1967) 44 TC 142, it was held, in the special circumstances of the case, that the transfer to the settlor by the trustees of securities amounted to a loan within these provisions.
In IRC v De Vigiers (1964) 42 TC 24, the wife of the settlor advanced £7,000 to the trustees and this advance was repaid in two amounts.
It was held that the repayments were capital sums and the settlor was correctly assessed to surtax.
Under TA 1988, s677(10) there shall be treated as a capital sum paid to the settlor by the trustees of the settlement any sum which is paid by them to a  third party at the settlor's direction or by virtue of the assignment by him of his right to receive it or is otherwise paid or applied by the trustees for the benefit of the settlor and which would not otherwise be treated as a capital sum paid to the settlor.
Clearly, a sum paid to the settlor to discharge a liability of his to the bank would come within this section (see IRC v Bates (1966) 44 TC 225: the case of Potts' Executors v IRC [1951]AC 43 held that a payment to a third party was not a sum paid to the settlor but that case is no longer good law in view of TA 1988, s677(10) which was inserted into the former TA 1970, s451 (now TA 1988, s677) by s42(7) of FA 1981).
Direct capital payments to the settlor or his spouse are caught by the section.
The provision also applies if the capital sum is indirectly paid to the settlor.
What methods of payment are caught?
In McCrone v IRC (1967) 44 TC 142, Lord Guthrie at 149E stated: "I incline to the view that a payment made" indirectly "" is, for example, one made to a third party for transmission to the settlor."
This means the term "indirectly" has a narrow meaning.
The trustees of the settlement lend £100,000 to X with X having agreed with the settlor that he would lend the £100,000 on to the settlor.
There will have been an indirect capital payment made by the trustees to the settlor in that case.
It is clear from the above that the following types of situations may arise and fall within the ambit of s677: 1.
a capital sum may be paid directly to the settlor; 2. a capital sum may be paid indirectly to the settlor; 3. a capital sum may be deemed to have been paid to the settlor if a sum is paid to any third party at the settlor's direction; 4. a capital sum shall be deemed to be paid to the settlor if the sum is paid to any third party by virtue of an assignment by the settlor of his right to receive it; and 5. a capital sum shall be deemed to have been paid to the settlor if it is otherwise paid or applied by them for the benefit of the settlor.
The trustees advance £10,000 to the settlor for his own use and benefit absolutely.
The capital sum would have been paid directly to the settlor within 1 above.
Trustees advance £20,000 to X who is the agent for the settlor and who is accountable to the settlor for the monies.
The capital sum would have been paid indirectly to the settlor (see the case of Potts v IRC [1951]AC 443 especially at 460 where Lord Oaksey states: having regard to the object of the statute I think the words "paid directly or indirectly to the settlor" should be held to mean paid into the settlor's hands or into the hands of someone accountable to him).
See also McCrone v IRC mentioned above.
The settlor owes X £30,000.
He directs the trustees to advance £30,000 to him (X) absolutely in order to extinguish the debt.
That is a capital sum which is deemed to be paid to the settlor because it is paid to a third party at the settlor's direction.
The settlor assigns to Mr X (as against the trustees) the right to receive £40,000 with the trustees paying that sum to Mr X. That sum is deemed to be paid to the settlor by virtue of an assignment by the settlor of his right to receive it.
The settlor has an overdraft at X bank plc of £50,000.
The trustees pay off that overdraft.
The £50,000 is deemed to be a capital payment paid to the settlor as being paid or applied by the trustees for the benefit of the settlor.
The benefit comprises the discharge of the overdraft.
If a capital sum is paid under this provision, so that it is assessed upon the settlor, it is treated as the income of the settlor for the year of payment and it shall be treated as income of such amount as after the deduction of tax at the basic rate and additional rate for that year, or the rate applicable to the trust from 1993/94 (see TA 1988, s686(1A)), would equal the sum or that part of that sum.
In 1993/94 the rate applicable to trusts is 35 per cent.
The additional rate is 10 per cent.
The trustees make a capital payment of £65 and this is assessed upon the settlor.
The settlor is treated as having received a sum of £100 less an amount equal to 35 per cent.
The higher rate of tax is 40 per cent for 1993/94 and, in an appropriate case, the settlor may have to pay a further £5 in tax.
It should be noted the charge is under Case VI of Schedule D (s677(6)).
Example: Indirect payments
Example: Direct payment
Example: Indirect payment
Example: Direction
Example: Assignment
Example: Application for benefit
How the assessment on the settlor works
Example
It should also be noted that in determining the amount of income available  up to the end of any year one looks at the aggregate amount of the income arising under the settlement in that year and in any previous year which has not been distributed and one deducts an amount equal to tax at the rate applicable to trusts on the aggregate amount of income, arising under the settlement in the year of payment and any previous year, which has not been distributed.
Thus, income tax does reduce the amount of the income available.
Thus, if in the year 1992/93 the income was £100 and the trustees paid the basic rate of tax because the income had a UK source of £25 and the additional rate of tax of £10 the amount of income available at the end of 1993 is £65.
Any assessment on the beneficiaries to income tax can never be more than on the £65 grossed up.
The relevant income has been reduced by the amount of the actual tax payable (not the amount brought into charge to tax).
However, there is a further relief in TA 1988, s677(7).
There, it is provided that there shall be set off against the tax charged on any amount treated by virtue of the section as income of the settlor for any year an amount equal to: 1.
the tax at the rate applicable to trusts for the year on the amount so treated as his income; or 2. so much of the amount of tax at that rate as is equal to the tax charged whichever is the less.
In computing the liability to income tax of a settlor chargeable under s677 the same deductions and reliefs shall be allowed as would have been allowed if the amount treated as income by virtue of s677 had been received by him as income.
Thus, although the monies received are capital in nature they are deemed to be income for the purposes of giving the taxpayer deductions and reliefs and they are charged under Case VI of Schedule D. Thus, for instance, the remittance basis would not be applicable although there is no reason why general principles should not be applicable so that income arising overseas and received by a non-resident would not be chargeable under general principles whilst income arising in the United Kingdom could be chargeable under general principles regardless of who it is paid to.
There are provisions dealing with the repayment of loans paid to the settlor. (a) Loans paid off Where the capital sum paid to the settlor is a sum paid by way of loan and the whole of that loan is repaid, no part of that sum shall be treated as the settlor's income for any year of assessment after that in which the repayment occurs (TA 1988, s677(4) (a)).
Thus, if the settlor obtains a loan of, say, £25,000 and the income available is £10,000 he will be taxable on the £10,000.
If he repays the loan no part of it shall be treated as his income for any year of assessment after that in which repayment occurs.
(b) Repeated loans Where the capital sum paid to the settlor is a sum paid by way of loan, then if one or more capital sums have previously been paid to the settlor by way of loan and wholly repaid, the amount of that capital sum shall be treated as equal to its excess (if any) over so much of the sum or sums previously paid as had already fallen to be treated as his income by virtue of s677(1) (TA 1988, s677(4) (b)).
Repayment of loans
The mischief which this provision is designed to cater for is set out in para 12 of the Inland Revenue Consultative Paper of September 1980.
This reads as follows: If a settlor who has taken a loan from his settlement and has been charged to tax under the legislation repays the loan the tax previously charged is not of course repaid.
But if he borrows the same amount a second time he becomes liable to a second charge.
If, say, he borrows £5,000 three times, repaying it each time, he is treated as severely as someone who borrows £15,000 outright.
It may be thought unreasonable that the legislation should both refuse to give credit for repayments and charge renewed borrowings as if they were a first-time borrowing.
The effect of the new subsection is to cater for this problem by limiting the amount of the capital sum which can be brought into charge to income tax upon the settlor where a loan is repaid.
(c) Repayment of loans from settlors Where the capital sum paid to the settlor is a sum paid by way of complete repayment of a loan, then, if an amount not less than the sum is thereafter lent by the settlor to the trustees of the settlement, no part of that sum shall by virtue of TA 1988, s677(1) be treated as his income for any year of assessment after that in which the further loan is made (TA 1988, s677(5)).
A repayment of a loan made by the settlor to the trustees can amount to the payment of a capital sum for the purposes of s677 (TA 1988, s677(9) (a)(i)).
For example, A creates an overseas settlement by lending money to his trustees to buy investments.
The settlor thereafter withdraws the income of the investments in the form of the repayment of the loan.
The provisions of s677 will apply to his situation.
Thus, to the extent of the amount of income available in the year and the following years an income tax charge can arise on the settlor.
This is to the extent of the amount repaid.
Section 677(5) is designed to afford some measure of relief where the amounts repaid are lent by the settlor to the trustees of the settlement so that there is a re-advance by the settlor.
Taxes Act 1988, s678 deals with the situation where capital sums are paid by a connected company to the settlor and where there have been associated payments made by the trustees to that company.
(a) Basic charging provision Where:(i) a capital sum is paid to the settlor in a year of assessment by any body corporate connected with the settlement in that year; and (ii) an associated payment has been or is made directly or indirectly to that body corporate by the trustees of the settlement the capital sum shall be treated for the purposes of s677 as having been paid to the settlor by the trustees of the settlement.
The tax consequences will, broadly, flow as if the settlement had simply lent or advanced monies to the settlor.
Capital sums paid by body connected with settlement
If a capital sum is paid by the connected body corporate to the settlor then to the extent of the income available in the trust, that capital sum can be taxed as income upon the settlor and the excess of the amount of the capital sum over income for that year can be taxed in subsequent years as income becomes available in the trust.
 "Capital sum" for these purposes has the same meaning as in s677. (b) Associated payments In relation to any capital sum paid to the settlor by a body corporate the expression "associated payment" means:(i) any capital sum paid to that body by the trustees of the settlement; and (ii) any other sum paid or asset transferred to that body by those trustees which is not paid or transferred for full consideration in money or money's worth being a sum paid or asset transferred in the five years ending or beginning with the date on which the capital sum is paid to the settlor (s678(3)).
It is not possible to circumvent these provisions by one company receiving a payment from the trustees and another company associated with the same within TA 1988, s416 making a loan or other capital payment to the settlor (s678(4)).
(c) Connected company A company is connected with the settlement if it falls within TA 1988, s681(5). (d) "Capital sum" The expression "capital sum" has the same meaning as that given in s677 and any question whether a capital sum has been paid to the settlor by a body corporate or to a body corporate by the trustees shall be determined in the same way as any question under that section whether a capital sum has been paid to the settlor by the trustees (s678(5)).
Where a capital sum is paid to the settlor in the year of assessment by a body corporate connected with the settlement in that year it shall be assumed until the contrary is shown that an associated payment of an amount not less  than the amount of the capital sum has been made to that body corporate by the trustees of the settlement (s678(7)).
A charge under s678(1) shall not apply to any sum paid to the settlor by way of loan or repayment of loan if: 1.
the amount of the loan is repaid within 12 months of the date on which it was made; and 2. the period for which amounts are outstanding in respect of loans made to the settlor by that or any other body corporate connected with the settlement, or by him to that or any other such body, in any period of five years, does not exceed 12 months.
As well as Part XV in general, practitioners must pay special attention to TA 1988, s678.
Loans and repayment of loans
Section 678 in action
The following example illustrates how s678 works.
Mr X may have put 10 per cent of the UK family company (X Ltd) into an overseas accumulation and maintenance trust for the benefit of his children.
Mr X and the spouse of Mr X may be excluded from all benefit.
Over two years, let us say, £100,000 of income may have accrued to the settlement.
The settlement may lend money to X Ltd; that will be an associated payment (TA 1988, s678(1) (a) and (5)).
In turn the company may lend monies to Mr X. Mr X would receive a capital sum (Mr X may also have tax problems under TA 1988, s419 (in an appropriate case) but there is a relief from double tax (TA 1970, s677(3))).
X Ltd would be a body corporate (s678(1) (a)) and would be connected with the settlement (s678(4)).
Section 677 applies as if the capital sum had been paid to the settlor by the trustees of the settlement thus bringing the whole £100,000 worth of income, potentially, into charge to tax under s677.
Taxes Act 1988, s683 provides that where income under a settlement is payable to or applicable for the benefit of any person other than the settlor then unless the situation comes within one of the following five situations (listed in TA 1988, s683(1)) the income shall for the purposes of "excess liability" be treated as the income of the settlor and not as the income of any other person for tax purposes.
The situations are as follows: 1.
the income consists of annual payments made under a partnership agreement to or for the benefit of a former partner, or the widow or dependants of a deceased former partner, of the partnership, being payments made under a liability incurred for full consideration; 2. the income is payable in connection with the acquisition of a partnership; 3. the income arises under a settlement made by one party to a marriage by way of provision for the other after the dissolution or annulment of the marriage, or while they are separated under an Order of the Court or under a separation agreement or in such circumstances that the separation is likely to be permanent, being income payable to or applicable for the benefit of the other party; 4. the income is from property of which the settlor has divested himself absolutely by the settlement; 5. the income is income which under other provisions of the tax legislation is treated for the purposes of the Taxes Acts as that of the settlor.
For the purposes of 4 above the settlor shall not be deemed to have divested himself absolutely of any property if that property or any income therefrom or any property directly or indirectly representing the proceeds of or the income from that property or any income therefrom is or will, or may, become payable to or applicable for the benefit of the settlor or the wife or husband of the settlor in any circumstances whatsoever (TA 1988, s685(1)).
However, if the settlor may benefit on the occurrence of one or more of the following events he will still be deemed (TA 1988, s685(2)) to have divested himself of the property: 1.
the bankruptcy of some person who is or may become beneficially entitled to any such property or income; or  2. an assignment of or a charge on any such property or income being made or given by some such person; or 3. in the case of a marriage settlement, the death of both parties to the marriage and of all or any of the children of the marriage; or 4. the death under the age of 25 or some lower age of some person who would be beneficially entitled to that property or income on attaining that age.
Charitable donations under a deed of covenant will generally be deductible for excess liability purposes (s683(3)).
 "Excess liability" means the excess of liability to income tax over what it would be if all income tax not chargeable at the lower rate were charged at the basic rate to the exclusion of any higher rate.
The definition is convoluted but it means that the excess liability is the difference between the basic rate and the higher rate, ie 15 per cent.
This provision does not charge the basic rate of tax upon the settlor and special rules apply if the lower rate is in point.
Part IV: income from property of which the settlor has not divested himself absolutely
Basic charge
Special exceptions
Special case of charities
Meaning of "excess liability" 
Part V: definitions applicable to the settlement provisions
(a) "Undistributed income" Where the income of a trust has not been distributed it will have been seen that this has important consequences with regard to s673 (settlements where settlor retains an interest)(see p46) and ss677 and 678 (capital sums)(see p48-55).
It will also be important with regard to s676 (annual payment to settlement not deductible).
Section 682 provides that income arising under a settlement shall be deemed not to have been distributed if and to the extent that it exceeds the aggregate of:(i) the sums, excluding all payments of interest, paid in that year by the trustees of the settlement to any persons (not being a body corporate connected with the settlement and not being the trustees of another settlement made by the settlor or the trustees of the settlement) in such manner that they fall to be treated in that year, otherwise than by virtue of s677 above, as the income of those persons for the purposes of income tax, or would fall to be so treated if those persons were domiciled, resident and ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom and the sums had been paid to them there; and (ii) subject to s682(2)– (5)(rules for ascertaining undistributed income where  interest is paid by trustees) any expenses of the trustees of the settlement paid in that year which, in the absence of any express provision of the settlement, would be properly chargeable to income, in so far as such expenses are not included in the sums mentioned in para (i) above; and (iii) in a case where the trustees of the settlement are trustees for charitable purposes, the amount by which any income arising under the settlement in that year in respect of which exemption from tax may be granted under s505 of TA 1988 exceeds the aggregate amount of any such sums or expenses as aforesaid paid in that year which are properly chargeable to that income.
In the case of Piratin v IRC [1981]STC 441, the court dealt with the provisions of TA 1988, s677 and the judge referred to one of the contentions of the taxpayer that insurance premiums payable on the life of the settlor for the protection of the trust fund were an expense of the trustees and properly chargeable to income.
The judge held that there was no power in the deed to pay the premiums and the premiums were paid in breach of trust.
However, he mentioned that after referring to Re Bennett [1896]1 Ch 778 the expenses of a term life assurance policy as well as a whole life insurance policy on the settlor's life would prima facie be capital rather than income.
Support for that proposition can also be derived from the case of Re Sherry [1913]2 Ch 508 at 512.
Such payments are properly chargeable to capital and not income and as the provision required that they be properly charged to income the relief was not available.
(b) "Income arising under a settlement" Taxes Act 1988, s681 defines the expression "income arising under a settlement" for the purposes of TA 1988, Part XV, Chapter III (ie ss671-682).
The definition also applies to s683 (TA 1988, s685(4)).
The term includes:(i) any income chargeable to income tax by deduction at source or otherwise (first limb) and any income which would have been chargeable to income tax if it had been received in the United Kingdom by a person domiciled, resident and ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom (second limb)(s681(1) (a));[(ii) where the amount of the income of any body corporate has been apportioned (ie shortfalled) under Schedule 16 to FA 1972 or could have been so apportioned if the body corporate were incorporated and resident in any part of the United Kingdom, so much of the income of the body corporate for that year or period as is equal to the amount which has been or could have been so apportioned to the trustees of or a beneficiary under the settlement (s681(1) (b))[abolished in relation to income of bodies corporate for accounting periods beginning after 31 March 1989 by FA 1989, Sched 17, Part V]].
Where, however, the settlor is not domiciled or not resident or not ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom in any year of assessment the term does not include income arising under a settlement in that year in respect of which the settlor, if he were actually entitled thereto, would not be chargeable to income tax by deduction or otherwise by reason of his now being so domiciled, resident or ordinarily resident.
Mr X is the settlor, and he is not domiciled, resident or ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom.
Income from an overseas bank deposit arises in the overseas accumulation trust and is validly accumulated.
The settlor is a beneficiary under the trust.
This cannot be income arising under a settlement, because had the settlor actually been entitled thereto, he would not have had to pay UK tax by reason of his not being domiciled, resident or ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom.
Head (i) above (dealing with the meaning of income arising under a settlement) is really divided into two limbs.
These are: 1.
any income chargeable to income tax by deduction or otherwise (first limb); and 2. any income which would have been so chargeable if it had been received in the United Kingdom by a person domiciled, resident and ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom (second limb).
The case of Perry v Astor (1935) 19 TC 255 is very instructive in this respect although its effect has been fundamentally changed by the addition of the second limb to s681(1) (a).
Payment of premiums on life of settlor
Example
Prior to the change in the law the relevant income tax provisions only referred to "income" (ie there was only effectively the first limb) and the House of Lords in Perry v Astor held that "income" following Colquhoun v Brooks [1889]14 AC 493,(1889) 2 TC 490 meant "any income chargeable to a tax under the British Finance Act of the year" .
Essentially, therefore, the provisions only had application to income falling within the first limb.
The effect, therefore, of only the first limb applying, ie before the change in the law bringing in the second limb, could be seen by the following example.
Mr X sets up a trust in Jersey.
The trust spends £100,000 to buy land in the United Kingdom and receives rent of £1,000.
It spends £100,000 in buying American shares (that are located in the USA for the purposes of Schedule D, Case V) and receives £2,000.
The £2,000 is chargeable under Case V of Schedule D. The £1,000 derived from the UK property could be caught by Part XV of the Taxes Act.
As a result of the second limb of what is now s681(1) (a) being passed into law, the Inland Revenue could assess all the income under Part XV of the Taxes Act; with regard to the income of £2,000 derived from the American shares the Inland Revenue may have an option whether to charge the same  under Case V of Schedule D or if, for instance, s672 is the relevant provision under which Part XV is applied, then under Case VI of Schedule D (s679).
Head (ii) referred to above, ie s681(1) (b), was abolished in relation to income of bodies corporate for accounting periods beginning after 31 March 1989 by the Finance Act 1989, Sched 17.
Example
Underlying companies and the abolition of TA 1988, s681(1) (b)
The history of that provision and its abolition demonstrates clearly that income arising in an overseas company which is, for instance, owned by an overseas trust, is not income arising under a settlement for the purposes of TA 1988, Part XV, Chapters III and IV or indeed any of the other provisions of Part XV.
The existence of the provision showed that in certain restricted cases income arising to such an underlying company could be deemed to be income arising under the settlement.
That is no longer the case and the position, the author would suggest, is governed by the statement of Lord Reed in Vesty v IRC 31 TC 1 at 120 where he states: I think that Chamberlain's case shows that the most profitable course to follow is to determine what was the property comprised in the settlement, and that the way to find the property is to look for property charged with rights in favour of beneficiaries.
I do not think that any hard and fast rule is laid down in Chamberlain's case.
The ingenuity of those who devise those schemes is such that it might be rash to say that property could never be comprised in the settlement unless it is charged with rights in favour of others, but I think that as a general rule this must now be the test.
There is thus a slight caveat on the point but subject to exceptional circumstances it is felt that taxpayers can now safely assume that income arising in an underlying company which is owned by the overseas trust cannot be caught by Part XV of TA 1988.
Mr X is resident, ordinarily resident and domiciled in the United Kingdom.
He puts £100,000 into an overseas settlement.
The settlement is a discretionary settlement and he is one of the beneficiaries.
The £100,000 is lent to an underlying company or used to subscribe for share capital in the underlying company.
The income arising from the £100,000 would not be caught by TA 1988, Part XV as the income would not be income arising under a settlement.
It should be noted, however, that the income may be taxed upon the settlor under TA 1988, s739.
The situation may arise where the taxpayer is on the face of it chargeable to tax under Case V of Schedule D and also caught by Part XV of the Taxes Act 1988.
This could apply where A is a life tenant under a foreign trust and A was  the settlor.
The trustees may have power to advance capital to A. There is no provision in Part XV to say that if there is a charge under Part XV then there shall not be a charge under any other provision.
The point was raised in Perry v Astor 19 TC 255.
Lord Russell of Killowen at 282 stated: One argument needs perhaps to be specifically considered.
It was said that one result of reading the Section as I read it would be this: that Mr Astor would be liable to pay tax in respect of the income received by the trustee in the United States as income deemed to be his (Part XV) and also likely to pay tax on the income which the trustee was bound to pay over, the latter being (within the decision in [Garland v Archer-Shee (1930) 15 TC 693]) the income springing from a foreign possession, namely, his right of action against the trustee.
In my opinion no such double taxation could occur…
Once the income which is the property of the trust deed is to be deemed the income of Mr Astor (that is, is to be treated for the purposes of the Income Tax Acts in all respects as if it were the property of Mr Astor), it automatically becomes impossible for the purposes of those Acts to say that he receives anything which springs from a right of action against the trustee in respect of his income.
Although Lord Russell of Killowen gave a dissenting judgment it is felt that that point holds good.
Example
Part XV and Case V
Summary of non-resident trusts and the Part XV income tax settlement code
Generally, when taxpayers set up non-resident trusts they have in mind with regard to income tax the special anti-avoidance provisions concerned with the transfer of assets abroad, namely TA 1988, ss739 and 740.
It is critical, however, that practitioners bear in mind the basic principles of income tax namely that if income arises in the United Kingdom it is subject to income tax or if the taxpayer is resident in the United Kingdom income which is his wherever it arises will be chargeable to income tax.
It is also important to bear in mind the income tax settlement code in Part XV of TA 1988.
The Part XV code, however, is excluded if there is no element of bounty (there is no similar exclusion with regard to TA 1988, ss739 and 740) and also income arising to an underlying company owned by the overseas trust would not comprise income arising to the settlement for the purposes of Part XV.
However, there is no exclusion from the application of Part XV similar to that contained in TA 1988, s741, ie it applies whether or not the taxpayer set up the trust to avoid tax and whether or not the transaction was a bona fide commercial transaction.
Although in many bona fide commercial transactions it may be there will be no element of bounty which would exclude Part XV.
Part XV is built upon the basic UK taxing principles which require that overseas income is taxable on a remittance basis if the settlor is resident in the United Kingdom but not domiciled in the United Kingdom.
Ordinary residence has no special relevance for the purposes of Part XV although, of course, it is an essential prerequisite for the application of TA 1988, ss739 and 740.
The point is if taxpayers have entered into arrangements to seek to avoid TA 1988, ss739 and 749 (the two ugly sisters) they must as a matter of proper form check to see that there is no tax liability under general principles and no tax liability under one or other of the sections contained within Part XV of TA 1988.
4 Income tax: TA 1988, ss739 and 740 (transfers of assets abroad)
(1) TA 1988, s739
Preamble
Taxes Act 1988, s739(1) states that the section is enacted:…for the purpose of preventing the avoiding by individuals ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom of liability to income tax by means of transfer of assets by virtue or in consequence of which, either alone or in conjunction with associated operations, income becomes payable to persons resident or domiciled outside the United Kingdom.
Main charging provision
Section 739(2) reads as follows: Where by virtue or in consequence of any such transfer, either alone or in conjunction with associated operations, such an individual has, within the meaning of this section, power to enjoy, whether forthwith or in the future, any income of a person resident or domiciled outside the United Kingdom which, if it were income of that individual received by him in the United Kingdom…would be chargeable to income tax by deduction or otherwise, that income shall, whether it would or would not have been chargeable to income tax apart from the provisions of this section, be deemed to be income of that individual for all purposes of the Income Tax Acts.
The meanings of the important words used in s739(2) will now be examined.
The words "such transfer" refer to the transfer of assets mentioned in s739(1).
Section 742(9) (b) defines "assets" to include property or rights of any kind, and "transfer" in relation to rights shall include the creation of those rights.
Clearly the creation of an overseas settlement will come within the section.
 "Where by virtue or in consequence of any such transfer" 
If the relevant transfer of assets comprises a transfer from one country outside the United Kingdom to another country outside the United Kingdom, the requirement as to the "transfer of assets" in s739 is satisfied.
The provision and s740 do not just apply to cases where there is a transfer of an asset from the United Kingdom to a place outside the United Kingdom.
There is dicta in Vestey v IRC [1980]STC 6 at 20(g) which indicate that with regard to s739, the assets should be transferred abroad, but the dicta are not clear and there is probably nothing to prevent the legislation being simply interpreted as applying to transfers from one overseas country to another.
The provisions of s739 (and s740) apply to situations where there is a transfer to a UK company which thereafter becomes resident outside the United Kingdom or to a UK trust which thereafter becomes resident outside the United Kingdom.
This follows from the natural reading of the legislation and although the case of Congreve v IRC (1948) 30 TC 163 was overruled by the House of Lords in Vestey v IRC on the central point of what individuals can be liable to tax under s739, this point was not specifically referred to by the House of Lords.
It was also made clear by Lord Simonds at p206 in Congreve, that the section would apply to a transfer to, say, a UK company which was subsequently transferred overseas.
Lord Simonds stated: The transfer of assets aimed at by the Section is not expressed to be a transfer to a person resident or domiciled out of the United Kingdom.
I should suppose that it is deliberately not so expressed, for I cannot think that so simple an expedient as the transfer of assets to a company resident in the United Kingdom and the immediate removal of that company outside it would not occur to the draftsman.
The word "transfer" in s739 has a very wide meaning.
As mentioned, the section does not require assets as such to be transferred abroad.
It is only necessary that as a result of the transfer of assets income becomes payable to a person who is domiciled or resident outside the United Kingdom.
There may, for instance, be a foreign discretionary trust which wishes to acquire a lease in the United Kingdom.
Under that lease it is required to pay rents to the landlord.
The landlord may require Mr X in the United Kingdom to enter into a guarantee that if the non-resident trust defaults Mr X will bear the rent.
It may be that if Mr X enters into the guarantee the property can be purchased with perhaps the non-resident trust having to borrow to purchase the same.
The non-resident trust may hope to offset the interest it pays on the  borrowing against any profit rents which it obtains from letting the property out.
Are there tax problems in this arrangement?
The danger is if Mr X had entered into that transaction partly with a view to avoiding tax then the entire gross income without any deduction for trustee expenses and indeed (in strictness) for the payments of interest under the loan will be taxed upon Mr X. He would have made a transfer of an asset.
This is even though all he simply did was enter into a guarantee.
 "Associated operations" is defined for the purposes of s739 (and s740) in s742(1) and means, in relation to any transfer, an operation of any kind effected by any person in relation to any of the assets transferred or any assets representing, whether directly or indirectly, any of the assets transferred, or to the income arising from any such assets, or to any assets representing, whether directly or indirectly, the accumulations of income arising from any such assets.
Death has been held not to be an associated operation (Bambridge v IRC (1955) 36 TC 313).
 "Either alone or in conjunction with associated operations" 
In Fynn v IRC (1958) 37 TC 629, the taxpayer, Mr Fynn, transferred investments to an Eire company in return for shares in the company which he settled on irrevocable trusts for his children.
Subsequently, money was lent interest-free by Mr Fynn to the trust.
The Revenue contended that this loan, which was repayable on demand, was associated with the transfer of the assets to the company, and was sufficient to give Mr Fynn power to enjoy the income of the company.
Upjohn J held on the facts of the case that the transfer of assets and the making of the loan were not associated operations, so that the section was not applicable.
This means the settlor (or the spouse of the settlor)(s742(9) (a)) who will have made the transfer of assets and perhaps any individual who had been associated with the transfer of assets (Vestey v IRC [1980]STC 10, overruling Congreve v IRC (1948) 30 TC 163 (HL)).
 "Such an individual" 
Following the recent House of Lords decision of Pepper v Hart [1992]STC 898 it is possible to refer to Hansard in certain circumstances and it is felt that it is proper to refer to the relevant Hansard to discover who the individual is referred to in the provisions.
As mentioned, the House of Lords took the view that it was the person who made the transfer and his spouse and possibly persons connected with the transfer of the assets.
The Financial Secretary during the course of the relevant Act—Finance Act 1936, s18 at that time—gave an assurance that only a transferor or his spouse could be made liable under what is now s739 (HC Deb Vol 313, cols 676, 678 and 689) an assurance which was repeated by the Attorney General (HC Deb Vol 313, col 701).
Summarising the conditions precedent to the operation of s739 the Financial Secretary stated: Under the clause…there have to be three conditions precedent.
In the first place there has to be a transfer of assets abroad by an individual resident in this country.
Secondly, that transfer must have given rise to rights in the individual who makes it.
Thirdly, the individual must have power to enjoy the income of the following company.
It is not until these three conditions are present that the clause comes into operation.
It seems clear from the case of Herdman v IRC (1969) 45 TC 394 that if a taxpayer not ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom makes a transfer of an asset with a view to avoiding UK tax he could be liable under s739 when he becomes ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom.
Section 739—residence of transferor
The income arising overseas with respect to the transfer of the asset would not be chargeable until the individual becomes ordinarily resident (and resident) in the United Kingdom and until such time as the Revenue can say that had the income been received by the individual in the United Kingdom it would have been chargeable to income tax.
Thus, with respect to the income arising during the years prior to the taxpayer coming to the United Kingdom there should be no tax charge under s739.
Thereafter there could be a tax charge under s739.
In the Herdman case the taxpayer argued that s739 could not apply if the taxpayer was not ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom when he made the relevant transfer.
Lord MacDermott CJ found such an argument surprising because it would create a large loophole in the legislation.
At p405C he stated: Contrast, for example, the following instances.
A, whose career abroad ends when he attains a certain age, decides to retire to the United Kingdom, and before his return from abroad transfers his United Kingdom assets to a company he has incorporated in the Irish Republic with a view to future tax avoidance.
B, on the other hand, who has always been resident in the United Kingdom, does likewise for the same reason.
Why should A be outside and B within [what is now s739]?
Neither the wording of the section nor its underlying purpose seems to me to call for such an anomalous distinction.
There are dicta in Vestey which indicate that Herdman v IRC may not be good law, but it is felt that the Revenue probably have the better argument on a simple reading of the legislation.
However, the real doubt cast upon the question of whether Herdman v IRC is good law comes from the case of Pepper v Hart [1992]STC 898 where the Financial Secretary to the Treasury—W S Morrison—stated: The hon. and learned friend asked us to imagine the case of a foreigner ordinarily resident overseas who has transferred foreign securities to a foreign company.
If the foreigner made that transfer in the past before he became ordinarily resident here the clause would not apply to him because in its opening words it refers to individuals ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom.
The wording is very clear and in view of the dicta in the Vestey decision and the major shift in the approach to be adopted to that section—restricting the same to the settlor and his spouse and taking into account the provisions of TA 1988, s740—it is felt that the Revenue will have to concede this point unless they change the law (in which case one would have to watch very carefully what was said in Parliament to see how the change is to have effect!).
Note that before an individual is charged to tax under s739 he must be ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom.
It is arguable that in the case of foreign source income he must also be resident in the United Kingdom before a charge can arise.
Section 742 states that an individual shall be deemed to have power to enjoy the income for the purposes of s739 if he comes within one or more of the following heads:(a) To enure for benefit The income is in fact so dealt with by any person as to be calculated, at some point of time and whether in the form of income or not, to enure for the benefit of the individual.
 "Has within the meaning of this section, power to enjoy, whether forthwith or in the future, any income" 
The word "calculated" in this head means "reckoned, estimated or thought out" (Vestey v IRC (No 2)[1978]STC 567, Walton J at 579).
The Revenue would have some difficulty if they were to try to apply this head to tax upon the settlor or the spouse of the settlor income validly accumulating in an overseas discretionary trust.
They are likely to rely on head (d) below.
(b) Increase in value of asset The receipt or accrual of the income operates to increase the value to the individual of any assets held by him or for his benefit.
(c) Benefits The individual receives or is entitled to receive, at any time, any benefit provided or to be provided out of that income or out of monies which are or will be available for the purpose by reason of the effect or successive effects of the associated operations on that income and on any assets which directly or indirectly represent that income.
(d) Exercise of powers The individual may, in the event of the exercise or successive exercise of one or more powers, by whomsoever exercisable and whether with or without the consent of any other person, become entitled to the beneficial enjoyment of the income.
(e) Control The individual is able in any manner whatsoever, and whether directly or indirectly, to control the application of the income.
It was held in IRC v Schroder [1983]STC 480 that overseas trustees who acted in accordance with the wishes of the taxpayer were not "controlled" by the taxpayer because he could not control the exercise of their fiduciary trustee powers.
This was a fundamental aspect of the nature of trusteeship.
Thus, because the taxpayer could not be said to control the trustees, he could not be said to have control over the application of the income within s742(e).
Thus, the income could not be taxed upon the taxpayer, under this head.
In this connection see also the trust law case of Turner v Turner [1983]2 All ER 745.
The words "power to enjoy" generally have a wide meaning.
It was thought (wrongly at it turns out) prior to the case of Vestey v IRC discussed below, that where assets were transferred to a non-resident discretionary trust with a number of beneficiaries ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom, each and every beneficiary could be taxed upon the income of the trust (see s742(2) (d); Lord Howard de Walden v IRC (1941) 25 TC 121 (CA); Congreve v IRC (1948) 30 TC 163 (HL)).
The decision of the House of Lords in Vestey v IRC (No 2)[1979]3 All ER 976 is of considerable importance not only in attempting to interpret TA 1970, s478 (now TA 1988, s739) but also with regard to the constitutional questions raised concerning extra-statutory concessions.
Wide but not wide enough
The Vestey (1979) decision
Briefly, the facts in Vestey were that in 1942 the heads of two Vestey families conveyed certain properties to non-resident trustees to be held on discretionary trust for the benefit of the settlors' descendants.
Income was accumulated and capital payments were made to six beneficiaries between the years of assessment 1962/63 and 1968/69.
The total number of eligible beneficiaries was 29 in 1963 and 32 in the subsequent relevant years and they were all persons other than the two settlors.
In 1970 the Revenue assessed each beneficiary to whom capital payments had been made.
The Revenue contended that regardless of the amount of the capital appointed each appointee was liable on the full amount of the trust income so that the Crown was entitled to as many times the tax on the income as appointees year by year.
However, the Revenue limited their actual claims to fixed proportions so that the total of the overseas income was not taxed more than once.
Apparent options open to Revenue
This meant that it was open to the Revenue to select one or more of the beneficiaries to tax and to pass over the others.
It was also open to the  Revenue to apportion the tax among several beneficiaries according to any method they thought fit.
Also, the liability of any individual beneficiary may depend on when the Revenue chooses to make its assessment.
The House of Lords found this wholly unsatisfactory.
Lord Wilberforce said that this would be taxation by self-asserted administrative discretion and not by law (p895).
Lord Wilberforce considered (at pp986 and 987) that there were two possible interpretations to the section: The first is to regard it as having a limited effect; to be directed against persons who transfer assets abroad; who by means of such transfers avoid tax, and who yet manage when resident in the United Kingdom to obtain or to be in a position to obtain benefits from those assets.
For myself I regard this as being the natural meaning of the section…
The second is to give the whole section an extended meaning, so as to embrace all persons, born or unknown, who in any way may benefit [author's emphasis]from assets transferred abroad by others…
This I regard as a possible but less natural meaning of the section.
As a result of this restriction on the section Viscount Dilhorne said (at p994): The limited application would leave, it is said, a "yawning gap" .
Persons who transfer assets abroad may do so for their benefit.
With this construction their descendants would not come within the section.
Gaps when they are found in our tax laws are usually speedily filled.
As the law presently stands, it is open for a settlor to transfer assets overseas upon an accumulation trust for the benefit of his children without there being any UK tax liability on the income as it arises overseas.
Finance Act 1981 (now TA 1988, s740) has not changed that fundamental point although charges can arise in respect of payments out from the trust to beneficiaries.
This is provided the settlor and his spouse, and possibly persons associated with the setting up of the settlement, are excluded from all benefit.
The reference to an "associated" person was made by Lord Wilberforce (at p989).
Clearly if a trust is set up for beneficiaries, for example, children of the settlor who were not involved in or even aware of its creation, they would not be associated persons.
 "Of a person resident or domiciled out of the United Kingdom" —a trust which is administered overseas, and where the trustees are resident overseas, would clearly come within this provision.
Even if there were some UK trustees, the provision could apply (see p7).
Two interpretations
Section 742(8) states that for the purposes of this section any body corporate incorporated outside the United Kingdom shall be treated as if it were resident outside the United Kingdom, whether it is so resident or not.
Non-resident UK incorporated companies come within s739 as they will be persons resident outside the United Kingdom.
It is necessary that the amounts which are chargeable to tax are income, so that if capital gains are made overseas this section will not be applicable.
 "That income shall, whether it would or would not have been chargeable to income tax apart from the provisions of this section, be deemed to be the income of that individual for all the purposes of the Income Tax Acts" —the individual ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom can be chargeable under the section whether or not he receives the income.
The tax liability is on an arising basis.
 "Capital sums" —section 739(3) (4) states:(3) Where, whether before or after any such transfer, such an individual receives or is entitled to receive any capital sum the payment of which is in any way connected with the transfer or any associated operation, any income which, by virtue or in consequence of the transfer, either alone or in conjunction with associated operations, has become the income of a person resident or domiciled outside the United Kingdom shall, whether it would or would not have been chargeable to income tax apart from the provisions of this section, be deemed to be income of that individual for all purposes of the Income Tax Acts.
(4) In subsection (3) above "capital sum" means…(a) any sum paid or payable by way of loan or repayment of a loan, and (b) any other sum paid or payable otherwise than as income, being a sum which is not paid or payable for full consideration in money or money's worth.
An individual shall be deemed to have received a capital sum or be entitled to receive such a sum where a third person receives the same or is entitled to receive the same at the direction of the individual or where the individual assigns his right (by, for instance, a deed of assignment or an equitable assignment) to receive the sum to such third person (s739(5)).
Income shall not be treated as that of an individual under s739(3) (payment of a capital sum) where he has received a sum by way of loan and he has wholly repaid the loan before the beginning of the particular year.
In Ramsden v IRC (1957) 37 TC 619, it was held that if A sold property to B with the sale price being left outstanding that could not be treated as a loan within s739(4).
Outstanding purchase price is not a loan
Harman J was quite clear on the point.
At p625 he stated: A vendor selling property to a purchaser cannot be said to lend him the unpaid portion of the purchase price.
However, if such a situation does arise the income may increase the value of the individual's right to recover the debt.
The individual would therefore have power to enjoy the income and be taxable under s739 even though no "capital sum" may have been paid.
Mr X who is ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom transfers shares in a foreign company to Panama Inc, another foreign company which Mr X controls.
Dividends accrue to Panama Inc.
The sale price was £1M which was left outstanding.
Mr X will argue that he has not received and nor is he entitled to receive any capital sum, namely a loan or a repayment of a loan.
That is probably correct following Ramsden v IRC.
Thus s739(3) may not be in point.
However, the income accruing to Panama Inc will increase the value of Mr X's right to recover his debt.
He therefore has power to enjoy the income of the company within the meaning of s739(1) and s742(2) (b).
Harman J accepted the Crown's contention that "The appellant's right to recover his debt is an asset held by him and…the value of that right is increased by anything tending to increase the value of the company's assets" (see p627).
Section 739 (and indeed s740) shall not have effect if the individual shows in writing, or otherwise, to the satisfaction of the Board either: 1.
that the purpose of avoiding liability to taxation was not the purpose or one of the purposes for which the transfer or associated operations or any of them were effected; or 2. that the transfer and any associated operations were bona fide commercial transactions and were not designed for the purpose of avoiding liability to taxation (s741).
Taxation, however, is not restricted to UK income tax.
In Sassoon v IRC (1943) 25 TC 154, Mr X, who was ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom, transferred investments to a Swiss company.
Mr X had power to enjoy the income of the Swiss company.
The transfer had taken place only to avoid UK death duties.
It was held that the income of the Swiss company was taxable upon Mr X under what is now s739.
Scott LJ said: In my view the nature of the proviso, instead of requiring a strict interpretation of the word "taxation" in favour of the taxpayer, calls for a liberal interpretation in favour of the Crown.
The draughtsman no doubt had in mind to cover what he would have called all bona fide transfers, that is to say transfers which would be regarded by the Revenue as not made for any fiscal purpose which they would regard as improper.
The word "taxation" is a short expression of such an idea and I think a happy one.
Death duties, National Defence Contribution, perhaps other taxes or duties, would all be within the Revenue's mind in deliberately choosing the wide word "taxation" , in order to make sure that their concession on transfers for other purposes should not be used to deprive the Revenue of other taxes than Income Tax or Sur-tax.
(On the implications of the Sassoon decision, however, see "Sassoon—Dead or Alive?" ,
Hilda Wilson, 1984 Capital Taxes No 2, p51 (Sweet & Maxwell).)
Example
Exclusion for bona fide commercial transactions, etc
An individual may have set up a UK settlement with a view to mitigating inheritance tax.
Section 739 would not apply at that point because no income is paid to an overseas person.
Subsequently the trust may be exported.
That export may amount to an associated operation.
Because the trust was originally set up for the purposes of mitigating inheritance tax the trust may come within the provisions of ss739 and 740 with the exemption mentioned in s741 not being available.
Supplemental provisions
Income under s739 is chargeable under Schedule D, Case VI by virtue of TA 1988, s743(1).
If the income has already borne tax at the basic rate relief will be given for that charge.
Reliefs and deductions can be obtained by the taxpayer in the same way as if he had actually received the income (s743(2)).
Non-domiciled persons—tax haven treatment
An individual who is domiciled outside the United Kingdom shall not be chargeable to tax in respect of the sum which is deemed to be his under s739 if he would not have been chargeable to tax in respect of it if it had been in fact his income.
The position of a non-domiciled person is therefore not made worse or is intended not to be made worse by virtue of the deemed receipt of income charged under s739 (s743(3)).
TA 1988, s743 prevents a double charge
Section 743(4) provides that where an individual has been charged to income tax on any income deemed to be his by virtue of s739 and that income is subsequently received by him, it shall be deemed not to form part of his income again for the purposes of the income tax acts.
Thus, if in year 1 X is charged under s739 on the income arising in his overseas discretionary trust or in a company owned by that trust and that money is, for instance, then lent to him, the loan of the money would not give rise to any further charge.
The same in an appropriate case would apply if the monies were simply advanced to him.
X has set up an overseas discretionary trust.
£100,000 worth of income arises and this is assessed on X. The income arises in year 1.
After X has been so charged to income tax the £100,000 is advanced to X absolutely.
The advance is made, say, in year 3.
The advance would not give rise to an income tax charge.
However, if the income which arose in year 1 had not been charged at the time when the payment was made in year 3 to the beneficiary, that relieving provision would not be applicable and it would appear that the tax charge would take place in year 3.
It would seem that "charged" in this context would mean actually charged rather than chargeable.
Example
In the case of Aykroyd v IRC 24 TC 515, Macnaghton J, at p523, stated that any contrary argument would depend on the substitution of the word "chargeable" for the word "charged" .
There is no ground that I can see for making any such substitution.
The implication from the provision and s741 is if the Revenue have not actually charged the income when it arose in year 1 and it is paid out in year 3, the only charge under s739 would be in year 3 when the monies are paid out.
Section 743(5) states that in any case where an individual has for the purposes of s739 power to enjoy income of a person abroad by reason of his receiving a benefit from the trust (hence giving rise to a tax charge under TA 1988, s742(2) (c)), the individual shall be chargeable to income tax under s739 for the year of assessment in which the benefit is received.
He shall be assessed on the whole amount or value of that benefit except in so far as is shown that the benefit derives directly or indirectly from income on which he has already been charged to tax for that year or a previous year of assessment.
Thus, if the taxpayer can show that in year 1 he had been assessed under s739 on the £100,000 which accrued to the trust then the trustees are able either in that year or in subsequent years to pay the monies out without any tax charge under s742(2) (c).
If the taxpayer had not been assessed (charged) in the year the benefit was provided to the beneficiary or in a previous year, he can be assessed on the benefit under TA 1988, s742(2) (c).
The situation may exist where X is, for example, resident and ordinarily resident and domiciled in the United Kingdom.
He may have created a settlement overseas which in turn owns an underlying company, which underlying company receives UK dividends.
Tax credits and TA 1988, s739
As the income arises in the underlying company it is felt that, on a proper reading of TA 1988, s231(1) and (4), the income will be assessed upon the UK settlor under s739 and he will be entitled to a tax credit.
This is because a reference to a "distribution" in s231(4) is a reference to a distribution which is a qualifying distribution made by a company resident in the United Kingdom within s231(1), and not to such a distribution which by necessity has to be received by a person resident in the United Kingdom.
In other words the fact that the distribution may be received by the overseas company which is not resident in the United Kingdom would not prevent the UK settlor being entitled to the tax credit (that is the author's reading of the provision).
Vital deductions and s739
Section 739 deems the income of the overseas person to be that of the individual who is ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom.
The question arises as to what is the meaning of the term "income" .
Before dealing with the meaning of that term the following points should be noted in connection with s743.
First, income tax at the basic rate shall not be charged by virtue of s739 in respect of income which has borne tax at the basic rate by deduction or otherwise.
Income tax chargeable under s739 shall be charged under Case VI of Schedule D. Thus, whether or not the income arises from an overseas trade is not relevant; the charge is still under Case VI of Schedule D. Section 743(2), however, provides that in computing the liability to income tax of an individual chargeable under s739 the same deductions and reliefs shall be allowed as would have been allowed if the income deemed to be his by virtue of s739 had actually been received by him.
The reference to income tax at the basic rate not being charged in respect of income that has already borne tax at the basic rate is designed to ensure that there is no double taxation where the overseas entity receives income which has already borne UK tax.
This ensures that tax at the basic rate is not charged again on such income which has already borne tax at the basic rate (see Lord Chetwode v IRC (1977) 51 TC 647 per Sir John Pennycuick at 670H).
If an overseas company invests in shares and the structure is caught by s739 then the entire dividend comprises the income for the purposes of s739 and it is not possible to deduct in computing the chargeable income revenue expenses such as investment advisory fees, management fees, safe keeping charges, security handling fees and bank charges and registered and executive office fees.
With respect, however, to overseas trading transactions it is clear from the obiter in the case of Lord Chetwood (see p687) and it is implicit in the case of Latilla v IRC (1943) 25 TC 107 and the obiter in IRC v Frere (1964) 42 TC 125 that one looks to the net trading income.
Although not free from doubt, the author is of the opinion that if an overseas company, for instance, carries on a trade overseas and Mr X who is ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom is assessed on the income the position would be as follows: 1.
It is not possible to argue that because the income is trading income s739 does not apply to that income (Latilla v IRC (1943) 25 TC 107 and IRC v Brackett [1986]STC 521).
2.
It is the net trading income which is deemed to be the income of the individual.
Section 743(2) does not state that the computation should be done in accordance with the rules applicable in Cases I and II of Schedule D. It seems the computation involves the deduction of proper trading expenses but nevertheless should be done on an actual basis under Case VI of Schedule D.  3.
The reference to deductions and reliefs in s743(2) does not refer to trading deductions but to deductions which the individual may have in his personal capacity such as Case VI losses, personal reliefs, etc.
It is clear from Lord Chetwode v IRC 51 TC 647 that the income arising to an investment company will be taxed upon the transferor under s739 without any deduction for charges such as investment advisory fees, management fees, safe keeping charges, security handling fees and bank charges and registered and executive office fees.
That is because of the meaning of the term "income" as it is used in s739.
 "Power to enjoy" and expenses
It was argued in that case that the taxpayer, however, could only be assessed on the income (the gross income) to the extent that he had power to enjoy it.
If the monies were utilised on expenses then surely the taxpayer would not have the power to enjoy that part of the income which is utilised on expenses so that in that indirect fashion relief will be available for expenses.
Lord Wilberforce at pp687-688 dealt with this point as follows: This leaves one final point to be taken by the taxpayer.
Under s412(1) (now TA 1988, s739) the income which is to be taxed as if it were the taxpayer's is income which he has power to enjoy within the meaning of the section.
The argument is that he had power to enjoy so much of the income of Attleborough [the overseas company]as was spent in expenses, etc, so that by this route one arrives at a taxable amount of net income.
My Lords, the short answer to this lies in the very extensive powers which Lord Chetwode [the settlor]had over the assets of the settlement and so over the share capital of Attleborough.
He could at any time have obtained for himself the beneficial enjoyment of the whole income.
This gives him power to enjoy the income by virtue of subs (5)(d)[now s742(2) (d)].
He can no more diminish the amount of income which he has power to enjoy by the amount of his expenses than any other taxpayer who chooses to expend his income, however prudently, can claim to be taxed on what is left after the expenditure.
I think it also probable that he had power to enjoy by virtue of paras (a),(b) and (c)(now s742(2) (a),(b) and (c)).
This argument therefore clearly fails.
That line of analysis tends to indicate that when one is interpreting s740(3) and the meaning of the expression "relevant income" (meaning "income which can directly or indirectly be used for providing a benefit for an individual or for enabling a benefit to be provided for him" ) the taxpayer may be having the benefit of a slightly generous interpretation if the Revenue permit, in any year in which income arises, the amount of the relevant income in that year to be reduced by the amount of expenditure incurred in that year.
(2) TA 1988, s740
Main provision
Taxes Act 1988, s740 has effect where there is a transfer of assets, either alone or in conjunction with associated operations, and income becomes payable to a person resident or domiciled outside the United Kingdom.
Before the provision can apply, an individual ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom must receive a benefit and that individual must not be liable to tax under s739.
Because of the latter requirement there cannot be a double charge to tax on the same income (s744).
Benefits
The receipt of the benefit referred to must be out of the assets which are available for the purpose by virtue or in consequence of the transfer or of any associated operations.
Mr Dalton of the Revenue, in the meeting between the Law Society and the Revenue on 8 June 1981, stated that he felt that the appointment of a life interest to a beneficiary was not a benefit because it was not "provided out of assets" .
If in the year in which the benefit is given to the taxpayer the amount of the relevant income is less than the amount of the benefit then the individual is only taxed on the amount of the relevant income but in subsequent years he can be further charged if there is further relevant income but never in excess of the amount of the benefit (s740(2)).
In 1993/94 £100,000 of capital under a deed of appointment is paid for the benefit of Mr X. The relevant income in 1992/93 was £20,000, in 1993/94 £50,000 and in 1994/95 £70,000. £70,000 of the £100,000 will be treated as Mr X's income for 1993/94 and £30,000 will be treated as Mr X's income for 1994/95.
Example
The Ming Vase controversy
The ascertaining of benefits under s740 is the subject of much difficulty.
For the purposes of s740 the individual who must be ordinarily resident (and the author would suggest also resident in the case of overseas source income but that is an arguable point) in the United Kingdom must receive a benefit.
He is taxed on the amount or value of any benefit.
Certain value added tax cases would tend to indicate that the amount of benefit obtained by a taxpayer if the trustees allow him the use of a Ming Vase would equate to the sort of rent which they could have received if they had let  the vase with appropriate adjustments being made for insurance, agreeing to house the vase, etc.
It may be that the courts would apply some sort of reasonable annual percentage.
Evidence would have to be called as to the likely charge which would be made.
The Revenue have been known to allow in practice the taxpayer to use the Schedule E rules with respect to certain types of benefits, eg loans.
The taxpayer may seek to raise a robust argument based on fundamental Schedule E rules that the benefit should be limited to the amount which the taxpayer could obtain on a sale of the rights (Tennant v Smith (1892) 3 TC 158, Abbott v Philbin (1960) 39 TC 82 and Heaton v Bell (1969) 46 TC 11).
However, the author is not optimistic on that approach.
It is possible that the courts will allow the Revenue to (in effect) have the benefit of hindsight.
Thus if the Ming Vase is lent to the taxpayer repayable on demand (so to say) then if the taxpayer does in fact have the use for the entire year then the type of rental likely to be charged on such a letting in the market (duly discounted because the trustees can call back the vase on demand) is likely to comprise the benefit under s740.
Loans repayable on demand
The author feels that the amount of benefit will be equal to the interest which a lender would charge and the borrower would pay duly discounted because the loan is repayable on demand (see cases such as Exeter Golf and Country Club Ltd v The Commissioners of Customs and Excise [1981]STC 211).
There is some support for the proposition that such a loan, if made to a person fully capable of repaying the same and, for instance, charged against property in the United Kingdom, gives the taxpayer minimal benefit from the case of O"Leary v McKinlay [1991]STC 42 where Vinelott J at p51, dealing with a Schedule E beneficial loan, stated the following: If an employer lends money to an employee free of interest or at a favourable rate of interest and if the employee is free to exploit the money in any manner he chooses his employment cannot be said to have been the source of the income derived from the exploitation; the employer is the source of the money and the taxpayer is assessable to tax under Sch E on the benefit to him of obtaining the loan on the terms on which the loan was made; but if the loan is repayable on demand that benefit cannot be quantified and form the basis of an assessment under Sch E. It is arguable if property is held by a non-resident trust for A for life and B absolutely that if the trustees lend money to A at interest then if A allows the trustees not to pursue him in his capacity as borrower for the interest that no benefit will arise.
Effectively the loan is interest-free.
One, of course, must  take care under the Ramsay doctrine (Ramsay v IRC [1981]STC 174 and Furniss v Dawson [1984]STC 153 at 166g).
Unpaid interest—no income
It seems clear from the case of Lambe v IRC 18 TC 212 that if interest is not paid then no income will be received by the lender.
Section 740 benefits: living accommodation—assistance elsewhere?
When looking at the amount of the benefit under s740 of TA 1988 some assistance may be obtained by looking at how the problem is dealt with in other areas of taxation.
There are specific provisions dealing with Schedule E—the benefits in kind code in TA 1988 Part V and the specific provisions in TA 1988, s145 and s146 dealing with the user of living accommodation.
There are no provisions as such dealing with the situation where a person has provided services to a client (where Schedule D, Case I and Case II are in point) and the client allows the taxpayer to use the client's premises.
In many cases such user may be found to be tax-free because the taxpayer who uses the premises has not received "income" for the purposes of Schedule D, Case I and Case II.
In a number of cases the Revenue did seek to argue that the beneficial user was a taxable benefit for the purposes of Case I and Case II (and indeed Schedule E before the specific legislation was introduced).
Some guidance may therefore be obtained from the cases.
One can see what sort of benefit would have been taxable if the courts had decided that a tax charge could arise.
These could only amount to obiter because, of course, the courts found that there was no tax charge.
Halsbury LC in Tennant v Smith 3 TC 158 at 164 stated in a case where a Mr Tennant occupied premises: Now, Mr Tennant occupies this house without paying any rent for it.
It may be conceded that if he did not occupy it under his contract with the bank rent free he would be obliged to hire a house elsewhere, pay rent for it, and pro tanto diminish his income [author's emphasis].
And if any words could be found in the Statute which provided that besides paying Income Tax on income people should pay for advantages or emoluments in its wider sense (such as I think the word "emoluments" here, has not, for reasons to be presently given), there is no doubt of Mr Tennant's possession of a material advantage, which made his salary of higher value to him than if he did not possess it, and upon the hypothesis which I have just indicated, would be taxable accordingly.
The case indicates that the type of benefit which was provided from the property user was the fact that the taxpayer could live there without paying rent and that if the accommodation had not been provided he would have been obliged to hire a house elsewhere and pay rent for the same.
Similarly, the possible charge with respect to the free user of chattels may  be based on the "rental" which does not have to be paid by the beneficiary for the use thereof.
Multiple users and s740
The multiple user of trust property where the trust has relevant income can give rise to interesting problems.
If an overseas trust has relevant income and a particular beneficiary lives in a house owned by the trust then the position is reasonably clear; the beneficiary will be taxed on the value of his beneficial use of the property.
However, individuals may use the property for limited periods.
For instance, it may be available to members of a family who use the same for a number of days during the year or for weekends.
In this case, the taxpayers should ensure that either they pay rent for each day of the use or that the property is not available for their use for extended periods when the parties have no intention of using the same.
Appropriate legal relations should be created.
Assume that trustees of a non-resident trust lend X, the life tenant, £100,000 interest-free.
What is the benefit to X?
Assume that the income generated in the trust by the £100,000 would have been, say, £10,000 and that therefore X, a 40 per cent taxpayer, would have received £6,000 after income tax.
If X had borrowed the money from the trust and paid interest on it at 10 per cent, then the position would have been as follows.
If X had put the £100,000 on deposit, then he would have received £10,000, and out of this he would have been left with £6,000 after tax.
He would have owed the trust £10,000 in interest and thus would have had to find £4,000 out of his own pocket.
The benefit to X from borrowing the money interest-free from the trust is thus his savings in tax of £4,000.
Valuing benefits conferred on life tenants
Example
Relevant income
Relevant income for any year of assessment, in relation to an individual is any income which arises in that year to a person resident or domiciled outside the United Kingdom and which by virtue or in consequence of the transfer or associated operations referred to in the main charging provision—s740—can directly or indirectly be used for providing a benefit for the individual or for enabling a benefit to be provided for him.
It is possible to construe the words "the relevant income of a year of assessment" in two ways, ie as establishing a "once-and-for-all" test or as establishing a "continuing review" test.
Under the "once-and-for-all" test what matters is that the income can be used to benefit the individual in question in the year of assessment in which it arises, and it does not matter if it is not possible so to apply that income in a subsequent year of assessment.
Under the "continuing review" test, what matters is whether the income can directly or indirectly be used for providing a benefit for the individual at the time the benefit in question is in fact conferred on him.
As part of their representations on the 1981 Finance Bill, the Law Society recommended that income should not be "relevant income" to the extent that it was paid away to some person other than the recipient of the relevant benefit either before or after the receipt of the relevant benefit as it had by then ceased to be available as a source of funds out of which the relevant benefit could be paid.
The Inland Revenue were of the view "that if income had been paid away it could not be" relevant income "" because it would not be available for providing a benefit".
The Inland Revenue Technical Division were asked in correspondence whether they adhered to this view where the income in question was paid to a beneficiary who was neither resident nor ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom or, alternatively, where foreign source income was concerned, was paid outside the United Kingdom to a beneficiary who was not domiciled in the United Kingdom.
Technical Division confirmed that their view was that such income ceased to be relevant income.
In subsequent correspondence Technical Division were asked to confirm that the timing of the provision of the benefit to the non-resident or non-domiciled beneficiary was irrelevant, ie that it did not matter whether the income in question was paid to him in the year of assessment in which it arose or in a subsequent year, but Technical Division refused to confirm that this was the case on the grounds that the actual circumstances of particular cases tended to vary so widely that they felt unable to answer the question without more details.
Recycling income
Taxpayers should avoid the unnecessary "bunching" of relevant income.
Mr X may emigrate from the United Kingdom leaving behind members of  his family who he may wish to benefit from his assets.
If Mr X creates a new settlement generally, this would be outside the UK taxation regime but TA 1988, s740 could cause benefits to be assessed on UK beneficiaries who are ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom to the extent that they receive benefits.
They can only be taxed to the extent that there is relevant income in the trust.
For example, Mr X may settle £1M.
The income derived therefrom (which is accumulated) may be £200,000 a year and at the end of the fifth year Mr X may die.
There will thus have been £1M worth of relevant income.
If any benefits are provided to the UK beneficiaries then they will be assessed on the same to the extent of the relevant income.
On the other hand, if the income as it arose in each of the five years was paid out to Mr X that would have no tax consequences: he could not be assessed under TA 1988, s739 as he is not ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom.
With a certain amount of care he may be able to resettle some of the monies which have been paid out to him.
The trust would therefore have no relevant income at the time of his death.
Funds could therefore be appointed out to the children or other relevant UK beneficiaries without a tax charge (although if subsequently income arose in the structure that could be assessed on the beneficiaries to the extent of the relevant income).
However, there would be no total prohibition on the payment out of trust monies subsequent to the death by virtue of the fact that there would be £1M of relevant income ready to be used in an assessment on any beneficiaries under TA 1988, s740.
No credit for tax suffered at source
If a capital payment is made to a beneficiary, the payment can be taxed as income under s740.
Thus if the income, which had been capitalised, bore tax at source, no credit would be available for that tax charge (see Notes of Meeting of the Law Society and the Revenue, 8 June 1981, para 15).
An overseas discretionary trust receives £100 of UK source income, and bears £35 of tax thereon.
It capitalises the income.
It pays £65 to a UK beneficiary who bears, say, 40 per cent tax thereon.
The overall tax charge is thus 61 per cent.
If the trustees make a payment to a beneficiary as an income distribution and the trustees submit trust returns supported by the relevant income tax certificates which detail all sources of trust income arising and payments made to beneficiaries and the trustees pay the additional rate tax chargeable on the UK income of the trust credit can be obtained for income tax suffered by the trustees.
This is under Concession B18.
This is an important concession and reads as follows: B18 Payments out of a discretionary trust: entitlement to relief from UK tax under the provisions of the Income Tax Acts or of a double taxation agreement If a payment made by trustees falls to be treated as a net amount in accordance with TA 1988 s.687(2) and the income arising under the trust includes income in respect of which the beneficiary would, if such income came to him directly instead of through trustees, be entitled to relief under the provisions of the Income Tax Acts, eg TA 1988, s.278 (claims for personal reliefs by non-residents); TA 1988 s.47 (claims for exemption from tax on certain UK Government securities held by persons not ordinarily resident in the UK); TA 1988 ss.48, 123 (claims for exemption from UK tax on income from overseas securities by persons not resident in the UK); or under the terms of a double taxation agreement, such relief will be granted to the beneficiary on a claim made by him to the extent that the payment is of income which arose to the trustees not earlier than in the year 1973–74 and not earlier than six years before the end of the year of assessment in which the payment was made, provided that the trustees have submitted for each year trust returns which are supported by the relevant income tax certificates and which detail all sources of trust income arising and payments made to beneficiaries.
A similar concession will operate where the payment made by the discretionary trustees is not within TA 1988 s.687(2), but constitutes income arising from a foreign possession (eg where non-resident trustees exercise their discretion outside the UK) provided the trustees (a) submit trust returns, supported by the relevant income tax certificates, which detail all sources of trust income arising and payments made to beneficiaries; and (b) pay the additional rate tax chargeable on the UK income of the trust in accordance with TA 1988 s.686.
Example
Taxes Act 1988, s740(5)—individual domiciled outside the United Kingdom
There is a special relief contained in TA 1988, s740(5) which applies where the individual who receives the benefit is domiciled outside the United Kingdom.
The relief applies where an individual who is domiciled outside the United  Kingdom receives a benefit but he does not receive the benefit in the United Kingdom.
In this case that individual shall not be chargeable to tax under s740 by reference to relevant income which is such that if he had received it he would not, by reason of his being so domiciled, have been chargeable to income tax in respect of it.
It is critical, however, that the benefit is not received in the United Kingdom.
One is likely to get guidance as to the meaning of received in the United Kingdom for these purposes from the cases on Schedule D, Cases IV and V. In addition, the second limb of s740(5) states that s65(6)– (9) shall apply for the purposes of s740 as they would apply for the purposes of s65(5) if the benefit were income arising from possessions outside the United Kingdom.
There is an overseas trust which received income arising from overseas possessions and securities.
The income is £100,000 in 1993/94.
The trustees pay that £100,000 to Mr X who is resident and ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom but not domiciled in the United Kingdom.
It is paid into the Jersey bank account for Mr X. Mr X spends that money outside the United Kingdom.
Section 740 will not apply because the relief in provision in s740(5) will apply.
This is because: 1.
the income arising to the trust has a foreign source and therefore had it been received by the beneficiary he would not have borne tax on it; and 2. the benefit—the payment out by the trustees to the individual—is not received in the United Kingdom.
Example
Use of trust monies to pay interest on a loan
One of the anomalies in the remittance basis is the fact that a person who is resident and ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom but not domiciled in the United Kingdom may use his overseas source income to discharge the interest on an overseas loan which is used, say, to purchase a house in the United Kingdom in which he lives without there being a remittance of that overseas income to the UK.
It may be that such an individual has created an overseas trust or is the beneficiary under an overseas trust and the income is taken out from the trust and used to pay the interest on the overseas loan outside the United Kingdom.
The question may be asked as to whether the income has been remitted to the United Kingdom for the purposes of Schedule D, Case IV or V.
There are a number of provisions to be looked at.
Under general principles there will have been no remittance of the income, initially received by the trust, to the United Kingdom.
It is not actually brought to the United Kingdom and if it is brought then it is brought by the  lender and, following Carter v Sharon 20 TC 229, that will not have been a remittance by the relevant taxpayer.
(See Hall v Marians 19 TC 582, Wild v King Smith 24 TC 86, IRC v Gordon 33 TC 226 cf Lord Radcliffe in Thompson v Moyse 39 TC 29 at 337; it is not felt that Harmel v Wright 49 TC 149 at 159 alters the position because if one is "keeping one's eye" (p157E) on the income and benefit it does not find its way to the United Kingdom (it is hardly the case that the income and benefit "come in at one end of a conduit pipe and pass through certain traceable pipes until they come out at the other end to the taxpayer (in the United Kingdom" )).)
The income is used to pay the interest on the loan (the loan must be a "debt for money lent (to the client) outside the United Kingdom: TA 1988, s65(b) (d)" ) so the constructive remittance provisions in s65 will not apply.
The question is whether the following provisions can have relevance to alter the above: 1.
the fact that a new source of income may be created because of the payments by the trust; 2. section 681(1); 3. section 670 ( "income" ); 4. section 743(3); 5. section 740.
Following the case of Drummond v Collins ([1915]AC 1011) if the payments from the trust are made periodically there is a high likelihood (see Brodie's WT v IRC 17 TC 432 and Stevenson v Wishart [1987]STC 327) that a new source of income (Case V, Schedule D) will be created.
Because the trust is a foreign trust and the original sources of the income are foreign the payments give rise to a Case V, Schedule D source.
One therefore has a non-UK domiciled person receiving a foreign source of income which is taxable on a remittance basis (TA 1988, s65).
That income is never remitted to the United Kingdom.
There can be no UK tax problems under this head.
The taxpayer is assessed on the income arising to the settlement on a remittance basis.
The income is never remitted to the United Kingdom.
It is difficult to see how s681 can apply to cause the income to comprise "income arising under a settlement" within Part XV, Chapters III and IV: the proviso  clearly provides relief.
It seems that this tax charge does not actually cancel out the potential tax charge referred to above but it is difficult to see how there can be double tax problems because there can only be a charge on monies remitted to the United Kingdom and this cannot extend beyond the amounts actually available to be so remitted.
This section relates to the provisions in Chapter II of Part XV (children's settlements).
Despite the wide definition of "income" in s670, the Revenue can only charge tax if they can find an appropriate Case and/or Schedule.
The income arising to the trust can only be taxed under Schedule D, Case IV or V. Payments from the trust can only give rise to a new source under Case V. Those Cases give the taxpayer the benefit of the remittance basis.
For the reasons mentioned above there cannot be a double charge.
Section 743(2) provides relief from charges under s739.
The wording of s743(3) is in all material respects the same as the wording of s681(1).
This section will not cause the remittance basis to cease to be available or cause income to be treated as having been remitted to the United Kingdom.
Basic relief for unremitted income
 "New source" and the anti-avoidance provisions
Creation of new source of income
Taxes Act 1988, s681(1)
Taxes Act 1988, s670
Taxes Act 1988, s743(3)
Section 743(4) provides, specifically, for relief from double taxation: Where an individual has been charged to income tax on any income deemed to be his by virtue of section 739 and that income is subsequently received by him, it shall be deemed not to form part of his income again for the purposes of the Income Tax Acts.
It is arguable (and the Revenue do accept this) that if the income arising in the trust is taxable under s739 and payments are made out from the trust there is no double charge to tax (under s739 and Case V as a new source), even though these may create a new Case V source.
As the taxpayer is on a remittance basis (both with respect to the income arising in the trust and with respect to the new source of income) there should be no possible problems in connection with s739; there is never any remittance to the United Kingdom of the income.
This provision applies if there is relevant income arising in the trust and a benefit is provided to a person who is ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom.
It is arguable that the provision does not apply to the transferor.
Taxes Act 1988, s740
The question is how does this provision apply if the trustees make payments (annually or monthly) to the transferor's overseas bank account which payments are then used to discharge the interest obligations under the loan made to the transferor to buy the UK property?
The relevant provision is s740(5) which reads thus: An individual who is domiciled outside the United Kingdom shall not, in respect of any benefit not received in the United Kingdom, be chargeable to tax under [s740]by reference to relevant income which is such that if he had received it he would not, by reason of his being so domiciled, have been chargeable to income tax in respect of it; and [s65(6)– (9)]shall apply for the purposes of [s740(5)]as they would apply for the purposes of [s65(5)]if the benefit were income arising from possessions outside the United Kingdom.
There may be said to be two limbs to s740(5).
The first limb provides that if the recipient is domiciled outside the United Kingdom and the benefit is not received in the United Kingdom then the recipient shall not be chargeable to tax by reference to relevant income which is such that if he had received it he would not by reason of his being so domiciled have been chargeable to tax in respect of it.
The relevant income has a foreign source and is never remitted to the United Kingdom either by the trustees or by the taxpayer.
There are no problems with respect to the first limb.
The second limb extends the meaning of the words "received in the United Kingdom" .
A benefit will be treated as received in the United Kingdom if, had the benefit been income arising from possessions, s65(6)– (9) would have deemed the income to have been received in the United Kingdom.
The benefit—the payments from the trust—is not actually received in the United Kingdom; it is paid overseas to the overseas lender.
One can apply the Carter v Sharon analysis to the situation (although the case is only indirectly relevant to this type of notional situation).
The client is then able to rely on the fact that even if s65(6)– (9) applied the benefit will not have been received in the United Kingdom because the benefit will be used to repay the interest on the loan (and not the capital).
It is felt that s740 does not present a problem in this case (at least as far as the payment of monies by the trust to the client to enable the client to discharge interest payments on the loan taken out to buy a UK property is concerned).
The proposed transaction should succeed in its object of ensuring that the monies used to pay the interest on the borrowings will not be taxable upon the borrower.
This is because the client is not domiciled in the United Kingdom for general income tax purposes and the monies are not remitted to the United Kingdom (TA 1988, s65).
The fact that the taxpayer may be said to benefit in some way from the overseas income—he was able to buy the property because the loan was made to him and he could only keep up, or he kept up, the payments of interest by using that income—is not enough to cause there to be a remittance.
The Lord President (Cooper) in IRC v Gordon 33 TC 226 at 230 stated that:…it is not enough that a person resident in the United Kingdom should somehow have derived benefit from the income of a foreign possession…the duty of the Court was to seek for an actual remittance to, and receipt in, the United Kingdom and not to be lead astray by an "equivalent" to a remittance or receipt, or a "constructive receipt" .
Conclusions
Relationship of TA 1988, s739 with s740
Sections 739 and 740 are both comprised within Part XVII, Chapter III of TA 1988.
The general relieving provision in s740, where transfers took place, etc not with a view to avoiding tax or which were carried out for bona fide commercial reasons, applies to ss739 and 740.
The definition of "associated operations" in s742(1) applies to both provisions and s744 contains provisions designed to ensure that there is no double charge to tax under both the sections.
It should be noted, however, that the "preamble" to s739 contained in s739(1) is not repeated in s740 and does not apply to that section.
5 Overseas trusts under the inheritance tax regime
Introduction
Capital transfer tax was introduced by FA 1975, effective from 26 March 1974.
The special capital transfer tax rules applicable to discretionary trusts were substantially recast in FA 1982.
All the capital transfer tax provisions were brought together in the CTTA 1984 with Part III dealing with settled property.
The FA 1986 introduced some important changes.
Finally, the tax was renamed inheritance tax in the Finance Act 1986, s100 and it presently comprises a unique but complex blend of the old estate duty legislation originally to be found in the repealed FA 1894 and the capital transfer tax legislation contained in the CTTA 1984 (now IHTA 1984).
Essentially the Finance Act 1986 has left the IHTA 1984 provisions intact but there are a number of changes, the most substantial one being that if an individual gives property to another individual, or an accumulation and maintenance trust, or a trust for the disabled and survives the gift by seven years and the gift is not subject to reservations (the taxpayer can no longer have his cake and eat it) no inheritance tax at all is payable.
The general rule is that overseas trusts are subject to the same IHT rules as UK trusts.
A tax on chargeable transfers
There are set out below the main features of inheritance tax.
1.
Inheritance tax is charged on the value transferred by a chargeable transfer.
2.
A chargeable transfer is a transfer of value which is made by an individual and which is not an exempt transfer (an exempt transfer would be, for example, a transfer to a spouse which comes within IHA 1984, s18 or a transfer which comes within the annual exemption of £3,000 contained in s19 of that Act).
3.
A transfer of value is a disposition made by a person (called the transferor) as a result of which the value of his estate immediately after the disposition is less than it would be but for the disposition.
The amount by which the estate is reduced is the value transferred by that transfer.
4.
Disposition has a very wide meaning and would include a deliberate omission to do something (s3(3)).
A disposition cannot be a transfer of value if, broadly, it was made without the intention of conferring any gratuitous benefits (s10(1)).
Thus inheritance tax is concerned with gratuitous transactions.
5.
In calculating whether there has been a reduction in the estate of the transferor one ignores the value of any excluded property which ceases to form part of the transferor's estate as a result of the transfer (excluded property includes property situated outside the United Kingdom where the person beneficially entitled to it is an individual domiciled outside the United Kingdom).
Mr X gives property to an overseas discretionary trust.
The open market value of the property is £500,000 but the reduction in the value of the estate of Mr X caused by the gift is £1M.
The gift is a transfer of value (value is transferred out of the donor's estate) because it comprises a disposition (the act of giving) which reduces the value of the estate of Mr X and the amount of the value transferred by the transfer of value is £1M.
If the property given was excluded property then although it would reduce the value of the estate of Mr X that gift is ignored and the reduction in the value of the estate of Mr X caused by the gift of excluded property is not taken into account.
Thus although possibly it may amount to a transfer of value it could not amount to a chargeable transfer and it is only upon chargeable transfers that inheritance tax is payable.
Assuming there is a transfer of value and consequently a reduction in the value of the estate of Mr X which does not arise from the disposal of excluded property, and further assuming that the transfer is not an exempt transfer, one is left with a chargeable transfer on which inheritance tax is payable starting at nil per cent(the nil rate band) and 40 per cent .
6.
As well as being able to make chargeable transfers and exempt transfers, under IHTA 1984, s3(3A) a taxpayer may also make a potentially exempt transfer which is broadly a transfer which is assumed to be exempt from inheritance tax at the time of the gift but which may ultimately end up being a chargeable transfer because the donor does not survive the making of the gift by seven years.
7.
When the donor makes a chargeable transfer (eg on a gift to a discretionary trust) he is chargeable to inheritance tax on the amount of the reduction in his estate consequent on the making of the gift of half of the tax rates contained in Sched 1 to the 1984 Act (IHTA 1984, s7(2)).
He may have more tax to pay if he does not survive seven years (IHTA 1984, s7(4)).
Example: Chargeable transfers
Associated operations
It is very important to consider the associated operations provisions when dealing with trusts and inheritance tax planning.
Section 268(1) provides that associated operations means any two or more operations of any kind, being:(1) operations which affect the same property, or one of which affects some property and the other or others of which affect property which represents, whether directly or indirectly, that property, or income arising from that property, or any property representing accumulations of any such income; or (2) any two operations of which one is effected with reference to the other, or with a view to enabling the other to be effected, or facilitating it being effected, and any further operations having a like relation to any of those two, and so on whether those operations are effected by the same person or different persons, and whether or not they are simultaneous.
Operation includes an omission.
The granting of a lease for full consideration in money or money's worth shall not be taken to be associated with any operation effected more than three years after the grant, and no operation effected on or after 27 March 1974 shall be taken to be associated with an operation effected before that date.
Where a transfer of value is made by associated operations carried out at different times it shall be treated as made at the time of the last of them.
Where any one or more of the earlier operations, however, also constituted transfers of value made by the same transferor, the value transferred by the earlier operations shall be treated as reducing the value transferred by all the operations taken together, except to the extent that the transfer constituted by the earlier operations (but not that made by all the operations taken together) is exempt under s18 of the Act (see IRC v Brandenburg [1982]STC 555 at p468a, Fynn v IRC (1957) 37 TC 629 and Corbett's Executors v IRC (1943) 25 TC 305).
It is also to be noted that a disposition includes a disposition effected by associated operations (IHTA 1984, s272).
This section is very difficult and the following should be noted: 1.
A disposition is a very wide term and for instance a transfer out of assets by trustees to a tenant for life although it would not be a transfer of value would nevertheless be a disposition.
2.
The first limb (1) above, applies regardless of intention although possibly the second limb (2) above, requires some element of intention.
3.
It is to be noted that an omission can be in operation (the decision of Nichols v IRC [1973]STC 505 is thus nullified).
4.
It shall be noted that there is a special relief which applies to the granting of a lease but there is a three year time gap which must be satisfied.
5.
It should also be noted that "credit" is available for earlier dispositions which are associated operations which amounted to transfers of value except where the disposition was made to a spouse.
Potentially exempt transfers
A potentially exempt transfer is a transfer of value: 1.
which is made by an individual, 2. on or after 18 March 1986, 3. which would otherwise be a chargeable transfer, and 4. comprises a gift made to:(a) another individual, or (b) an accumulation and maintenance trust, or (c) a disabled persons trust (IHTA 1984, s3A).
In order to amount to a gift to an individual the property transferred by the donor must: 1.
become comprised in the estate of that individual (the donee); or 2. the estate of that individual (the donee) must be increased.
Mr X gives £1M to an overseas trust under which Mr Y has an interest in possession.
The gift is a potentially exempt transfer (s3A(2) (b)).
Mr X gives £1M to an overseas discretionary trust.
That gift is a chargeable transfer (s2(1)).
If the taxpayer makes a potentially exempt transfer he pays no IHT when the gift is made and will pay no IHT at all with respect to the gifted property if he survives the gift by seven years (and has not reserved a benefit in the gifted property)(IHTA 1984, s3A(4)).
If the taxpayer donor dies within seven years of the gift, IHT will be payable (IHTA 1984, s3A(5) and s7(4)).
Example
Example
Transfers on death
On the death of a person a charge to inheritance tax could arise by reference to the value of his estate immediately before his death.
Death results in a deemed transfer of value (IHTA 1984, s4(1)).
All the property which the deceased had immediately before his death comes into charge as well as: 1.
property which the deceased gave away but nevertheless reserved a benefit with respect thereto; and 2. property which he gave away and did not survive the gift by seven years.
Mr X dies.
He owns assets worth £1M and that is his estate.
He gave away a property two years before his death to a discretionary trust.
That was a chargeable transfer but nevertheless becomes chargeable to more inheritance tax on his death because he did not survive the gift by seven years.
Five years prior to his death he gave property absolutely to his son.
There may also be a charge to inheritance tax with regard to that property which was a potentially exempt transfer; it never in fact became exempt in the end because he (Mr X) did not survive seven years.
Four years prior to his death he gave a house to his daughter but lived in it.
That is a gift with regard to which he had reserved a benefit and that gift (the full value of the house) will come into charge to inheritance tax on his death.
Where an individual on or after 18 March 1986 disposes of any property by way of gift and either: 1.
possession and enjoyment of the property is not bona fide assumed by the donee at or before the beginning of the relevant period (in theory therefore, if the donee assumes this late, the provisions will be offended); or 2. at any time in the relevant period the property is not enjoyed to the entire exclusion, or virtually to the entire exclusion, of the donor and of any benefit to him by contract or otherwise then the provisions of Finance Act 1986, s102 will apply.
Example: Charge on death—the clawback of gifts
Gifts with reservation
Those requirements may be broken down into three separate limbs all of which must be satisfied.
First, possession and enjoyment of the property given to the donee must be bona fide assumed by the donee at or before the beginning of the relevant period.
Secondly, at any time in the relevant period the property given to the donee must be enjoyed by the donee or it seems any other person to the entire exclusion or virtually to the entire exclusion of the donor.
Thirdly, in relation to the gifted property this must be enjoyed to the exclusion or virtually to the exclusion of the donor and of any benefit to him by contract or otherwise.
The words "in relation to" referred to in the third limb do not appear in the section but it seems to the author that the reference to "any benefit to him by contract or otherwise" must relate in some way to the gifted property, and a conclusion along those lines seems to have been drawn in some of the old estate duty cases (see Chick v Commissioners of Stamp Duties [1958]AC 435  at 447).
Additionally if in relation to the gift the donee seeks to get some benefit over to the donor the transaction may be caught by the associated operations provisions contained in FA 1986, Sched 20, para 6(1) (c).
With regard to the second and third limbs it seems clear that the statute requires not only the exclusion (or virtual exclusion) of the donor from the enjoyment of the gifted property (second limb) but also the exclusion (or, presumably, the virtual exclusion) of the donor from any benefit to him by contract or otherwise (Oakes v Commissioners of Stamp Duties [1954]AC 57).
Also it is to be noted that all the property given to the donee by the donor will be dutiable if the donor retains any benefit, etc and not just an apportioned part quantified with respect to the benefit.
Mr X gives Blackacre to his son.
Subsequently the son agrees that Mr X can live in the house on every Saturday for ten years.
Assume the parties do not come within Finance Act 1986, Sched 20, para 6(1).
The whole of Blackacre is chargeable on Mr X's death and not just an apportioned value thereof.
The relevant period means a period ending on the date of the donor's death and beginning seven years before that date or, if it is later, on the date of the gift.
X disposes of property by way of gift to Y in 1993.
X dies in 1998.
Seven years prior to 1998 is 1991.
Thus, the relevant period means a period ending on the date of the donor's death (1998) and beginning seven years before (1991) that date (1998) or, if it is later, on the date of the gift (1993).
1993 was the date of the gift and this is later than 1991 so the relevant period is 1993 to 1998.
If the three limbs are not satisfied the property which has been given away is referred to as "property subject to a reservation" (Finance Act 1986, s102(2)).
If the property is subject to a reservation then the provisions of FA 1986, s102 will apply and the following consequences will ensue: 1.
If the donor dies and he has given property away which is subject to a reservation then that property will form part of the donor's estate immediately before his death.
The property will be treated for the purposes of IHTA 1984 as property to which the donor was beneficially entitled  immediately before his death.
That being the case the entire property would be chargeable to inheritance tax at the rates, subject to regulations, prevailing at death.
2.
If at a time before the end of the relevant period any property ceases to be property subject to a reservation, the donor shall be treated for the purposes of the inheritance tax legislation as having at that time made a disposition of the property by way of a potentially exempt transfer (s102(3) and (4)).
Mr X gives property to a discretionary trust and is one of the named discretionary beneficiaries.
The gift will have been one subject to a reservation either because the gift is treated as a class gift to all the discretionary beneficiaries and the donor is one of them (so he is not entirely excluded from the property) or, possibly because he has retained a benefit (there is an ability to benefit him under the terms of the trust deed).
Even though the gift was subject to a reservation Mr X must pay tax at half the Sched 1 rates as he has made a chargeable transfer.
Two years later Mr X releases all rights in connection with the property so that it ceases to be property subject to reservation and the relevant period begins to run.
Mr X is treated as having made a disposition of the property by a disposition which is a potentially exempt transfer hence the necessity to survive the seven year period from the date of the release.
It is a potentially exempt transfer even though the original gift was to a settlement.
All the gifted property is chargeable
Example: Chargeable property
Relevant period
Example: Relevant period
Consequences of the provisions applying
Example: Discretionary trusts; settlor is a beneficiary
The reservation of benefit provisions and golden trusts
It should be noted that the reservation of benefit provisions in FA 1986 only apply to gifts made on or after 18 March 1986.
Thus, if the taxpayer created a discretionary trust before 18 March 1986 and is a beneficiary thereunder, the reservation of benefit provisions cannot apply.
Such a trust created now would be disadvantageous from an inheritance tax point of view because the assets in the discretionary trust in the event of the death of the settlor will be chargeable to inheritance tax under the reservation of benefit provisions.
Sometimes taxpayers who have discretionary trusts created before 18 March 1986 seek to create interests in possession perhaps in favour of the settlor in order to have an advantageous income tax position if, for instance, the trust holds shares in a UK company and dividends are paid.
However, it should be realised in that event that the discretionary trust ceases to be one of these golden trusts and on the death of the life tenant inheritance tax may be payable.
The property subject to reservation provisions does not apply to gifts which are exempt transfers by virtue of the following provisions of IHTA 1984: 1.
section 18 (transfers between spouses); X gives (within s18) his house to his wife and continues to live in it.
The gift will not have been made subject to a reservation.
2. section 20 (small gifts); 3. section 22 (gifts in consideration of marriage); 4. section 23 (gifts to charities); 5. section 24 (gifts to political parties); 6. section 25 (gifts for national purposes, etc); 7. section 26 (gifts for public benefit); 8. section 27 (maintenance funds for historic houses); and 9. section 28 (employees' trusts).
As listed above it is clear that certain exempt gifts can be made without the gifts being property subject to a reservation.
This applies to gifts between spouses within s18, gifts in consideration of marriage, etc.
Even though the donor may benefit nevertheless the gifts will not be gifts subject to a reservation.
It is noticeable, however, that a transfer making use of the £3,000 annual exemption is not excluded from the property subject to reservation provisions so that if a donor makes use of his annual exemption and, for instance, retains a benefit then these provisions can apply in the event of the donor's death.
Exemptions from the reservation of benefit provisions
Example: Gift to spouse
Major IHT reliefs
Overseas trusts offer no special IHT reliefs.
However, if a taxpayer is preparing to carry out IHT planning by giving property to a trust then he should still consider setting up an overseas trust rather than a UK trust.
Three important areas of IHT planning concern the 100 per cent farming and business relief, deeds of variation and the normal expenditure out of income exemption and some points with respect to these are discussed below.
Farms and businesses—the demise of inheritance tax?
The Finance (No 2) Act 1992 has, in effect, taken out of inheritance tax many holdings of business assets and agricultural property.
If a farmer dies having occupied his agricultural property for a period of at least two years, no inheritance tax is payable.
Broadly, if he gives the property away to his son or a share in his agricultural partnership to his son absolutely and he survives seven years no inheritance tax is payable.
Even if he dies within seven years no inheritance tax is payable provided the son broadly continues to use the property for agricultural purposes.
A similar 100 per cent relief is available with regard to business property.
If a sole trader or partner, for instance, dies his business or interest in the business is wholly outside the charge to inheritance tax.
Farmer
Other businesses
For these purposes a business or interest in a business does not qualify for the 100 per cent relief if the business consists wholly or mainly of dealing in securities, stocks or shares, land or buildings or of the making or holding of investments (IHTA 1984, s105(3)).
The 100 per cent relief is also available with respect to certain shareholdings in companies.
If the taxpayer gives away his business or an interest in his business to his son and it is an absolute gift and he survives seven years then no inheritance tax is in point.
If the donor dies within seven years there will still be no inheritance tax payable provided the son uses the property for a qualifying purpose (see IHTA 1984, s113A).
Note that in order to qualify for this relief the donor must have owned the business asset for the two years immediately preceding the transfer (ie the gift to the son).
These reliefs are spectacular.
All inheritance tax on death and on the making of gifts can now be avoided with respect to farming and other business assets.
Planning
If property is given away and the taxpayer reserves a benefit the 100 per cent relief should still be available provided certain conditions are satisfied.
The change in the law takes away the incentive to make lifetime gifts of such assets.
Indeed there is now an incentive to hold on to the assets because if such assets are retained until death they receive a capital gains tax-free uplift (TCGA 1992, s62(1)).
For example, X owns qualifying agricultural property worth £500,000.
If X dies no inheritance tax is payable and the base cost of the property for capital gains tax purposes is £500,000.
Thus, if pursuant to the will of X the property is vested in Y as legatee and Y subsequently sells the property for £550,000, Y will only have made a taxable gain (subject to the indexation allowance) of £50,000.
If instead of holding on to the property X had given the property to Y no inheritance tax will be in point provided Y farmed the property (or X survived the gift by seven years) but in that case there would have been no capital gains tax uplift on the death of X.
Taxpayers may have to review their wills in view of the new reliefs.
One wonders whether this is the first step towards the total abolition of inheritance tax.
The government may also amend the law to ensure that where there is no inheritance tax on death there is no capital gains tax uplift in base cost.
The new rules apply with respect to a transfer of value and other events occurring after 9 March 1992.
Pushing the IHT 100 per cent reliefs one step further
It may be possible, in effect, to give the 100 per cent relief to non-qualifying assets by leaving the qualifying assets to a discretionary trust.
Using a simple example X may die leaving £1M of non-qualifying assets and £1M of qualifying assets.
If he leaves all to his wife on his death there may only be duty on the £1M non-qualifying assets on his widow's death.
Under the trust route the widow will be left the £1M of non-qualifying assets and will use them to "buy" (by way of exchange) the qualifying assets (which she must hold for the requisite two years (before death)).
The above is the bare bones of the arrangement.
Many other points must be taken into account.
Avoiding inheritance tax by deeds of variation
It seems to be fairly common practice if a taxpayer dies for a deed of family arrangement or deed of variation to be entered into under which, for instance, the children receive £150,000 (this is the nil-rate band for inheritance tax purposes effective from 10 March 1992) and for the balance of the assets to be left to the surviving spouse.
In this event no inheritance tax will be payable because of the exemption from inheritance tax for gifts to spouses in the normal case (IHTA 1984, s18).
The deed of variation will have the effect as if the will of the deceased had the same terms as the deed of variation (IHTA 1984, s142).
The idea may then be for the surviving spouse to give the property (which she took under the deed of variation) to the children and make a potentially exempt transfer under IHTA 1984, s3A: provided she survives seven years no inheritance tax will have been payable on the death or on the gift or indeed on her death by reference to the property which she gave to the children.
However, the Capital Taxes Office is likely to raise the following "standard" question: what discussions took place between the parties at or before the time of the deed of variation about how the assets which went to the spouse under the deed of variation were to be dealt with by the surviving spouse, ie was there some sort of plan or understanding that the property would be given to the children?
If there was such a plan then the transaction may be caught by Furniss v Dawson 55 TC 324 at 401 (note also Craven v White [1987]STC 297 and Countess Fitzwilliam v IRC [1993]STC 502).
The arrangement under which the assets would be transferred to the children by the widow after the deed of variation has to be fairly "cut and dried" before the Inland Revenue would succeed.
The figures if the Revenue were to succeed in a Furniss v Dawson attack may, of course, be considerable.
If X died leaving an estate of £1,150,000 and   under the variation £150,000 went to the children and £1M to the widow and subsequently (not as part of a preordained scheme) the £1M was transferred to the children and the widow survived the normal seven years, no inheritance tax would be payable.
On the other hand, if the gift-back of the £1M to the children was part of a preordained scheme inheritance tax of £400,000 will be payable.
Each case depends on its own facts.
In one case the author was involved in, the widow (after the deed of variation) was able to convince the CTO that she only considered making the gifts back after a cocktail party she attended and at which the topic of conversation was inheritance tax.
In another case there was an announcement of a General Election and in another case there was a concern that there may have been a change of government because of the opinion polls.
This is an extremely dangerous area and it is an area in which the CTO can easily pick up a considerable amount of tax if practitioners are not fully aware of the dangers.
The CTO will often ask to see copies of relevant correspondence between the parties and the legal advisors subject to any privilege rights.
For a case on the startling effect of a deed of variation made for CGT purposes see Marshall v Kerr [1993]STC 360.
Gifts to overseas settlements
It is clear that a gift can amount to a potentially exempt transfer if it is an outright gift to an individual or it is a gift to an accumulation and maintenance trust or indeed it is a gift to a trust under which the beneficiary has an interest in possession.
The X Trust is based in Guernsey under which the trustees are A, B and C. D has a life interest under the trust.
Mr X who is fully within the UK inheritance tax regime makes a gift to the settlement.
That will comprise a potentially exempt transfer regardless of where the life tenant resides or where his ordinary place of residence is or where he is domiciled.
It is clear that gifts to discretionary trusts will not comprise potentially exempt transfers.
If taxpayers wish to make gifts to such trusts then they have to look for their exemptions elsewhere.
Example
One exemption not to be overlooked is the normal expenditure exemption under which a taxpayer who has a considerable amount of net income arising over the years is able to make gifts into a discretionary trust out of his income provided the expenditure is normal and that, after allowing for all transfers of value forming part of his normal expenditure, the transferor was left with sufficient income to maintain his normal standard of living (IHTA 1984, s21).
Thus, if the taxpayer has net income of £50,000 pa and his standard of  living only requires him to spend £30,000 he may be able to give the balance away providing he starts the pattern early and continues with that pattern of making the gifts to the discretionary trust.
This is a difficult exemption and may well cause the Capital Taxes Office much heartache (see Standing Committee House of Commons Debate, Standing Committee A Finance Bill, 5 February 1975 especially cols 868 and 867; Attorney General for Northern Ireland v Heron (1959) 38 ATC 3; Dymond's Capital Taxes, paras 13.319–320; McCutcheon on Inheritance Tax 3rd edn, section 3–13 and the Revenue Booklet IHT 1, para 76).
The overseas element
Where property comprised in a settlement is situate outside the United Kingdom, the property is excluded property unless the settlor was domiciled in the United Kingdom at the time the settlement was made (IHTA 1984, s48(3)).
Excluded property is not chargeable to inheritance tax (IHTA 1984, s5(1)).
The s80 trap
In order for settled property to be excluded from inheritance tax it is necessary that the settlor was not domiciled in the United Kingdom at the time the settlement was made and, in addition, it is necessary that at the time of the relevant charge, eg on the death of a life tenant or when a ten year charge occurs if the trust is a discretionary trust or where assets are appointed out of a discretionary trust, the particular trust assets are not located in the United Kingdom.
Thus, if Mr X, who is not domiciled in the United Kingdom, puts property into a discretionary trust and at the time of the ten year charge the trust assets are not located in the United Kingdom, eg they are chattels such as a motor vehicle which is located outside the United Kingdom, no inheritance tax is in point.
It is also quite clear that if, prior to the ten year charge, the asset had been located in the United Kingdom the fact that it is taken outside the United Kingdom so that trust becomes an excluded property trust does not cause a tax charge in itself.
The same would apply if Mr X gave property to a trust in which his son had an interest in possession.
Provided Mr X was not domiciled in the United Kingdom when the settlement was created and at the relevant time, eg the death of the son, the assets were not located in the United Kingdom, inheritance tax would not be in point even if the son is domiciled in the UK.
That much is not controversial.
However, there is an anti-avoidance provision in s80 of IHTA 1984.
The effect of s80 is that if, for instance, the settlor creates a trust for himself for life and then his son for life or absolutely  that in order for the trust to be an excluded property trust the settlor must not be domiciled in the United Kingdom at the time when the settlement is created and nor must he be domiciled in the United Kingdom (and this would include deemed domiciled in the United Kingdom) at the time of his death.
That is the effect of s80 and s82 of the Act.
However, in an appropriate case if the spouse of the settlor took a life interest after the settlor's life interest the spouse exemption may be available on the settlor's death under s18 of the Act but subject to s18(2).
Note it is important in that case that not only the settlor but the spouse of the settlor was not domiciled in the United Kingdom at the time of the last to die otherwise the property would not be in an excluded property settlement—see s80(1) which refers to the last of the spouse or the settlor to cease to be beneficially entitled to an interest in possession.
Extended meaning of domicile
Domicile has an extended meaning for IHT purposes (IHTA 1984, s267).
It includes people who were domiciled in the United Kingdom on or after 10 December 1974 and within the three years immediately preceding the relevant time.
It also includes people who were resident in the United Kingdom on or after 10 December 1974 and in not less than 17 of the 20 years of assessment ending with the year of assessment in which the relevant time falls (see IHTA 1984, s267).
All references in the IHT legislation to domicile generally refer to that extended meaning.
The Channel Islands and Isle of Man do not now suffer any special UK deemed domicile penalties.
It should be noted that the above rules are often referred to as the 17 year rule and the 3 year rule.
One normally thinks in terms of the 3 year rule as applying to a person who emigrates from the United Kingdom whilst one considers that the 17 year rule is applicable to someone who becomes resident in the United Kingdom whilst retaining his overseas domicile under general principles.
However, when someone leaves the United Kingdom one must think in terms of both rules.
In other words to break his deemed domicile a person leaving the United Kingdom must be outside of the United Kingdom for three years counting three lots of 12 months from the time he left the United Kingdom.
In addition, one must ensure that he was not resident in the United Kingdom for three full years of assessment being the year ended 5 April.
Seeking to become domiciled in the United Kingdom
Generally, the taxpayer will seek to be not domiciled in the United Kingdom.
This will enable him to set up excluded property settlements.
Also, where  there is property located outside the United Kingdom, no inheritance tax will be payable.
However, there are times when the taxpayer will want to become domiciled in the United Kingdom.
IHTA 1984, s18(2) states that if immediately before a transfer the transferor (but not the transferor's spouse) is domiciled in the United Kingdom, the value in respect of which the transfer is exempt shall not exceed £55,000 less any amount previously taken into account for the purposes of that exemption.
Thus, if Mr X is domiciled in the United Kingdom when he dies and his surviving spouse was not domiciled in the United Kingdom, a mere £55,000 exemption is available.
That circumstance may occur where, for instance, Mr X may have a domicile of origin in the United Kingdom and goes to live permanently in Germany where he marries a German woman.
He has a domicile of choice in Germany; his wife has a domicile of origin in Germany.
They then return to the United Kingdom with his domicile of origin reviving but without his wife having acquired a domicile of choice in the United Kingdom.
Trusts with interests in possession
Where settled property is excluded property, it is taken out of the charge to IHT by IHTA 1984, s48(3) with regard to settlements where there is an interest in possession.
The fact that the life tenant is domiciled in the United Kingdom when he dies or gives his life interest away is irrelevant.
X is not domiciled in the United Kingdom and gives overseas located assets to a trust under which Y has an interest in possession.
Y is domiciled in the United Kingdom.
On Y's death no IHT is payable.
It makes no difference where the trustees are resident: it is necessary, however, that the assets are not located in the United Kingdom when Y dies.
Example
Discretionary trusts
Excluded property is taken outside any charge to IHT with regard to discretionary trusts by virtue of IHTA 1984, s58(1) (f).
The following special provisions should be noted.
(a) Moving trust property abroad A non-domiciled settlor may have set up a settlement but the settled property may nevertheless be located in the United Kingdom.
The property will thus not be excluded property and may be subject to the ten year charge and, on the face of it, the interim charge (IHTA 1984, ss64 and 65).
IHTA 1984, s65(7) however provides that there will be no interim charge by reason only that the property ceases to be situated in the United Kingdom and thus becomes excluded property because of IHTA 1984, s48(3) (a).
X is domiciled in France.
He creates a settlement in France and the funds are invested in UK shares.
The property is not excluded property.
Shares are sold and the funds invested in American shares.
The property in the trust becomes excluded property.
Prima facie, there is a charge under IHTA 1984, s65.
However, that charge does not arise because of the provisions mentioned above.
(b) Exempt gilts A non-UK domiciled settlor may have put monies into a trust.
These monies may be invested in UK land and then in gilts.
IHTA 1984, s65(8) provides that just because the trustees invest in gilts, etc, within IHTA 1984, s6(2), thus making the property excluded property (IHTA 1984, s48(4)) does not mean an interim charge will arise.
The IHT deemed domicile provisions in IHTA 1984, s267 do not apply to determine the settlor's domicile for the purposes of this provision (nor do they apply in respect of moving trust property abroad) in relation to property which became comprised in the settlement before 10 December 1974.
Example
The gilt scheme
A taxpayer may have emigrated to the Channel Islands.
He may own shares on the UK Stock Exchange and he may have an interest under a UK settlement.
What planning should he undertake with respect to inheritance tax—bearing in mind that under the deemed domicile provisions in IHTA 1984, s267(1) the taxpayer is deemed to be domiciled in the United Kingdom if he was so domiciled three years immediately preceding his death or he was resident in the United Kingdom in not less than 17 of the 20 years of assessment ending with the year of assessment in which the death occurs?
To assist on the income tax residence point ( "residence" for these purposes means residence for income tax purposes) one has always disregarded the dwelling house available in the United Kingdom (IHTA 1984, s267(4) (now amended)).
Note also that a person domiciled in the Channel Islands can benefit from owning the assets specified in s6(3) by virtue of s267(2) although the relief in s48(4) only applies for the purposes of s6(2) and not for the purpose of s6(3).
If the taxpayer whilst not resident and not ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom disposes of the UK shares and buys s6(2) gilts, the assets will be regarded as excluded property and not subject to IHT even if the taxpayer dies within the three year deemed domicile period.
With regard to the settlement, IHTA 1984, s48(4) provides that the trust would be regarded as holding excluded property provided the life tenant is regarded as entitled to a qualifying interest in possession.
If there is no qualifying interest in possession s48(4) (b) states that if it can be shown that all known persons for whose benefit the settled property or income from it has been or might be applied or who are or might become beneficially entitled to an interest in possession are persons neither domiciled nor ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom the gilt relief will be applicable.
The problem is that in order to invest the trust assets in gilts it may be necessary to dispose of these and pay capital gains tax.
Alternatively if the trust is a UK trust which is exported then there may be an export charge.
Depending on the value of the asets it may be worth suffering that initial capital gains tax charge.