

Contract Formalities and Obligations
Sources of the Law of Sale and Supply
An important issue which arises from contracts for sale and supply of goods is the interaction of legislation and the common law.
Some of the statutes are essentially 19th century in orientation, the most notable being the Factors Act 1889 (FA) and the Sale of Goods Act 1979 (SGA) which consolidates the original Act of 1893 with the subsequent amendments made especially in the Supply of Goods (Implied Terms) Act 1973 (SOGIT).
There are also other statutes of relatively recent origin which follow the tradition adopted under the SGA 1979 as seen, for example, under the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982 (SGSA).
For the most part, the SGA 1979 and the SGSA 1982 reflect an attempt to re-form the shape and organisation of common law rather than effect a reform of the substantive law.
Certainly Chalmers, the draftsman of the SGA 1893, considered that each provision in the Act should have a common law history, an outlook which influenced the approach to formulating the statutory implied terms in contracts of hire under the SGSA 1982.
Consequently, when, subsequent to the passage of the SGA 1893, Chalmers wrote his various Digests, his purpose was not merely to annotate the Code with cases decided under it: "Our common law is rich in the exposition of principles, and these expositions lose none of their value now that the law is codified.
A rule can never be appreciated apart from the reasons on which it is founded".
(see Chalmers, The Sale of Goods Act 1893, 4th ed (1899) at px).
The underlying approach of codification in re-forming the law has stressed the mechanistic nature of legal reasoning as essentially a syllogistic exercise.
The language of the Code is taken to constitute the major premise so that Lord Herschell said in Bank of England v Vagliano Brothers [1891]AC 107: "[T]he law should be ascertained from interpreting the language used instead of, as before, roaming over a vast number of authorities in order to discover what the law was…" (p145).
At the same time, codification was seen as a starting point for finding and applying common law rules.
This point was expressed by Lord Herschell in Vagliano as follows: I am of course far from asserting that resort may never be had to the previous state of the law for the purpose of aiding in the construction of the provisions of the code.
If, for example, a provision may be of doubtful import, such resort would be perfectly legitimate…(p145) Because Chalmers saw codification as an improvement in the form of the law, resurrection of old authorities is easy.
This approach is assisted by the common law saving provision found in s62(2) of the SGA 1979 which states:(2) The rules of the common law, including the law merchant, except in so far as they are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, and in particular the rules relating to the law of principal and agent and the effect of fraud, misrepresentation, duress or coercion, mistake, or other invalidating cause, apply to contracts for the sale of goods.
Indeed in Cehave NV v Bremer Handelgesellschaft [1976]QB 44, the Court of Appeal considered that it was the intention to re-state the pre-existing sales law and that this intention translated itself into a canon of statutory interpretation.
Nonetheless, some speeches in the House of Lords in Ashington Piggeries Ltd v Christopher Hill Ltd [1972]AC 441 would suggest an important gloss to this approach.
In particular, in the interpretation of provisions of the SGA 1979 relating to implied terms, Lord Diplock said (at p501) that the Act "ought not to be construed so narrowly as to force on parties to contracts for the sale of goods promises and consequences different from what they must reasonably have intended" .
The value of the SGA 1979 and the SGSA 1982 lies in their general applicability to all products and transactions.
However, the trend in recent years has been to discriminate between consumer and non consumer transactions as seen in the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 (UCTA).
This distinction was fundamental in the ill fated Consumer Guarantees Bill 1990.
Here an attempt was made to make voluntarily given consumer guarantees legally enforceable.
This approach was conceived as being designed to encourage "non-price competition" .
In large measure, the background to the Bill reflects the unease with the SGA 1979 with its echoes of 19th century sales practice where the distinction between retail and wholesale sales was not as acute as it is today.
This led to a review of the merchantability provisions under the SGA 1979 by the Law Commission and their proposals were published in Report No 160 on Sale and Supply of Goods (1987) Cmnd 137.
These Law Commission proposals were also incorporated in the Consumer Guarantees Bill.
It is easy to understand why consumers might see a superficial attraction in the existence of a system of consumer guarantees.
However, the real difficulty, leading to the eventual scuttling of the Bill, was that the scheme proposed different remedies being offered in different circumstances against different defendants.
Whatever its defects, the value of the SGA 1979 lies in its general applicability to all products and consumer transactions as well as in the fact that the consumer's rights are not dependent on the existence or otherwise of a guarantee.
An important phenomenon behind recent legislation in the area of sale  and supply of goods is the role of the European Community.
Thus, Pt 1 of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 (CPA) is the response of English law to the European Community Directive (85/374/EEC) on the approximation of the laws of the member states relating to liability for defective products (see Chapter 6).
In addition, the European Community Directive on Consumer Credit was agreed in 1986 (87/102/EEC).
To a great extent this is based on the Consumer Credit Act 1974 (CCA) although it is not as extensive.
There is also a further Directive on the calculation of APR's (90/88/EEC) whilst the Directive on Doorstep Selling (85/577/EEC) regulates most contracts, whether for cash or credit, where negotiations have been conducted away from business premises.
The CCA 1974 came about in the wake of the Crowther Committee Report on Consumer Credit (1971) Cmnd 4596.
The Report made serious and far-reaching criticisms of the previous law which regulated transactions on the basis of legal form rather than commercial reality.
Furthermore, the Report contains a full historic, economic and social critique of consumer credit and proposed a new legal framework.
This has been largely achieved under the 1974 Act.
Unfortunately, the second strand to the Report that a Lending and Security Act be implemented to regulate commercial transactions has yet to be successful.
The Government's response in the White Paper on Reform of the Law on Consumer Credit (1972) Cmnd 5427, para 14 stated: The Government accept that there are aspects of the existing law in this field which cause difficulty, but they do not have sufficient evidence either of a need for such major recasting of existing law on new principles or of general support for the particular solution proposed by the Committee.
More recently, the Cork Committee Report on Insolvency Law and Practice (1982) Cmnd 8558, para 1623 expressed the following opinion: We are conscious that our remit limits us to recommendations concerning the law of insolvency.
Proposals for a comprehensive code for the regulation of security interests in personal property, though necessarily impinging on the law of insolvency, are beyond our terms of reference.
There can be no doubt, however, from the force and weight of the submissions made to us that there is a considerable body of informed opinion which supports the recommendation of the Crowther Committee and believes that the problems arising in relation to the impact of reservation of title clauses on insolvency are only part of more extensive problems deriving from the unsatisfactory laws concerning security interests in personal property.
(emphasis added) Renewed impetus for reform along Crowther lines is provided by Professor Diamond's DTI Report, A Review of Security Interests in Property (1989).
The attempt here is to highlight the inadequacy of the present legal approach where it is assumed that selling on credit, or leasing for the useful life of the equipment is not lending, and that reservation of title on sale does not constitute the creation of a security interest but is merely an agreement as to the time at which the property should pass to the buyer.
In this respect, as the Crowther Committee pointed out (para 5.5.6), art 9 of the US Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) is "in concept and in structure an admirable prototype for a modern law of personal property security" .
Such a scheme would, if implemented, introduce into English law two key features, namely, a functional classification of security interests and a priority system based on the order of registration of those interests.
A filing mechanism cuts down debtor misbehaviour because the availability of reliable information about the debtor's property reduces the debtor's incentive to misbehave by removing the opportunity to do so.
Furthermore, one set of filing rules in replacing the many chattel security files which now exist in England, would allow for secured financing of stock-in-trade through the simple priority rule of first-to-file.
Definition and Nature of Contracts for the Supply of Goods
There is no doubt that sale of goods is the principal method by which legal ownership in goods can be transferred for value.
There shall be a strong emphasis on sale in this work because it provides the model for other supply contracts.
The purpose of this chapter is to define the contract of sale and highlight the similarities and differences between other supply contracts.
1 Definition of sale contract
The statutory definition of "sale" encapsulated in s2 of SGA 1979 contains a number of ingredients which distinguish sale from other transactions.
It is worth setting out the definition in full: 2–(1) A contract of sale of goods is a contract by which the seller transfers or agrees to transfer the property in goods to the buyer for a money consideration, called the price.
(2) There may be a contract of sale between one part owner and another.
(3) A contract of sale may be absolute or conditional.
(4) Where under a contract of sale the property in the goods is transferred from the seller to the buyer the contract is called a sale.
(5) Where under a contract of sale the transfer of the property in the goods is to take place at a future time or subject to some condition later to be fulfilled the contract is called an agreement to sell.
(6) An agreement to sell becomes a sale when the time elapses or the conditions are fulfilled subject to which the property in the goods is to be transferred.
In order to satisfy the SGA 1979, the definition requires that the following components be present:(a) Contract for the sale of goods It should be noted that within the definition of a contract of sale a distinction is drawn between an executory sale or agreement to sell, and an executed transfer.
The distinction is important because the executory contract creates only personal rights between the parties themselves whereas the executed contract gives the buyer an interest in the goods.
Nevertheless, the inclusion of both the executed and executory agreement within the statutory definition does emphasise that delivery of the goods is  not an essential element of a sale contract.
Even so, there must be a contract, a requirement that can prove particularly problematic in supply situations where the contract element is missing, for example , drugs prescribed under the NHS.
The statutory definition of "goods" in s61(1) of SGA 1979 includes the following: "goods" includes all personal chattels other than things in action and money, and in Scotland all corporeal moveables except money; and in particular "goods" includes emblements, industrial growing crops, and things attached to or forming part of the land which are agreed to be severed before sale or under the contract of sale.
From this definition, assignments of choses in action are excluded and this is also the case with money.
Of course, where the money is no longer legal tender as seen with half crown coins and sixpences in R v Thompson [1980]QB 229, or where it is being transferred because of its curiosity value (Moss v Hancock [1899]2 QB 111), or because of its inherent value such as Krugerrands, in these circumstances "money" can be considered to be "goods" for the purposes of the statutory definition.
The definition of "goods" also embraces fructus industriales including industrial crops and fructus naturales such as grass.
In Kursell v Timber Operators and Contractors Ltd [1927]1 KB 298, a contract for timber to be felled by the buyer at a future date was treated as a sale of goods.
Minerals may also be included within the definition as being things "forming part of the land" .
However, much will depend upon the circumstances so that profits à prendre cannot be considered as a contract for the sale of goods being simply a privilege to work the land in question.
(b) The parties to the contract The two parties envisaged under the SGA 1979 are the seller and the buyer.
The seller is defined as a "person who sells or agrees to sell goods" and the buyer is defined in similar terms (s61(1)).
Clearly, if a person has contracted to buy his own goods from someone else, the contract can be set aside on the basis of mistake and any money paid over will be recoverable because of total failure of consideration.
At the same time, s2(2) of SGA 1979 does specifically contemplate the sale by one part owner to another (but compare Graff v Evans (1882) 8 QBD 373; Davies v Burnett [1902]1 KB 666) and there appears to be nothing wrong, as a matter of legal principle, in treating this as a sale.
In this situation the buyer, as owner of the goods, will be able to recover them from a person having a legal authority to sell them, for example, a sheriff acting in execution of a writ of fi fa to which the SGA 1979 will apply.
The proliferation of retention of title clauses requires a sharp distinction to be drawn between contracts of sale and agency.
Essentially, the issue here concerns the capacity in which the transferee is holding the goods (see Chapter 12).
In addition, a franchise agreement to sell goods may also create an agency to which the SGA 1979 is inapplicable.
However, the  agency tool has been utilised by the CCA 1974 as a consumer protection measure so that the negotiator or dealer under a regulated consumer credit agreement (see below) is deemed, in certain circumstances, to be the agent for the financier (CCA 1974, s56).
Under s57 of CCA 1974, the negotiator is the agent for the purpose of receiving a notice of withdrawal (including rescission), or cancellation under the CCA 1974 (see Chapter 3).
Moreover, the deemed agency device is used as far as receiving knowledge relating to undertakings of fitness for purpose is concerned (see Chapter 5), and also for any representations made by the dealer to the consumer in the course of negotiating a regulated consumer credit transaction (CCA 1974, s56(2)).
(c) Property passing The object of a contract of sale is "to transfer the property in the goods" from the seller to the buyer.
The SGA 1979 defines property as meaning the general property as distinct from special property (s61(1)).
A hirer has a special property in the goods bailed and it follows that the assignment of such an interest is not a sale.
The meaning of general property will be discussed at length in Chapters 7 and 8.
It is sufficient at this stage to note that the SGA 1979 does not necessarily contemplate the sale of absolute ownership (National Employers Mutual General Insurance Association Ltd v Jones [1988]2 WLR 952) and that relativity of title is the key to the understanding of the property passing provisions under the SGA 1979.
Under s5(1) of SGA 1979 it is envisaged that future goods, ie "goods to be manufactured or acquired by the seller" , can form part of a contract of sale.
However, since no interest in the goods passes to the buyer at the time of the contract this will be an agreement to sell.
There may also be a contract of sale with respect to a future contingency so that s5(2) of SGA 1979 states:(2) There may be a contract for the sale of goods the acquisition of which by the seller depends on a contingency which may or may not happen.
Again, this can only be an agreement to sell and the contract will fail if the contingency fails to occur within the stipulated time, or if there is none within a reasonable time (compare the sale of a chance or spes).
(d) Price The statutory definition of sale requires that the transfer of property be for "a money consideration called the price" .
Open price contracts are specifically provided for in ss8 and 9 of SGA 1979 which state: 8–(1) The price in a contract of sale may be fixed by the contract, or may be left to be fixed in a manner agreed by the contract, or may be determined by the course of dealing between the parties.
(2) Where the price is not determined as mentioned in sub-section (1) above the buyer must pay a reasonable price.
(3) What is a reasonable price is a question of fact dependent on the circumstances of each particular case.
9–(1) Where there is an agreement to sell goods on the terms that the price is to be fixed by the valuation of a third party, and he cannot or does not make the  valuation, the agreement is avoided; but if the goods or any part of them have been delivered to and appropriated by the buyer he must pay a reasonable price for them.
(2) Where the third party is prevented from making the valuation by the fault of the seller or buyer, the party not at fault may maintain an action for damages against the party at fault.
Insofar as ss8 and 9 represent a codification of the common law rules they will also be applicable to other supply contracts, although in the case of regulated agreements under s61(1) of CCA 1974 there is a requirement to state the price in writing (Sched 6).
The determination of the price is very important since the lack of this may be an indication that the contract has not been concluded.
This is especially so where such expressions as "Our offer is made on the basis of our current price list" are used.
Nevertheless, especially in the case of executed contracts, the courts are anxious to uphold contracts between businessmen (Foley v Classique Coaches Ltd [1934]2 KB 1).
Indeed, this approach finds statutory expression in s9(1) of SGA 1979.
A different problem to the above concerns attempts by suppliers to control minimum resale prices where there are statutory controls under the Resale Prices Act 1976.
Detailed discussion of restrictive trade practices which are regulated by anti-trust laws such as the Fair Trading Act 1973 and the Competition Act 1980 are beyond the scope of this work.
It is sufficient to note here that under ss1, 2 and 4 of the Resale Prices Act 1976, collective agreement between manufacturers and dealers to withhold supplies from those who do not observe laid down resale prices or charges for hiring, hire purchase, or conditional sale are unlawful.
There are similar provisions in relation to individual restrictions regulating minimum resale prices or charges as between a manufacturer and a retailer.
Exemptions may be granted on specified grounds with respect to a particular "class of goods" (Resale Prices Act 1976, ss14-21).
2 Supply contracts for consideration other than money
(a) Exchange Despite the fact that implicit in any definition of money is the element of exchange, English law has traditionally distinguished between sale and exchange disregarding the equivalence of economic function.
When the practical rules applicable to sale and exchange are interchangeable, to distinguish between them is little more than a scholastic exercise.
Under s1(1) of SGSA 1982 it would seem that an exchange contract comes within its purview since it generally applies to contracts where "one person transfers or agrees to transfer to another the property in goods" .
The SGSA 1982 incorporates into such a contract terms almost identical to those applying in the sales contract (see Chapter 5).
Following on from this there should be no difficulty in categorising transactions where gift tokens or coupons are exchanged wholly for a product as transactions under the SGSA 1982 (compare Davies v Customs and Excise Commissioners [1975]1  WLR 204).
Where the price of the goods is more than the value of the token, the inclusion of a money consideration would suggest that the transaction is a sale of goods.
In one sense, the characterisation of the transaction as being either sale or exchange may be important because the remedy for defective performance in exchange is not for the price, but rather a claim for unliquidated damages for non delivery.
In the case of a part exchange transaction there is no difficulty in categorising the supply of new goods as a sale simply because the supplier will be receiving a composite consideration.
Thus in Aldridge v Johnson (1857) 7 E & B 885 there was an agreement to transfer 32 bullocks valued at £192 in return for 100 quarters of barley valued at £125, the set off of £23 to be paid in cash; this was construed as a reciprocal sale (see also Forsyth v Jervis (1816) 1 Stark 437; Sheldon v Cox (1824) 3 B & C 420).
Surprisingly, there appears to be only one English decision which deals with the trading-in of motor vehicles in part exchange, even though it is such a commonplace everyday experience.
The facts in this case, GJ Dawson (Clapham) Ltd v H and G Dutfield [1936]2 All ER 232, are worth elaboration.
The plaintiffs were dealers in second hand lorries and agreed to transfer to the defendants two lorries for £475 and take in exchange two other lorries valued at £225, provided they were delivered within one month.
The defendants paid in cash the balance of £250 but did not deliver the lorries.
It was held that this was a contract for sale and the plaintiffs were therefore able to sue for the price.
The decision would have been otherwise if no value had been assigned, as in the Irish Supreme Court decision in Flynn v Mackin [1974]IR 101.
Whether the transaction is to be categorised as a sale or exchange is a question of contractual intention.
This may be important if credit finance for the new article purchased with a part exchange is declined by the financier.
In these circumstances, it is probable that both transactions will be regarded as interdependent so that the part exchange element may be construed as a sale subject to a condition subsequently, thereby, making it determinable if the financier does not accept the transaction.
This analysis will have relevance as far as the passing of property and risk is concerned (see Chapter 10) where the goods are damaged in the meantime (Clarke v Reilly (1962) 96 ILTR 96).
Moreover the exception to the nemo dat principle discussed in Chapter 11 will be significant here especially if it is considered that the dealer has bought or has agreed to buy the goods under s9 of FA 1889.
There is also special provision under s73(2) of CCA 1974 for a part exchange allowance in respect of a cancelled regulated agreement where property has been transferred (see Chapter 3).
(b) Free gifts The requirement of consideration distinguishes a sale from a gift.
Nevertheless, as we shall see in Chapter 5, a wide definition is given to the term "supply" in a contract of sale so that an insertion accompanying goods will be considered as having been supplied under the contract, thereby  attracting the implied terms under the SGA 1979.
Sometimes, the so-called "free gift" will constitute a collateral contract, the consideration for which being the entry into the main contract of sale.
This issue was discussed by the House of Lords in Esso Petroleum v Customs and Excise Commissioners [1976]1 WLR 1 in relation to a promotion scheme.
Here Esso petrol stations gave motorists buying their petrol, coins of little intrinsic value which depicted members of the England 1970 World Cup Squad.
The Commissioners claimed purchase tax on these coins, but the House of Lords held that there had been no sale.
Lord Dilhorne and Lord Russell both thought that there was nothing more than a gift, whereas Lord Fraser, dissenting, considered that there had been a sale of both articles (ie the petrol and the coins) in one transaction.
The via media was adopted by Lord Wilberforce and Lord Simon of Glaisdale, namely, there was a contract for the supply of the coins but it was a collateral contract.
Following this last approach, s1(1) of SGSA 1982 would apply giving the transferee the benefit of the implied terms in ss2-5 (see Chapter 5).
If the free gift is supplied as a genuine gift without the transferee being under any obligation to do anything, there will be no contractual relationship between the transferor and transferee.
The significance here is that all the implied obligations under the SGA 1979 and SGSA 1982 will be avoided, although there may be liability in negligence.
Where the requirements of the Unsolicited Goods and Services Act 1971 (as amended) are satisfied, the recipient of unsolicited goods can treat those goods as an unconditional gift.
The relevant circumstances are set out in s1(2) of that Act which states:(2) The circumstances referred to in the preceding subsection [the extinguishment of any right of the sender to the goods]are that the goods were sent to the recipient with a view to his acquiring them, that the recipient has no reasonable cause to believe that they were sent with a view to their being acquired for the purposes of a trade or business and has neither agreed to acquire nor agreed to return them, and either (a) that during the period of six months beginning with the day on which the recipient received the goods the sender did not take possession of them and the recipient did not unreasonably refuse to permit the sender to do so; or (b) that not less than thirty days before the expiration of the period aforesaid the recipient gave notice to the sender in accordance with the following sub-section, and that during the period of thirty days beginning with the day on which the notice was given the sender did not take possession of the goods and the recipient did not unreasonably refuse to permit the sender to do so.
Where a person does not have reasonable cause to believe that there is a right to payment in these circumstances, it is an offence under s2 of the Act as amended to demand such payment.
Indeed, the scope of s2(2) is extensive in this respect:(2) A person who, not having reasonable cause to believe there is a right to payment, in the course of any trade or business and with a view to obtaining any payment for what he knows are unsolicited goods sent as aforesaid  (a) threatens to bring any legal proceedings; or (b) places or causes to be placed the name of any person on a list of defaulters or debtors or threatens to do so; or (c) invokes or causes to be invoked any other collection procedure or threatens to do so, shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on summary conviction to a fine not exceeding [level 5 on the standard scale].
The Secretary of State for the purposes of the Act (as amended) may make under s3A "regulation as to the contents and form of notes of agreement, invoices and similar documents" (the Unsolicited Goods and Services (Invoices etc) Regulations 1975 (SI 1975 No 732)).
(c) Trading stamps The Trading Stamps Act 1964 (as amended)(see SOGIT 1973 and Sched 4 of CCA 1974), is of much less importance now that trading stamps are available in so few shops.
There is uncertainty as to whether the exchange of trading stamps for goods is a sale or an exchange.
Notwithstanding this, the Act (as amended) grants the holder elaborate rights of redemption for cash (s3) as well as non-excludable implied terms under s4(1) (as substituted by s16(1) of SOGIT 1973) against the promoter of the trading stamp scheme.
(d) Transfers of goods and services The law has traditionally distinguished between contracts for the supply of goods and contracts for the supply of services.
With the repeal of the rule that certain sales had to be evinced in writing, and following the enactment of the SGSA 1982, the importance of the distinction is less acute.
Nevertheless, there still appear to be notable differences, for example, with regard to the passing of property (see Chapter 7) and also the effects of frustration (see Chapter 10).
The approach of the law is to distinguish the following transactions, namely, a contract for the sale of goods with a severable contract for services, a sale of goods, a contract for work and materials, and lastly, the supply of services.
These categorisations are only important insofar as they sound in different legal treatments.
Under the SGSA 1982, in any contract of supply the seller's or supplier's duties will normally be strict and excludable only in limited circumstances (see Chapter 5), whereas, in contracts for the supply of services, the supplier's duties will be duties of care which will be excludable subject to the reasonableness requirement of UCTA 1977.
The major difficulty is that the SGSA 1982 has not sufficiently delineated the boundary between the situation where the supply of goods was incidental to the supply of services, so that liability is not strict, with the converse case.
At common law, the position is that if the article in question is a standard product like a meal in a restaurant (Lockett v A and M Charles Ltd [1938]4 All ER 170) this is a sale of goods so that liability is strict.
On the other hand, the supply and installation of roofing tiles has been held to involve a contract for work and materials (Young and Marten Ltd v  McManus Childs Ltd [1969]1 AC 454; compare Phillip Head and Sons Ltd v Showfronts Ltd [1970]1 Lloyd's Rep 140).
Where the article is a unique or one-off product such as the commissioning of a portrait from an artist, the court is likely to construe this arrangement as a contract of work and materials notwithstanding the incidental supply of the canvas (Robinson v Graves [1935]1 KB 579; compare Issacs v Hardy (1884) Cab & EL 287).
Where the skill of the transferor is so important and the materials used insignificant, this is treated as a contract for the supply of services.
Thus in the medical field, especially with interventionist techniques involving implantation of human products, for example blood or biologics, this may be considered a supply of services because the courts will be reluctant to regard matter of human origin as "goods" (see Perlmutter v Beth David Hospital (1955) 123 NE 2d 792).
It follows that the surgeon will not be strictly liable for the products used, his obligation being to exercise reasonable care and skill (Bolam v Friern Hospital Management Committee [1957]1 WLR 582).
On the other hand in Dodd v Wilson & McWilliam [1946]2 All ER 691, the plaintiff contracted with a veterinary surgeon to inoculate his cattle with a serum and it was held that the surgeon impliedly warranted the vaccine to be fit for the purpose for which it was supplied.
This may be considered to be the more appropriate standard in contracts between patients and doctors where artificial products, such as manufactured heart valves, are used for implantation.
However, it is very important to take a balanced approach here because value judgments are often made with regard to the comparative worth of the skill of the professional, versus the materials used.
For example, it is unlikely that Lee v Griffin (1861) 1 B & S 272 would be followed today.
In that case the supply of dentures was considered to be a sale, and it was clear that the court paid scant regard to the dentist's skill, providing some indication of the dentist's standing in the 19th century.
(e) Bailment and hire Bailment is the delivery of goods to another on condition, express or implied, that they shall be returned to the bailor or dealt with according to his instructions.
The purpose of bailment and sale is different because, in the case of an ordinary contract of hire, it is not intended that general property in the goods will pass to the bailor/hirer.
Sophisticated credit instruments are predicated upon this legal analysis (including equipment leases discussed in Chapter 13).
At the same time, contracts in the form of a bailment do raise interesting sale versus security issues (which will be discussed in the context of retention of title clauses in Chapter 12).
A contract of hire is a species of bailment and although it is readily distinguishable from sale in that general property is not intended to pass to the hirer, there are important public policy issues in a consumer hire context, which dictate that the owner be subject to similar liability to that visited upon the seller.
This has in large measure been achieved under the  SGSA 1982 (see Chapter 5).
Nevertheless, there are some important differences which attach to the categorisation of the transaction as a contract of hire:(1) The hirer is not a person who has "agreed to buy" for the purposes of s9 of the FA 1889.
(2) Chattel mortgage legislation does not apply to a genuine contract of hire even in the case of a sale and leaseback.
(3) It is not until the termination of the hiring that the owner has a sufficient interest in the goods to maintain an action for wrongful interference with goods under s1 of the Torts (Interference with Goods) Act 1977.
This action is available if, at the time of the conversion, the plaintiff was in possession of the goods (The Jag-Shakti [1986]1 AC 337) or had an immediate right of possession of them.
One significant feature of the 1977 Act is that under s8 the jus tertii may be pleaded, thereby, giving the court power to settle competing claims in one set of proceedings.
(4) Because the essence of a bailment is the transfer of possession, the hiring with its obligation to pay rent does not commence until delivery and the bailee is under a prima facie duty to return the goods when the agreement comes to an end (see Chapter 13).
The CCA 1974 applies statutory control to a regulated consumer hire agreement.
This is defined under s15(1) as: 15–(1) A consumer hire agreement is an agreement made by a person with an individual (the "hirer" ) for the bailment or (in Scotland) the hiring of goods to the hirer, being an agreement which (a) is not a hire purchase agreement, and (b) is capable of subsisting for more than three months, and (c) does not require the hirer to make payments exceeding [£15,000].
This is a wide definition and would include leasing of business equipment and vehicles (see Chapter 13), the general effect being to equate consumer hiring with instalment sales and hire purchase agreements (see below).
However, in some important respects there are differences in treatment the most notable being as follows:(1) The hirer is granted a more limited right of termination under s101(1) of CCA 1974.
(2) The "protected goods" rules (s90) do not apply here (see Chapter 13).
(3) The financial relief accorded to a hirer under a consumer hire agreement following the owner's recaption of the goods may be different because under s100 of CCA 1974 there are limitations placed on recovery of money following termination in the case of conditional sale and hire purchase.
However, it is probable that under the common law a minimum payment clause stipulating for future rental payments would be void (see Chapter 13).
In any case, under s132 of CCA 1974 the court has powers to grant the defaulting hirer financial relief in respect of sums paid and payable.
(f) Conditional sales and hire purchase The right of security is intimately connected with property.
Herein lies the reason for the distinction drawn under the common law between credit sales (where the property in goods passes on or before delivery), conditional sales and hire purchase.
In Helby v Matthews [1895]AC 471, the House of Lords decided that a hirer under a hire purchase agreement who was entitled to terminate the hiring agreement at any time, was not a person who had agreed to buy the goods within the meaning of s9 of FA 1889, so confirming the nemo dat rule (see Chapter 11).
Their Lordships distinguished Lee v Butler [1893]2 QB 318 where there was a conditional sale agreement on the basis, in that case, that there was a binding obligation to sell the goods to the buyer.
During the course of the 20th century, the general statutory approach has moved towards the gradual assimilation of conditional sales and hire purchase.
In this respect, although conditional sales are regulated for the purposes of the nemo dat exceptions in s25(2) of SGA 1979, and hire purchase under Sched 4 of CCA 1974, the two sets of provisions are virtually identical.
Moreover, the limited exception to the nemo dat rule created for dispositions of motor vehicles to "private purchasers" , does not distinguish between a conditional buyer or a hirer under a hire purchase agreement (see Chapter 11).
The legislature through the SGA 1979, SOGIT 1982, the SGSA 1982 and the CCA 1974 has also assimilated sale, conditional sales and hire purchase in relation to the statutorily implied terms as to title, description, quality and fitness for purpose (see Chapter 5).
The real dilemma with hire purchase which we will discuss in Chapter 13 is that of deciding the extent of the hirer's proprietary interest in the goods.
This is of a peculiarly uncertain nature since the supplier, by lawfully terminating the agreement, will automatically bring the hirer's interest to an end.
3 Consumer credit
The CCA 1974 was inspired by the American Uniform Commercial Code (UCC).
The Crowther Committee on Consumer Credit (1971) Cmnd 4596, recommended that transactions should be dealt with not according to their legal form, but according to their economic substance.
Under the CCA 1974, there is a recognition that legal rights and duties of a consumer should not necessarily turn upon whether the consumer has borrowed money to buy goods, bought them on credit, or acquired them under a hire purchase contract (ie the traditional distinction drawn between lender credit and vendor credit).
Thus the Hire Purchase Acts 1938–1965 have been almost entirely repealed by the CCA 1974, and the rights and duties of the parties involved in a hire purchase contract are similar to those of parties to a sale of goods, in which the consumer has obtained credit, whether from the seller or a third party.
(a) Consumer Credit Act terminology The CCA 1974 contains new functional terminology so that, as such, there are no references to hire purchase or conditional sales.
The central new terms are as follows: Restricted and unrestricted-use creditA restricted use credit is defined in s11(1): 11–(1) A restricted-use credit agreement is a regulated consumer credit agreement (a) to finance a transaction between the debtor and the creditor, whether forming part of that agreement or not, or (b) to finance a transaction between the debtor and a person (the "supplier" ) other than the creditor, or (c) to refinance any existing indebtedness of the debtor's, whether to the creditor or another person, and "restricted-use credit" shall be construed accordingly.
The issue here is that the debtor has no control over the use to which the credit is put.
In contrast, unrestricted-use credit is where the debtor has the control over the application of the loan, and this is so even if it is a term of the loan contract that he must apply the money to a specified purpose (CCA 1974, s.11(3)).
Debtor-creditor-supplier agreementsThis is where there is a special relationship between the creditor and the supplier who may even be one and the same person (s12 (a)).
By definition, this type of contract will always involve restricted-use credit.
More difficulty is posed with the party arrangements.
In the case of restricted-use credit the CCA 1974 treats what under the common law would be two contracts, one of supply and the other of credit, as one composite agreement, if the credit is given under pre-existing arrangements with the supplier, or in contemplation of future arrangements between them (for example with credit card transactions (s187(2))).
It is possible for there to be unrestricted-use three party debtor-creditor-supplier agreements, but the requirements are more exacting as seen under s12 (c): an unrestricted-use credit agreement which is made by the creditor under pre-existing arrangements between himself and a person (the "supplier" ) other than the debtor in the knowledge that the credit is to be used to finance a transaction between the debtor and the supplier.
Debtor-creditor agreementsAll credit agreements that are not debtor-creditor-supplier agreements are debtor-creditor agreements (s13).
Such agreements are likely to be unrestricted-use credit although this may not always be the case, for example where a financier who has no arrangement with the seller insists on paying the money directly to him (s13 (a)).
Fixed-sum and running-account creditThis is the distinction between a hire purchase agreement for a fixed amount (s10 (b)) and a credit card agreement where the debtor enjoys a credit facility that he can draw upon from time to time often subject to a credit limit (s10 (a)).
(b) The ambit of the Consumer Credit Act The CCA 1974 applies to regulated credit agreements.
In order to satisfy this, four conditions must be satisfied:(1) The transaction must have been entered into on or after 1 April 1977 (Consumer Credit Act 1974 (Commencement No 2) Order 1977 (SI 1977 No 325)).
(2) The debtor must be an individual, not a company (s8(1)).
This will be discussed in greater detail in Chapter 13.
(3) The amount of credit given must not exceed £15,000 (Consumer Credit (Increase in Monetary Limits) Order 1983 (SI 1983 No 1878)).
The credit here denotes not the total amount the debtor has to pay but the element of financial accommodation.
The relevant formula would appear to be: Credit=Total price—any deposit payable (s189(1)) +the total charge for credit (s9(4)).
In seeking to define what items are to be included as part of the total charge for credit, s20 emphasises that what matters is the cost to the debtor rather than the net return to the lender (see Directive 90/88/EEC and also Consumer Credit (Total Charge for Credit) Regulations 1980 (SI 1980 No 51), Pt 2 (as amended)).
In the case of hire purchase transactions, hire rent is treated as credit by virtue of s9(3) of CCA 1974 (see Sched 2 to CCA 1974, Example 10).
(4) It must not be an exempt transaction.
A number of agreements otherwise falling within the ambit of the CCA 1974 are exempted under s16 of the Act.
Most of these relate to mortgages of land and are of no concern here.
However, two types of exempt agreements are of significance.
The first is in relation to debtor-creditor-supplier agreements where the amount owed is to be paid off in a few instalments.
Thus, the Consumer Credit (Exempt Agreements) Order 1980 (SI 1980 No 52)(as amended) which implements s16(5) (a) of CCA 1974, provides, in the case of fixed sum credit, that the agreement is exempt if no more than four payments are involved, whereas, in the case of running-account, credit exemption is provided if full settlement is made at the end of each period of account.
The same statutory instrument implements s16(5) (b) which exempts debtor-creditor agreements on the basis of the rate of interest charged.
Following on from this, a debtor-creditor agreement will be exempted if the annual percentage rate does not exceed the higher of either 13 per cent or 1 per cent more than the base rates of lending banks.
4 Sale and loans on security
Continental law, with its emphasis upon a unitary concept of dominium in which possession is central (possession vaut titre), is reluctant to recognise a non-possessory security right except insofar as it has been introduced by statute.
It is little wonder therefore that the failure by the SGA 1979 to  reconcile "property" and "title" have been criticised in a Scottish context.
Indeed, the extension of the Sale of Goods Bill 1892 to Scotland is often portrayed as being "hasty" and "ill-considered" (see T B Smith, Property Problems in Sale (1979)).
Despite this, the SGA 1979 does make some attempt to deal with the Scottish dilemma vis à vis non-possessory security interests through the insertion of s61(4) of the 1893 Act (now s62(4) of the 1979 Act), a provision specifically drafted for Scotland but which also applies to England.
Section 62(4) of the 1979 Act expressly excludes from its application: "…a transaction in the form of a contract of sale which is intended to operate by way of…security" .
This section undoubtedly reflected the Scottish case of McBrain v Wallace (1881) 8 R 330, aff'd (1881) 8 R, HL 106.
In this case, the view was taken that so long as the "sale" was correctly carried through, the arrangement's function as a security did not overturn the transaction.
From this it follows that s62(4) applies to transactions where the sale is a complete sham, ie where the owner purports to sell goods to a creditor in order to raise secured finance while retaining possession.
Thus, the Scottish Law Commission in para 5:23 of their Memorandum 25, observed that s62(4):…is of importance since the introduction of the rule that property in sale might pass without delivery would otherwise have been possible by resort to transactions in the form of sale to circumvent the rule that a security over moveables may not generally be constituted without transfer to them.
In a similar vein, Lord Moncrieff held in Robertson v Hall's Trs (1896) 24R 120 (at p134):[T]his [s 62(4) of SGA 1979]is in effect a statutory declaration that a pledge of, or other security over moveables, cannot be created merely by completion of what professes to be a contract of sale.
The form of the transaction is not conclusive, the reality of the transaction must be enquired into.
The difficulties involved in determining the "true intentions" of the parties anticipated in s62(4) are particularly acute in sale and leaseback provisions (see for example Ladbroke Leasing (South West) Ltd v Reekie Plant Ltd [1983]SLT 155).
There is no doubt that the purpose here is to evade the technical requirements of the Bills of Sale (1878) Amendment Act 1882 which regulates non-absolute sale transfer transactions under which a grantee is given a licence to seize.
Any mortgage bill of sale falling within the 1882 Act is void against all persons unless the strict form set out in the Schedule to the Act is adhered to (s9).
Nevertheless, it is the policy of the courts in England where there is security with recourse to property which can be effected by means other than a transaction of loan or charge, not to treat it as registrable under s395 of the Companies Act 1985 (as amended).
This is so even though the exact economic effect might be carried out through a transaction which, in form, was registrable as a security interest in the goods.
In this respect, a document purporting to be a sale of hire purchase agreements was construed by Eve J at first instance in Re George  Inglefield [1933]Ch 1, as a charge on book debts whereas, in the Court of Appeal (at p27), it was held to be a sale: "[There is]no reason whatever for attempting to drag the transaction within the operation of the section [s 395 of the Companies Act 1985]by calling it something which in truth it is not." 
A similar issue arose in Lloyds and Scottish Finance Ltd v Cyril Lord Ltd (1979) 129 NLJ 366.
In this case, the plaintiffs were a finance house and the defendants were a company in liquidation and liquidators of that company.
The company before going out of business entered into a "block discounting" agreement with the finance house.
Book debts arising from these credit sales were to be assigned in blocks, containing substantial numbers of such debts to the plaintiffs in return for a lump sum, calculated so as to provide a discounting charge to the plaintiffs.
It was argued that these assignments were by way of charge.
However, this argument was rejected in the House of Lords and Lord Wilberforce (at p372) said that to:…suppose that the assignments were made not by way of sale but by way of security would be to impose upon the parties a form of transaction totally different from that which they had selectednamely, one of saleand of which there was no evidence whatsoever that either of them desired…
[The plaintiffs]had no intention of creating any charge over book debts or merely making a series of loans.
His Lordship thought that it would be a strange doctrine of "looking for the substance" or looking through the documents which would produce a contractual intention so clearly negated by the documents and by oral evidence.
The doctrine of sham is particularly significant in the context of retention of title clauses (see Curtain Dream plc v Churchill Merchanting Ltd [1990]BCC 341).
A 'sham "has been defined by Diplock LJ (as he then was) in Snook v London and West Riding Investments Ltd [1967]2 QB 786 (at p802) to include:[A]cts done or documents executed by the parties to the" sham"which are intended by them to give to third parties or to the court the appearance of creating between the parties legal rights and obligations different from the actual legal rights and obligations (if any) which the parties intend to create.
This approach influenced the Scottish Court (Lord Ordinary Ross presiding) when considering an interim interdict (injunction) in Emerald Stainless Steel Ltd v South Side Distribution Ltd [1983]SLT 162.
In this case, goods were sold subject to a retention of title clause (condition 8:1 of the contract) which provided: Title of each item of goods sold or agreed to be sold shall remain vested in the Company [ie the sellers]until the full purchase price and all additional charges relating to that item and all and any other monies for the time being owing by the customer [ie the buyers]to the Company shall have been paid in full to the customer (and all products into which such items held by the customer)(and all products into which such items come to be converted or incorporated) shall be and remain the property of the Company and shall be held by the customer as trustee for the Company but with liberty for the customer to pass title as the Company's agent on its own account (but subject to 8.2 below) bona fide for full value in the normal course of the customer's trading.
Even though the matter involved an interim injunction, the judgment of Lord Ross was a full one.
His Lordship concluded that the clause amounted to a non-possessory security right which was invalidated by virtue of s62(4): I accept that the only recognised forms of legal hypothec (that is where a person has security without possession) are those of a landlord, a superior, a solicitor and certain maritime hypothecs.
In my opinion counsel for the receiver is well-founded in his contention that condition 8.1 must be construed as an attempt to create a hypothec of a type not recognised by law.
It is contrary to principle that a seller in Scotland should be able to obtain security in this way…
Having considered the terms of condition 8.1, I am of the opinion that it cannot be construed merely as a clause of retention of title but that it is truly an attempt to create a security without possession in which the machinery of a trust under Scots law is sought to be employed.
It is significant that security is sought not only for the purchase price of the goods but also for "all and any other monies for the time being owed by the customer to the Company" .
The major difficulty here is the failure to consider the relationship between s17 (where property passing is linked to contract rather than conveyance) and s62(4) of SGA 1979.
Remarkably, there is no mention of the SGA 1979 in Lord Ross's judgment.
It is difficult, in any case, to sustain the conclusion that a hypothec has been created because inherent in this is the idea that the debtor owns the goods and the creditor enjoys real rights.
As such, this would therefore suggest a predisposition of some of the Scottish judiciary towards the possession vaut titre continental concept and the logical concomitant here is the failure to give effect to ss17-19 of the 1979 Act.
The above approach has now been thwarted by the House of Lords' decision in Armour and Another v Thyseen Edelstahlwerke AG (1990) The Financial Times, 26 October.
The respondents were the joint receivers of the assets of Carron Co Ltd, a company which had purchased 67,423 kg of steel strip from the appellants without having paid the purchase price of £71,769.
The appellants relied on their retention of title clause incorporated into their conditions of supply which provided, inter alia, "All goods delivered by us remain our property…until all debts owed to us…on any legal grounds are settled" .
The House of Lords overturned the decision of Lord Mayfield and the subsequent decision of the Second Division of the Inner House of the Court of Session ((1989) SLT 182) to the effect that the clause constituted an invalid non-possessory security interest.
The orthodox legal position was re-stated namely, that where there is an effective reservation of title clause this does not constitute a conventional security device as it is a reservation of title by the supplier rather than a grant by the debtor of a jus in re aliena (see Chapter 12).
Formalities and the Formation of Sale and Supply Contracts
Even though Pt II of SGA 1979 (ss2-15) is entitled "Formation of the Contract" , there is nothing in it which regulates the actual formation of the contract of sale of goods.
The common law saving provision will apply and it is possible to infer from s62(2) of SGA 1979, that the ordinary principles of contract formation are therefore applicable here.
Presumably, this will also apply by analogy to other supply scenarios, even though the major statutes regulating the supply of goods (SOGIT 1973, CCA 1974, SGSA 1982, and the Consumer Protection Act 1987) are entirely silent on the matter.
The modern position regarding the formalities attendant with the SGA 1979 is encapsulated in s4(1) of the Act which states: 4–(1) Subject to this and any other Act, a contract of sale may be made in writing (either with or without seal), or by word of mouth, or partly in writing and partly by word of mouth, or may be implied from the conduct of the parties.
It follows that nearly all contracts of sale and supply can be made by word of mouth, subject to the normal common law rules of contract formation.
1 Formation
The contract of supply must be a complete agreement (see Scammell and Nephew Ltd v Ouston [1941]AC 251), although this does not necessarily mean that every part of the contract has been worked out in meticulous detail.
Indeed, as already mentioned (see Chapter 2), the SGA 1979 has special provisions with regard to the determination of price where this is not fixed in the contract of sale (s8).
In general, the courts are concerned to enforce contracts between businessmen, especially executed agreements even where the uncertain terms may be meaningless (Nicolene Ltd v Simmonds [1953]1 QB 543).
The common law requirements of contract formation are adequately dealt with in standard works on contract.
It is sufficient here merely to note the importance of the objective test for agreement, the relevant question being whether the offeree has accepted the offer in the sense in which a reasonable person would have understood it.
(a) Contract and the doctrine of mistake Where one party is aware that the offer or the acceptance of the other party does not represent his true intentions but still deals with the other party without disclosing the mistake, the law will abandon the objective interpretation of the first party's intentions.
Thus in Hartog v Colin and Shields [1939]3 All ER 566, it was held that the plaintiff could not sue on a contract for the sale of hare skins at so much per pound when he knew that the offeror really meant to sell at that price per piece.
Problems with mistake have arisen with hire purchase proposal forms where dealers have manipulated figures on proposal forms.
The common law position appears to be that a dealer is not normally the agent of the finance company, and a customer is bound by the terms of the document, unless the finance company knows that it does not accord with the customer's intentions (United Dominions Trust Ltd v Western [1976]QB 513).
In the case of regulated agreements, the common law rule has been overturned so that s56(2) of CCA 1974 provides that antecedent negotiations shall be deemed to be conducted by the dealer, "in the capacity of agent of the creditor as well as in his actual capacity" .
The effect of this is that the finance company would be regarded as knowing what its agent knows, namely that the proposal form does not represent the customer's intended offer.
In cases of mistaken identity, the issue is with whom did the offeror actually intend to contract, as seen in the infamous case of Cundy v Lindsay (1878) 3 App Cas 459.
Essentially, there is no real answer to this question because, in most cases of fraud, the transferor actually believes that the transferee is the person he is pretending to be.
The legal position appears to be (see Thomas v Heelas 27 November (1986) CAT No 1065; Lewis v Averay [1973]1 WLR 510; compare Ingram v Little [1961]1 QB 31) that where a sale is made inter praesentes, it will be treated as a voidable sale thereby championing the security of transactions principle discussed in Chapter 11.
Less problematic are cases of mistake relating to the quality of the goods.
Of course, the relevant question here will often be the extent to which the caveat emptor doctrine has been abrogated through legislative intervention in contracts of supply (see Chapter 5).
Even so, as Lord Atkin pointed out in Bell v Lever Bros Ltd [1932]AC 161 (at p218), a contract may be set aside for mistake as to the quality of the goods if "it is the mistake of both parties, and is as to the existence of some quality which makes the thing without the quality essentially different from the thing as it is believed to be" .
(See also Associated Japanese Bank (International) Ltd v Crédit du Nord SA [1988]3 All ER 902).
In most cases, a mistake as to quality will be treated as a breach of one of the implied obligations under the SGA 1979.
A distinction should be drawn here with the case where the mistake relates to the terms of the sale itself.
Thus in Smith v Hughes (1871) LR 6 QB 597, it was held that the seller of oats could not hold the buyer to the contract of sale if the seller was aware that the buyer was intending to accept an offer to sell oats warranted to be old, where, in fact, the seller was not intending to give any such warranty.
2 Formalities
It has already been noted that as far as contracts of supply are concerned, required formalities are the exception.
Nevertheless, in the following situations certain formalities have to be satisfied:(1) Auction sales.
(2) Regulated consumer credit agreements.
(3) Sales of interests in land because the s61 (SGA 1979) definition of "goods" as including fructus naturales (see Chapter 2) may have to satisfy the requirements of s2 of the Law of Property (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1989.
On the other hand, where severance of the subject matter is envisaged under the contract and property is to pass at this time, it is possible to argue that this is only a sale of goods (see Kursell v Timber Operators and Contractors Ltd [1927]1 KB 298).
(4) The Bills of Sale Act 1878 will apply to genuine sale transactions so that a sale of goods evidenced in writing, by virtue of which the seller remains in possession, is void against execution creditors and trustees in bankruptcy unless it is registered in compliance with the Act (Bills of Sale Act 1878 s8).
(Compare non-absolute transfers, or sales by way of mortgages which are outside the scope of the SGA 1979 but must nevertheless comply with the Bills of Sale (1878) Amendment Act 1882).
(5) Sales of certain capital assets such as ships and aircraft which have their own registration formalities.
(6) Some dangerous goods are subject to special statutory regimes, for example, under the Firearms Acts 1968 and 1982 (as amended), the Crossbows Act 1987.
It is sufficient for our purposes to elaborate upon the first two categories.
(a) Auction sales Auction sales give rise to some particular problems which are specifically regulated in s57 of SGA 1979.
Under s57(1), where goods are put up for sale by auction in lots, each lot is prima facie deemed to be the subject of a separate contract of sale.
Section 57(2) goes on to state that a sale by auction is complete when the auctioneer announces its completion by the fall of the hammer, or in some other customary manner.
Until this time, any bidder may retract his bid, and this was settled in the 18th century case of Payne v Cave (1789) 3 TR 148.
Moreover, it was held in Harris v Nickerson (1873) LR 8 QB 286, that an auctioneer will not be liable to a person who attends, on the strength of an advertisement, a place in the hope that an auction will take place.
In these circumstances, advertisements will be construed as a declaration of intention to hold an auction and not a contract.
Where the auction is expressly advertised subject to a reserve price, s57(6) expressly preserves the seller's right not to sell below the reserve price.
If the auctioneer, by mistake, forgets that there is a reserve price and knocks down the goods at less than the reserve price, there is no sale.
This is  because the auctioneer has no express, implied or apparent authority as an agent to sell the goods below the reserve price (McManus v Fortescue [1907]2 KB 1).
It would seem that the bidder, in these circumstances, has no remedy against either the seller or the auctioneer because the sale was expressly subject to a reserve price and the auctioneer's authority was known to be so limited.
Where the seller instructs the auctioneer to place a reserve price which is not publicised, the auctioneer may still refuse to accept any bid below the reserve price since bids constitute only offers.
However in this situation the auctioneer may not accept a bid on behalf of the seller; s57(4) and (5) provide:(4) Where a sale by auction is not notified to be subject to a right to bid by or on behalf of the seller, it is not lawful for the seller to bid himself or to employ any person to bid at the sale, or for the auctioneer knowingly to take any bid from the seller or any such person.
(5) A sale contravening sub-section (4) above may be treated as fraudulent by the buyer.
In this case, the contract may be set aside and the buyer will be able to sue for damages.
Even where a reserve price is notified, the owner is not entitled to bid unless this is specifically reserved.
If, in the absence of this, he does bid and the reserve price is reached then this may be treated as fraudulent by the buyer.
Furthermore, where a sale is announced to be without reserve and the seller intervenes, as distinct from withdrawing the goods from the auction, he has no right to bid so that the highest bona fide bidder will be able to treat the transaction as fraudulent (Green v Baverstock (1863) 14 CBNS 204).
If the auctioneer is a party to the seller's conduct then he may also be sued.
The auctioneer may be held liable in any case on the basis that he had contracted to sell the goods to the highest bidder (see Warlow v Harrison (1859) 1 E & E 309).
Nonetheless, the auctioneer does not, in the absence of a contrary agreement, warrant the vendor's title.
In Benton v Campbell, Parker and Co Ltd [1925]2 KB 410, it was held that the auctioneer was not liable to the purchaser for the sale of a car when it transpired that the person who put the car into the auction was not the owner.
The extent of the warranty of title implied at common law is that the possession given to the purchaser will be undisturbed by the vendor or auctioneer and that the latter knows no defect in the vendor's title (see Chapter 7).
An attempt to conduct a mock auction is proscribed under s1(1) of the Mock Auctions Act 1961.
Essentially, this is a consumer protection device making it a criminal offence to sell, by way of competitive bidding, prescribed articles listed in s3(2):…any plate, plated articles, linen, china, glass, books, pictures, prints, furniture, jewellery, articles of household or personal use, or ornament or any musical or scientific instrument or apparatus.
The following techniques are outlawed under s3: restricting the right to bid to more than one article; goods being knocked down for a price less than the highest bid; or where there are "free" gifts.
There are also statutory provisions governing undesirable auction practices by buyers under the Auctions (Bidding Agreements) Acts 1927 and 1969.
At common law it appears to be doubtful whether an agreement for a "knockout" , ie a contract between interested bidders to refrain from bidding against each other, was illegal.
These Acts apply to prevent dealers from agreeing to abstain from bidding at a sale unless there was a genuine prior agreement to purchase on joint account, and a copy of this agreement lodged with the auctioneer.
Section 3 of the 1969 Act provides that the seller may avoid the contract, recover the goods and, in default, any loss he has suffered, the parties to the ring being jointly and severally liable to him (s3(2)).
The major difficulty in practice is that of proving the existence of such "rings" .
(b) Formation of regulated consumer credit agreement The consumer credit agreement must contain certain information which is set forth in a prescribed manner laid down by the Consumer Credit (Agreements) Regulation 1983 (SI 1983 No 1553).
A failure to comply with this entails that the agreement is improperly executed and cannot be enforced without a court order (s65 of CCA 1974).
The following paragraphs focus upon the right to cancel for failure to comply with the requisite formalities, as this is likely to be most important in practice.
The consumer must be provided with copies of the consumer credit agreement but this requirement will vary.
Where the consumer is accepting an offer by the creditor, the copy of the agreement must be given to him immediately (s63(1)).
On the other hand, if the consumer is making an offer, he is entitled, for record purposes, to a copy of the agreement there and then but to a second copy, which must be sent to him when the creditor accepts his offer, within seven days of the conclusion of the contract (s63(2)).
Failure to comply with these rules means that the credit agreement will be improperly executed and will require a court order to be enforced under s127 of CCA 1974.
A very important protection afforded by the CCA 1974 in the case of a regulated agreement, is the right to cancel.
This can be exercised during the "cooling-off" period where the debtor did not sign the agreement at the business premises of the creditor, a party to a linked transaction, or a negotiator in antecedent negotiations (s67(b)).
In addition, it can be exercised where, during antecedent negotiations, there were oral representations made irrespective of whether they were concluded on or off business premises (s67).
The right of cancellation is subject to various exceptions which should be noted:(1) Exempt agreements (see Chapter 2) and also some small agreements  in the case of credit sales where the credit does not exceed £50 (s74(2) (A)).
This provision was inserted by reg 9 of the Doorstep Selling Directive (85/577) implemented by the Consumer Protection (Cancellation of Contracts Concluded away from Business Premises) Regulations 1987 (SI 1987 No 2117)(as amended).
This lays down cancellation provisions (reg 4) similar to those applied under the CCA 1974 in relation to supplies by a trader of goods or services to a consumer which are made during an unsolicited visit to the consumer's home, or that of another consumer, or the consumer's place of work (reg 3) for a VAT inclusive payment of £35 or more (reg 3(2) (f)).
(2) Certain agreements secured on land, house purchase money or bridging loans (s67).
(3) Regulated agreements which are not caught by Pt V of CCA 1974 as laid out in s74 of CCA 1974, for example non-commercial agreements, or small agreements (s17(1)), or running-account credit such as bank overdrafts or other overdrafts exempted by the Director if this is not against the interests of the debtor.
This is also the case with agreements to finance payments on death (ss74(3) and 183).
(4) Unexecuted agreements signed by the debtor or hirer at "business premises" which does not include the business premises of the debtor or hirer (s67(b)).
The "cooling-off" period in the case where the debtor makes an offer, allows the debtor the opportunity to cancel up to five days from receipt of the second copy of the agreement which must be sent to him (s68(a)).
Where the debtor accepts an offer made to him, a special notification of the right to cancel must be given to him and the debtor can cancel at any time up to five days from receipt of that notification (s68(a)).
A notice of cancellation sent by post is deemed to be served at the time of posting (s69(7)).
However, in cases where the Director General of Fair Trading has dispensed with that notice (usually in the case of mail order consumer credit agreements), the "cooling-off" period runs until "the end of the fourteenth day following the day on which he signed the unexecuted agreement" (s68(b)).
In circumstances other than where the Director-General of Fair Trading has dispensed with a notice of cancellation in relation to certain mail order consumer credit (s64(4) of CCA 1974 as implemented by the Consumer Credit (Notice of Cancellation Right)(Exemptions) Regulations 1983 (SI 1983 No 1358), time runs from receipt by the debtor or hirer of a second copy or notice.
If this is never received, a fresh copy or notice must be served within seven days, and if this is not done, although the agreement remains binding and enforceable, it is perpetually cancellable under s68.
It should also be noted that the right of cancellation is in addition to any common law right of rescission or statutory right of termination.
(c) Duties following cancellation Where notice has been given, in the case of hire purchase or conditional sale transactions, s72 generally places upon the debtor a legal duty to redeliver the goods subject to a lien for any part exchange goods tendered by him (s73(5)).
Under s73(2) the primary entitlement of the debtor or hirer is to recover the "part exchange allowance" .
In the case of loan finance in a regulated debtor-creditor-supplier agreement, the creditor and the supplier are jointly and severally liable to him (s70(3)).
Within a period of ten days from the date of cancellation, the duty to pay the part exchange allowance will be discharged by the return of the part exchanged goods where they are in substantially the same condition as originally delivered to the negotiator (s73(2)).
If both sides agree, any deterioration or delay regarding the return of the part exchanged goods can be ignored (s173(2)).
As far as the debtor's obligations are concerned, he must retain possession of the goods and make them available for the creditor to collect, taking reasonable care of them in the meantime (s72(4)).
The duty to take reasonable care is confined to the period of 21 days after cancellation (s72(8)), thereafter, he usually becomes an involuntary bailee with a duty to refrain from wilful damage.
Where money has been paid over to the debtor before the end of the "cooling-off" period, the CCA 1974 gives the debtor the choice: firstly, to take a month's free credit before repaying the credit already advanced (s71(2) (a)); or secondly, with regard to money already spent, he can repay the money with interest, as provided for in the credit agreement, so that the effect of the cancellation only relates to the linked supply transaction (s71(3)).
Cancellation of a credit agreement also entails the cancellation of linked transactions (s69(1)) as this has no effect until the principal agreement is made (s19(3)).
Here again the debtor must allow the goods to be collected and take reasonable care in the meantime whilst sums paid out by him must be repaid.
Cancellation of a directly financed transaction will leave the sale from dealer to financier still outstanding; this though is normally covered through a contractual repurchase provision.
Express Undertaking as to Quality and Description
One important consequence of the mass production of goods has been the rise of extensive media advertising by manufacturers.
Such a practice invites scrutiny about the different legal effects concerning express statements.
These expressions may constitute either a promise, by which the maker of the statement intends that he should be bound, or a representation which is not intended to operate as a promise but is made with the intention and does have the effect of persuading the other party to enter into the contract.
Advertising by manufacturers has become notorious for the extravagant but contractually ineffective commendation of goods.
The statements made which have no legal effect are often described as being mere "puffs" (Carlill v Carbolic Smoke Ball [1893]1 QB 256).
The law is concerned only with statements which take the form of remarks which are significant and are representations of present or future fact.
Modern advertisements which are specific in detail, for example, advertisements for cars which specify exact performance information, may be sound in legal contractual liability.
The scenario envisaged here is that a buyer of a car will have a contract not only with the supplier, but also a collateral contract with the manufacturer on the basis of the terms contained in a precise advertisement, the consideration for which being the entry into the main contract of supply (see Shanklin Pier Ltd v Detel Products Ltd [1951]2 KB 854; Andrews v Hopkinson [1957]1 QB 229).
In the case of misleading advertisements, criminal liability is envisaged under legislation such as the the Consumer Protection Act 1987 (see Chapter 6).
The basic distinction at common law is between statements which are intended to be terms of the contract of supply, ie promissory in nature, and statements which are representational in nature.
1 Specific undertakings
(a) Representations At common law, a misstatement of fact which induced a contract is a misrepresentation.
The common law refused to grant damages for innocent misrepresentation but would do so in the tort of deceit if the representation  was fraudulent, although this is notoriously difficult to prove (Derry v Peek (1889) 14 App Cas 337).
It was because of this that it became so important for a buyer to establish that the seller's representation amounted to a contractual term so that full damages would then be available.
However, in Hedley Byrne and Co Ltd v Heller and Partners [1964]AC 465, the House of Lords recognised that there could be liability in tort for negligent misrepresentation dependent upon the establishment of a duty of care between the parties.
Inherent in this requirement is the establishment of a "special relationship" between the parties and in Esso Petroleum Co Ltd v Mardon [1976]QB 801, the Court of Appeal recognised that a duty of care is owed by a seller who has special expertise.
The Misrepresentation Act 1967 provides considerable protection for the buyer.
Where the negligent misrepresentation induces a contract between the parties, it may be more advantageous to proceed under s2(1) of the 1967 Act, not least because it reverses the onus of proof by placing it upon the seller (see Howard Marine and Dredging Co Ltd v A Ogden and Sons (Excavations) Ltd [1978]QB 574).
In the case of an innocent misrepresentation, s2(2) of the 1967 Act gives the court discretion to award damages in lieu of rescission.
This is set out as follows:(2) Where a person has entered into a contract after a misrepresentation has been made to him otherwise than fraudulently, and he would be entitled, by reason of the misrepresentation, to rescind the contract, then, if it is claimed, in any proceedings arising out of the contract, that the contract ought to be or has been rescinded, the court or arbitrator may declare the contract subsisting and award damages in lieu of rescission, if of the opinion that it would be equitable to do so, having regard to the nature of the misrepresentation and the loss that would be caused by it if the contract were upheld, as well as to the loss that rescission would cause to the other party.
The provision reflects that the normal remedy for misrepresentation is rescission but the excessiveness of this remedy is mitigated under s2(2) of the Act.
Here we find similarities with the position in breach of contract where the courts have recognised the innominate term as a method of reducing the hardship of categorising terms of the contract, irrespective of the consequences of the breach, as conditions (see below).
The right to rescind will be lost where restitutio in integrum is impossible, for example where the goods have been consumed or services provided.
In addition, rescission is forfeited where the buyer has accepted the goods which is illustrated in Leaf v International Galleries [1950]2 KB 86.
In this case, the plaintiff purchased a painting of Salisbury Cathedral from the defendants who innocently misrepresented that it had been painted by John Constable.
Five years later, the plaintiff, having been informed that the painting was not a Constable, returned it to the defendants and asked for his money back.
The Court of Appeal held that even if there had been a right of rescission it was barred by lapse of time.
Essentially, this is a question of fact which will vary from case to case although, prima facie, with innocent misrepresentation, time will run from the date of execution of  the contract; in the case of fraud however, it will run from the date of reasonable discovery.
It appears from this case (see also Long v Lloyd [1958]1 WLR 753) that the rules of acceptance are substantially the same as those applicable in cases of breach of condition (see Chapter 9).
However, in two important respects the Misrepresentation Act 1967 has removed some bars to rescission so that s1 provides that, whether or not the representation has become a term of the contract, or that the contract has been fully performed, the right to the rescission remedy is not lost.
In Leaf v International Galleries, Denning LJ (as he then was) expressed the view that the right to rescind for misrepresentation cannot survive beyond the point of time when a right to reject for breach of condition is lost.
This reasoning no longer applies following s1(a) of the 1967 Act which permits rescission for a misrepresentation, even where the misrepresentation has become a term of the contract.
It would be anomalous if the right to rescind was lost at an earlier date when the misrepresentation does not become a term of the contract.
The principal weakness of the rescission remedy and the statutory alternative of damages in lieu of rescission, is that they do not provide for consequential loss, for example, profits on resale.
Even though equity together with rescission gives an indemnity, this is limited in scope to cover only expenditure necessarily incurred as a result of entering into the contract (Whittington v Seale-Hayne (1900) 82 LT 49).
In order to get full compensation the buyer will have to look to tort, as in the case of fraudulent misrepresentation, or sue for breach of contract.
It would seem from this that the issue of whether the representation has become a term of the contract cannot be avoided, especially if the buyer seeks compensation for loss of profits since expectation damages are linked to breach of contract.
(b) Express terms Unless there is a written contract (which is rare in most consumer sales) there is the possibility that the parol evidence rule may prevent the successful incorporation of extrinsic evidence.
Nevertheless, the rule is subject to so many exceptions that they have practically destroyed the rule.
Thus, it does not apply where the evidence establishes the existence of a collateral contract; where it can be shown that the document was not intended as a complete record of the contract terms; where its existence or operation was dependent upon some prior unexpected stipulation; or where it was procured by some illegality or misrepresentation.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the Law Commission has recommended no reform of the parol evidence rule, declaring that the "rule" is not as extensive as traditionally expounded (see Law of ContractThe Parol Evidence Rule, Law Commission No 154 (1986)).
The question of whether a statement made during the course of negotiations remains a mere representation or becomes a contractual term, turns on the intention of the parties.
Such a criterion is notoriously elusive, but in determining the precise legal status of a statement some reliance has  been placed upon the point during the negotiations at which the statement was made.
The further away from the making of the contract it was made the more likely it is to be considered as a misrepresentation.
In Routledge v McKay [1954]1 WLR 615, the seller of a motorbicycle incorrectly told the buyer that it was a 1942 model, but the contract was not concluded until one week later and the Court of Appeal held that this statement was not, thereby, a term.
In the same way, if, after an oral representation, the terms of the sale are reduced into writing which does not include the representation, this may indicate that it did not form part of the agreement.
However, in this circumstance, the court will readily infer a collateral contract as illustrated by the case of Couchman v Hill [1947]KB 554.
Here, a statement at an auction by the auctioneer that a heifer was "unserved" was held to amount to a collateral warranty, for breach of which the auctioneer was liable even though the main contract excluded liability for fault, imperfections and errors of description.
In Oscar Chess Ltd v Williams [1957]1 WLR 370, Denning LJ suggested that a binding promise might be inferred from the circumstances if the seller stated a fact which was or should be within his own knowledge, and of which the buyer was ignorant, intending that the buyer should act upon it, and with the result that the buyer did act upon it.
In this case the seller, as a private individual, had no special expertise and the representation made as to the age of the car being traded-in to the dealers, was held by the Court of Appeal not to be contractual.
Where the representation was made by a knowledgeable seller, such as a car dealer, a different result will ensue as in Dick Bentley Productions Ltd v Harold Smith (Motors) Ltd [1965]1 WLR 623.
Here the fact that the statement as to mileage done by the second-hand car was not included in the written contract of sale, did not prevent its being treated as a term of that contract.
One particular problem with incorporation of terms has emerged in the context of the so-called "battle of forms" .
Classical theory, as applied in Butler Machine Tool Co Ltd v Ex-Cell-O Corpn (England) Ltd [1979]1 WLR 401, would suggest a mirror image rule, namely, each proffering of standard terms is a counter-offer, and it is the last document proffered which embodies the final offer when the recipient accepts by acting upon it.
Of course, in theory, the mirror image rule makes printed forms matter since it encourages or even forces parties receiving documents to read them carefully.
However, with standard form contracts directed at consumers, the legislature has interfered because of the imbalance in bargaining power.
As such, UCTA 1977 regulates the application of exemption clauses especially against consumers (see Chapter 5).
Resolution of the question whether a statement is a representation or a contractual term, does not resolve the issue as to the legal effect of the statement made between the parties.
Express contractual undertakings will have different consequences depending upon the significance given to the particular term ascribed by the law.
There has been much confusion here mainly because the SGA 1979 uses the words "condition" and "warranty" as  technical expressions, the breach of which gives the right to treat the contract as at an end in the case of a condition (s11(3) of SGA 1979), or in the case of a subsidiary term like a warranty, the breach of which only sounds in damages (s61(1) of SGA 1979).
Whether a term is a condition or a warranty depends upon the construction of the sale contract (s11 of SGA 1979).
Moreover, s11(2) of SGA 1979 provides that conditions may be waived, or a breach of a condition may be treated by the buyer as a breach of warranty and not as a ground for treating the contract as repudiated.
Section 11(3), on the other hand, emphasises that a stipulation may be a condition even though it is called a warranty in the contract.
In Chapter 15 the circumstances under s11(4) of SGA 1979, where the Act compels a buyer to treat a breach of condition as a breach of warranty, will be considered.
The binary approach to contractual obligations, as anticipated under the SGA 1979, has provoked considerable dissatisfaction.
The reason for this is that it permits buyers to set aside a bad bargain following the seller's breach of condition where only slight consequences have ensued.
However, a new approach to the question of remedies available for breach was occasioned by Diplock LJ in Hong Kong Fir Shipping Co Ltd v Kawasaki Kisen Kaisha Ltd [1962]2 QB 26 (at p70): There are…many contractual undertakings of a more complex character which cannot be categorised as being "conditions" or "warranties" , if the late 19th century meaning adopted in the Sale of Goods Act, 1893, and used by Bowen LJ in Bentsen v Taylor, Sons & Co be given to those terms.
Of such undertakings all that can be predicated is that some breaches will and others will not, give rise to an event which will deprive the party not in default of substantially the whole benefit which it was intended that he should obtain from the contract; and the legal consequences of a breach of such an undertaking, unless provided for expressly in the contract, depend upon the nature of the event to which the breach gives rise and do not follow automatically from a prior classification of the undertaking as a "condition" or a "warranty" .
This approach allows for greater flexibility by concentrating on the nature of the consequences of the breach.
Nevertheless the language used in the SGA 1979 does not easily admit of Diplock LJ's tertium quid where terms are defined as "conditions" or "warranties" .
In Cehave NV v Bremer Handelgesellschaft [1976]QB 44, Diplock LJ's analysis in the Hong Kong Fir Shipping case was extended to sale of goods and this was approved by the House of Lords in Bunge Corpn v Tradax Export S A [1981]1 WLR 711.
The Cehave case involved a sale of citrus pulp pellets where it was a term in the contract that the goods be shipped "in good condition" .
By the time the citrus pellets were delivered, the market price had fallen.
The buyers argued that they were entitled to reject the goods primarily on the basis of breach of the express condition since they were slightly damaged, even though they could be satisfactorily used.
The Court of Appeal indicated that the language of the SGA 1979, especially in view of the fact that s62(2) preserves the rules of the common law, did not preclude  the status and effect of a term being regarded, as Ormrod LJ put it, in the light of "the events resulting from the breach, rather than the breach itself" (p83).
This approach was mirrored in the Law Commission Working Paper No 85 on the Sale and Supply of Goods (1983) where a recommendation was made to abolish the automatic classification of statutory implied terms as conditions, the buyer in a consumer sale being given the right to reject for any breach of the implied terms unless the consequences and nature of the breach were trivial so that rejection would be unreasonable.
Significantly, the Law Commission Working Paper No 160 did not adopt this approach preferring, in the case of consumers, to maintain the present categorisation of implied terms as conditions (para 4.15).
This was perceived necessary so as to bolster the bargaining position of consumers.
The Consumer Guarantees Bill 1990, which sought to implement the Law Commission proposals, did not, therefore, eliminate the distinctions between conditions and warranties and innominate terms.
Nevertheless, in one significant respect an important modification to the common law rule could be seen with the proposal for a new s15A of SGA 1979.
This part of the Bill was supported by the Government and it is reasonable to suppose, therefore, that further legislative initiatives will be forthcoming.
The proposed amendment anticipated that where the buyer does not deal as a consumer, the right to reject for a breach of the statutory implied terms, seen in ss13-15 of SGA 1979, is limited where "the breach is so slight that it would be unreasonable for [the buyer]to reject [the goods]" .
It is important not to take a dogmatic stance with regard to the categorisation of terms as always concentrating on the nature of the breach.
The need for certainty in commercial transactions is self evident and the parties' categorisation of terms as conditions will obviously be relevant (see for example the discussion at p249 of Lombard North Central plc v Butterworth [1987]Q B 527).
The House of Lords in Bunge Corpn v Tradax (1981) tabulated several factors which are relevant in the determination of the classification of a term as being a condition:(1) There are enormous practical advantages in certainty especially in string contracts where today's buyer may be tomorrow's seller.
Businessmen must be able to do business with confidence in the legal results of their actions.
(2) Difficulty of assessment of damages is an indication in favour of categorising a term as a condition.
(3) To make "total loss" the only test of a condition is contrary to authority, for example, terms as to the time of shipment, delivery and payment have been traditionally regarded as conditions, irrespective of the fact that failure to comply with them does not always have serious consequences.
Besides, it is a cardinal principle of law that an innocent party may choose to accept repudiation and sue for damages for breach of contract, or he may choose to refuse to accept the repudiation so that the contract will remain in full effect.
How could this right of election be anything other than a fiction if the breach of the term in all circumstances  deprives the innocent party of substantially the whole benefit which it was intended that he should receive?
2 Exclusion and limitation of liability
A contract of supply may state expressly that the supplier is to be exempt from performance of some terms of the contract of supply, or that liability may be restricted in some way or other.
The validity and application of such exclusion and limitation clauses have raised many difficult problems, as well as prompting statutory intervention principally through UCTA 1977.
This legislation prohibits or restricts the exclusion of terms that would otherwise be implied in contracts of supply (see Chapter 5).
Where an exclusion or limitation clause is permitted, the question then arises as to its effect as a matter of law.
For our purposes, it is sufficient to note that the doctrine of fundamental breach, as a rule of law, has finally been laid to rest by Photo Production Ltd v Securicor Transport Ltd [1980]AC 827, and it would now appear that fundamental breach is relevant only as a factor to be considered in the construction of the contract.
In no small measure, the issue of incorporation of terms is relevant here which includes the question of notice, such as a previous course of dealings (compare Olley v Marlborough Court [1949]1 KB 532), or trade usage (s55(1) of SGA 1979), or where reasonable steps have been taken to bring the exclusion clause to the attention of the contracting party (Interfoto Picture Library Ltd v Stiletto Visual Programmes Ltd [1989]Q B 433).
Where the exclusion clause is embodied in a signed contract, the general rule is that the signatory is bound by the contents of the document regardless of whether he has read or understood them (L"Estrange v Graucob Ltd [1934]2 KB 394) in the absence of the plea of non est factum (Saunders v Anglia Building Society [1971]AC 1004).
The effect of exclusion clauses is principally a matter of construction of the contract.
The strict approach, whereby in construing the effect of a purported exclusion clause everything was construed against the party in whose favour a term was included in the contract, the contra preferentem rule, has been mitigated through statutory intervention.
This is because UCTA 1977 provides the courts with a statutory weapon for controlling exclusion clauses in general(see p65).
In George Mitchell (Chesterhall) Ltd v Finney Lock Seeds Ltd [1983]2 AC 803, the House of Lords endorsed a balanced approach to the construction of exclusion clauses.
The facts are well known and involved the defendant seed merchants who agreed, in December 1973, to supply the plaintiff farmers with 30 pounds of Dutch winter cabbage seed for £192.
An invoice which accompanied the seed when it was delivered, and which was treated as forming part of the contract, contained a limitation clause restricting liability to the price of the seed.
It went on to exclude"all liability for any loss or damage arising from the use of any seeds or plants supplied by us and for any consequential loss or damage arising out of such use…
".
The plaintiffs planted 63 acres with the  seed which turned out to be the wrong kind and unmerchantable, the crop being a total failure.
In the Court of Appeal the majority held that, as a matter of construction, the clause did not apply.
It was not clear enough to protect the sellers from the consequences of their own negligence and it did not apply when the sellers had delivered something wholly different in kind from that which had been ordered.
Significantly, in the House of Lords the limitation clause was as a matter of construction upheld to apply to the circumstances of the case although, in the event, their Lordships affirmed the unanimous judgment of the Court of Appeal in holding that the clause was rendered unenforceable by statute because it would not be "fair or reasonable to allow reliance" on it.
The approach taken by the House of Lords in George Mitchell draws a distinction as a matter of construction between exclusion and limitation clauses evident in their earlier decision of Ailsa Craig Fishing Co Ltd v Malvern Shipping Co Ltd [1983]1 WLR 964.
In the case of limitation clauses, the construction given is according to ordinary and plain meaning whilst exclusion clauses, especially those of fundamental breach, are construed more strictly against the party relying on them.
However such a distinction can be a narrow one especially since some limitation clauses are effectively exclusion clauses where, for example, the limitation of liability is for a trivial sum.
Moreover, the approach taken by their Lordships in George Mitchell does seem at variance with the Photo Production case where it was held that artificial distinctions should be rejected in favour of construction according to plain and natural meaning.
3 The doctrine of waiver
An indulgence constituting a common feature of commercial life is that of waiver which is essentially acceptance of a substituted performance.
This is embodied in s11(2) of SGA 1979 as follows:(2) Where a contract of sale is subject to a condition to be fulfilled by the seller, the buyer may waive the condition, or may elect to treat the breach of the condition as a breach of warranty and not as a ground for treating the contract as repudiated.
The efficacy of waiver is open to the technical objection that it is unsupported by consideration and, as such, it draws heavily on equitable doctrine.
It is clear that a waiver is of no effect unless it is unequivocal and only where the representee acts on it to his detriment.
The relationship between waiver and equitable estoppel is obvious, as Denning LJ pointed out in Charles Rickards Ltd v Oppenheim [1950]1 KB 616 (at p623): If the defendant, as he did, led the plaintiffs to believe that he would not insist on the stipulation as to time, and that, if they carried out the work, he would accept it, and they did it, he could not afterwards set up the stipulation as to the time against them.
Whether it be called waiver or forbearance on his part, or an agreed variation or substituted performance, does not matter.
It is a kind of estoppel.
By his conduct he evinced an intention to affect their legal regulations.
He made, in effect, a promise not to insist on his strict legal rights.
That promise was intended to be acted on, and  was in fact acted on.
He cannot afterwards go back on it.
The major differences are first, whereas waiver looks to the intention and knowledge of the waivor, estoppel does not as it is concerned with the effect on the representee (see Motor Oil Hellas Refineries v Shipping Corporation of India, "The Kanchenjunga" [1990]1 Lloyd's Rep 391).
Second, whilst waiver of past breaches of contract can never be revoked, the effect of estoppel is to suspend obligation which may be revoked with reasonable notice.
The case of Charles Rickards is a convenient illustration of the effects of the doctrine of waiver.
In this case, the defendant ordered a Rolls Royce chassis from the plaintiffs who agreed to build a body on it by 20 March.
After the plaintiffs had failed to complete the work by that date, the defendant continued to press for delivery but, on 29 June, gave notice that, if the work was not completed within a further four weeks, he would cancel the order.
The Court of Appeal unanimously held that the time of delivery was of the essence of this contract, but that this stipulation was waived by the defendant's requests for delivery after the due date which would have estopped him had there been delivery within the extended time.
However, the notice given on 29 June granted a final indulgence of four weeks and constituted reasonable notice (see Tool Metal Manufacturing Co Ltd v Tungsten Electric Co Ltd [1955]1 WLR 761), that time was once more of the essence of the contract, and that failure to deliver would amount to a breach of condition entitling the defendant to rescind the contract.
From this it would appear that a party can be considered to have waived his rights without full knowledge of the facts.
Nevertheless, the Court of Appeal in Proctor and Gamble Philippine Manufacturing Corpn v Peter Cremer GmbH and Co (The Manila)[1988]3 All ER 843, pointed out that promissory estoppel may be relevant here if there is a representation which carries a strong implication that the representor did have full knowledge of the facts.
The issue of waiver is particularly important where a buyer rejects the goods for a wrong reason.
The argument here is that the buyer can rely on the seller's breach as a waiver of performance so as to justify refusal to accept delivery.
It is a long established rule of law that where a contracting party refuses to perform his contractual obligations by giving a wrong reason, this does not subsequently deprive him of a justification which in fact existed at the time of refusal (see Taylor v Oakes (1922) 27 Com Cas 261; Braithwaite v Foreign Hardwood Co Ltd [1905]2 KB 543; and Fercometal SARL v Mediterranean Shipping Co SA [1989]AC 788 discussed in Chapter 15).
Lastly, it should be noted that a party who reserves legal rights following breach can still, as a matter of law, be regarded to have waived the breach.
The reason for this is that following the breach of condition which leads to termination, the innocent party has alternative remedies: he can either affirm or terminate the contract.
By reserving his rights he does not achieve a legal impasse, and indeed, if this is the goal, he should be advised to terminate the contract and re-negotiate it in the light of the new circumstances.
Implied Undertakings as to Quality and Description
Historically the doctrine of caveat emptor, or let the buyer beware, had little place in English law.
This is not surprising in a society where there was Christian influence and the concept of sin was so acute.
Thus in Summa Theologica, Saint Thomas says that if a defect is known to the vendor, it is a sin not to disclose it and the sale is void.
Even if the defect was unknown to the seller he had to recompense the buyer.
Standards were kept in fairs and markets so that in the Assize of Bread and Beer (1256) a mechanism of complaint was instituted against poor loaves or insufficient gallons of beer.
Moreover, there were customs in markets which aimed to protect standards and the emphasis was upon maintaining honesty and standards in trade.
The doctrine of caveat emptor, with the adoption of the Latin tag, does have an authentic ring to it although it is alien to the spirit of the civil law.
Indeed, Ulpian puts the case of a seller of a female slave who knowingly allows the buyer to believe that she is a virgin when she is not (D.19.1.11.5), a defect which is treated as being strictly liable so that the buyer can return the slave.
It is uncertain, therefore, how caveat emptor was adopted in English law.
Certainly it could not find a place within the great authoritarian scheme by which Christian society was ordered.
The emergence of caveat emptor is probably explained in terms of it being a shorthand expression to cover the case where no writ or redress was available and this was transmogrified into a legal principle in the 18th and 19th centuries.
After all, this was the age of the triumph of the mercantile viewpoint which was quite at variance with any concept of asceticism.
The common sense of individualism voiced by Adam Smith won for it judicial acceptance, the high point being Smith v Hughes (1871) LR 6 QB 597 where Cockburn J said: The question is whether, under such circumstances, the passive acquiescence of the seller in the self-deception of the buyer will entitle the latter to avoid the contract.
I am of the opinion that it will not…
I take the true rule to be that where a specific article is offered for sale, without express warranty, or without circumstances from which the law will imply a warranty…and the buyer has full opportunity of inspecting and forming his own judgment, the rule caveat emptor applies.
(p603) The SGA 1893 marked the legislative beginning of the movement away from caveat emptor where a number of implied terms were laid down.
Today s12 of SGA 1979 provides the implied undertaking as to title (see Chapter 7).
Sections 13, 14 and 15 of SGA 1979 include four major implied conditions which relate to conformity with description, and in a supply transaction in the course of a business the goods are merchantable and are fit for their purpose and conform to any sample provided.
These implied terms have been substantially reproduced in the SGSA 1982.
The movement towards caveat venditor, at least in consumer sales, was confirmed by the Consumer Guarantees Bill 1990 which sought to implement the recommendations of the Law Commission Report No 160 on Sale and Supply of Goods (1987).
Here a distinction is drawn between consumer sales, where the four major implied conditions remain, whilst in non-consumer sales a de minimis principle was introduced under s15A(1) (b) where breach was treated as sounding only in damages.
This part of the Bill had Government support and it is reasonable to suppose that it will be re-introduced within the near future.
1 Supplies by description
Section 13(1) of SGA 1979 lays down that: Where there is a contract for the sale of goods by description, there is an implied condition that the goods shall correspond with the description.
This undertaking can also be found in the case of a contract of supply (s3(1) of SGSA 1982), and also in the case of a bailment (s8(1),(2) of SGSA 1982) as well as a hire purchase arrangement (s9(1) of SOGIT 1973 as substituted by the CCA 1974).
In a sense the inclusion of an implied term of correspondence with description is a little surprising.
It was accepted quite early on that a seller would be bound by any description by which he had sold specific goods (Shepherd v Kain (1822) 5 B&A 240).
Elementary description had a natural place particularly where "errors of description" had been excepted and the courts tended to discover some measure of description by which the goods had been sold (see for example Taylor v Bullen (1850) 5 Ex 779).
However, it is wrong to assume that s13 of SGA 1979 somehow converts all statements made as to description into contractual terms, and the recent case of Harlingdon Ltd v Hull Fine Art Ltd [1990]1 All ER 737 confirms that the normal contractual principles as to incorporation of terms still subsist (for example Dick Bentley Productions Ltd v Harold Smith (Motors) Ltd [1965]1 WLR 623).
The significance of s13 is that matters of description are treated as conditions and not as innominate terms, although this would not have been the case in non-consumer sales had s15A(1) (b) of the Consumer Guarantees Bill 1990 been implemented.
(a) The meaning of description If goods sold by description are defined in terms of being identified or earmarked, then in the case of a contract for the sale of specific goods, non-correspondence with description ought logically to be impossible since s61(1) of SGA 1979 defines "specific goods" as including those identified and agreed upon at the time of the contract of sale.
In Varley v Whipp [1900]1 QB 513, the facts concerned the sale of a second-hand reaping machine which the buyer had not seen and the court interpreted the concept of sales by description to cover all sales of specific goods where the buyer was relying on the description.
However, it also came to be recognised that a sale can be by description even though the buyer has seen the goods.
As Lord Wright said in Grant v Australian Knitting Mills Ltd [1936]AC 85: It may also be pointed out that there is a sale by description even though the buyer is buying something displayed before him on the counter: a thing is sold by description, though it is specific, so long as it is sold not merely as the specific thing but as a thing corresponding to a description, eg woollen undergarments, a hot-water bottle, a second-hand reaping machine, to select a few obvious illustrations.
(p100) This is now given statutory effect by s13(3) of SGA 1979 which provides that: A sale of goods is not prevented from being a sale by description by reason only that, the goods being exposed for sale or hire, they are selected by the buyer.
The issue of the description requirement invites scrutiny of the question concerning the nature of the goods.
It is important to differentiate between which goods are being sold and what they are.
With regard to the former, the approach typically involves an existing subject matter by reference to its position in time and space.
Essentially, it is a process under which goods are ascertained by being identified.
Nonetheless, care should be taken here to distinguish between words which can be considered to be merely useful information, from words which go to the identity of the goods sold.
In Reardon Smith Line Ltd v Hansen Tangen [1976]1 WLR 989, shipbuilders contracted to build a vessel to a certain specification at Yard No 354 at Osaka Zosen, but the ship was in fact built at a different yard, the House of Lords did not consider these words of location as being part of the identity of the vessel.
Indeed, Lord Wilberforce pointed out that only words whose purpose is to identify an essential part of the description, attract the implied condition of s13.
There is no doubt that statements relating to the nature of the goods supplied, for example, that a car is a vintage Bentley Speed Six "Old No 1" is a matter of identity which goes to the heart of description.
A striking case in this context is Beale v Taylor [1967]1 WLR 1193, where the seller advertised a car as "Herald, convertible, white, 1961" .
The buyer subsequently discovered that the rear half of the car was a 1961 Herald but the front half was part of an earlier model, the two halves having been welded together.
In delivering the judgment of the Court of Appeal, Sellers LJ said that, even if there were no other terms as to the state of the goods, fundamentally the seller was selling a 1961 Herald.
Most of the problems with s13 relate not to the question of which goods  are being sold but rather what they are.
Here we are concerned with essential characteristics of the goods so that, for example , in a hire purchase case Karsales (Harrow) Ltd v Wallis [1956]1 WLR 936, a car was defined as being a vehicle capable of moving under its own power.
In this context, we are concerned with distinguishing identity from attributes which is notoriously difficult.
The leading case here is Ashington Piggeries Ltd v Christopher Hill Ltd [1972]AC 441 where the facts concerned a consignment of mink food made up, amongst other things, of herring meal.
The manufacturer of the food obtained the herring meal from a Norwegian company.
Unknown to anyone the herring meal contained DMNA, a substance which was poisonous to mink.
As a result of the damage caused to the owner of minks to which the food had been given, the latter counterclaimed when the supplier of the food sued for the price of the food that had been sold and delivered.
As between the parties themselves the questions related to quality and fitness for purpose.
However, the food supplier brought in as third party, the Norwegian company, which had provided the herring meal.
One issue between these parties was whether the herring meal supplied corresponded with the description.
In discussing the meaning of s13, the House of Lords focussed upon the question of identification so that, as Lord Hodson said (at pp466-7): "The language used [s 13 of SGA 1979]is directed to the identification of goods…
The essential point is that identification of the goods is that with which the section is concerned."
Lord Wilberforce pointed out that the problem was not to be dealt with as though it were a philosophical question which distinguishes identity from attributes:…
I do not believe that the Sale of Goods Act was designed to provoke metaphysical discussions as to the nature of what is delivered in comparison with what is sold.
The test of description, at least where commodities are concerned, is intended to be a broader, more commonsense, test of a mercantile character.
The question whether that is what the buyer bargained for has to be answered according to such tests as men in the market would apply, leaving more delicate questions of condition, or quality, to be determined under other clauses of the contract or sections of the Act.
(p489) Thus, in the Ashington Piggeries case it was held that herring meal, containing the poison DMNA, had not lost its identity as herring meal "fair average quality" of the season, since this was a statement of quality and not description.
If goods are sold by description, that is by prescribing the characteristics they are to possess, then, as Salmond J pointed out in Taylor v Combined Buyers Ltd [1924]NZLR 627, every element of the description, whether it relates to number, quality, kind, state, should in theory form part of the description.
The reasoning here is that such goods are only capable of being identified through defining their characteristics.
This phenomenon is particularly prevalent in the case of unascertained future goods where a strict approach is often evidenced.
As Lord Blackburn said in Bowes v Shand (1877) 2 App Cas 455 (at p460): "If the description of the article  tendered is different in any respect it is not the article bargained for and the other party is not bound to take it." 
The leading case is Arcos Ltd v EA Ronaasen and Son [1933]AC 470 where the buyers agreed to buy a quantity of staves of half an inch thickness for making cement barrels.
Only five per cent of the staves were of the correct thickness but the rest were nearly all less than nine-sixteenths of an inch thick.
It was found as a fact by the arbitrator that the goods "were commercially within and merchantable under the contract specification" .
Despite this, the House of Lords rejected any concept of commercial equivalence so that Lord Atkin held: It was contended that in all commercial contracts the question was whether there was "substantial" compliance with the contract: there must always be some margin and it is for the tribunal of fact to determine whether the margin is exceeded or not.
I cannot agree.
If the written contract specifies conditions of weight, measurement and the like, those conditions must be complied with.
A ton does not mean about a ton, or a yard about a yard.
Still less when you descend to minute measurements does half an inch mean about half an inch.
If the seller wants a margin he must, and in my experience does, stipulate for it…
No doubt there may be microscopic deviations which businessmen and therefore lawyers will ignore…
But, apart from this consideration, the right view is that the conditions of the contract must be strictly performed.
(pp479-80) An even clearer illustration of the above can be seen in Re Moore and Co and Landauer and Co [1921]2 KB 519.
In this case, tins of fruit conformed with the description in every respect except that some of them were packed in cases of 30 tins instead of 24.
The packing made no difference to the market value, but the Court of Appeal held that the tins failed to comply with the description and could be rejected.
In the light of the excessive technicality seen here, it is little wonder that Lord Wilberforce in Reardon Smith Line Ltd, and the House of Lords in Ashington Piggeries proposed giving a narrower scope to s13, confining it to matters of identification.
As Lord Diplock said in Ashington Piggeries: The "description" by which unascertained goods are sold is, in my view, confined to those words in the contract which were intended by the parties to identify the kind of goods which were to be supplied.
It is open to the parties to use a description as broad or as narrow as they choose.
But ultimately the test is whether the buyer could fairly and reasonably refuse to accept the physical goods proffered to him on the ground that their failure to correspond with what was said about them makes them goods of a different kind from those he had agreed to buy.
The key to s13 is identification.
(pp503-4) The problem with this approach is that it begs the question concerning the nature of identification in unascertained future goods.
Moreover, insofar as it suggests a commercial equivalence or de minimis rule, this would seem to be at variance with Lord Atkin's approach in Arcos Ltd v EA Ronaasen and Son.
In any case, the commercial context will often require strict compliance.
Indeed in Moralice (London) Ltd v ED and F Man [1954]2 Lloyds Rep 526, it was held that where the price is payable by means of a bankers' commercial credit against the shipping documents, the maxim de minimis has no application as between the seller and the bank.
Although Lord Wilberforce in Reardon Smith Lines called for a review of cases based upon excessive technicality, his Lordship's views are obiter and there is no doubt that he anticipated a definitive review of the question in future cases.
It may be that the mischief to which Lord Wilberforce was alluding toward, namely that it allows buyers to avoid an improvident bargain, would in any case be solved if the Law Commission Proposals on Sale and Supply of Goods No 160 (1987) had been implemented by the Consumer Guarantees Bill 1990.
In the case of non-consumer contracts, it was proposed that the buyer would not be allowed to reject the goods for breach of s13 where it was unreasonable to do so.
The effect of this would be to make s13 an innominate term.
However, in the case of consumer contracts, the right of rejection would not be lost on the basis of the recognition of the consumers' weak bargaining position.
It is likely that this amendment will be implemented in subsequent legislation.
(b) Goods sold by description and reliance If the description has a special trade usage, the goods may have to comply with the specialised meaning if this is part of the contractual intention.
This is illustrated by Grenfell v EB Meyrowitz Ltd [1936]2 All ER 1313, where the defendants were held not to be in breach of s13 when they supplied goggles of "safety glass" which subsequently had acquired a technical meaning and the goggles conformed to this design (see R v Ford Motor Co [1974]1 WLR 1220 as to the meaning in the motor trade of a "new" car).
It is worth noting that under the Trade Descriptions Act 1968 and Pt IV of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, it is an offence to apply a false or misleading description.
It is therefore unlikely that the Grenfell decision would be the same today in the light of this consumer protection legislation (see Chapter 6).
The buyer must contract to buy the goods by description.
If there is no reliance then, notwithstanding the fact that the goods were offered for sale by description, the buyer has bought the goods on other terms.
Even so, proof of reliance is not difficult especially in view of s13(3) of SGA 1979 which provides that ordinary articles of commerce as specific goods are expressly included in the definition of sale by description.
In the recent case of Harlingdon and Leinster Enterprises Ltd v Christopher Hull Fine Art Ltd [1990]1 All ER 737, the Court of Appeal considered the issue of reliance on description and it is worth dwelling upon the facts.
The defendants were art dealers who carried on business from a London gallery owned and controlled by the principal of the defendants, Mr Christopher Hull.
In 1984, Mr Hull was asked to sell two oil paintings which had been described in a 1980 auction catalogue as being by Gabriele Munter, an artist of the German expressionist school.
Mr Hull specialised in young contemporary British artists and had no training, experience or knowledge which would have enabled him to conclude from an examination of the pictures whether they were by Munter.
He took the paintings to Christie's who expressed interest in them and, at the same time, he contacted the plaintiffs who  carried on business as art dealers at a London gallery specialising in the German expressionist school.
He told the plaintiffs that he had two paintings by Munter for sale and accordingly an employee of the plaintiffs visited the defendants' gallery to view the paintings.
Mr Hull made it clear that he did not know very much about the paintings and that he was not an expert in them.
The plaintiffs' employee agreed to buy one of the paintings for £6,000 without asking any questions about the provenance of the paintings, or making any further inquiries about them.
The invoice for the painting described it as being by Munter, but was later discovered to be a forgery.
The plaintiffs claimed repayment of the purchase price on the basis that the contract was for the sale of goods by description within s13(1) of SGA 1979 and could, therefore, be avoided on the grounds of misdescription.
The judgment for the majority in the Court of Appeal (Stuart Smith LJ dissenting) was given by Nourse LJ who held that there had not been a sale "by" description.
In this respect considerable reliance was placed upon Lord Diplock's dictum in Gill and Duffus SA v Berger and Co Inc [1984]AC 382:…while "description" itself is an ordinary English word, the Act contains no definition of what it means when it speaks in that section of a contract for the sale of goods being a sale "by description" .
One must look to the contract as a whole to identify the kind of goods that the seller was agreeing to sell and the buyer to buy…where, as in the instant case, the sale (to use the words of s13) is "by sample as well as by description" , characteristics of the goods which would be apparent on reasonable examination of the sample are unlikely to have been intended by the parties to form part of the "description" by which the goods were sold, even though such characteristics are mentioned in references in the contract to the goods that are its subject matter.
(Lord Diplock's emphasis at p394) The conclusion arrived at was that the requirement "by description" had to be determined by reference to the contract as a whole, that is, whether the characteristics had become terms in the contract.
As Slade LJ put it in Harlingdon Ltd:…the fact that a description has been attributed to the goods, either during the course of negotiations or even in the contract (if written) itself, does not necessarily and by itself render the contract one for 'sale by description".
(p751) Where there has been no reliance upon the description, it is unlikely that this can be considered an essential term in the contract.
As Nourse LJ held: The description must have a sufficient influence in the sale to become an essential term of the contract and the correlative of influence is reliance.
Indeed, reliance by the buyer is the natural index of a "sale by description" .
(p744) The question of reliance was determined objectively.
Since Mr Hull made it plain that he was not qualified to give an opinion about the painting's authorship, the plaintiff's employee must have realised that in proceeding with the purchase he was relying on his own skill and judgment.
Reliance need not be total as the issue is whether the description is material in influencing the decision to buy.
At the same time it should be  noted that if the description does not sound in contract, it may still have effect as a misrepresentation. (c) Exclusion of description requirement In the Harlingdon Ltd case it was argued, at first instance, that there was an actual usage or custom in the London art market which excluded the application of s13.
Although s6(2) (a) of UCTA 1977 (as amended by Sched 2, para 19 of SGA 1979) provides that "As against a person dealing as consumer" obligations arising from undertakings as to compliance with description cannot be excluded or restricted, the definition of "dealing as a consumer" in s12 of UCTA 1977 excludes a person who makes the contract "in the course of a business" .
In this case the clause is subject to the test of reasonableness which is discussed in greater detail below (see p67).
There is no reason to suppose that in Harlingdon Ltd such an exclusion clause would not have been maintained, especially since it would hardly be likely to deter art experts from using their skills in the market place to discover masterpieces.
Moreover, it is the present position that art expert buyers, in the absence of fraud or a fiduciary relationship, have no obligation to disclose information relating to the true identity of a painting.
Any clause excluding or limiting contractual description will have to be construed in the light of the common law.
Obviously, if the contract goods are unascertained, an attempt to exclude all undertakings as to description would destroy the certainty of subject matter in the contract.
It is otherwise where the attempt is made to exclude liability for trivial breaches as in Arcos Ltd v EA Ronaasen and Son (1933).
2 Undertakings as to quality
The SGA 1979 and the SGSA 1982 imply conditions as to the fitness and quality.
No other warranties or conditions to such effect may be implied except insofar as they may be annexed to the contract by custom or trade usage (s14(4) of SGA 1979, ss4(7), 9(7) of SGSA 1982).
The usage must fulfil all the normal tests of a custom and it will become part of the contract so long as it is reconcilable with the terms of the contract (Peter Darlington Partners Ltd v Gosho Co Ltd [1964]1 LLoyd's Rep 149).
As such, this subsection is an illustration of the general rule that the intention of the parties with respect to a contract must be gleaned in the light of the surrounding circumstances.
However, the normal rule applicable is that of caveat emptor which is reflected in s14(1) of SGA 1979: Except as provided by this section and s15 below and subject to any other enactment, there is no implied condition or warranty about the quantity or fitness for any particular purpose of goods supplied under a contract of sale.
This approach is also mirrored in ss4(1) and 9(1) of SGSA 1982.
The caveat emptor doctrine has been mitigated by the implied terms as to quality.
The rationale here is colourfully illustrated by Lord Ellenborough's dictum in Gardiner v Gray (1815) 4 Camp 144 to the effect that a person does not buy goods simply for the pleasure of depositing them on a dunghill.
Before considering the implied terms of merchantability and fitness for purpose, some common themes applicable to both must first be discussed.
(a) The supply must be in the course of business This requirement is a common feature of consumer protection legislation and applies to both sale (s14) and supply transactions (ss4, 9 of SGSA 1982).
There is also an implied term that the supplier of a service who acts in the course of a business will supply the service with reasonable care and skill (s13 of SGSA 1982).
The phrase also appears in the Trade Descriptions Act 1968 and the Consumer Protection Act 1987.
Moreover, under UCTA 1977, a distinction is drawn between the effect of exemption clauses where a person acquiring the goods deals as consumer and those cases where he does not.
In this respect, a person acquiring goods deals as consumer only if the supplier makes the contract to supply the goods in the course of a business (s12 of UCTA).
This requirement reflects the policy of risk spreading so that the Law Commission First Report on Exemption Clauses in Contracts No 24, para 82 (1969) justify distinguishing between private and business purchasers on the basis of the:…ability of the business purchaser to take into account the likelihood of defects, to reduce their incidence by arrangements for re-examination and servicing (which may be allowed for in the price paid) and to make suitable dispositions, by insurance and in his costings, to cover the risks which he has to bear.
Little guidance is given in legislation as where precisely to draw the line between business and private sales.
The definition of "business" under the SGA 1979 (s61(1)) and the SGSA 1982 (s18) provide that it includes "a profession and the activities of any government department…or local or public authority" .
It would appear therefore that the element of profit is not a prerequisite for the finding of a business activity under this legislation.
However, there must be some element of regularity of business activity and the leading authority here is the House of Lords' decision in Davies v Sumner [1984]1 WLR 1301.
This case was decided under the Trade Descriptions Act 1968, the defendant being acquitted of applying a false trade description because the sale was not in the course of a trade or business due to the absence of regularity.
It could be argued that the requirement of regularity is unduly restrictive and reflects the rationale of the Trade Descriptions Act 1968, namely, the additional duties imposed on suppliers should only fall on those who can, because of the regularity of their dealings, be expected to have some competence in relation to the goods supplied.
Such reasoning does not easily apply to finance leasing transactions (see Chapter 13).
It is significant that under s46(2) of the Consumer Protection Act 1987, banks or finance  companies who have only acquired goods for the purposes of supplying them on hire, hire purchase or conditional sale, are not treated as suppliers for the purposes of liability for defective products and consumer safety.
Such liability is visited upon the dealer who is considered to have introduced the goods in question into the general stream of commerce.
The view of the House of Lords in Davies v Sumner [1984]1 WLR 1301 failed to take sufficient account of the variety of situations in which the phrase "dealing in the course of a business" appear.
In the case where contractual liability is strict, for example, the implied conditions under the SGA 1979 and the SGSA 1982, the consumer protection rationale could suggest a wide interpretation of acting in the course of a business.
Thus in Corfield v Sevenways Garage Ltd [1985]RTR 109, a car repairer sold a car from his garage forecourt and the Divisional Court held this to be in the course of business even though selling was an infrequent side line.
However, the Court of Appeal in R & B Customs Brokers Co Ltd v United Dominions Trust Ltd [1988]1 WLR 321, following the House of Lords' decision in Davies v Sumner, considered that the phrase "in the course of a business" should be given a uniform interpretation in all consumer protection legislation.
Unfortunately, such an approach ignores the range of situations in which the phrase appears.
Nonetheless, even if it is insisted that some degree of regularity is normally required, there are situations where the first transaction entered into by a supplier can be treated as being made in the course of business, for example, one-off adventures integral to a business activity.
As Dillon LJ pointed out in R & B Custom Brokers:…there are some transactions which are clearly integral parts of the businesses concerned, and these should be held to have been carried out in the course of those businesses; this would cover, apart from much else, the instance of a one-off adventure in the nature of trade, where the transaction itself would constitute a trade or business.
(pp330-1) A significant exception to the supply in the course of a business is where a private supplier chooses to use a business agent to find a client.
In this respect, s14(5) of the SGA provides: The preceding provisions of this section apply to a sale by a person who in the course of a business is acting as agent for another as they apply to a sale by a principal in the course of a business, except where that other is not selling in the course of a business and either the buyer knows that fact or reasonable steps are taken to bring it to the notice of the buyer before the contract is made.
A similar provision can also be found in hire and hire purchase transactions (s10(5) of SOGIT 1973, ss4(8), 9(8) of SGSA 1982).
Liability is anticipated except where the seller is not in fact selling in the course of a business and prior to contracting the transferee knows this fact, or reasonable steps have been taken to bring it to his notice.
There may be important public policy issues which dictate that the implied terms as to quality should extend even to private sellers.
This would essentially reverse the ordinary presumption to caveat venditor.
Indeed in  Ireland, questions of safety for road users explains the incorporation of s13(2) of the Irish Sale and Supply of Goods Act 1980 which provides that, except where the buyer is a dealer in motor vehicles, "there is an implied condition that, at the time of the delivery of the vehicle under the contract, it is free from any defect which would render it a danger to the public, including persons travelling in the vehicle" .
This does not apply if the parties agree that the vehicle is not to be used in the condition in which it is when sold, and a document to this effect is signed by them and given to the buyer at the time of delivery.
An important caveat to this is that the agreement must be fair and reasonable.
It is probable that this exception would apply only where there is a state of affairs which would make it unsafe to use the vehicle immediately.
If the document is provided merely to cover the seller, it could scarcely be regarded as fair and reasonable in most cases.
The Irish contractual approach is an important adjunct to action by enforcement officers.
In England, the public interest is solely protected by the criminal law where s75 of the Road Traffic Act 1988 makes it a strict liability offence to sell an unroadworthy vehicle, irrespective of the nature of the sales transaction.
(b) The implied terms as to quality extend to the goods supplied The undertakings as to quality extend not only to the contract goods but also to other goods supplied under the contract, for example, a defective bottle in the case of a supply of ginger beer (Morelli v Fitch and Gibbons [1928]2 KB 638), or mineral water (Geddling v March [1920]1 KB 668).
The reference in these cases is to s61 of SGA 1979 (s18 of SGSA 1982) where the definition of "quality of goods" covers "their state or condition" .
In the celebrated case Wilson v Rickett Cockerell and Co Ltd [1954]1 QB 598, the Court of Appeal held the seller liable for damage to property caused by a detonator which was included in a consignment of Coalite.
From this case, it would appear that all the goods supplied under the contract have to be of merchantable quality which is of significance with regard to "free gifts" and promotions supplied with goods.
The protection conferred by the implied terms as to quality also extend to labels and instructions accompanying the product.
Perhaps the most important case in this context is Niblett Ltd v Confectioners' Materials Co Ltd [1921]3 KB 387.
In this case, a sale of tins of condensed milk bearing labels which infringed a registered trade mark, was held to be in breach of the implied condition of merchantibility (per Bankes LJ at p395): Quality includes the state or condition of the goods.
The state of this condensed milk was that it is packed in tins bearing labels.
The labels were as much part of the state or condition of the goods as the tins were.
The state of the packing affected the merchantable quality of the goods.
At first instance in Wormell v RHM Agriculture (East) Ltd [1986]1 WLR 336, it was held that accompanying written instructions were "goods supplied under the contract" .
However, this was not relied on by the Court of Appeal who reversed the decision on the facts (see p60 below).
(c) The implied obligation of merchantable quality The SGA 1979 and the SGSA 1982 provide that, where goods are sold in the course of a business, there is an implied condition that the goods supplied under the contract are of merchantable quality.
Section 14(6) of SGA 1979, which is replicated in ss4(9), 9(9) of the SGSA 1982, provides: Goods of any kind are of merchantable quality within the meaning of [the undertaking]if they are as fit for the purpose or purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly bought as it is reasonable to expect having regard to any description applied to them, the price (if relevant) and all the other relevant circumstances.
This statutory definition was originally formulated under s15(2) of SOGIT 1973 (now substituted by s192(3) (a), Sched 4 of CCA 1974) which came about as a response to the demand for reform in this area.
There was no definition of merchantable quality under the SGA 1893 because, at first, there were no problems with the definition and understanding of the concept.
It was originally designed for the business community to have a broad meaning of commercial saleability in the case of unascertained goods by description.
The House of Lords in Henry Kendall and Sons v William Lillico and Sons Ltd [1969]2 AC 31 considered the relevant authorities with respect to merchantability.
The case involved sales of Brazilian groundnut extraction which proved to contain a proportion of poison.
It was bought by the first buyers for the purpose of reselling in smaller quantities to be compounded into food for cattle and poultry and was resold by them for compounding into pig and poultry food.
It appeared that the extraction could still be used and would be bought at the same price for compounding into cattle food, but not for compounding into poultry food.
Two tests for merchantability emerged from the survey of the old authorities by the House of Lords.
The first was whether a reasonable buyer who was acquainted with the condition of the goods would buy them without a substantial abatement of the price.
The second test, favoured by the minority, was that the goods would be merchantable if they could be used by a reasonable buyer for at least one of their normal purposes.
The different approaches, evident in the House of Lords, demonstrate the compromise which the law must seek to achieve between two extreme propositions: first, that the goods be merchantable for every purpose, which is harsh on the seller; and second, that they be merchantable for any one of the purposes, which is adverse to the buyer.
(d) Merchantability and purpose It was a matter of speculation whether s14(6) with its emphasis on "purpose or purposes" had changed the law with respect to merchantability.
The section could be interpreted as requiring goods to be fit for all of their purposes.
This would have been a statutory reversal of Kendall as well as rendering s14(3), which is concerned with fitness for a particular purpose, redundant.
However, the Court of Appeal in M/S Aswan Engineering Establishment Co v Lupdine Ltd [1987]1 WLR 1 concluded that the statutory definition in s14(6) had not changed the law in this respect.
The facts involved the plaintiff construction company, carrying on business in Kuwait, which had bought a quantity of heavy duty pails with waterproofing compound, the latter being manufactured by the first defendants.
When the pails reached Kuwait they were left in the open on the quayside and the pails melted in the hot sunshine.
It was held that the plaintiffs could succeed against the first defendants in contract, but in third party proceedings the first defendant's action against the second defendants (the manufacturers of the pails) failed as the pails were merchantable under s14(2).
The claim failed because the contract required pails suitable for export and those supplied were entirely fit for shipment to a cooler destination.
The analysis of Lloyd LJ in Aswan was an exhaustive one of previous authorities and it is worth noting.
His Lordship maintained that s14(6) did not alter the law and that "purpose or purposes" referred to the range of uses of the contract goods but not that they had to be fit for all these purposes.
The question of suitability for a particular purpose was to be judged, as anticipated by s14(6), by reference to description and other relevant circumstances such as price.
This approach is appropriate to a commercial buyer in that it forces the buyer to reveal his requirements if the purpose is over and above the most basic one for goods of that kind.
Nevertheless, there is an element of incongruity here since the requirement of fitness for purpose is made the basis of s14(2) as well as s14(3). (e) Merchantability and quality The emphasis in s14(6) upon function and purpose can in one sense be regarded as undermining an important element in merchantability, namely, quality.
Of course, it could be argued that purpose is not confined to use in a functional sense but also encompasses the enjoyment which the buyer can reasonably expect from his purchase.
This is reflected in Mustill LJ's approach in Rogers v Parish (Scarborough) Ltd [1987]1 QB 933 where his Lordship maintained that the purpose of buying a car was:…not merely the purpose of driving it from one place to another but of doing so with the appropriate degree of comfort, ease of handling, reliability and…pride in the vehicle's outward and interior appearance.
(p944) His Lordship specifically rejected the argument that drivability was the sole test of merchantability and overturned the decision at first instance ([1987]2 WLR 353) where it is held that the vehicle was merchantable as its defects did not destroy "the workable character" of the machine.
The facts involved the sale of a Range Rover sold as new which had a defective engine, gearbox, bodywork and oilseal, but it was still drivable and roadworthy.
The Court of Appeal in finding against merchantability laid emphasis upon the reasonableness of the degree of fitness to be expected.
This was determined by the price range, the fact that the vehicle was sold as new and  by the expectations raised by the description "Range Rover" .
The fact that the car had been sold with a manufacturer's warranty was irrelevant.
It is important to remember that the question of merchantability cannot be divorced from the contract description.
Indeed, this was recognised by Slade LJ in Harlingdon Ltd v Hull Fine Art Ltd (1990): The complaint, and only complaint as to the quality of the picture, relates to the identity of the artist.
There is no other complaint of any kind as to its condition or quality.
If the verdict of the experts had been that the artist was in truth Gabriele Munter, the claim would not have arisen.
Having concluded that this was not a contract for the sale of goods by description…
I see no room for the application of s14.
If the plaintiffs fail to establish a breach of contract through the front door of s13(1), they cannot succeed through the back door of s14. (p753) This explains the approach in Bartlett v Sidney Marcus [1965]1 WLR 1013 which was a pre-1973 definition case.
In this case, a plaintiff bought a used car which he was told had something wrong with the clutch and oil pressure gauge but that neither would be serious.
After a few weeks other problems appeared and the plaintiff sued for the cost of repairing them.
At first instance, the judge held that the car was not of merchantable quality.
This was overturned on appeal where Lord Denning held: "…a buyer should realise that, when he buys a second-hand car, defects may appear sooner or later and in the absence of an express warranty, he has no redress…" (p755).
Even if a car is sold as new this does not necessarily mean that it should be perfect.
Thus in Bernstein v Pamsons Motors (Golders Green) Ltd [1987]2 all ER 220, Rougier J held that although a purchaser of a new car was entitled to expect a better quality vehicle than the buyer of a second-hand car, nevertheless, teething problems had to be expected.
The defect in this case though, a drop of sealant had got into the lubrication system, went beyond mere teething trouble.
A buyer was entitled to a car, not a running fight with a defective machine.
(f) Merchantability and price The issue of price may also be relevant in the determination of merchantability.
In the pre-1973 definition case of BS Brown and Son Ltd v Craik Ltd [1970]1 WLR 752 which was accepted as authority in Aswan Engineering (1987), the House of Lords held that goods will be unmerchantable if they can only be resold at a substantially reduced price.
Such an approach is also mirrored in Shine v General Guarantee Corp Ltd (Reeds Motor Co (a firm), third party)[1988]1 All ER 911.
In this case, the Court of Appeal held that there had been a breach of s14(2) as the plaintiff had thought he was buying a second-hand enthusiast's car in good condition at a fair price when in fact he was buying, at the same price, a car which no one, knowing its history (a car insurance write-off because it had been submerged in water for over 24 hours), would have bought at other than at a substantially reduced price.
At the same time it has to be admitted that pecuniary considerations are only a guide and there is authority that defective goods can be unmerchantable per se, for example as in the case of  underpants impregnated with sulphate (Grant v Australian Knittings Mills Ltd [1936]AC 85).
Similarly in Lee v York Coach and Marine [1977]RTR 35, a second-hand Morris car that was unsafe to drive was held unmerchantable even though the cost of repair was small.
With manufactured goods, trivial defects have sometimes been held to render the goods unmerchantable, as in the case of Jackson v Rotax Motor and Cycle Co Ltd [1910]2 KB 937 where motor horns bought for resale were slightly dented.
This approach would seem to be correct because goods in that condition were unsaleable by the buyer under the contract description (but compare Cehave v Bremer [1976]QB 44).
(g) Durability and determination of merchantability It was clearly established in the pre-1973 cases that where goods are entrusted to a carrier for transmission to the buyer, they must be capable of remaining fit throughout the normal incidents of carriage (Mash and Murrell Ltd v Joseph I Emmanuel Ltd [1961]1 WLR 862 rev [1962]1 WLR 16).
By itself, this approach does not establish a concept of durability since, in the case of perishables, it is self-evident that, if at the time of delivery to the carrier the natural produce are in such peak condition that they are likely to arrive in a deteriorated state, the requirement of merchantability at the time of delivery to the buyer has not been satisfied.
Following the passage of the SOGIT 1973, the requirement of reasonable durability has received some explicit recognition.
This can be illustrated by Lord Denning's approach in Crowther v Shannon Motor Co [1975]1 WLR 30 where a used Jaguar car with over 82,000 miles on the clock was driven for three weeks covering 2,300 miles before it broke down with engine seizure.
In this case, Lord Denning distinguished Bartlett v Sidney Marcus (1965) by explaining that if a car does not go for a reasonable time and the engine breaks up, this is evidence to show that the car was not fit for its purpose when sold.
Similarly in Lee v York Coach and Marine [1977]RTR 35, the requirement of reasonable durability in the case of a second-hand car was recognised, the court drawing strongly upon the approach of the House of Lords in Lambert v Lewis [1982]AC 225.
A decision which seems to be on the borderline in this respect is Business Appliances Specialists Ltd v Nationwide Credit Corpn Ltd [1988]RTR 332.
The facts involved the sale of a second-hand Mercedes car which developed unusual faults requiring repair for a Mercedes of that age and mileage.
It was held that the car was merchantable because some defects and some ordinary wear and tear should be expected with a second-hand motor car.
Clearly, this is a matter of degree especially with an expensive second-hand car.
In order to remove all doubt, the Law Commission in their Report Sale and Supply of Goods (1987) No 160 recommended that the concept of merchantability should explicitly include reasonable durability as measured from the time of supply and this was included in s2B(e) of the Consumer Guarantees Bill 1990.
Certainly where the manufacturer prints advice as to shelf life on the product, this can be analysed as an express term incorporating durability.
Where goods are not durable, the mischief lies not in the fact that they ceased to perform adequately but rather that, at the date of supply, they did not have the capacity to endure.
This is important for limitation purposes so that time runs from the sale of the goods.
The same approach would also apply to contracts of supply such as bailment and contracts of hire.
It does not necessarily entail that goods supplied must be fit for the whole hire period, especially where extended hire periods are envisaged.
Nevertheless, in the case of contract hire of motor vehicles, the requirement of durability for the whole contract period is often expressly incorporated in the contract where, of course, the hirer pays extra in terms of rentals for facilities such as servicing and the provision for a replacement vehicle.
The determination of merchantability is at the point of delivery.
However, there are difficulties with latent defects, for example, characteristics not known to be harmful at the time of delivery, or immunities to harmful substances being subsequently discovered.
These issues were considered by the House of Lords in Henry Kendall and Sons v William Lillico and Sons Ltd (1969) where the majority held that subsequent knowledge should be taken into account as otherwise, Lord Guest argued, it would be tantamount "to approach the true situation with blinkers" (p108).
With respect, there is much to be said for the minority view expressed by Lord Pearce which is based upon certainty in transactions and would not expose the parties to shifts in scientific knowledge right up to the time of trial.
It is surely reasonable to maintain that the parties assumed to contract in the light of the scientific knowledge prevailing at the time of delivery.
The Henry Kendall case demonstrates that liability for merchantability is strict and it is no defence that the seller took all reasonable care that the goods were merchantable.
As such, the issue of fault is irrelevant, which is beneficial to a buyer especially since s4(1) (e) of the Consumer Protection Act 1987 restricts recovery in tort with its development risks or state of the art defence (see Chapter 6).
(h) Excepted defects There is no condition as to merchantability where defects have been drawn to the buyer's attention before the contract is made, or if the defects should have been obvious from examination.
Thus s14(2) of SGA 1979 (replicated in s10(2) of SOGIT 1973 as substituted by the CCA 1974 and ss4(3), 9(3) of SGSA 1982) provides:(2) Where the seller sells goods in the course of a business, there is an implied condition that the goods supplied under the contract are of merchantable quality, except that there is no such condition (a) as regards defects specifically drawn to the buyer's attention before the contract is made; or (b) if the buyer examines the goods before the contract is made, as regards defects which that examination ought to reveal.
Proviso (a) It is difficult to understand this defence because it is already included within the statutory definition of merchantibility as it will affect  the description under which the goods are sold.
The requirement that the defects be disclosed to the buyer is one of degree and it is probable that some positive act of drawing attention seems to be required.
Proviso (b) There is no requirement that the buyer examines the goods.
At common law, the merchantability undertaking was excluded by the mere opportunity for pre-contract examination which is retained in the case of sales by sample (see p62).
Under the present s14(2) (b), the crucial issue is what defects the examination actually carried out ought to have revealed.
The standard applied here is objective, based upon the reasonable man in the seller's position ignoring any peculiar idiosyncrasies of the buyer.
In R & B Customs Brokers Co Ltd v United Dominions Trust [1988]1 WLR 321, a car, bought on conditional sale, was delivered to the customer before the relevant documentation was completed.
The customer discovered during this period that the car had a leaking roof and it was argued that, as a result of the customer's examination of the car before the contract was made, he had knowledge of the defect so as to exclude liability under s14(2) (b).
Undoubtedly, such an approach will prejudice any buyer who takes delivery before concluding the contract of supply.
(i) Purpose versus quality and law reform It may be that judicial ingenuity has already introduced into the law, irrespective of its emphasis upon purpose and function, a requirement that the goods supplied should be free of cosmetic defects, thereby introducing an acceptability test.
This is clearly illustrated by Mustill LJ's approach in Rogers v Parish (1987)(discussed above) which gave a wide scope to s14(6) by bringing in defects that are, comparatively speaking, minor ones.
It is submitted that this approach inhibits the development of an appropriate standard and definition of merchantable quality, especially in a non-consumer setting.
The matters listed by Mustill LJ such as comfort, handling, appearance and reliability are the concerns of a relative standard of quality rather than purpose.
The point here is that merchantability as a commercial concept is unsuited in its application to consumer supply contracts, a fact which was recognised under the ill-fated Consumer Guarantees Bill 1990.
This stipulated that products had to be fit for their purpose and meet standards of appearance and finish being free from minor defects as well as safe and durable.
The Consumer Guarantees Bill 1990, would have included in the present s14(2) of SGA 1979 and its equivalent provisions under SOGIT 1973 (as substituted by Sched 4 to CCA 1974) and the SGSA 1982, the following provision which is worth setting out in full since it received Government approval and is likely to be re-introduced in the near future:(2A) For the purposes of this Act, goods are of satisfactory quality if they meet the standard that a reasonable person would regard as satisfactory, taking account of any description of the goods, the price (if relevant) and all the other relevant circumstances.
(2B) For the purposes of this Act, the quality of goods includes their state and condition and the following (among others) are in appropriate cases aspects of the quality of goods—(a) fitness for all the purposes for which goods of the kind in question are commonly supplied,(b) appearance and finish,(c) freedom from minor defects,(d) safety, and (e) durability.
(2C) The term implied by subsection (2) above does not extend to any matter making the quality of goods unsatisfactory (a) which is specifically drawn to the buyer's attention before the contract is made,(b) where the buyer examines the goods before the contract is made, which that examination ought to reveal, or (c) in the case of a contract for sale by sample, which would have been apparent on a reasonable examination of the sample.
The Law Commission, in their Report No 160 on Sale and Supply of Goods (1987), recognised many of the weaknesses in the present law on merchantable quality (paras 3.4–6) and recommended a new definition to be adopted in all contracts involving supply of goods.
Unfortunately, the Law Commission thought that it was not appropriate to provide different standards according to the nature of the transaction (para 3.8).
In this respect, the Report is inconsistent since it later recommends that there should be different remedies separating consumer and business transactions.
The basic principle encapsulated in the Report is that goods must be of an acceptable quality: the word "merchantable" is dropped.
Goods must meet the standard that a reasonable person would regard as acceptable, taking into account any description of the goods, the price (if relevant) and all other relevant circumstances.
This was considered preferable by the Law Commission to using a single word to denote either a qualitative standard, such as "good" , or a neutral standard, such as  "proper" .
The new test replaces the usability test with an acceptability one which makes clear that breaches will not be confined to those which impair the use or function of the product but extend to other factors that a reasonable person would take into account.
The definition also removes the present reference to expectation and with it the possible argument that goods which are generally of low quality generate low expectations.
The use of a non-exhaustive list of examples has been usefully employed elsewhere to put flesh on the bones of a general standard (see, for example, UCTA 1977, Sched 2).
The list covers fitness for purpose, state, condition, appearance, finish, minor defects, safety and durability (paras 3.28–65).
A few specific points need to be made about some of these examples.
First, the fitness of purpose envisaged is a fitness not just for one or some of the purposes to which the goods are commonly put, but a fitness for all such purposes.
This reverses the present position as established in Aswan Engineering.
Second, as regards durability, the goods should last for a  reasonable time and any breach should be regarded as occurring at the time of supply rather than when the lack of durability became apparent.
Finally, apart from demoting the status of fitness for purpose and reversing the Aswan case, this list does not change the present law, but merely removes uncertainty and renders the implied term easier and less uncertain in application.
For practical reasons, the Commission decided not to include suitability for immediate use, spare parts and servicing facilities in the list.
However, this does not mean that in an appropriate case they will not be relevant matters for a court to take into account, especially where items of equipment are complex and require specialist knowledge and materials for repair.
(j) The implied obligation of fitness for purpose The implied condition of merchantability is supplemented by the fitness for purpose provision found in s14(3) of SGA 1979 which provides:(3) Where the seller sells goods in the course of a business and the buyer, expressly or by implication, makes known (a) to the seller, or (b) where the purchase price or part of it is payable by instalments and the goods were previously sold by a credit-broker to the seller, to that credit-broker, any particular purpose for which the goods are being bought, there is an implied condition that the goods supplied under the contract are reasonably fit for that purpose, whether or not that is a purpose for which such goods are commonly supplied, except where the circumstances show that the buyer does not rely, or that it is unreasonable for him to rely, on the skill or judgment of the seller and credit-broker.
Similar obligations can be found in relation to other supply contracts (see s10(3) of SOGIT 1973 as substituted by the CCA 1974 and ss4(4)– (6), 9(4)—(6) of SGSA 1982).
It would seem that two factors are especially relevant.
Firstly, knowledge on the part of the seller, bailor, transferor or their agent of the purpose for which the goods are sought.
Secondly, reliance upon the skill or judgment of the seller, bailor or transferor.
The statutory undertaking requires that the goods be "reasonably fit" for the normal purpose or special purpose as communicated to the supplier (see below).
This is the case irrespective of whether the supplier himself has exercised all reasonable care and skill and has not been careless, so liability is strict.
Thus in Frost v Aylesbury Dairy Co [1905]1 KB 608, the supplier was held liable under this section for the supply of milk for household purposes contaminated with typhoid.
This should be contrasted with the decision of the Court of Appeal in Griffiths v Peter Conway Ltd [1939]1 All ER 685 where it was held that a buyer could not rely on this section when she contracted dermatitis from a Harris Tweed coat supplied because of her unusually sensitive skin.
Similarly, in Ingham v Emes [1955]2 QB 366, a woman contracted dermatitis when her hairdresser applied a particular dye to her hair, but she failed to recover damages since she had not informed the  hairdresser of her allergy.
Moreover, the hairdresser had performed the recommended test for the allergy with favourable results and had no reason to suspect that she was unusually sensitive.
It would seem that the criterion of reasonableness therefore relates to "normal" situations.
Consequently, had the dye in Ingham provoked a reaction even to a "normal" customer, but the effect was exacerbated because of the particular customer's sensitive skin, the hairdresser could not avoid or limit liability on this ground (see Parsons (Livestock) Ltd v Uttley, Ingham and Co [1978]QB 791).
Sometimes the question of fitness under s14(3) relates to issues of remoteness of liability.
This can be demonstrated in Vacwell Engineering Co Ltd v BDH Chemicals [1971]1 QB 88 where a chemical supplied by the defendants, although fit for the plaintiffs' purposes, exploded on contact with water, though this was unknown to the plaintiffs.
It was held that the defendants were liable because they ought to have foreseen the possibility of the chemical coming into contact with water and they had not warned the buyers of this danger.
The extent to which instructions and warnings can limit liability will be discussed below (see p60).
(k) The question of knowledge The problem of ascribing knowledge to the supplier of the purpose for which goods were intended, is complicated by the fact that the goods may sometimes have more than one purpose.
The overlap here with the merchantability provision is obvious and often the two will coincide.
However, s14(3) comes into its own where the purpose in question is not a common one, or even if it is a common one the goods are fit for some other common purpose thereby making them merchantable.
This was the case in Ashington Piggeries Ltd v Christopher Hill Ltd (1972) where cattle food suitable for animals generally was bought for the particular purpose of being fed to mink which turned out to be poisonous to mink.
There is no real problem where the supplier expressly notifies the buyer of the purpose he has in mind.
When the goods have only one normal purpose, the seller's knowledge of this purpose will normally be assumed.
Thus in Priest v Last [1903]2 KB 148, a hot water bottle burst causing injury to the purchaser's wife and it was held that there was a breach of the implied condition even though nothing was said about the purpose.
The reason for this is clear in Collins MR's judgment where it was said that, in the case of a purchase of goods capable of a multitude of purposes, in order to invoke the implied condition, it was necessary to show that the goods were sold with reference to a particular purpose:…in order to give rise to the implication of a warranty, it is necessary to show that, though the article sold was capable of general use for many purposes, in the particular case it was sold with reference to a particular purpose.
But in a case where the discussion begins with the fact that the description of the goods by which they were sold points to one particular purpose only, it seems to me that the first requirement of the subsection is satisfied…
The sale is of goods which, by the very description under which they are sold, appear to be sold for a particular purpose.
(p153) It follows that even though s14(3) of SGA 1979 provides for extraordinary use (s10(3) of SOGIT 1973 as substituted by CCA 1974 and ss4(5), 9(5) of SGSA 1982), in order for the buyer to obtain the benefit of this he must specify that use.
Thus in Cammell Laird and Co Ltd v Manganese Bronze and Brass Co Ltd [1934]AC 402, the contract was for the provision of two propellers for a specified ship and it was held that the sellers knew the purpose for which the propellers were required, ie that they should be suitable for the ship in question.
The meaning of the requirement of specificity for a particular purpose was considered in Kendall v Lillico (1969).
This case involved the sale of "Brazilian groundnut extractions" required for compounding as food for cattle and poultry by the first buyers.
They sold to the second buyers for the purpose of compounding into food for pigs and poultry.
The second buyers compounded the goods into food for birds and the third buyers bought the compound and fed it to poultry which died because, unknown to anyone at the time of supply, the compound included minute traces of poison rendering it unfit for poultry.
It was held that there had been a breach of the implied condition as to fitness for purpose, the court refusing to read the word "particular" in s14(3) in the sense of special as opposed to general purpose.
Lord Morris said: The degree of precision or definition which makes a purpose a particular purpose depends entirely on the facts and circumstances of a purchase and sale transaction.
No need arises to define or limit the word "particular" .
(p93) It would appear that as long as the buyer communicates the purpose for which the goods are required, he does not have to specify all of the particular applications so long as they fall within the scope of normal purpose.
This is clear in the approach taken by the House of Lords in Ashington Piggeries Ltd v Christopher Hill Ltd (see above).
The majority view was that, the buyers having intimated that the herring meal was required for animal food, it was not necessary to specify the kind of animal(s) to which the food might be given.
Moreover, it was accepted by the House of Lords that if the sellers had not known that the herring meal was to be used as food, no condition of fitness for purpose would have been implied.
(l) Communication of knowledge to agent or credit-broker Section 14(3) of SGA 1979 makes specific provision for the situation where goods are taken on credit terms.
This solves the common law problem where a particular purpose is made known by a consumer to a dealer who may not have had ostensible or actual authority to receive such communication on the part of the financing institution.
Similar provisions are also found in relation to other supply situations (see s10(3) of SOGIT 1973 as substituted by the CCA 1974 and ss4(4), 9(4) of SGSA 1982).
This can prove particularly problematic in the financing leasing context (see Chapter 13).
The statutory agency anticipated under s14(3) (b) is in line with the trend towards consumer protection.
It reflects the business reality of the situation in that, for the consumer there is no distinction between vendor credit and lender credit.
The logic here is carried a stage further in s75 of CCA 1974 which applies in three party debtor-creditor-supplier agreements as it allows the debtor a "like claim" against the creditor as he has against the transferor.
In Porter v General Guarantee Corporation Ltd [1982]RTR 384, s75(2) of CCA 1974 was clearly misapplied.
This case involved an unroadworthy car sold by a dealer to the finance company to the debtor on hire purchase.
A hire purchase agreement is a two party debtor-creditor-supplier agreement to which s75 does not apply.
In this situation, the dealer's liability to the finance company should have been founded on the sale contract between them.
Section 56 of CCA 1974 provides that in antecedent negotiations the supplier is deemed to act as agent for the creditor.
In particular, the effect of s56(4) is very wide since this defines antecedent negotiations to include:(4) For the purposes of this Act, antecedent negotiations shall be taken to begin when the negotiator and the debtor or hirer first enter into communication (including communication by advertisement), and to include any representations made by the negotiator to the debtor or hirer and any other dealings between them.
Thus, negotiations will include representations and "other dealings" which extend back in time to when the debtor or hirer reads an advertisement inserted by the negotiator.
Antecedent negotiations terminate on the formation of a regulated agreement.
It should be noted that the definition of credit broker under the SGA 1979, SOGIT 1973 and the SGSA 1982 refers to a person acting in the course of a business of credit brokerage and effecting introductions of "individuals" which would appear to exclude a registered company as a single consumer (see s189(1) of CCA 1974).
It follows also that it is not credit-broking merely to advertise credit facilities or even carry application forms.
The key issue is the forwarding of a completed proposal form to the creditor or owner (see Brookes v Retail Credit Cards Ltd [1986]CLY 370).
At the same time, the CCA 1974 exempts certain categories from liability here: first, lawyers involved in contentious business (s146(1)– (4)); second, where introductions are not effected by someone acting in the capacity of an employee canvassing off trade premises (s146(3)).
The sense of this second exception is to apply (especially) to women who solicit business for friends from mail order catalogues.
(m) The question of reliance It is not enough that the seller knows of the particular purpose of the goods sold, the buyer must also have relied upon the credit-broker or seller's skill and judgment at the date of the contract.
It is not necessary to show exclusive reliance so that in the Cammell Laird case (1934), notwithstanding that the buyers laid down detailed specifications as to the propellers made  by the sellers, there was still, in Lord Macmillan's words, "an important margin within which the [seller's]skill and judgment had scope for exercise" (p419).
This approach was confirmed in the Ashington Piggeries case where it was recognised that both the seller and buyer had their own areas of expertise and the issue was whether the defect fell within the respective area of expertise of the buyer.
The onus of showing reliance has now shifted away from the buyer and it is for the seller to prove that there was no reasonable reliance.
There is no doubt that the shift in the burden of proof means that reliance will now be assumed.
If the supplier is on an equal footing with the buyer there will be no implied undertaking.
In Teheran-Europe Co Ltd v Belton (SDT) Ltd [1969]2 QB 545, the facts involved the sale of machinery to a Persian company and it was held that there was no reliance on the seller's skill or judgment since the seller was ignorant of the foreign market where the goods were destined for resale.
At the same time, the fact that both buyers and sellers are members of the same commodity market does not of itself show that the buyer does not rely on the seller.
Indeed, it was pointed out in Henry Kendall (1969) that if the seller is himself the manufacturer of the goods the implied condition will normally apply.
Even if the buyer relies on the seller's skill or judgment, the implied condition cannot be invoked where this reliance is unreasonable.
Thus, a sale of "Coalite" in Wilson v Rickett Cockerell and Co Ltd (1934) was a sale under a trade or patent name which the Court of Appeal considered to preclude reliance.
Nonetheless, the mere fact that the buyer has inspected the goods does not necessarily preclude reliance.
Certainly undertakings in the contract that the buyer has not relied upon the seller's skill and judgment will not be conclusive, especially in consumer sales where s6 of UCTA 1977 precludes contracting out of the implied condition of fitness.
Of course, it is still a matter of degree as the contract may be concluded specifically on the basis of non-reliance.
Even so, the obligation of merchantability will still remain.
(n) The significance of instructions and warnings Instructions placed on the goods may indicate unreasonableness of reliance.
In principle a careful approach should be adopted here since the seller should not be able to avoid the strictures of UCTA 1977 merely by expressly stating no reliance.
The only modern English case concerning instructions is that of Wormell v RHM Agriculture (East) Ltd [1987]1 WLR 1091 (rev [1986]1 WLR 336).
In this case, the plaintiff farmer was prevented from getting onto his land to spray his crops in order to kill wild oats until much later than normal during the wet spring of 1983.
He therefore consulted the defendant sellers of agricultural products and asked them to recommend a herbicide that could be used later than usual.
Their recommendation was a Shell weedkiller called "Commando" , and, accordingly, the plaintiff purchased some to the value of £6,438.
The full technical instructions on the can stated that the contents ought not to be applied  beyond a recommended stage of crop growth as damage might result to the crop.
The plaintiff understood this to mean that, although damage to the crop might result, the "Commando" would nevertheless be effective to kill the wild oats; and, as the weed infestation was so serious, he was prepared to run the risk of some loss to his crop of winter wheat.
The "Commando" was thus applied later than normal.
However, although there was no damage to the crop, the herbicide was almost totally ineffective in killing the weeds.
The plaintiff sought damages from the defendants for breach of the implied terms of s14(2) and(3).
At first instance the judge founds as a matter of fact that the instructions were misleading and ambiguous.
The defendants argued, inter alia, that there was no reliance on the seller's skill and judgment but rather a reliance by the buyer on his own understanding of the manufacturer's instructions.
The judge found that the manufacturer's misleading instructions attached to the goods sold by a retailer was a breach of s14(3), even though the seller himself did not have sufficient technical expertise to know whether the instructions were accurate.
The Court of Appeal reversed this decision, but it was held that instructions were relevant in deciding fitness for purpose.
Since, the "Commando" had a clear warning that the contents should not be used after a certain time, this was deemed to put the plaintiff on notice not to use the herbicide and he could not complain that his own misunderstanding of the consequences of ignoring the warning had rendered the herbicide unfit for the purpose which it was supplied.
It would seem that following this case, the importance of instructions cannot be underestimated.
Where they are unduly complicated they themselves may be subject to scrutiny for fitness for purpose, as they could be considered as part of the goods supplied under the contract.
Indeed, it could be argued that where instructions are not adequate there may be a breach of the merchantability provision.
This is recognised in the Law Commission Working Paper No 85 (1983) in relation to self-assembly furniture where it was said: The goods would, of course, have to be in a condition in which they could be assembled, and if they were sold without adequate instructions it is unlikely that they would meet the required standard of quality.
(para 4.16)
3 Implied obligations in supply and services contracts
The general effect of SOGIT 1973 and the SGSA 1982 is to equate the implied conditions applied to sale in transactions of supply.
This phenomenon can also be seen in trading stamp transactions so that s4(1) of the Trading Stamps Act 1964 (substituted by s16(1) of SOGIT 1973) provides: In every redemption of trading stamps for goods, notwithstanding any term to the contrary on which the redemption is made, there is—(a) an implied warranty on the part of the promoter of the trading scheme that he has a right to give the goods in exchange;(b) an implied warranty that the goods are free from any charge or encumbrance not disclosed or known to the person obtaining the goods before, or at the time of redemption and that that person will enjoy quiet possession of the goods except so far as it may be disturbed by the owner or other person entitled to the benefit of any charge or encumbrance so disclosed or known;(c) an implied warranty that the goods are of merchantable quality, except that there is no such warranty (i) as regards defects specifically drawn to the attention of the person obtaining the goods before or at the time of redemption; or (ii) if that person examines the goods before or at the time of redemption, as regards defects which that examination ought to reveal.
In the case of the supply of services, s13 of SGSA 1982 states that, where the supplier is acting in the course of a business, "the supplier will carry out the service with reasonable care and skill" .
This is the common law position and s16(3) provides for the possibility of a court implying stricter terms so that the reasonable care provision may be regarded as the minimum legal requirement.
At the same time, the reasonableness provision under ss14 and 15 of SGSA 1982, extends to time of performance and price where these are not stipulated in the contract.
Obviously, these are questions of fact to be decided in each case.
Problems may arise with regard to hybrid contracts containing both a service and supply element.
Section 1(3) of SGSA 1982 states that a contract is a contract of transfer notwithstanding that services are also provided, whilst s12(3) states that a contract is a contract for the supply of services even though goods are also transferred.
It follows that the materials element will be governed by s4 which refers to merchantability and fitness for purpose (see Young and Marten Ltd v McManus Childs Ltd [1969]1 AC 454) whilst the services element will be governed by the reasonableness provision as a minimum standard laid down in s13.
With regard to the end product following a supply of materials and services, it is a question of the intention of the parties as to whether the service or materials element is the most important factor.
4 Implied obligations in contracts by sample
The most common situation associated with contracts by sample is where the seller abstracts a small quantity from a larger bulk, or where the buyer is sent a small representative quantity in advance.
The special conditions contained in s15(2) of SGA 1979, replicated in other supply contracts (s11 of SOGIT 1973 as substituted by the CCA 1974 and ss5(1), 10(1) of SGSA 1982), do not apply to every case in which a sample is exhibited, for example in a shop, but only to sales by sample.
This is defined in s15(1) which provides as follows: 15–(1) A contract of sale is a contract for sale by sample where there is an express or implied term to that effect in the contract.
(2) In the case of a contract for sale by sample there is an implied condition (a) that the bulk will correspond with the sample in quality;(b) that the buyer will have a reasonable opportunity of comparing the bulk with the sample;(c) that the goods will be free from any defect, rendering them unmerchantable, which would not be apparent on reasonable examination of the sample.
In shop sales it may still be possible to imply as a matter of general contract law that the goods supplied, in the absence of representation to the contrary, correspond to the goods displayed in the shop.
Essentially a sample is a non-verbal description and whether or not a sale is by sample depends upon the intention of the parties.
Thus, it may be that the only undertaking being made is that the sample was honestly and properly taken from the bulk, as was the case in Gardiner v Gray (1815) 4 Camp 144.
However, the vast majority of cases in which samples are exhibited are, in any case, likely to be sales by description.
In Nichol v Godts (1854) 10 Exch 191, a sale of "foreign refined rape oil, warranted only equal to samples" was held to be a sale by description so that a seller could not deliver something which, although equal to sample, could not match the contract description.
Of course this presupposes that the description is a meaningful one (see RW Cameron and Co v L Slutzkin Pty Co (1923) 32 CLR 81).
It is well established that a buyer may reject goods which do not conform to a contractual sample.
Strict compliance is needed so that in the case of E and S Ruben Ltd v Faine Bros and Co Ltd [1949]1 KB 254, the buyers were held entitled to reject rolls of rubber which, unlike the sample shown, were crinkly and hard.
It was irrelevant that the rubber would correspond with the contract sample by the simple process of warming the rubber and it would seem that the only relaxation of this strict rule is the de minimis principle (see Joe Lowe Food Products Ltd v JA and P Holland Ltd [1954]2 Lloyd's Rep 71).
Nevertheless, conformity with sample depends upon the nature of the investigation carried out.
If the normal trade practice is that a sample be subjected only to visual examination, there is no breach of s15(2) (a) if the bulk does not correspond with the same in some manner not discoverable by such visual examination (Hookway & Co v Alfred Issacs and Sons [1954]1 Lloyd's Rep 491).
The buyer is given an opportunity to inspect the goods by virtue of s15(2) (b).
This is a specific application of ss34 and 35 of SGA 1979 where the buyer is given the right to examine the goods for the purpose of ascertaining whether they are in conformity with the contract determined at the contractual delivery point.
The Law Commission in their Report No 160 on Sale and Supply of Goods (1987), recommended that s15(2) (b) should be deleted and instead a reference to the buyer having a reasonable opportunity to compare the bulk with the sample should be inserted into s34.
This provision was indeed included in the ill-fated Consumer Guarantees Bill 1990.
The requirement of merchantability under s15(2) (c) is part of the wider principle applicable to contracts of supply (see also s11(c) of SOGIT 1973 as substituted by the CCA 1974 and ss5(1) (c), 10(2) (c) of SGSA 1982).
Despite this, there are important differences, for example, there is no requirement to supply in the course of a business, and there is no express defence of defects specified.
Perhaps the most important difference is that the buyer cannot complain of defects that a reasonable examination ought to reveal.
Thus, whereas a buyer by sample can complain only of latent defects, a buyer "by description" can complain of any defects except those which his actual examination (if any) ought to have brought to light.
This less generous treatment does not seem unreasonable because it can surely be expected that the sample should be examined.
Be that as it may, the buyer can still rely on the general merchantability provision in s14(2).
In this respect, the Law Commission in their Report No 160 (1987) proposed (see para 6.27) that reliance should no longer be possible and that s14(2) should be made subject to s15(2) (c).
This proposal also extends to corresponding sections in the SGSA 1982 and was included in the Consumer Guarantees Bill 1990.
5 Other implied terms
The statutory undertakings discussed above are perhaps the best known examples of the implied terms recognised in the common law and have been codified as such.
Nevertheless, s14(4) of SGA 1979, which is replicated in other supply contracts (s10(4) of SOGIT 1973 as substituted by the CCA 1974 and ss4(7), 9(7) of SGSA 1982), provides, "An implied condition or warranty as to quality or fitness for a particular purpose may be annexed to a contract of sale by usage" .
The general rules apply that the usage or custom must be reasonable, universally accepted by the particular trade, certain, not unlawful and not inconsistent with the express or implied terms of the contract.
An example of terms routinely implied in contracts of sale is that where goods are ordered from a manufacturer who makes such goods, it is implied that the goods are the manufacturer's own make and supplied under his normal label for the brand (see Johnson v Raylton (1881) 7 QBD 438; Scaliaris v E Ofverberg and Co (1921) 37 TLR 307).
It can be argued that a car dealer has an implied obligation to make pre-delivery checks on a new car to ensure that it meets the manufacturer's specification.
In this respect, voluntary codes of practice applied in a particular trade are highly relevant.
It is still possible to refer to the common law position.
Sometimes this is difficult to state so that, for example , although the common law did refer to the owner being under an obligation to hire out goods of a reasonable fitness, the level of care associated with this obligation was uncertain, being mainly the product of dictum rather than decision.
Indeed the Law Commission Working Paper No 77, Implied Terms in Contracts for the Supply of Goods (1977), recognised three possible approaches: firstly, the  bailor is strictly liable (Jones v Page (1867) 15 LT 619 per Kelly CB at p621); secondly, the goods must be as fit as care and skill can make them (Hyman v Nye (1881) 6 QBD 685 per Lindley J at p682); thirdly, the bailor is liable only if he fails to take reasonable care to ensure that the goods are fit which, as the via media of the two other approaches, was eventually adopted in s9 of SGSA 1982.
Other implied terms seen in the context of hire include an obligation to deliver the goods in substantially the same condition as they were inspected by the hirer.
In the case of hire purchase contracts, the supply of documentation including a log book or registration document, has been considered necessary (Bentworth Finance Ltd v Lubert [1968]1 QB 680).
The bailees implied duties normally include not to convert the goods nor to deviate in the case of a carrier's obligation to follow his stipulated route.
Different standards of care are applicable to the various types of bailment recognised in the seminal case of Coggs v Barnard (1703) 2 Ld Raym 909.
The extent of the duties will normally be settled by agreement, as seen in the case of retention of title clauses discussed in Chapter 12.
6 Exclusion of liability
Far-reaching controls on attempts to exclude contractual and tortious liability were introduced by UCTA 1977.
In s6 of UCTA 1977 there are certain special provisions which relate to the statutory implied terms in contracts of sale and s7 (as amended by the SGSA 1982), contains analogous provisions with regard to other contracts for the transfer of goods.
Section 7 provides: 7–(1) Where the possession or ownership of goods passes under or in pursuance of a contract not governed by the law of sale of goods or hire-purchase, subsections (2) to (4) below apply as regards the effect (if any) to be given to contract terms excluding or restricting liability for breach of obligation arising by implication of law from the nature of the contract.
(2) As against a person dealing as consumer, liability in respect of the goods' correspondence with description or sample, or their quality or fitness for any particular purpose, cannot be excluded or restricted by reference to any such term.
(3) As against a person dealing otherwise than as consumer, that liability can be excluded or restricted by reference to such a term, but only in so far as the term satisfies the requirement of reasonableness.
[(3A) Liability for breach of the obligations arising under section 2 of the Supply of Goods and Services Act 1982 (implied terms about title, etc in certain contracts for the transfer of the property in goods) cannot be excluded or restricted by references to any such term.]
(4) Liability in respect of(a) the right to transfer ownership of the goods, or give possession; or (b) the assurance of quiet possession to a person taking goods in pursuance of the contract; cannot [(in a case to which subsection (3A) above does not apply)]be excluded or restricted by reference to any term except in so far as the term satisfies the requirement of reasonableness.
There can be no exclusion of the implied title undertaking, but this is somewhat misleading since it is possible under s12 of the SGA to sell only a limited interest in the goods (see Chapter 7).
The effect of s7(2) and (3) is that the other implied terms cannot be excluded or restricted at all where the buyer deals as a consumer; they can be excluded outside of consumer supply transactions so long as the supplier can show that such an exclusion is fair and reasonable.
(a) Dealing as consumer Whether a person acts in the course of a business is a key element in establishing whether a person "deals as consumer" .
Section 12(1) of UCTA 1977 provides as follows: 12–(1) A party to a contract "deals as consumer" in relation to another party if (a) he neither makes the contract in the course of a business nor holds himself out as doing so; and (b) the other party does make the contract in the course of a business; and (c) in the case of a contract governed by the law of sale of goods or hire-purchase, or by section 7 of this Act, the goods passing under or in pursuance of the contract are of a type ordinarily supplied for private use or consumption.
The Court of Appeal in R & B Custom Brokers Co Ltd v United Dominions Trust Ltd [1988]1 WLR 321, applied the criteria identified in cases under the Trade Descriptions Act 1968 including Davies v Sumner (1988) in resolving this question (see pp46-8).
It was held that a private company which was buying a car for a director did not acquire the vehicle "in the course of a business" .
The acquisition of a car for the private and business use of a director was not considered by both members of the Court of Appeal (Neill and Dillon LJJ) to be an integral part of the company's business.
Furthermore, there was an insufficient degree of regularity to make the purchase of the car by the plaintiffs something which was done in the course of their business.
The requirement that the goods must be of a type ordinarily supplied for private use or consumption is obviously problematic.
This is illustrated by the facts in R & B Customs Brokers where a car can be used both for business and private use.
It is surely a matter of degree whether the goods are "ordinarily" supplied for private use, but s12(3) of UCTA 1977 provides that the onus is upon the supplier to prove that the buyer is not a consumer.
The two special cases in s12(2) should also be noted, namely, a buyer is not to be treated as a consumer where he buys at auction and neither is he where the sale is by competitive tender.
(b) Exemption clauses affected by UCTA 1977 The ambit of UCTA 1977 to exclusion clauses includes attempts to disclaim by notice, liability in tort for negligence.
Thus s2(1) of UCTA 1977 nullifies contractual provisions and notices excluding or restricting liability for negligence resulting in death or injury.
Where a party to a contract deals  as consumer or on the other's written standard terms of business (McCrone v Boots Farm Sales Ltd 1981 SLT 103) that other cannot by reference to a contract term limit, exclude or restrict his liability (ss3, 13(1) of UCTA 1977), and this applies to terms and notices (s13(2) of UCTA 1977).
Such an approach also applies to product guarantees which attempt to exclude or restrict the consumer's rights.
Section 5(1) of UCTA 1977 states: 5- (1) In the case of goods of a type ordinarily supplied for private use or consumption, where loss or damage (a) arises from the goods proving defective while in consumer use; and (b) results from the negligence of a person concerned in the manufacture or distribution of the goods, liability for the loss or damage cannot be excluded or restricted by reference to any contract term or notice contained in or operating by reference to a guarantee of the goods.
A wide approach is taken here to "defective goods" which covers design and production defects whilst "loss or damage" extends beyond death or personal injury to all types of injury.
Anything in writing is a guarantee if it "contains or purports to contain some promise or assurance" (s5(2) (b)).
(c) The requirement of reasonableness Part I of UCTA 1977 permits a party to restrict or exclude liability by reference to the requirement of reasonableness in the following cases:(1) Negligent damage to property (s2(2)).
(2) Standard form contracts (s3(2)).
(3) Indemnity clauses (s4(1)).
(4) Implied terms in supply contracts (ss6, 7).
(5) Misrepresentation (s3 of Misrepresentation Act 1967, as amended by UCTA 1977).
Except for criterion (1), the requirement of reasonableness can only be invoked outside a consumer context.
The reasonableness test is set out in s11 with further guidelines provided in Sched 2 of UCTA 1977.
Section 11(1) of the 1977 Act states: 11–(1) In relation to a contract term, the requirement of reasonableness for the purposes of this Part of this Act, section 3 of the Misrepresentation Act 1967 and section 3 of the Misrepresentation Act (Northern Ireland) 1967 is that the term shall have been a fair and reasonable one to be included having regard to the circumstances which were, or ought reasonably to have been, known to or in the contemplation of the parties when the contract was made.
The requirement of reasonableness is determined at the time of contracting which is an important difference from the 1973 Act.
Under SOGIT 1973, the test of reasonableness was to be applied taking account of all the circumstances including those which occurred after the making of the contract, whereas, under UCTA 1977, the test is to be applied to the terms of the contract at the time of contracting.
In this respect, s11(4) provides that where an exclusion clause seeks to restrict liability, regard should be had to the availability of resources and insurance to meet the liability.
Of  great practical importance is s11(5) which provides that the onus is upon the party who claims that an exclusion clause is reasonable, to satisfy the court that it was.
So in Walker v Boyle [1982]1 WLR 495, for example, a clause was held unreasonable, although Dillon J listed no reasons why this was so.
Some guidance as to the requirement of reasonableness has emerged from the House of Lords in George Mitchell (Chesterhall) Ltd v Finney Lock Seeds Ltd (1983)(the facts of which are set out in Chapter 4).
Care should be taken here because it was the wording of SOGIT 1973 which was considered, and although this is substantially similar to the 1977 Act, it is, in some respects, different.
Hence the 1973 Act provides that exclusion clauses are void "to the extent that" they did not comply with reasonableness, whereas, under UCTA 1977, a term shall not be effective "except in so far as the term satisfies the requirement of reasonableness" .
Although the House of Lords did not give a concluded opinion, the inclination of the judgments was that the court could not use the test to limit a plaintiff to a proportion of his losses.
It would seem that the change made under UCTA 1977 does not affect this point.
A second guideline which emerges from this decision is that the application of the reasonableness test is not merely the exercise of a discretion, but is a decision.
Accordingly, a first instance decision will only be reversed on appeal if it proceeded on some erroneous principle or was plainly and obviously wrong.
The 1977 Act also deals with clauses exempting a party to a contract from liability for misrepresentation.
Under s8 of UCTA 1977, s3 of the Misrepresentation Act 1967 is replaced by the following: 3—If a contract contains a term which would exclude or restrict (a) any liability to which a party to a contract may be subject by reason of any misrepresentation made by him before the contract was made; or (b) any remedy available to another party to the contract by reason of such a misrepresentation, that term shall be of no effect except in so far as it satisfies the requirement of reasonableness as stated in s11(1) of the Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977; and it is for those claiming that the term satisfies that requirement to show that it does.
No guidelines are given for the interpretation of s8 except that the term to be included must have been a fair and reasonable one having regard to the circumstances which were, or ought reasonably to have been, known to or in the contemplation of, the parties when the contract was made (s11(1)).
In Howard Marine and Dredging Co Ltd v A Ogden and Sons (Excavations) Ltd [1978]QB 574, a case decided under s3 of the 1967 Act, Lord Denning considered the following factors to be relevant: the parties were of equal bargaining position, the representation made was innocent, and in any case the plaintiffs had failed to prove that they had reasonable grounds for believing the truth of the statement.
The question of reasonableness is determined as between the actual parties.
Hence in South Western General Property Company Ltd v Marton (1982) 263 EG 1090, a clause in an auctioneer's catalogue attempting to  avoid the effects of the Misrepresentation Act 1967 was held unreasonable.
The other party was a builder who bought a plot of land at auction to build a house for himself and his family.
He had obtained the auctioneer's catalogue only a day before the sale and the purported effect of the clause was to relieve the sellers from telling more than a part of the material facts, thereby obliging the buyer to check the remainder for himself.
There are suggestions in the judgment that the decision would have been otherwise had the buyer been a property speculator.
This allows a court to adjust its decision according to the other party involved.
Such a phenomenon may be illustrated further by the facts in Phillips Products v Hamstead Plant Hire (1985) 4 TrL 98, which involved the hire of a crane and driver.
As a consequence of the driver's negligence, damage was caused to the plaintiff's factory, but the conditions of hire excluded such liability.
This exclusion clause was considered to be unreasonable on the basis of the following factors.
First, the hire period was short and the plaintiffs therefore had little time to arrange insurance.
Second, the plaintiffs were not regular hirers of such equipment.
The result may have been otherwise had the hirers received previous notice of their obligation to insure which, of course, invites scrutiny of the issue relating to incorporation of terms (see Olley v Marlborough Court [1949]1 KB 532).
A clause that is otherwise unreasonable will not necessarily be saved because it is a clause of long standing in a widely-used standard form.
Nonetheless, a standard form drafted by both parties or by bodies representing both parties is more likely to be considered reasonable.
Thus in RW Green Ltd v Cade Bros Farms [1978]1 Lloyd's Rep 602, a clause in a contract used for many years, with the approval of bodies representing both sides, was held to be reasonable.
On the other hand in Walker v Boyle [1982]1 WLR 495, one of the National Conditions of Sale (19th edn) which were not drafted by bodies representative of all parties, was held unreasonable.
(d) Statutory guidelines Supplementary guidelines to the reasonableness test are included in Sched 2 to the 1977 Act.
These guidelines are similar to those in the original 1973 Act and apply to sale and supply contracts by virtue of s11(2) of UCTA 1977.
Even so, the guidelines have been used in other cases as factors to be considered where the statute applies (see Woodman v Photo Trade Processing Ltd reported by Lawson in (1981) 131 NLJ 933, at p935).
These guidelines, although not exhaustive of the factors to be considered, include the following:(a) the strength of the bargaining positions of the parties relative to each other, taking into account (among other things) alternative means by which the customer's requirements could have been met;(b) whether the customer received an inducement to agree to the term, or in accepting it had an opportunity of entering into a similar contract with other persons, but without having to accept a similar term;(c) whether the customer knew or ought reasonably to have known of the existence and extent of the term (having regard, among other things, to  any custom of the trade and any previous course of dealing between the parties);(d) where the term excludes or restricts any relevant liability if some condition is not complied with, whether it was reasonable at the time of the contract to expect that compliance with that condition would be practicable;(e) whether the goods were manufactured, processed or adapted to the special order of the customer.
If one party freely consents to a clause, a court is unlikely to hold it unreasonable.
Paragraphs (a) -(c) and perhaps,(d) of Sched 2 reflect this fact.
Clearly a pertinent factor in the determination of the free consent issue, is whether one party has exercised superior bargaining strength to impose terms on the other.
The central theme of the House of Lords decision in Photo Production Ltd v Securicor Transport Ltd [1980]AC 827, is that the parties' arrangements will stand if there is no inequality.
In this respect, alternative courses of action available to the party will be relevant.
Thus in RW Green Ltd v Cade Bros Farms (1978), farmers bought seed potatoes under a contract which limited the supplier's liability to the cost of the seed.
Nonetheless, the farmers could have bought at a slightly higher price certified seed, which, being certified, was less likely to be suffering from the virus which affected the seed actually bought.
Only genuine alternative courses of action available will be relevant to the reasonableness question.
This is illustrated in Woodman v Photo Trade Processing Ltd (1981) where insurance was said not to be a suitable alternative to cover the loss of a precious film.
What was needed was a guarantee that extra care would be taken not to lose the film.
Insurance is only mentioned in UCTA 1977 (s11(4) (b)) with regard to clauses which seek to restrict liability to a specified sum.
In this respect the court has, in holding a clause unreasonable, pointed to the facts that a seed merchant, seeking to rely on the clause, could have insured against the risk of crop failure caused by supplying the wrong variety of seed, and that such insurance would not materially have increased the price of the seed (see (George Mitchell (Chesterhall) Ltd v Finney Lock Seeds Ltd (1983)).
The criteria identified in Sched 2 operate within the normal principles of incorporation of exclusion clauses under the common law.
Under Sched 2, para (c), a clause is more likely to be held reasonable if the party knew or should have known of it when he entered into the contract.
A distinction should be drawn here with the reasonableness of a clause which is the main test under UCTA 1977.
The wider the purported exclusion, the more likely it is to be held unreasonable.
In Rasbora Ltd v JCL Marine [1976]2 Lloyd's Rep 645, which was a case decided under SOGIT 1973, the builders of a power boat purported to exclude liability for breach of s14 of SGA 1979.
The only undertaking made was to repair or replace defective parts, as a result of the use of faulty materials or of faulty workmanship.
Obviously, this undertaking was of no use when, as happened, the boat caught fire and sank.
In such a case, Lawson J held that the sale was a consumer sale so that the exclusion clause was void insofar as it excluded the implied conditions  under the SGA 1979.
However, he went on to say that even if the sale had not been a consumer sale, the exclusion clause was unreasonable since the buyer would be left with no remedy insofar as it purported to exclude the merchantability provision.
(e) Limited contracting-out It may still be possible to contract out of the implied obligations owed under supply contracts.
In this respect, s6 of UCTA 1977 provides that liability for breach of the obligation arising under the implied terms, cannot be excluded or restricted by "reference to any contract term" .
This provision has a narrow ambit and it does not prevent a supplier attempting to shrink the core of the obligations, rather than excluding the implied terms.
Thus, for example, the seller may argue that a sale is not by description but is rather a contract for the sale of a specific unique chattel.
Alternatively, a seller may state expressly that he is not an expert and no reliance should be placed upon any opinion he expresses (see Harlingdon and Leinster Enterprises (1990) discussed earlier).
Similarly with regard to misrepresentations made, it was held in Overbrooke Estates Ltd v Glencombe Properties Ltd [1974]1 WLR 1335 (followed by the Court of Appeal in Collins v Howell-Jones (1980) 259 EG 331), that a clause limiting the authority of auctioneers and the firm's employees to make or give representations or warranties, fell outside the scope of the original version of s3 of the Misrepresentation Act 1967, since it was a limitation on the apparent authority of the auctioneers rather than an exemption clause.
A fine balance has to be achieved between the definition of obligations and exclusion of liability (compare Smith v Eric S Bush [1989]2 WLR 790).
This can be illustrated through the increasing trend of restricting liability by reference to labelling and the insertion of instructions for use.
The general approach of UCTA 1977 relating to contractual liability is confined to contractual terms and it is, therefore, desirable that instructions and labels should be regarded as terms if they are to be controlled by UCTA 1977.
Nevertheless, s13 also covers "notices" which exclude or restrict the relevant duty.
 "Notice" is defined in s14 as including "an announcement, whether or not in writing, and any other communication or pretended communication" .
This is a wide definition which should cover pre-contractual labels or post-contractual instructions included, for example, in sealed goods.
Failing this, if a consumer buyer is effectively denied the protection of the implied terms because the instructions or labels have shrunk the central obligations, recourse will have to be made to the common law rules on incorporation and the general controls of reasonableness found in ss2 and 3 of UCTA 1977. (f) Manufacturers' guarantees In Lambert v Lewis [1980]2 WLR 289, the Court of Appeal declined to hold that statements, made in advertising literature, constituted a collateral warranty on the basis that they were not "intended" to create contractual  liability (this decision was reversed on other grounds in the House of Lords [1982]AC 225).
Such an approach is anomalous especially since buyers will often rely upon promotional literature, and the collateral contract device may be relevant here with regard to express statements made.
Of course, the label or promotional literature as constituting a representation would have to induce the representee to enter the main contract of sale and he would have to know of it prior to the contract.
As already mentioned, s5 of UCTA 1977 restricts the ability of a manufacturer, in the case of goods ordinarily supplied for private use or consumption, to exclude liability for negligence.
There are important limitations here so that a guarantee could provide a defence to a manufacturer in respect of damage to property (personal injury and death being excluded by s2 of UCTA 1977) caused by defective goods which is not due to negligence.
Additionally, s5 does not apply to goods manufactured for commercial use, as in the case of commercial weedkiller bought by a farmer in Wormell v RHM Agriculture (East) Ltd (1987).
There may be circumstances where an exclusion of liability clause included in the guarantee for the benefit of a retailer, may be incorporated outside a consumer sale context into the main contract of sale where it is read pre-contractually.
This result could be achieved through the application of similar reasoning to that adopted by the Privy council in NZ Shipping Co Ltd v AM Satterthwaite Co Ltd [1975]AC 154.
In this case, a contract was made between a shipper and a carrier for the carriage of machinery from England to New Zealand.
The machinery was damaged by employees of the stevedore while it was being unloaded.
The issue before the court was whether an elaborately drawn exclusion clause in the bill of lading, which purported to limit liability for independent contractors, could be relied upon by the stevedores despite the privity rule.
All the members of the Privy Council agreed that third persons could be protected by an appropriately drawn clause.
Indeed, some members of the Privy Council adopted a unilateral contract type approach seen in Carlill v Carbolic Smoke Ball Co [1893]1 QB 256.
This is illustrated by Lord Wilberforce's speech when he said that the bill of lading containing the exclusion clause:…brought into existence a bargain initially unilateral but capable of becoming mutual, between the shipper and the [stevedore], made through the carrier as agent.
This became a full contract when the [stevedore]performed the services by discharging the goods.
(pp167-8)(g) Criminal use of ineffective exemption clauses Under the Consumer Transactions (Restrictions on Statements) Order 1976 (SI 1976 No 1813), it is a criminal offence for anyone, in the course of a business, to display or publish or include in a written document, an exemption clause which is void by virtue of s6 of UCTA 1977.
However, it should be noted that s6 itself does not render an exemption clause void as against a consumer unless the clause, as a matter of interpretation, purports to exclude or limit liability under ss13-15 of SGA 1979 (see Hughes v Hall [1981]RTR 430).
Consumer Protection
The majority of consumer complaints concern defective goods and centre upon claims for pure economic loss.
As we have seen, the approach taken under the SGA 1979, SGSA 1982, and SOGIT 1973 is to make the supplier, in the ordinary course of business, strictly liable with regard to the merchantibility provisions.
Such an approach may be justified on the basis of risk allocation since the business supplier is in a good position to bear the risk.
The major difficulty with this contract-based approach is the doctrine of privity of contract.
The purchaser must be the person suffering loss unless it can be shown that the purchaser was acting as agent for the injured customer.
Even here, unless the purchaser was expressly authorised to contract for the principal, such a contract can only be ratified if the purchaser, at the time of making the contract, professed to contract on the principal's behalf.
Nevertheless, the courts have been remarkably inventive in circumventing the privity doctrine through the development of the collateral contract device and negligent misrepresentation.
Despite this, the privity doctrine still represents a considerable obstacle as manifested in quasi-sale devices such as finance leasing (see Chapter 13).
In recent years there have been significant statutory interventions protecting the consumer.
The most important of these relate to the quality and fitness of goods under supply contracts.
Major new legislation in the Consumer Protection Act 1987 (CPA) has changed the basis on which a victim can sue a producer, introduced new criminal offences and extended the powers of the safety enforcement authorities.
1 Statutory product liability under Pt I of the Consumer Protection Act 1987: the ambit of the Act
Part 1 of the CPA 1987 is the response of English law to the European Community Directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to liability for defective products.
This is specifically provided for in s1(1) of CPA 1987 which states:(1) This Part shall have effect for the purpose of making such provision as is necessary in order to comply with the product liability Directive and shall be construed accordingly.
The basic principle of the CPA 1987 is stated in art 1 of the Directive, namely, "The producer shall be liable for damage caused by a defect in his product" .
Strict liability has become a basis on which a victim can sue a producer.
Although the burden of proof is still on the victim to show the damage, the defect and the causal link between them, it is no longer necessary to establish negligence.
Furthermore, liability cannot be limited or excluded by virtue of s7 of CPA 1987 by any contract term, notice or otherwise.
Given the far reaching nature of this legislation, the different elements will now be considered.
(a) Liability The basic liability under s2(1) (a) of CPA 1987 is upon "the producer of the product" .
A "producer" , under s1(2), is defined as:(a) the person who manufactured it;(b) in the case of a substance which has not been manufactured but has been won or abstracted, the person who won or abstracted, the person who won or abstracted it;(c) in the case of a product which has not been manufactured, won or abstracted but essential characteristics of which are attributable to an industrial or other process having been carried out (for example, in relation to agricultural produce), the person who carried out that process…
It is unfortunate that the word "manufactured" is not defined.
In order to deal with the problem of an assembler of a finished product, s1(2) allows the consumer to treat any party in the chain of distribution as the producer, unless the latter can identify his supplier.
It should be noted that s1(2) (c) is particularly relevant in the medico-pharmaceutical area where health care professionals may mix medicinal ingredients and, as such, they could be liable as producers.
This liability would only be avoided if careful records of the sources of drugs were kept so as to pass on liability to the manufacturer responsible for any defect.
Alternatively, it may be possible to argue that the mixing of the ingredients did not change the "essential characteristics" of the product.
Although primary liability for breach is laid upon the producer of the product, the principle of joint and several liability is introduced into the CPA 1987 in order to ensure that the person injured can find a defendant within the jurisdiction.
Thus, three other categories of persons who are not involved in any manufacturing, are treated as if they were producers under s2.
Own branders The liability applies under s2(2) (b) to:(b) any person who, by putting his name on the product or using a trade mark or other distinguishing mark in relation to the product, has held himself out to be the producer of the product.
The CPA 1987 is not clear as to what constitutes a holding-out and much will depend upon how the branding is perceived by the reasonable consumer.
Importers The liability envisaged under s2(2) (c) extends to:(c) any person who has imported the product into a Member State from a place outside the Member States in order, in the course of any business of his, to supply it to another.
An importer of a product from outside the EEC is treated as a producer.
The intention here is that victims do not have to pursue claims against manufacturers in foreign countries which may have less favourable laws.
Suppliers The general approach is that a supplier is not liable under Pt I of the CPA 1987 for defective goods, but he may be liable in contract or negligence, or perhaps be criminally liable under Pt II (discussed below).
However, s2(3) of CPA 1987 enables the persons injured to hold an effective supplier liable where, for example, the product is anonymous.
The reference to an effective supplier is in the case of a directly financed transaction to the dealer, rather than the financier (s46(2) of CPA 1987)(see Chapter 13).
Liability of an effective supplier is envisaged under s2(3) as follows:(3) Subject, as aforesaid, where any damage is caused wholly or partly by a defect in a product, any person who supplied the product (whether to the person who suffered the damage, to the producer of any product in which the product in question is comprised or to any other person) shall be liable for the damage if (a) the person who suffered the damage requests the supplier to identify one or more of the persons (whether still in existence or not) to whom subsection (2) above applies in relation to the product;(b) that request is made within a reasonable period after the damage occurs and at a time when it is not reasonably practicable for the person making the request to identify all those persons; and (c) the supplier fails, within a reasonable period after receiving the request, either to comply with the request or to identify the person who supplied the product to him.
The supplier need not identify the actual manufacturer, only the next person back up the chain of supply.
It is clear that ultimate liability is envisaged to lie with the producer, own brander or importer, irrespective of whether they are insolvent, that is, "whether still in existence or not" (s2(3) (a)).
(b) Product Under s1(2) of CPA 1987, "product" is defined to mean: any goods or electricity and…includes a product which is comprised in another product, whether by virtue of being a component part or raw material or otherwise.
This is a wider definition than that of goods under the SGA 1979.
Even fixtures can be goods for the purposes of the CPA 1987 because s45(1) defines "goods" to include, "substances, growing crops and things comprised in land by virtue of being attached to it any ship, aircraft or vehicle" .
The point here is that materials incorporated into buildings will be covered if they turn out to be defective (s46(3)).
Waste can also be a product, for example, where it is sold as a by-product or if it is disposed in a supply situation, rather than a mere discharge, where it may be covered under the Control of Pollution Act 1974.
Specifically exempted are agricultural produce and game which have not gone through an "industrial process" .
The public policy issue here is that farmers should not be strictly liable for defects beyond their control, such as the long-term effects of fertilisers.
The difficulty here is that modern methods of farming are highly intensive and sometimes artificial.
It seems anomalous that animals injected during their life with hormones, which later cause damage to consumers, will not sound in liability for the farmer under Pt 1 of the CPA 1987. (c) Defect A product is defective under the CPA 1987 when it does not provide the safety which persons generally are entitled to expect, taking into account all the circumstances.
It would seem that if the real complaint is about shoddiness or unsuitability of the goods, the course of action is still by reference to the implied terms under the SGA 1979, SGSA 1982 and SOGIT 1973.
Section 3(1) of CPA 1987 provides as follows:(1) Subject to the following provisions of this section, there is a defect in a product for the purposes of this Part if the safety of the product is not such as persons generally are entitled to expect; and for those purposes "safety" , in relation to a product, shall include safety with respect to products comprised in that product and safety in the context of risks of damage to property, as well as in the context of risks of death or personal injury.
The test adopted here is an objective one so that the issue of a person with particular sensitivities is irrelevant.
To assist in the application of criteria, s3, in requiring the courts to take all the circumstances into account, sets out three non-exclusive factors to be considered.
Marketing circumstances and instructions Section 3(2) (a) provides that regard should be taken as to:(a) the manner in which, and purposes for which, the product has been marketed, its get-up, the use of any mark in relation to the product and any instructions form or warnings with respect to , doing or refraining from doing anything with or in relation to the product.
The way in which a product is marketed will obviously have a great impact upon the public's expectation.
In considering the liability for such unsafe products, the court must take into account the manner in which it has been marketed, its "get-up" and any warnings and instructions supplied.
An important consequence of this is that it should lead to a great improvement in the quality of instructions and warnings produced by manufacturers attached to their products (see Vacwell Engineering Co Ltd v BDH Chemicals Ltd [1971]1 QB 88).
It may be argued by analogy that, given the importance under the CPA 1987 placed upon accurate instructions, this should permeate to cases where the buyer sues for economic loss under, for example, s14 of SGA 1979.
This view calls into doubt the approach taken by the Court of Appeal in Wormell v RHM Agriculture (East) Ltd [1987]1 WLR 1091 (see Chapter 5).
Use Section 3(2) (b) provides that a court should take into account,"what might reasonably be expected to be done with or in relation to the product…
".
The producer should reasonably foresee what might be done with the goods, such as predictable misuse by a child.
If it is not possible to remove the hazard, adequate warnings or instructions will be relevant here.
Time of supply Section 3(2) (c) states that the precise time to which reference should be made is when "the product was supplied by its producer to another" .
Obviously this will be of significance for producers where there is a long shelf life.
As technology and standards change so does public expectation.
Section 3(2) of CPA 1987 expressly provides for this as follows: and nothing in this section shall require a defect to be inferred from the fact alone that the safety of a product which is supplied after that time is greater than the safety of the product in question.
Without this provision, producers would constantly have to recall and modify older products every time they introduced a safety improvement.
(d) Damage Pure financial loss is not covered under the CPA 1987 where "damage" is defined under s5(1) to mean "death or personal injury or any loss of or damage to any property (including land)" .
The damages recoverable (including congenital disability) are applied as in any other civil case subject to the following: Damage to the product itself Section 5(2) provides: A person shall not be liable under section 2 above in respect of any defect in a product for the loss of or any damage to the product itself or for the loss of or any damage to the whole or any part of any product which has been supplied with the product in question comprised in it.
It follows from this that if there is an internal defect then damage to that appliance cannot be recovered under the CPA 1987.
In this situation the buyer must pursue a claim under the SGA 1979 for his money back or any other settlement.
Of course, recovery is still possible under the general damage heading in s5(1) against the manufacturer of either the appliance or the manufacturer of the component.
Damage to business property Producers who supply products solely for business use where the only likely consequence of a defect is damage to business property or financial loss, are unaffected by Pt I of the CPA 1987.
Essentially, Pt 1 of the Act is designed as a consumer protection measure.
Thus s5(3) states:(3) A person shall not be liable under section 2 above for any loss of or damage to any property which, at the time it is lost or damaged, is not-  (a) of a description of property ordinarily intended for private use, occupation or consumption; and (b) intended by the person suffering the loss or damage mainly for his own private use, occupation or consumption.
It follows from this that a consumer who uses an appliance which is not "ordinarily intended for private use" , such as a heavy goods vehicle, will not be covered beyond death or personal injury under the CPA 1987.
Damage which is trivial Under s5(4), no damages are awarded in respect of trivial property damage which is defined as where the total capital loss does not exceed £275.
This lower threshold applies only to property, not personal injury.
Claims for property losses under £275 will therefore have to be pursued in contract and negligence.
It should be noted that the £275 minimum takes account of any reduction in damages through contributory negligence.
Section 6(4) applies the Law Reform (Contributory Negligence) Act 1945 and s5 of the Fatal Accidents Act 1976 relating to contributory negligence, to claims under Pt I of the CPA 1987. (e) Defences The burden of proof of causation under the CPA 1987 is upon the victim.
Damages may be reduced by his contributory negligence and, in this respect, it could be argued that disregard of instructions breaks the chain of causation.
This was a position taken by the House of Lords in Lambert v Lewis [1982]AC 225.
Here it was held that the chain of causation was broken where the buyer continued to use the goods with actual knowledge of the breach, as regards subsequent consequential loss (compare Basildon District Council v JE Lesser (Properties) Ltd [1985]QB 839).
The CPA 1987 specifically provides in s4 for defences available with respect to "the person proceeded against" for defects in a product supplied.
These defences are found in s4(1).
Section 4(1) (a) provides"that the defect is attributable to compliance with any requirement imposed by or under any enactment or with any Community obligation…
".
The essential point here is that the producer must show that the defect was the inevitable result of compulsory compliance with domestic or Community law.
Where standards followed by manufacturers are voluntary rather than mandatory such as British Standard, this is not within the defence anticipated here.
Section 4(1) (b) stipulates, "that the person proceeded against did not at any time supply the product to another" .
 "supply" is defined in s46 to include:(a) selling, hiring out or lending the goods;(b) entering into a hire-purchase agreement to furnish the goods;(c) the performance of any contract for work and materials to furnish the goods;(d) providing the goods in exchange for any consideration (including trading stamps) other than money;(e) providing the goods in or in connection with the performance of any statutory function; or (f) giving the goods as a prize or otherwise making a gift of the goods.
It appears from this that there does not have to be a sale for money because free promotional gifts incur the same liabilities.
The defence is confined to absence of supply, for example where the goods are stolen from the manufacturer or scrapped by him.
Section 4(1) (c) provides:(c)(i) that the only supply of the product to another by the person proceeded against was otherwise than in the course of a business of that person's; and (c)(ii) that section 2(2) above does not apply to that person or applies to him by virtue of things done otherwise than with a view to profit…
The CPA 1987 is similar to the SGA 1979 and the SGSA 1982 with respect to merchantibility and fitness for purpose, as it imposes liability only on those acting "in the course of a business" .
A private supplier will not face strict liability under Pt 1 of the CPA 1987 unless the supply is with a view to a profit in the course of a business.
Section 4(1) (d) provides, "that the defect did not exist in the product at the relevant time" .
This in practice is the most important defence.
The relevant time is when originally supplied (s4(2)).
In the case of electricity this is defined as when generated so that, defects caused by failures during distribution, are not covered (s4(2)).
Where there has been malicious tampering of a product, if this occurs before the time of supply by, for example, an employee of the manufacturer, the latter will be strictly liable.
If it occurs after the time of supply then he will have a defence, although the retailer will be liable for breach of the implied terms under ss13-14 of SGA 1979 and analagous provisions in contracts of supply.
Section 4(1) (e) states as follows:(e) that the state of scientific and technical knowledge at the relevant time was not such that a producer of products of the same description as the product in question might be expected to have discovered the defect if it had existed in his products while they were under his control…
This defence can be best described as "development risks" .
The Directive made the adoption of this defence optional and, despite strenuous attempts by the consumer lobby to have it rejected, the government included it in the Act.
The test adopted is objective, based on the reasonable producer, so that the resources and experience of the particular producer will not be relevant.
The determining time, as defined under s4(2), is when the product was supplied and not when it was manufactured.
It follows from this that the producer must keep abreast of developments until the product leaves his control.
However, merely because safer products are subsequently produced, this does not necessarily mean that a product was defective when put into circulation (s4(1) (d)).
This defence will be highly relevant in the pharmaceutical industry where much will depend upon how strictly it is construed with regard to new drugs.
It may be, following the Directive (art 7(e)), that the test is whether the knowledge existed to discover the defect and not merely that the standard tests and procedures were undertaken by the drug company concerned.
Section 4(1) (f) provides:(f) that the defect (i) constituted a defect in a product ( "the subsequent product" ) in which the product in question had been comprised; and (ii) was wholly attributable to the design of the subsequent product or to compliance by the producer of the product in question with instructions given by the producer of the subsequent product.
To qualify for this defence, the component producer must have no responsibility for the design of the finished product or be simply following specifications which prove to be unsuitable.
The CPA 1987 amends the Limitation Act 1980 with respect to time limits for bringing an action (see s6(6) and Sched 1).
There is an overall cut-off point for any proceedings to be brought and which is ten years after the "relevant time" .
The "relevant time" is defined in s4 of CPA 1987.
A second limitation on actions contained in s11A(4) of the Limitation Act 1980 (as inserted by the CPA 1987, Sched 1), is that claims for personal injuries or property damage cannot be brought more than three years of becoming aware of the damage, the defect and the identity of the defendant, subject to the ultimate cut-off of ten years.
For latent damage, the three year period commences on the "date of knowledge" of the plaintiff (s14(1) (A) of the Limitation Act 1980 inserted by CPA 1987, Sched 1).
The reason for the overall cut-off point of ten years is to prevent the threat of legal action stretching out for an unlimited period.
Of course, many products will not have a ten year life span but in this situation the definition of "defect" takes into account consumption, perishability, and wear and tear as part of what "persons generally are entitled to expect" .
Undoubtedly, the CPA 1987 does simplify the plaintiff's task in establishing liability, since a victim no longer has to show that the producer was negligent or be party to a contract.
Nevertheless, there are important difficulties which still remain.
For example, the level of safety that persons are generally entitled to expect, problems with causation, contributory negligence and the development risks defence.
Moreover Pt I has other limitations in that it does not in any case apply to all products, neither does it cover damage to business property or to personal property below £275.
Lastly, the CPA 1987 is not retrospective so that products supplied before 1 March 1988 are not covered.
2 Criminal liability
Under Pt II of the CPA 1987, "consumer goods" must comply with a general safety requirement.
This is a catch-all provision which contrasts with piecemeal safety legislation covering specific products, for example, food, drugs, motor vehicles, and specific places, including factories and mines.
Under the general safety requirement, retailers are criminally liable if they knowingly expose an unsafe product for sale, whereas in civil law, under the product liability regime, retailers are liable to third party victims  only if they present themselves as the producer or cannot identify the person who supplied them with the product.
(a) The general safety requirement Liability is not confined to producers as is the case of civil liability, but extends to any supplier.
'supply"is defined under s46 as sale, hire, loan, hire purchase, exchange and providing goods in connection with a statutory function (for example, electricity), giving a prize or gift.
The "person" need not be a trader nor a trader supplying the goods he normally supplies.
In direct financing, the ostensible supplier, the financier, is not treated as supplier for liability purposes (s46(2)).
It should be noted that liability is confined to "consumer goods" intended for private use in the course of a business.
Under s10(7) the following are excluded: growing crops and emblements, water, food, feed or fertiliser, gas, aircraft or motor vehicles, drugs, tobacco.
This is a much narrower definition than "product" in Pt I of the CPA 1987.
However, when one takes into account other safety legislation such as the Food Safety Act 1990, Agriculture Act 1970, Medicines Act 1968, Misuse of Drugs Act 1971 and the Road Traffic Acts 1972 and 1988, these limitations are not significant.
The exception in relation to tobacco recognises the difficulty of making the supply of tobacco a criminal offence.
The limitation that "consumer goods" must be for private use or consumption, whilst a "product" can be supplied for any use, does not mean that suppliers of industrial or business products can escape their responsibilities, because the Health and Safety at Work Act 1974 will apply.
The general safety requirement is encapsulated in s10(2) which provides:(2) For the purposes of this section consumer goods fail to comply with the general safety requirement if they are nor reasonably safe having regard to all the circumstances, including (a) the manner in which, and purposes for which, the goods are being or would be marketed, the get-up of the goods, the use of any mark in relation to the goods and any instructions or warnings which are given or would be given with respect to the keeping, use or consumption of the goods;(b) any standards of safety published by any person either for goods of a description which applies to the goods in question or for matters relating to goods of that description; and (c) the existence of any means by which it would have been reasonable (taking into account the cost, likelihood and extent of any improvement) for the goods to have been made safer.
 "Safe" is defined in s19(1) in terms of risk of causing death or personal injury only, whereas under Pt I liability also arises for damage to personal property exceeding £275.
The ambit of s10(2) is reduced by s10(3) (a) which provides that compliance with a Community obligation is a defence.
This is identical to the defence seen in Pt I but the risk must be directly attributable to compliance.
Section 10(3) (b) goes further:(b) any failure to do more in relation to any matter than is required by—(i) any safety regulations imposing requirements with respect to that matter;(ii) any standards if safety approved for the purposes of this subsection by or under any such regulations and imposing requirements with respect to that matter;(iii) any provision of any enactment or subordinate legislation imposing such requirements with respect to that matter as are designated for the purposes of this subsection by any such regulations.
Meeting the minimum requirements of safety legislation or standards is a complete defence to criminal liability.
Contrastingly, it is not a defence to a civil claim where legislative standards are regarded as minimum which should, in some circumstances, be exceeded by the reasonably prudent producer.
There is a recognition that export goods outside the Community may be made to different standards so that, by virtue of s10(4), this will provide a defence.
More significant for domestic purposes is s10(4) (b) and (c) which give the retailer a defence provided:(i) that he supplied the goods, offered or agreed to supply them or, as the case may be, exposed or possessed them for supply in the course of carrying on a retail business; and (ii) that, at the time he supplied the goods or offered or agreed to supply them or exposed or possessed them for supply, he neither knew nor had reasonable grounds for believing that the goods failed to comply with the general safety requirement; or (c) that the terms on which he supplied the goods or agreed or offered to supply them or, in the case of goods which he exposed or possessed for supply, the terms on which he intended to supply them (i) indicated that the goods were not supplied or to be supplied as new goods; and (ii) provided for, or contemplated, the acquisition of an interest in the goods by the persons supplied or to be supplied.
This is important because it recognises that retailers may not have the knowledge or the resources to check whether the goods he sells meet the general safety requirement, especially in the case of second-hand goods.
The defence applies only to retailers and not to others in the distribution chain who can rely upon another defence of general application under s39, namely, "due diligence" .
(b) The "due diligence" defence The "due diligence" defence represents a crucial difference between the idea of strict civil liability, under Pt I, and criminal liability, under Pt II of the CPA 1987.
There is a natural reluctance to make criminals of suppliers who have taken reasonable steps to ensure that their goods accord with modern standards.
In this respect s39 states:(1) Subject to the following provisions of this section, in proceedings against any person for an offence to which this section applies it shall be a defence for that  person to show that he took all reasonable steps and exercised all due diligence to avoid committing the offence.
(2) Where in any proceedings against any person for such an offence the defence provided by subsection (1) above involves an allegation that the commission of the offence was due (a) to the act or default of another; or (b) to reliance on information given by another, that person shall not, without the leave of the court, be entitled to rely on the defence unless, not less than seven clear days before the hearing of the proceedings, he has served a notice under subsection (3) below on the person bringing the proceedings.
(3) A notice under this subsection shall give such information identifying or assisting in the identification of the person who committed the act or default or gave the information as is in the possession of the person serving the notice at the time he serves it.
(4) It is hereby declared that a person shall not be entitled to rely on the defence provided by subsection (1) above by reason of his reliance on information supplied by another, unless he shows that it was reasonable in all the circumstances for him to have relied on the information, having regard in particular(a) to the steps which he took, and those which might reasonably have been taken, for the purpose of verifying the information; and (b) to whether he had any reason to disbelieve the information.
The emphasis is upon reasonableness of his procedures.
Buying goods from a reputable source is not enough as the supplier will be required to entertain elementary precautions, for example, sampling or checking the weight of the goods supplied (s28(1) of the Weights and Measures Act 1985) and ensuring that the system can cope with mistakes.
The defence of "due diligence" is an ameliorating feature of most consumer protection strict liability statutes (see for example, s24(1) of the Trade Description Act 1968).
As Lord Reid put it in Tesco Supermarkets Ltd v Nattrass [1972]AC 153 at p174, if a defendant has done all that can reasonably be expected of him, how can he do more?
Thus in Barker v Hargreaves [1981]RTR 197, it was held that excusable ignorance could be a defence in the case of latent defects under the Trade Description Act 1968 (TDA).
Where a "due diligence" defence is relied upon, the burden of proof is on the accused.
The latter must show that the transgression was due to the act of another, and the general rule for criminal liability is that an employer will not be vicariously liable for his employee's crimes.
In Tesco Supermarkets Ltd v Nattrass, a shop manager of a large supermarket chain with considerable managerial powers, was held to be "another person" , thereby allowing the company to escape liability for a breach of the TDA 1968 when a misleading price offer was displayed due to his failure to check it.
It is otherwise where the employee can be considered to be part of the "brains" of the company, ie sufficiently senior for his acts to be regarded as those of the company.
Moreover under most consumer protection legislation, senior corporate officers will be vicariously liable where a corporation has been found criminally liable under such legislation (see s20 of TDA 1968, s132 of the Fair Trading Act 1973, s169 of CCA 1974 and s40(2) of CPA 1987).
(c) Safety regulations Under s11 of CPA 1987, the Secretary of State has comprehensive powers to issue regulations covering all aspects of product safety but subsuming the regulations already made under the CPA 1961 and Consumer Safety Act 1978.
Given the catch all general safety requirement under the CPA 1987, it is in the interest of retailers that these regulations be made since they will provide a shelter from liability.
The regulations anticipated under s11(1) will have the purpose of securing:(a) that goods to which this section applies are safe;(b) that goods to which this section applies which are unsafe, or would be unsafe in the hands of persons of a particular description, are not made available to persons generally or, as the case may be, to persons of that description; and (c) that appropriate information is, and inappropriate information is not, provided in relation to goods to which this section applies.
The Minister has a statutory duty to consult organisations he considers are representative of interests which will be affected by a proposed regulation and other appropriate persons.
In some cases of urgency he can introduce regulations with a shelf life of up to 12 months without consultation (s11(5)).
The scope of the power to issue regulations is laid out in s11(2) and (4) which include such matters as packaging, testing, marks, warning, instructions and requiring information to be given to enforcement authorities.
(d) The action for breach of statutory duty A person who buys goods not complying with the regulations will have an action for breach of a statutory duty.
However, the defendant may be able to escape liability if he can prove that he took all due diligence to avoid the commission of an offence (s12 of CPA 1987).
By virtue of s41 of CPA 1987, breach of a safety regulation, as distinct from the general safety requirement, is also grounds for a civil action by any person affected which cannot be excluded or limited by any contract term or notice.
In effect, safety regulations become part of the definition of "defective" in respect of personal injuries and have the great advantage of being self enforcing.
This approach contrasts with s35 of the TDA 1968 which expressly provides that failure to comply with that Act does not render any contract void or unenforceable.
The criminal courts do possess a discretionary power to make compensation orders where a supplier is prosecuted to conviction in the case of personal injury loss or damage (s35 of the Powers of Criminal Courts Act 1973 as amended by s67 of the Criminal Justice Act 1982).
There is a restriction on the maximum amount of compensation which a magistrates' court may order (currently £2,000) which has serious implications where there are other offences to be taken into account.
It may be that s104(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1988, which requires the criminal court to give  reasons if refusing compensation, will ensure that the power be exercised on a regular basis.
(e) Further CPA 1987 provisions In addition to the general power under s11 to make regulations, the Secretary of State and enforcement authorities have further powers to restrict the circulation of unsafe goods: Prohibition notice The minister can issue a prohibition notice under s13 of CPA 1987 on a named person to prevent that person from supplying a product which the minister considers unsafe.
If goods already supplied by that stockist may endanger consumers, the minister may serve "a notice to warn" requiring that person, at his own expense, to publish in the prescribed manner, a warning about any goods supplied that the minister considers unsafe.
The trader has the right to make representations that the goods are safe and to have the notice revoked.
Suspension notice Under s14 of CPA 1987, an enforcement authority which has reasonable grounds for suspecting that any safety provision relating to any goods has been contravened, is empowered to serve a notice prohibiting the person for up to six months from supplying, offering or exposing for supply those goods.
The trader can appeal to a magistrates' court against the notice and obtain compensation if there has been no contravention.
Forfeiture This is a drastic power as it gives an enforcement authority power, under s16 of CPA 1987, to obtain possession of unsafe goods and, if necessary, destroy them.
Such an order can be sought from a magistrates' court on evidence that a representative sample is unsafe and the authority does not need to secure a conviction in this respect.
A person affected by a forfeiture order may appeal to the Crown Court to have it withdrawn or delayed.
3 False statements as to goods and services
The TDA 1968 creates two main strict liability criminal offences under s1(1), namely, that of applying a false trade description to goods (s1(1) (a)), and supplying goods to which a false trade description has been applied (s1(1) (b)).
These offences are confined to the course of a trade or business (as to the meaning of this see Chapter 5) so that private transactions are excluded.
It appears that this includes a club having private membership (see John v Matthews [1970]2 QB 443).
The key issue is the question of supply of goods and there is separate provision under s14 of TDA 1968 for services.
It should be noted that in no way does the TDA 1968 enhance the consumer's contractual rights (s35), its aim simply being to ensure, by criminal sanctions that the consumer is not misled.
(a) Applying a false trade description to goods Proof of dishonesty is unnecessary for this offence.
Section 4 provides:(1) A person applies a trade description to goods if he (a) affixes or annexes it to or in any manner marks it on or incorporates it with (i) the goods themselves or (ii) anything in, on or with which the goods are supplied; or (b) places the goods in, on or with anything which the trade description has been affixed or annexed to, marked on or incorporated with, or places any such thing with the goods; or (c) uses the trade description in any manner likely to be taken as referring to the goods.
(2) An oral statement may amount to the use of a trade description.
(3) Where goods are supplied in pursuance of a request in which a trade description is used and the circumstances are such as to make it reasonable to infer that the goods are supplied as goods corresponding to that trade description, the person supplying the goods shall be deemed to have applied that trade description to the goods.
The offence extends to oral misdescription and is not necessarily confined to a contractual relationship with the customer (Fletcher v Sledmore [1973]RTR 371).
The definition of "false trade description" is contained in ss2 and 3.
Section 3 provides that a false trade description is one of material degree and this includes statements which, although literally true, are nevertheless misleading (s3(2)).
The term "trade description" is defined comprehensively in s2(1) as follows: A trade description is an indication, direct or indirect, and by whatever means given, of any of the following matters with regard to any goods or part of goods, that is to say,(a) quantity, size of gauge;(b) method of manufacture, production, processing or reconditioning;(c) composition;(d) fitness of purpose, strength, performance, behaviour or accuracy;(e) any physical characteristics not included in the preceding paragraphs;(f) testing by any person and results thereof;(g) approval by any person or conformity with a type approved by any person;(h) place or date of manufacture, production, processing or reconditioning;(i) person by whom manufactured, produced, processed or reconditioned;(j) other history, including previous ownership or use.
In Cadbury Ltd v Halliday [1975]1 WLR 649, it was decided that the words "Extra value" written on the wrapper of a bar of chocolate, did not relate to any of the items listed in s2 so that no offence was committed.
All the items listed in s2 are matters to which truth or falsity can be established as a matter of fact.
That could not be said of "value" in this case which is essentially a matter of opinion.
There is also a further power to exempt goods sold for export (s32) and trade descriptions which are covered under other statutes such as food and drugs legislation.
Section 1 of TDA 1968 is a powerful deterrent and can apply to an honest trader who misdescribes his goods.
In R v Ford Motor Company [1974]1 WLR 1200, the Court of Appeal had to determine whether the trade description "new" was a false one where a car, damaged in the care of forwarding agents, was repaired and supplied by the dealer as a "new car" .
The court held that a new car which is damaged and then repaired so as to be "as good as new" can still be regarded as "new" .
Much depends upon the type of damage and the quality of the repairs so that, for example , where an engine is damaged, a car may be restored to newness through a new engine being installed.
It should be noted that the criterion "new" applies not just to the condition of the car but also with regard to whether the car has been registered.
Thus in R v Anderson (1987) The Times, 31 December, the defendant had sold, as new, a Nissan car which, though in mint unused condition, had been registered in the retailer's name.
The Court of Appeal upheld the defendant's conviction on the basis that a purchaser would understand the description "new" to indicate that the vehicle had had no previous registered keeper.
A mileometer reading on a motor vehicle is a trade description within the Act.
A person who sells a vehicle in the course of his trade or business is supplying the vehicle with the description attached (Holloway v Cross [1981]1 All ER 1112).
If, however, the motor trader defendant is not responsible for turning back the mileometer and covers up the reading, the motor trader should be able to escape from liability on the basis that no false description was in fact applied to the goods (s1(1) (b)).
Any notice of disclaimer provided that it is "bold, precise and compelling" (see Zawadski v Sleigh [1975]RTR 113) should establish the defence.
In the case where the disclaimer itself is misleading, this will amount to a false trade description (Corfield v Starr [1981]RTR 380).
The significance of the TDA 1968 is that it applies, in auction situations, strict liability to a false trade description which cannot be excluded by a disclaimer even though, as a matter of civil law, such an exclusion clause could satisfy the reasonableness test under UCTA 1977 (see Derbyshire County Council v Vincent (1990) The Times, 19 June).
(b) Supplying or offering to supply goods The expression offering to supply was given a wide meaning by s6 in order to avoid the difficulty found in Fisher v Bell [1961]1 QB 394.
In this case flick knives displayed in a window were categorised by the court as an "invitation to treat" rather than an offer for sale.
Section 6 avoids this problem by extending to "exposing goods for supply" .
The main issue here is "possession for supply" and it is sufficient if the goods are in a stock room so that, in effect, they do not have to be exposed for supply at the business premises of the supplier (Stainthorpe v Bailey [1980]RTR 7).
The word 'supply"is a wide one and covers free gifts in the course of a business as well as extending to hire and hire purchase transactions.
Where the false trade description has not been applied by the retailer, the special defence of "reasonable diligence" in s24(3) of TDA 1968 may be relied upon.
This is different from the general defence of "due diligence" which looks for proof of mistaken belief.
Under the special defence, the issue is whether the defendant did not know and could not with reasonable diligence have discovered, the false trade description.
However, if the retailer knows of the trade description, even though he is not aware of its falsity, the offence is committed (Tarleton Engineering Co v Nattrass [1973]3 WLR 1261).
(c) Trade descriptions used in advertisements The TDA 1968 makes special provision for advertisements.
 "Advertisement" is widely defined under s39(1) to include a catalogue, a circular and a price list.
The trade description must be made in the course of a trade or business and be part of the advertisement so that genuine news items are excluded.
Section 5(2) states that the trade description shall be taken as referring to all goods of the class, whether or not in existence at the time the advertisement is published.
In determining whether goods are of a class to which an advertised trade description relates, s5(3) provides that regard shall be had not only to the form and content of the advertisement but also to the time, place, manner and frequency of its publication and all other matters making it likely or unlikely that a person to whom the goods are supplied would think of the goods belonging to the class in question.
4 Misleading price indications
This is now regulated by Pt III of CPA 1987.
A new general offence of giving a misleading price indication is provided in s20.
The question of what is misleading is determined under s21 on the basis of an objective test and extends to both the price itself and any method of determining the price.
It should be noted that the offences only apply where a misleading price indication is given by a person in the course of his business to a consumer.
The new provisions apply not only to goods but also to services, accommodation or facilities.
Section 20(6) defines consumer as follows:(a) in relation to any goods, it means any person who might wish to be supplied with the goods for his own private use or consumption;(b) in relation to any services or facilities, it means any person who might wish to be provided with the services or facilities otherwise than for the purposes of any business of his; and (c) in relation to any accommodation, it means any person who might wish to occupy the accommodation otherwise than for the purposes of any business of his.
In laying down the offences, s20 distinguishes according to whether or not the price indication was misleading when it was given.
If this is the case, two defences are available to the defendant.
Firstly, the due diligence defence in ss24 and 39.
Secondly, he was a prior party in the chain of distribution recommending a price which, under s24(4), he reasonably believed was being followed.
Where an advertisement becomes subsequently misleading, an offence is committed under s20(2) if, in the course of  a business, the supplier reasonably expected reliance on the advertisement and he has not taken steps which are reasonable to prevent reliance on this indication.
There is no doubt that in determining compliance with ss20-21 of CPA 1987, the initiatives of the Office of Fair Trading in encouraging business self-regulation through codes of practice, will be highly relevant.
This is anticipated under s25(1) which gives the Secretary of State, after consulting the Director General of Fair Trading, the power to issue such codes of practice containing detailed guidance as to legitimate and illegitimate price comparisons and price related matters.
Compliance by the defendant with the Code may be relied upon by him for the purpose of showing that the commission of an offence under ss20 and 21 has not been established.
By containing such provisions in a Code, the Secretary of State has power to alter it or withdraw approval.
Such an approach ensures flexibility in an ever-changing market situation.
Persons contravening s20 are liable on conviction on indictment to a fine not exceeding the statutory maximum under s20(4).
Prosecutions under s20, in common with other consumer protection legislation (for example s19(1) of TDA 1968), must be brought either by the end of the period of three years from the day that the offence was committed, or within one year of its discovery by the prosecutor, whichever is the earlier (s20(5)).
5 Licensing under the Consumer Credit Act 1974
At the heart of the CCA 1974 is the licensing system.
Any person who by way of business provides credit under regulated agreements (see Chapter 2), must have a licence (s21 of CCA 1974).
Unlicensed trading activies are prima facie unenforceable and both criminal and civil sanctions may apply (ss39-40 of CCA 1974).
An elaborate machinery is provided for the making by the Director General of Fair Trading of an enforcement order following unlicensed activity (s40 of CCA 1974).
In addition, Pt III of the Fair Trading Act 1973 (FTA) gives the Director General powers to seek the cessation of business activities detrimental to consumers (s34(1) of FTA 1973).
In identifying such conduct, reliance is made on information forthcoming from local authority consumer protection departments.
Moreover, a central registry of convictions is kept to enable the Office of Fair Trading to identify businesses for possible action.
When the Director is satisfied that a trader is indulging in conduct detrimental to consumers, the FTA 1973 provides for a three-fold procedure.
First, s34(1) instructs the Director to seek a written assurance from the trader or his "accessory" (for example, where a new company has been formed) that he will refrain from continuing that course of conduct.
Second, where he is unable to obtain satisfactory written assurances, the Director may bring proceedings before the Restrictive Practices Court (s35).
In respect of "small traders" there is an alternative power to bring proceedings in the county courts (s41).
The appropriate court may order  the respondent to refrain from such conduct, or alternatively, accept an undertaking from the respondent in this respect.
Lastly, breach of such an undertaking or court order will amount to a contempt of court.
It should be noted that there are wide powers to prevent avoidance of the process by transferring business between companies in a group (s40).
A list of assurances, court orders, and contempt orders given each year can be found in the Office of Fair Trading Annual Report.
6 The effect of illegality
Unless otherwise expressly or implicitly provided by statute, illegality does not render a contract totally void only unenforceable.
Much depends upon the statute creating the offence.
Thus under s170(1) of CCA 1974, the intention is to deprive breaches of the CCA 1974 of any legal consequences other than those provided by the Act, but this will not apply to separate civil or criminal wrongs.
In contrast under the CPA 1987, it has already been seen that there are different rules relating to each part of the statute.
Part I, dealing with statutory product liability, imposes only civil sanctions, whilst breach of any safety regulation made under Pt II or code of practice relating to price indications under Pt III, does not, in the absence of any provision to the contrary, render the agreement void or unenforceable (s41(3)).