

Building on Keith Green's "Deixis and the poetic persona" : further reflections on deixis in poetry
Elena Semino Lancaster, UK
1 Introduction
In his discussion of two lyric poems Keith Green suggests that the deictic expressions occurring in each text guide the reader in the construction of a context where their symbolic meanings can be realised indexically, i.e. where they perform a referential function.
The decision to define context not as an already given situational setting, but as "the set of possibilities which exist in the universe of discourse and situation of utterance for the interpretation of that utterance" (Section 4) underlies Green's belief that the use of deixis in lyric poetry differs in degree but not in kind (my italics) from its non-literary use.
Building on Green's paper, I will:
2 Poetic speakers, contexts and readers
As a consequence of the egocentric nature of deictic reference, the disambiguation of deixis usually requires that interpreters identify the spatio-temporal coordinates of the producer of the utterance, who acts as deictic centre, i.e. as the anchorage point for the indexical realisation of deictics in the particular instance of discourse.
In the interpretation of poetry, readers will, by and large, have to construct an imaginary situation of utterance, where the deictic expressions are anchored in relation to a fictional speaker.
Deictic expressions, in other words, act as markers of a fictional enunciation (speech event), within the enounced (narrated event) of the poem (Todorov 1981:324).
The speaking voices or personae who function as the subjects of the fictional enunciations cannot be straightforwardly identified with real-life authors but are essentially poetic constructs, resulting from the interpretative engagement of the reader with the language of the text (Herman 1989).
The degree to which readers assimilate the constructed poetic persona to the author will, however, vary from case to case, depending, presumably, on their knowledge and expectations about different writers and genres, and on their perception of each individual text.
Green, for example, repeatedly wonders about the identity of the first person speaker in "The retreate" ( "who is the"  "I"  "of the utterance?" 
(Section 8), "What kind of speaker is supposed to be uttering" Happy those early dayes "(Section 9)), but decides to identify the poetic persona of" Nutting "with the author himself (" …references to Wordsworth's surroundings', "as the poet reaches the scene of virgin beauty" (Section 9)).
The communicative situations evoked by different poems may vary considerably, not only with respect to the identity of the speaking persona, but also with respect to the scope of the deictic field, the presence and status of the addressee, the position reserved for the reader and so on.
The poems analysed below exemplify such variability.
They differ both in terms of the types of deictic references they contain, and in terms of the degree of overlap that readers are likely to perceive between the evoked situations of utterance and the actual contexts of production and reception of the texts.
 "The flea" by John Donne dramatises a conventional poetic situation, in which an eager lover tries to dissuade a reluctant partner from her coy attitude to sexual behaviour.
The well-known argument is that the woman's refusal to concede to sexual intercourse is totally unjustified, since the two bodies have in fact already been made one by a flea, who has been sucking blood from them both.
The first and second person pronouns "me" and "thou" / "thee" and the opening imperative "Marke" establish a situation of direct address involving a speaking persona and a (silent) addressee.
The time deictic "now" explicitly signals the synchronicity of content and coding time pointed out by Green in Section 6, while the use of the demonstrative of spatial proximity"this' in reference to the flea implies the existence of a shared situational context, in which a spoken, face-to-face interaction is taking place.
The communicative context evoked by the text, in other words, corresponds to the canonical situation of utterance, within which the two participants, a mutually visible object and the time of utterance are referred to deictically.
The fact that a spoken context of utterance is constructed from a written text emphasises the separation between the real and the fictional enunciations: the referents of the personal pronouns in the text are likely to be perceived as fictive personae, while author and reader are not directly present or involved in the constructed text world.
This is the kind of situation where readers seem to be relegated to the role of invisible eavesdroppers, overhearing a conversation between others.
In the opening stanza of Robert Frost's 'stopping by woods' a traveller begins a series of reflections as he stops to enjoy the sight of the snow falling upon the nearby woods.
The deictic references to a first person speaker "I" and to his immediate surroundings ( "these" , "here" ) explicitly indicate the presence of a fictive poetic persona functioning as deictic centre in a specific spatio-temporal context.
In this case, as in the poems discussed by Green, no addressee is mentioned or seems to be present within the evoked setting, so that the poetic persona can be imagined either as a thinking mind or as a speaker talking to himself in a solitary environment.
In the poem "Unlawful assembly" by D.J.
Enright, the demonstrative"this' highlights the spatial dimension of an implied situation of utterance, and therefore mobilises a poetic persona functioning as deictic centre even if no explicit reference is made to a first person speaker.
In this case the poem has variant readings, depending on whether the relevant context of utterance is identified as the setting of an illegal demonstration (the "unlawful assembly" indicated by the title), or extended to the wider societal context in which the text was produced.
This second hypothesis is suggested by the general tone of the reflections contained in the poem as a whole, as well as by the intertextual reference to a well-known Christian prayer, where"this vale of tears' is a metaphor for the human condition on earth.
In the former interpretation, the speaking persona is placed in an imagined situational context which is evoked by the text itself, so that the real and the fictional enunciations are once again rather neatly separated from each other.
In the latter interpretation, the relevant situation of utterance encompasses the actual context of production of the text, and may also include the context of reception, if readers recognise the evoked societal setting as their own.
This results in a blurring of the distinction between the real and the fictional enunciations, since the implied speaking persona is seen as representing the author himself, and the reader's situation is potentially included within the scope of the deictics in the poem.
Similar considerations apply to the demonstrative "these" in the opening line of Wilfred Owen's "Anthem for doomed youth" .
If "these" is taken as an indicator of physical distance, the resulting context of utterance is a fictive war scene, with the speaking persona acting as an observer/commentator on the inhumanity of the soldiers' deaths.
It is also possible, however, to interpret "these" as being used not to indicate spatial proximity, but to highlight the speaker's empathy with the unfortunate referents of "these who die as cattle" , and, possibly, to elicit a similar attitude in the reader (Lyons 1977:677; Levinson 1983:81).
The relevant situation of utterance can therefore be identified as the historical period of the First World War, in which the poem was actually composed and first received by its contemporary readers.
Any reader can, in any case, place himself or herself within the deictic centre by adopting an appropriate psychological distance towards those who lose their lives at war.
It is clear from these brief analyses that the nature and scope of the context that is constructed for each individual poem does not simply depend on the choice of deictic expressions in the text, but rather results from the combined effect of a wide range of variables, including the content of the text as a whole, and the attitudes and experiences that readers bring to the text or develop during reading.
3 Context construction in non-literary uses of deixis
The need for the interpreter to search actively for a context in which the deictic references can be successfully disambiguated is not a peculiarly literary phenomenon, but applies to a wide variety of language uses.
Whenever the context of production of the message is spatially and/or temporally separated from the context of reception (as in telephone conversations and in most written uses of language), the centre of orientation for the interpretation of deixis is not perceptually available to the addressee and therefore needs to be appropriately reconstructed.
Following Rauh (1983), Green talks about a "cline of deictic activity" (Section 7) along which discourse types can be ordered according to their distance from the canonical situation of utterance.
The fact that face-to-face communication is usually considered as basic for the purposes of deictic reference, does not imply, however, that the deictic context relevant to ordinary conversation is invariably and straightforwardly identified with the immediate situation in which the interaction takes place: In 1 it is the speaker's physical location within a restricted spatial setting (e.g. a room, a square, etc) that is relevant to the disambiguation of the place deictic "here" , whereas in 2 the reference of the same adverb falls within a much wider context (a whole country), and the spatial deictic centre includes the hearer as well as the speaker.
Similarly, in 3 the time span which is indicated by "now" is limited to the few seconds immediately following the utterance, whereas in 4 the reference of "now" extends well before and after the time of utterance.
In each case the successful disambiguation of the deictic reference requires that hearers identify the relevant context on the basis of the content of the utterance and of their general knowledge of the world.
Speakers also have the option of anchoring deictic expressions to a different centre of orientation by means of what is known as deictic projection (Levinson 1983:64): The anchorage point for the deictic verb "come" , which, in unmarked cases, indicates movement towards the speaker's location at the moment of utterance, is shifted to the speaker's future home base in 5, and to the addressee's position at a specific future moment in time in 6 (cf.
Levinson 1983:83—84).
In 7 the switch from the past tense ( "was') to the present tense (" walks', 'says') marks a shift in the temporal deictic centre from coding time to content time.
Similarly, the use of the demonstrative of proximity"this' can be seen as reflecting the speaker's perception at the time of the narrated event, in which case the spatial deictic centre is temporarily shifted from the location of the I as speaker to that of the I as character in the story.
These examples provide clear evidence for Green's claim that the difference between literary and non-literary uses of deixis should be expressed in terms of a continuum, rather than in terms of a clearcut opposition.
More importantly, they show how, even in what is regarded as the most basic type of communication, the context that is relevant to the disambiguation of deixis should be seen not as a physical setting that is fixed and given once and for all, but rather as a cognitive space that is actively constructed by participants in the course of the interaction.