

Literary studies in action by A. Durant and N. Fabb, 1990, Routledge, London, pp. 224, ISBN 0 415 03931 2 (hb), 0 415 02945 7 (pb)
Literary studies in action approaches the study of literature in the same way that a comparatively naive undergraduate reader approaches it: as a conglomeration of linguistic and literary forms, functions and meanings, all operating at once and all of which have somehow to be deciphered in order to gain access to the text, and explained in order to facilitate the production of adequate essays.
For those who want to operate "student-centred learning" , this work provides a good starting-place, for it is a workbook, not a study guide.
It aims to train students in what used to be called "close reading" and to provide them with a critical awareness of the ideological, socio-cultural and historical constraints on the perception of what constitutes "literature" .
Durant and Fabb claim that Literary studies in action is a pedagogical tool which can be used either by individual students or groups of students working in isolation, or as a course book.
My personal feeling is that it would be a brave student indeed who would take on such a wide-ranging and non-traditional approach to literary studies without at least the understanding of tutors, and preferably with their co-operation and guidance.
However, for students working on their own there is a neat and comprehensive contents list and a very adequate index.
Before the work proper gets under way, there are several sections designed to guide the user into "operating" the workbook in a productive way.
Particularly useful is the very brief section, "What to do if you get stuck" , a calming and careful list of suggestions putting control of the learning process firmly in the reader's own hands.
Detailed information on "teaching a course with this book" throws much light on the authors"conception of teaching and learning as well as giving practical examples of an efficient pedagogical approach.
Simple phraseology throughout makes the work easily accessible.
The textual layout is intended to direct the reader into performing the "Activities" during the reading process so that a better understanding of the information is gained.
The principle operates via numbered "activity boxes" , to which the reader is directed from the main body of the text by an imperatively pointing black hand icon.
One leaves the activity by the same means, directed back to the appropriate page of the main text.
In principle, the main text explains the thinking behind the aspects under discussion, and the activities provide investigative procedures which the learner can extend almost at will.
Bold as this aim is, it is bound to fail.
My primary criticism of the work is that it tries to encompass too much.
How much, can be gauged from seeing the first four entries under "D" in the index: dactylic foot, Daily Mail, Darwin, Charles, and deconstruction.
Similarly, a section on "How the brain enables us to interpret" (section 7.4, pp.152-3) runs away into the physiology of reading.
Since the section ends with a statement of our lack of access to, and control over, our mental and linguistic "input systems" , I see little reason for it to be there.
A related "Activity" (no. 79), tells us "by an act of thought" to "hear" a speaker "saying something completely different" .
I was left wondering just what I was supposed to do!
The vagueness of some of the "Activities" tends to cause recurring difficulty, and I can only assume that Durant and Fabb have their own ways of making them work.
An additional difficulty is that on occasion the layout does not help.
On page 110, one instruction (in an Activity Box) is "Now rejoin text on page 109" ; immediately below that box is another instruction, "Now do Activity 53 on page 111" , and immediately below that, a section headed "Connections between classifications" .
As well as looking messy, this means that trying to find the next step in the process is somewhat disruptive of the reading process, and hence, possibly, to retention of the information.
However, other activities are useful, well-designed and clearly related to the textual information, and there is a recurring insistence that learners try to evaluate the processes they are using as well as setting them in action as a means to an end.
For example, Activity 47 (p. 101), "Working with Scalar Paradigms" , provides a place for considering the role of value-judgements and obliges the reader to relate them to specific textual features.
Throughout the work, linguistic and literary terminology is kept to a minimum and introduced progressively, at a stage where there is a need for specific terms, which are explained as they arise.
In a comparatively short time the student is equipped with systems and a metalanguage suitable for carrying out the required tasks in a clear and specific manner.
No one who has worked through this book should come out writing typically vague literary essays where "language flows" or the text is "effective" .
The whole process is pedagogically very well motivated.
Nevertheless, there is one decision which I found puzzling.
In the section on sound symbolism (whose activity box appears on p. 120), I disliked the conflation of "letters" and "sounds" .
English spelling being what it is, dependence on graphological patterns is untrustworthy in relation to phonetic patterns.
In fact, I cannot see that sound symbolism can be discussed in any safe and effective manner without a basic knowledge of the articulatory or acoustic features of sounds.
In the main text explanation, the distinction between sounds and spelling is mentioned and so it seems a pity that the obvious procedure, of explaining phonetics in a little more detail, was not followed.
In my experience, there is a "felt need" on the part of the students for such information and without it they tend to slip into seeing sound symbolism everywhere!
A final criticism relates to that very simplicity of style which I have praised above.
I did feel that, by the end of the work, the language had remained a little over-simplistic, perhaps patronisingly so, to anyone who had worked through all the processes involved in this weighty work.
I would have liked to see a slightly higher register developed, moving more towards a normative academic usage and away from the predominantly plain-language lexis which characterises the work.
But then I am not an undergraduate student trying to cope with all the new concepts and processes needed for modern literary studies.
Despite my criticisms, Literary studies in action is a much-needed work.
The range of academic perspectives covered is broad enough to satisfy the literary specialist's desire that literature should relate to the world, yet the comparatively rigorous analytical approach to literary studies is very appealing to those who, like myself, have interests which are primarily linguistic and communicative rather than literary.
Encompassing such a range at all is a considerable achievement, and its value will no doubt be reflected in the increased skills of both the students and tutors who use it.
Carol Bellard-Thomson University of Dundee, UK