

The taming of the text edited by W. van Peer, 1988, Routledge, London, pp.xii +337, ISBN 0 415 01309 7
The title of Willie van Peer's The taming of the text is intentionally and instructively ambiguous, since, as the editor himself points out in the introduction, "the text may be either the subject or the object of the"  "taming" (p. 7).
The former interpretation highlights the role played by texts in the socio-cultural processes whereby conventions and ideologies are transmitted or subverted, while the latter points to the possibility of describing and exposing such processes by means of linguistic analysis, which is the central purpose of the papers collected in the volume.
According to Willie van Peer's introductory statement, the book is intended to promote a reconciliation between literary and linguistic approaches to the study of literature, and, more specifically, to provide a much-needed contribution in three fundamental directions: first, the development of a theory of textuality which accounts both for the way in which all texts function in society and for the differences between literary and non-literary texts; secondly, the construction of a model of literary communication that gives an adequate account of the complexities involved in the production and reception of literary texts; and thirdly, the development of more explicit and comprehensive accounts of the ways in which formal and contextual factors interact in the process of deriving interpretations from texts.
The book, which contains 14 papers, is divided into three parts, each dealing more specifically with one of these three major areas.
The papers contained in the first part, "Type and theory" , highlight the need to cross the boundary between literature and non-literature in order to capture significant similarities and oppositions between different text-types.
In an extremely lucid and original contribution, Mary Louise Pratt suggests that many "conventions of representation" cut across the distinction between fictional and non-fictional discourse, and need to be studied accordingly.
Pratt is specifically concerned with the ideological implications of landscape descriptions in novels and travel reports, and argues for the development of a stylistics that goes beyond purely aesthetic considerations, and takes into account the social, historical and ideological dimensions of texts.
The following two papers, by Dick Leith and Mick Short, exemplify the possibility of applying to literary texts theories and methods developed for the study of ordinary language, and vice versa.
Leith shows how the notions employed within pragmatics and discourse analysis for the study of conversation can help to shed light on the properties and functions of dialogue in ballads, while Short applies the categories of speech presentation developed for the study of the novel to a corpus of journalistic texts.
Short's paper demonstrates, on the one hand, the possibility, and indeed the necessity, of extending the scope of descriptive categories to a diverse range of text types, while on the other hand it stresses the need to refine our understanding of the conventions and expectations that are specific to each individual type of discourse.
The papers by Christoph Sauer and Kiernan Ryan are both concerned with the way in which language can be used to influence people's conceptions of themselves and of the socio-political environment they live in, as well as to condition and constrain their behaviour.
This applies both to Nazi propaganda, whose strategies and objectives are analysed and exposed by Sauer, and to the world portrayed in Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet, where, according to Ryan, the tragic fate of the two lovers is due to the inescapable power of the norms which regulate personal and sexual relationships in their particular society, and which are enforced and perpetuated through language.
The second part of the book, "Models and methods" , proposes a view of literary communication in which the sylistic properties of texts are seen as the result of a complex process of mediation between a variety of situational, social and cultural forces.
In Nils Enkvist's words, "styles come into being as aggregates of probabilities of expression in situational contexts, or, more briefly, as aggregates of contextual probabilities" (p. 129).
More specifically, Enkvist's paper presents the formal organisation of texts as the outcome of a dynamic decision-making process, in which the writer assigns different values to a variety of different, and often conflicting, parameters (such as end-weight, metre, rhyme, etc.), on the basis of the particular configuration of goals, situational constraints and discoursal conventions in which he or she is operating.
In the following paper Ludger Hoffman considers the linguistic evidence of this process of mediation in a particularly problematic communicative context, namely the writing of literature in a second language and culture.
Hoffman highlights a variety of peculiar stylistic traits in a corpus of German texts written by Turkish immigrants, and shows that stylistic analysis needs to be sensitive not only to formal linguistic devices, but also to the way in which such devices operate within wider patterns of action that are linked to social and situational contexts.
The implications of Mikhail Bakhtin's theory of language for the linguistic study of literary texts are considered in Katie Wales"and Helga Geyer-Ryan's papers.
Both authors argue for a stylistic analysis that recognises the inherently dialogic nature of all kinds of discourse, and that is able to discriminate between the multiplicity of voices and ideological accents that characterise not only the language of the novel, but also that of poetry and drama.
In particular, Geyer-Ryan shows how, contrary to Bakhtin's claim concerning the monologic nature of poetic language, heteroglossia is central to the aesthetic and ideological effects of Bertolt Brecht's and Tony Harrison's poems.
The final section of the book, "Form and function" , contains a variety of approaches to the problem of the switch from description to interpretation in the analysis of texts.
William Downes' study of King Lear's famous question to his daughters is a superb example of the level of depth and insight that stylistics can reach when it draws eclectically from a variety of areas within linguistics in order to relate the surface features of the text to the situational, historical and cultural contexts which are relevant to their effect and interpretation.
John Sinclair's analysis of an English poem by the Asian author Edwin Thumboo is not, however, equally enlightening.
The attempt to demonstrate how a close linguistic analysis can explain a text's meaning and effect only partially succeeds in this case, since the thoroughness and precision of the description are undermined by a failure to discriminate between features of different significance within the poem, and by a general neglect of the socio-cultural context in which the text is embedded.
James Thorne's discussion of the long-standing debate over the interpretation of Robert Frost's "stopping by woods" is instructive precisely because, among other things, it recognises the limitations of a stylistics that aims, or claims, to be objective and exhaustive, and because it highlights the need to be selective in description and open to the coexistence of multiple meanings in interpretation.
The idea that literary texts may trigger more than one level of reading is also central to Irene Fairley's paper, which is a discussion of a corpus of interpretative responses to Sylvia Plath's poem "Mushrooms" .
Fairley is especially concerned with the difference between "literal" readers, who do not go beyond the surface meaning of the text, and "figurative" readers, who seem to have internalised a number of conventions of reading which enable them to reach less obvious and more satisfactory interpretative results.
Fairley argues that such conventions demand systematic investigation, since they constitute the core of the "literary competence" that educational institutions are supposed to make available for students.
Graham Trengove is similarly concerned with the pedagogic applications of the linguistic analysis of literature.
In his paper he exemplifies an approach to the teaching of stylistics that keeps technical jargon to a minimum and that aims to develop in the students a keen sensitivity for the way in which all levels of language, including grammatical choices, can contribute to the creation of aesthetic effects.
On the whole The taming of the text is very rewarding and stimulating reading, both for those whose allegiances are split between linguistic and literary studies, and for those who only support one of the two "camps" .
The merit of the book, however, does not so much lie in its attempt to break the "iron curtain" that traditionally separates linguistic and literary approaches to literature, but rather in its contribution to the development of a stylistics that successfully reconciles linguistic analysis with a consideration of the socio-cultural and ideological dimensions of the production and reception of literary texts.
Such a widening of perspectives obviously leaves no place for the by now out-dated claim concerning the objective nature of linguistic analysis, but it opens up a whole range of stimulating opportunities for the exploration of the ways texts function in society.
Rather than striving for an impossible, and ultimately sterile, objectivity, scholars will increasingly need to follow Mary Louise Pratt's example in admitting their own ideological commitments in order to promote the development of research.
This is how Pratt concludes her paper: The taming of the text proves that such a stylistics is already on its way.
Elena Semino