

The Violence of Language by Jean-Jacques Lecercle, 1990, Routledge, London, pp. vii + 272, ISBN 0 415 03430 2 (hb), 0 415 03431 0 (pb)
In Derridian thinking violence is perpetrated by the dominant partner in a hierarchy: the "Original" is what oppresses the merely "Derived" , Men traditionally oppress Women and so on.
Hence the need for a deconstruction that will reverse these hierarchies.
For Lecercle violence erupts from below, at least in the matter of language (though, like many others, he comes close to saying that the linguistic is the social and the cultural) and is the revenge of the repressed.
The major term in his hierarchy is "Langue" or Chomskyan Deep Structure and the minor term that violently subverts the rule of this oppressor he names the "Remainder" .
His book is a brilliant and timely reminder of what is left out in our various theories and models of language.
The Remainder is the linguistic equivalent of the Freudian unconscious and, like the unconscious, it is not interested in rules.
From Deleuze and Guattari, Lecercle picks up the idea of the potential violence of the institution of language which, as they point out, is not so much a neutral entity that can best be analysed by looking at "normal" (i.e.  declarative ) sentences as a series of other people's slogans organised into a system of power-relations.
The unconscious, slogan-filled element inside language keeps breaking through its surface.
So although there is Langue, just as there is consciousness, there is always something more — the unconscious, the Remainder.
Like Derrida, Lecercle seeks to overthrow the hierarchy implicit here but without elevating the Remainder to a new dominant status — Langue and the Remainder are permanently and inescapably involved with one another.
What, then, is the Remainder?
Lecercle is a phenomenally acute linguist and this book, like his earlier Philosophy Through the Looking-Glass (1985), is written in an English that is as near perfect as that of any native speaker; but his studies have included the non-legitimate work of Edward Lear, Lewis Carroll and other writers of "nonsense" in English and French.
His view of this "delirious" material (note the etymology of délire) is that it breaks the rules of language (grammar, syntax, semantic cohesion) but that it does not mean nothing.
It indicates that there is something left over after the linguists have done their work, a dark or light madness about language that will not be repressed and that can erupt at the very heart of the most sacred regulations identified as normative by grammarians.
His book starts, for instance, by making a sort of sense out of a nonsense letter of Lear's of 1862 and proceeds from there, through a rag-bag of examples, towards a theory of the Remainder which now becomes central rather than marginal, or at least just as central as the rules of Langue.
In a sense Lecercle (whose own name doubtless encouraged him to consider the surplus meanings language provides) is sticking up for parole, the language as she is spoke (or written).
 "I" m not so young as I used to was"is wrong, except that when Somerset Maughan makes a Cockney landlady say it, it makes perfectly good sense.
A palindrome arises for reasons that have nothing to do with transformational grammar; puns undoubtedly perform some sort of linguistic operation even though they are not accounted for in the grammars; etymology reveals monsters more absurd than the most ignorant folk-etymology can imagine.
We live our linguistic lives as much in the grip of the Remainder as by following the legitimate paths of the Langue we have learnt.
After all, it is hardly a shocking suggestion any more to propose that dialects and slangs have as much right to be "English" as the official or received version (again, Derrida comes to mind here.)
Who now would dare to say that Standard English has any ultimate authority?
When I speak, language speaks.
There is always something delirious about language — the burgeoning, bubbling Remainder that has been left out of the dry official structure comes crashing through my best-formed sentences — so I can feel it speaking through me.
Equally there is always something grammatical about delirium; the nonsense-languages of the mad turn out not to be a merely random collocation of sounds.
So Structuralism, Chomskyism and all our offical Linguistics are not exactly wrong but they are radically incomplete.
Which we knew anyway because, and here is perhaps the strongest thrust of Lecercle's book for most of us, there's no accounting for poetry.
It is in the delirious inventiveness and ungrammticality of poetry that we can see the Remainder most fruitfully at work.
(This is Riffaterre's broad concept of the ungrammatical.)
It would seem that for Lecercle, e.e.
cummings is the most completely typical poet — cummings "grammar and syntax don" t work but his poetry does.
This is very clearly post-postructuralist stuff, and very good stuff too.
It could not have been written if the "eagles" who are our modern gurus had not shown the path from altitude; Lecercle calls himself, by contrast, a "centipede" grubbing about among tiny linguistic details, but he is a sensible and humorous centipede where some of the great eagles — the thinkers who have brought about the famous Copernican Revolution of Structuralism and Since — have been impenetrable or extremist.
In among his sense and his humour there are some difficult passages and words — we are not all as encyclopedic in our knowledge of language as M Lecercle; I, for one, have to pause to remember exactly what "anamorphotic" means — and he is a kind of extremist too, but there is a quiet comprehensiveness here and an enjoyment of language that are most welcome after the turbulences we have been through.
Above all Lecercle emerges from what has been called the "both-and" school of poststructuralism, that is, he is happy to include a plurality of theories and norms on the one hand and of practices and common sense on the other: Langue is OK but some New Yorkers just do say "I done do it" .
In several ways his position reminds me of Bakhtin, that other thinker who has come to our rescue from the (necessary) tribulations of post-Saussurean thought.
For Lecercle, for instance, the Remainder, in its appearance as folk-etymology, is a reaction against the arbitrariness of the sign and is thus, we might say, "carnivalesque" ; equally, the matter of language is not one that can be finally brought under the rule of one sign alone, so it is polyvocal perhaps: "Language is not the systematic ordering of constants…it is a composite reality that is essentially heterogeneous" (p. 184).
Like Bakhtin, Lecercle manages these moves without sinking into the quagmire of Marxism; language may be a structure "erected on the unstable basis of contradiction and strife" (p. 187), but it is not a game in which there will ever be winners or losers — it will just go on being what it uncontrollably is, for it speaks us as much as we it.
There are a few touches of delirium in Lecercle's text itself, as he would certainly be delighted to admit; I take them to be caused by an invasion of normal English by French.
My favourite comes when he is lamenting the decline of etymology as a linguistic discipline; he talks of "the death-toll of etymology" being "sounded" …by the Neo-Grammarians (p. 187).
This is entirely comprehensible and makes all the necessary references to Christian burial, John Donne and so on, but it is nonsense: toll as a noun means "tax" or "tariff" and death-toll refers (in journalese) to the quantity of dead people.
Lecercle of course means death-knell but English has spoken through him, creating a new meaning for the noun that works very well as a metonymy: the bell's tolling becomes the bell (it has "sounded" ) much as the water boiling in the kettle has become the kettle as in the expression, "The kettle's boiling" .
What is more, there is poetry here.
The new, unintentional play on words now includes the idea of the quantity of dead things inside the idea of the death-knell; "We've lost a lot" , it hints, in losing etymological attitudes.
If The Violence of Language is anything to go by, let's keep the etymologies rolling and, along with them, Lecercle's sort of intense awareness of the material reality that is language.
We minds.
Lance St John Butler University of Stirling, UK