

The Literary Language of Shakespeare by S.S. Hussey, 2nd edn, 1992, Longman, London, pp. x + 254, ISBN 0 582 08770 8 (pb)
This is the second edition of a book first published in 1982.
It is essentially the same book, though some changes have been made.
Section headings which were found only in some chapters in the first edition have been extended through each chapter.
Additions to take note of some recent scholarship have been introduced, though these are few.
Mostly they are of a single sentence or paragraph.
The majority are fitted in quite neatly, but the addition of a sentence after the first quotation on page 34 makes the referent of "Another possibility" , which opens the next sentence, ambiguous.
The two major additions are a section on 'sonnets and Soliloquies' in Chapter 8 and the discussion of the style of four plays (Henry V, As You Like It, Macbeth and The Winter's Tale) which forms Chapter 9 and replaces the original final chapter.
Even in this chapter the discussion of The Winter's Tale had occurred in the first edition much earlier in the book, from where it has been removed and rewritten to be included in the last chapter.
There are some changes which one might have expected, but which have not been introduced.
Although Hussey claims (p. 241) that "The standard edition must now be" the Wells/Taylor Oxford edition, he has not changed the quotations to match this edition since he continues to quote from the New Penguin editions.
It is true that he says that he has checked "difficult readings" against the Oxford text (p. 9).
This hardly seems satisfactory for a book on style since difficult readings are not necessarily the most important; and there is no discussion of any difficulties in the footnotes.
One might in any case question whether any modern edition is appropriate for a book on language since one will have to approach the language through a modern editor's eyes instead of through contemporary ones.
There has been some enlarging and updating of the bibliography, but many works that might have been included are not there.
Although Abbott's Shakespearean Grammar is described as "still useful" (p. 118), it is not in the bibliography; although there is a section on puns, Rubinstein's dictionary of sexual puns (1984) is not found there either.
A useful discussion of the discourse in Othello is found in M. Coulthard's An Introduction to Discourse Analysis (2nd edn 1985) and W. Nash comments on the opening of Hamlet in an article in Carter and Simpson's Language, Discourse and Literature (1989); neither is in the bibliography.
Books and articles about language are not well represented in the bibliography.
The reason for the absence of works like those noted in the previous paragraph may lie in the book's approach.
Although I am not clear in my own mind what "literary" means in the title The Literary Language of Shakespeare (for it seems to suggest that non-literary language is not included) it is apparent that Hussey aims to stress the literary rather than the language in his account of Shakespeare.
His book is about Shakespeare's style without getting too involved in the minutiae of Shakespeare's language.
This can lead to a lack of focus in the book, because one is not clear precisely what aspect of Shakespeare's language is being examined.
Indeed, Shakespeare is not always the major focus of some parts of the book which concentrates as much on his contemporaries as on Shakespeare himself.
There are chapters called "The new syntax" and "some uses of grammar" , which suggest a more linguistic approach.
One might have anticipated an exposition on how this new syntax differed from that of the preceding age and how it could be developed for stylistic purposes.
Instead it turns out to be very much concerned with rhetoric, which can hardly be said to be new for this age or even essentially syntactic.
And the chapter on some uses of grammar turns out to be more about how a few parts of the grammatical system undergoing diachronic change are open for exploitation by authors at this time.
Those developments in stylistics which have taken place recently such as the appropriation of discourse analysis, politeness theory and other aspects of pragmatics have had little impact on this book, although they could readily be subsumed under the heading "literary language" .
Since it is largely new, it might be appropriate to concentrate on the last chapter which "offers a reading of some very different Shakespearean plays" (p. 196).
The readings are not comprehensive, but illustrate how some points discussed earlier in the book may be studied.
The four plays are taken chronologically, Henry V (1599), As You Like It (1600), Macbeth (1606) and The Winter's Tale (1611).
Each play is treated separately in its own section and no comparison among them is made.
Equally no reason for their choice is offered, apart from the fact that they are very different.
It may be said that the section on Henry V has very little detailed discussion of the play's language and style.
Most of it is devoted either to the Chorus or to the development of Henry's character.
There is no sense of how the various points discussed earlier in the book should or could be applied, for we are simply presented with certain aspects of the play's style and development.
Each Chorus is commented on in turn.
We are shown certain words in the opening one and told that we "have begun at the highest level" (p. 197).
Chorus 2 is dismissed as "a report rather than a visual representation" (p. 198), and in Chorus 3 every line is said to have its descriptive adjective.
The emphasis is on the vocabulary rather than on other aspects of language and there is a tendency to focus on the high style.
But the composition of the lexis is not tackled.
Shakespeare is thought to have been strongly influenced by Spenser in these choruses, for instance, and this might have been reflected in the comments.
Equally the nature of the various styles, high, middle and low, needs more elucidation than it gets in this book (cf. pp. 70–71) if it is to form a central plank of the discussion of lexis.
This point emerges in the discussion of Henry, for the play is said to exhibit all aspects of war, the heroism and the cowardice, and these call forth the high and low styles.
But this emphasis is rather distorting for the play as a whole, for it is in danger of reducing the language to examples of one of the three styles.
The variety of dialects and registers is not given any attention and there is no discussion of the many features of discourse in the text.
Within its own terms this book is successful, but one could suggest that those terms are restrictive and hardly do justice to the breadth and variety of Shakespeare's style.
For those who are mainly literary specialists it may be sufficient; readers of a journal like this may well feel that this book does not go far enough.
N.F. Blake University of Sheffield, UK