

Competing Discourses: Perspective and Ideology in Language by David Lee, 1992, Longman, London, pp. xii + 210, ISBN 0 582 0780 4
David Lee has provided a textbook for undergraduates which focuses primarily on the "world-view" of texts.
There are still comparatively few coherent introductions to the "new" stylistics — that is, discourse stylistics, and Lee's book aims to fill a gap.
Both spoken and written texts are seen as sites where the tensions between "competing discourses" are realised.
The emphasis is therefore on language as social process above all else; or at least that is what Lee suggests.
There are some profound oddities about Competing Discourses, however, which often endanger its pedagogical potential.
Indeed, at first glance this does not look a very compelling book: it holds to a strong version of the Whorf-Sapir hypothesis; it contains extended discussions of those perennial seminar heroes Lok and Benjy from Golding's The Inheritors and Faulkner's The Sound and the Fury respectively; and there is a dutiful chapter on gender.
Lee's linguistic determinism is rather uncompromising; it is used as a discovery procedure in the analysis of (largely canonical) texts.
The central thesis is that "coding creates reality rather than simply reporting it" ; but to suggest that "simple reporting" is how one might normally see coding functioning in relation to reality is to presuppose a very naive view.
Of course, a strong linguistic determinism is a handy stylistic aid, but there are many theoretical and exegetic pitfalls.
In particular, Lee's reading of literary texts is based largely on a simple transposition of this linguistic determinism.
The kind of determinism dominant in the book is exemplified in his discussion of tense: On the other hand it could be said that the English tense system offers speakers the choice of whether to see time in this way.
However, both arguments are spurious, for there is a very loose connection between tense and time.
Temporal references and tenses are invariably processed pragmatically.
Lee seems to suggest that the relationship between tense and time is such that they reflect a simple cognitive process.
As far as the organisation of chapters is concerned, there are other oddities.
The discussions of the aforementioned Lok and Benjy are remarkable for their lack of reference to Halliday.
The chapter entitled "Language and gender" is bound to seem tokenistic, despite any protestations, for it is rather unsatisfactory to produce a chapter on gender and ideology and then discuss at length two canonical male texts.
It is not that Lee should in some way be forbidden to talk about white, male canonical authors, but a book such as this ought to suggest a greater awareness of the very issues it is summarising.
I wonder also if the book might not have been packaged in a more sensible manner.
It is clearly an undergraduate text; its use lies in the way it introduces discourse stylistics to a primarily conventional undergraduate group.
It should be more clearly aimed at such a market, for it has pretensions otherwise.
In many ways it seems churlish to criticize Competing Discourses as I have, for there are so few books available which engage with discourse stylistics in a manner which is readable and accessible.
But for my money, I would have liked to have seen more radical analyses and a weaker Whorf-Sapir hypothesis dominating the book.
Keith Green Sheffield Hallam University, UK