

The English Alliterative Tradition by Tom Cable, 1991, University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia, pp. 191, ISBN 0 812 23063 9
This important book is of prime interest to Anglicists and medievalists, but will also find an audience among those concerned with theories of English metre in toto.
In six chapters and 191 pages (including useful notes and bibliography), Cable outlines a new theory of Old English (OE) alliterative verse; explores the revival of alliterative writing in Middle English (ME); empirically demonstrates the distribution of final -e and its consequences for metricality in ME texts both alliterative and rhymed; explores the superficially similar decasyllabic metres of Chaucer and Shakespeare, concluding that they are respectively different underlying metres; and ends with a chapter on "theoretical implications" which links prosodic theory with critical theory.
Cable's work on OE shifts the focus away from overt features of half-lines such as stress and alliteration, and onto the syllable.
Four syllables, or their resolved equivalents, determine the underlying metre of OE verse, in his view.
This is certainly minimalist: in abstracting from stress and alliterative patterning, he loses useful diagnostic devices, and it may well be that higher-level patterning is crucial in determining and explaining how phonological constituents behave metrically.
Cable needs supplementary machinery in his model to help explain why half-lines with two or more adjacent, rising degrees of stress never occur in "classical" OE verse; the need for such supplements may indicate that his base theory is insufficiently constrained.
Having said this, one of the great strengths of Cable's OE model is its treatment of material usually neglected by theorists — unstressed syllables.
He shows conclusively that such material is carefully deployed in OE verse.
Half-lines may be expanded in typical ways: there may be one, and only one, optional expansion of the verse in one, and only one, of its first two positions.
Therefore the structures seen in (1a) are acceptable (where boldened material = expanded dip): whereas the structures seen in (1b) are debarred: The treatment of these expanded dips is very plausible since it shows that the distribution of elements within the verse-line can be derived from phonological behaviour: verbal prefixes, for example, are exempted from the constraint on expanded dips, just as they are labelled as extra-metrical in word-stress derivations.
This is not the only instance where Cable finds whole or partial isomorphism between phonological and metrical structures, and this theoretical stance — where prosody is enriched by synchronic phonology — is one of the distinctive attributes here.
His treatment of the "Alliterative Revival" is in some ways reminiscent of earlier treatments which argue that later alliterative writing in English reflects not so much a continuation of OE principles (which language-change would in any case have made unlikely), but a re-invention from a tradition of alliterative prose-writing which began with AElfric.
This prompts a series of speculations about the nature of poetic change: how far does language-change, and specifically, phonological change, govern and/or enable changes in poetic form?
And what is the role of literary models?
If both literary models, and language-change, impact on poetic change, what is the relative weight of each?
Cable gives some partial answers to these questions: both literary models (the tradition of alliterative prose) and linguistic pre-conditions (the survival or loss of final -e) play a role in his arguments, and he is particularly compelling on final -e.
He argues convincingly that loan-words from Old Norse which had final inflectional syllables (vowels) retain such syllables as -e into ME; similarly, Old French loans which had a final vowel in the accusative singular retain final -e into ME verse; and native OE words that ended in a vowel in the nominative singular retain final -e in non-genitive singular usage (see the summary on p. 78ff.).
These apparent facts, related to syncretism and phonology, are supported with close reference to relevant alliterative verse texts.
One important theoretical issue arises from this: Cable's arguments compel him on occasion to scan lines yielding more syllables than the spelling might indicate (p. 79), and he does confess to an "agnosticism" concerning the status of "the text" .
One thing weighs in Cable's favour: his principles do work, and he proves that the usage of final -e in ME alliterative verse is not unsystematic.
Also controversial will be his analysis of non-alliterative writing.
Focussing on the decasyllabic line of Chaucer and Shakespeare, he suggest that while such lines might appear superficially similar they embody two different metres, one (Chaucer's) simply alternating, the other (Shakespeare's) based on the "Classical foot" .
This is supported by reference to three key features (p. 114ff.), summarised below: Alternating decasyllabic verse is "lighter" in terms of its overall structure; this shows up in the high degree of promotion of underlyingly unstressed function words to relative stressed status.
While foot-based metre(s) do display promotion, they are typically "heavier" lines, and such heaviness shows itself in the high degree of demotion (e.g. of lexical monosyllables — blind in three blind mice) and subordination within the line.
Alternating metre rarely if at all allows strings of four or more syllables with four or more adjacent, rising degrees of stress, whereas foot-based metre is "endlessly modulated" (p. 124) by such patterns.
Point 3 relates to lines such as the following, from Shakespeare's "sonnet XXIII" : Such lines, Cable argues, show four rising degrees of stress (on the boldened syllables), and such adjacent increase indicates, in his view, that the metre is foot-based, since the string in question consists of four syllables in which the even-numbered ones are stronger than their neighbours.
This reflects what Cable calls the "tilting" power of metre.
Metre, a linear, literary artefact — and a mental abstraction — has the power to "tilt" language-material away from its underlying phonology.
Metre, then, may begin in what stress-phonology makes possible at any given period, but it may end in "the foot" having coercive power.
Notably, the Classical foot has never been part of English phonology; it is a verse-specific contruct.
Since the structures adduced to support Cable's arguments seem sound, we may be coming to a position where the study of prosody has mentalistic goals.
If "foot-based metres" are mentalistically real, the process of their composition may be in some sense teleological.
One of the strengths of Cable's work here is that he makes such possible lines of argument and controversy vivid.
Space is devoted in the final chapter to considerations of the mentalism, or otherwise, of metrical structures.
What is significant about this treatment of the topic is the way in which the overall theory is constrained — and constraints,(in effect, metrical filters), are susceptible of mentalistic investigation just as are syntactic or phonological rules.
And there is, too, the fact that Cable's handling of half-line or line patterns reveals not only their structure, but the processes by which the structures were arrived at — as in his remarks about finite-state processing, and the apparent fact that metrical composition is (or may be) largely a process of entailment, where decisions taken in one part of a metrical domain have profound consequences elsewhere.
The goal of such work is, surely, mentalistic, in an originally Chomskyan sense.
What Cable has equipped us with is a theoretical metrics with challenging things to say about poetic competence: metrics, as he puts it (p. 65), "is not about orthography and written texts apprehended by the eye but about mental structures" .
This, then, is not a static but a dynamic view of early English prosodies; its theoretical breadth and scope is wide, and its empirical procedures sound; it is innovative and challenging; and it also forms a vital teaching text.
Cable has brought the study of English verse prosody to a state comparable to syntactic studies post-Aspects.
There is much still to discover, but Cable has laid the groundwork and set the agenda for future work in this developing field.
Chris McCully Manchester University, UK