

Speech Acts and Literary Theory by Sandy Petrey, 1990, Routledge, London, pp.175, ISBN 0 415 90181 2 (hb), ISBN 0 415 90182 0 (pb)
As stated on the dust jacket, this book aims to offer "both an introduction to the speech act theory developed by J.L. Austin and a survey of the critical work that has adapted Austin's thought for literary analysis" .
It is neatly organised into three sections: first, an introduction to the theory, second a discussion of generally sympathetic critical work, finally a discussion of seemingly antagonistic critical work.
Throughout the book, Petrey argues that Austin's work is of huge importance and that it gives rise to significant insights when applied to the study of literature.
Along the way, a great deal of information about speech act theory, and about work which has developed and challenged it, is presented clearly and coherently.
Petrey begins by suggesting a sense in which speech-act-based approaches are typical of twentieth-century literary theory and a sense in which they are atypical.
They are typical in that they adapt non-literary work on language.
They are atypical in that the approach adopted focuses on social and historical aspects of language and language-use rather than on language as a set of abstract forms.
One simple way of describing this difference is to say that speech act theory is interested in the social rather than the cognitive aspects of language.
Petrey puts particular emphasis on the necessity of collective acceptance for the successful performance of speech acts.
As he puts it, "performative speech can never be the unilateral act of a single individual" (p.5).
Significantly, there is very little discussion of cognitive approaches to the questions discussed, and very little explicit argumentation against such approaches.
Rather, Petrey points out that speech act theory recognises the importance of such things as social conventions and states its superiority to approaches based on cognition; the reasons for this superiority are never spelled out.
In the first section,"Beginnings', Petrey outlines the version of speech act theory presented by Austin in How To Do Things With Words (1962).
The second section, "Applications" , considers how various other theorists have attempted to develop Austin's theory.
Its four chapters deal respectively with Searle's revised version of speech act theory, discussions of textual illocution (i.e. of the relevance of speech act theory to the study of literature), the treatment of drama in terms of speech acts, and the treatment of poetry (very briefly) and prose fiction in terms of speech acts.
The third section, "Challenges" , considers theorists who have proposed alternatives to Austin's approach, most notably Derrida and de Man.
Petrey outlines the main areas of disagreement and suggests an explanation for the differences between the two schools.
In fact, he suggests that speech act theory and deconstruction complement, rather than contradict, each other.
The two approaches, he claims, share the same essential insight but use it to tackle different questions.
In speech act terms, the difference is that Austin focuses on illocution ( "language in society" p.139) while the deconstructionists focus on locution ( "language in itself" p.139).
Most of the points which Petrey makes in the course of the discussion follow from his two central claims: that Austin's formulation of speech act theory was a significant breakthrough in the study of language and that speech act theory has an important contribution to make to the study of literature.
The reader is constantly reminded of the two main assumptions which Petrey takes to be central to the theory: that language depends on social conventions rather than on any individual's intentions, and that language is used to do things rather than to represent things.
Throughout the book, it is obvious that Petrey is deeply committed to Austin's way of thinking.
When Austin's views are challenged, Petrey almost always comes down on Austin's side (the one obvious exception is that Petrey, unlike Austin, believes that speech-act theory is as relevant to literature, and to written language in general, as it is to spoken language).
This commitment is particularly apparent in the chapter devoted to the work of Searle, who is in some ways a disciple of Austin and in others a dissident.
Petrey says that he thought long and hard about how to deal with him.
In the end, the chapter on Searle takes the reader through his thought showing where it agrees with, and where it diverges from, Austin.
Where they disagree, Petrey argues that Austin was right and that Searle was mistaken.
This aspect of Petrey's thinking is also illustrated in his discussion of the deconstructionists.
Again, Petrey concludes that Austin is right, but this time it does not automatically follow that Derrida and de Man are wrong, because the two camps are actually addressing different questions.
Of course, there is still one sense in which Derrida and de Man are wrong: in that they believe they are arguing aginst Austin.
(In fact, Petrey suggests that this error has been committed more by the readers of Derrida and de Man than by the original authors.)
Both approaches, according to Petrey, have their origin in Austin's original insight into the essentially social nature of language.
The discussion throughout the book is lucid and thoughtful, and many readers will find Petrey's arguments convincing.
There are many well-chosen examples which clearly illustrate the points Petrey wants to make.
However, there are a few areas where confusion might arise.
Usually, this is due to vagueness or to insensitivity to the difficulties which some of the concepts discussed might cause for uninitiated readers.
One example occurs when the terms locution and illocutionary force are first used (p.12).
Anyone who has introduced speech act theory to students will know that these technical terms (and the third member of the group — perlocutionary force) are not at all easy to grasp.
However, Petrey simply defines them in passing without warning readers of the importance, and potential difficulty, of fixing these terms clearly in their minds.
This is especially problematic as many points made later in the book depend on distinguishing the three notions.
This lack of explicitness is likely to make Petrey's book more useful to students with a relatively good grasp of speech act theory than to complete beginners.
Linguists will find it odd that the terms semantics and pragmatics are never mentioned in the book.
This is most serious during the discussion of locution and illocution.
Petrey seems to equate locution with semantics and illocution with pragmatics, but does not say so explicitly.
In fact, Petrey points out that the main significance of Austin's work stems from his concentration on illocutionary force and (although this is completely implicit) he seems to think that Austin's theory is essentially a pragmatic one.
If Petrey does hold this view, then it is an extremely significant claim which should have been made explicitly, especially since many speech act semanticists have based their semantic analyses on a link between linguistic forms and illocutionary forces.
It would be interesting to know whether Petrey really does hold the views I am attributing to him, and whether he thinks that speech act theories of semantics are therefore based on a fundamental error.
This lack of explicitness will surely limit the significance of the book for researchers working in speech act theory and related fields.
My final reservation relates to the almost total neglect of cognitive approaches to the questions discussed.
Of course, there is no reason why a book on speech act theory should discuss alternative approaches at all .
However, one of the main reasons Petrey gives for his admiration of speech act theory is its superiority to cognitive accounts, so it is odd that he never spells out where this superiority lies.
There is no space here to examine this issue in detail, but it is at least a little odd that the work of such pragmatic theorists as Grice, Horn, Levinson and Sperber and Wilson, which has been successful in many areas and which has also cast serious doubt on speech-act-based approaches, is never mentioned in a book which explicitly claims the superiority of Austinian approaches.
Despite my reservations about some aspects of the book, I do believe that it has much to commend it.
Students of literature who are sympathetic to, and at least partially acquainted with, speech act theory should find the arguments stimulating.
Even resistant readers will find much informative discussion of speech act theory and related matters.
Some of the ideas discussed are difficult and it would probably not be obvious to readers new to this area that they are important.
But for readers with some knowledge of speech act theory, literary theory, or both, this is bound to be an interesting read.
Billy Clark University of London, UK