

The voices of Paul de Man
Mark Currie, University of Dundee, UK
Abstract
This article argues that analysis of fictional point of view, especially through the effects of speech act categories, has important implications for the analysis of non-fictional discourse.
It takes Paul de Man's Allegories of Reading as its example and demonstrates that a multi-layered structure of different voices and personalities creates an untheorised confusion between a text and its reading: a confusion which is seen as a key factor in the impact of deconstruction in literary studies.
It examines the status of the metalingual propositions which de Man formulates in this mode as the allegorical meanings of literary texts, and claims that the critique of reference assembled by these readings is subverted by the movements in point of view in the argument.
Keywords: authority; deconstruction; de Man, Paul; focalisation; metaphor; reference; ventriloquy
1 Introduction
The categories of speech and thought presentation are perhaps the most significant contributions made by stylistics to the understanding of narrative fiction, adding depth to the analysis of narrative point of view, and enabling precise analysis of the very subtle movements between commentary and focalisation in the narrative voice.
But embedded voices and ambiguous modes of focalisation are not particular to narrative fiction, and the analytical techniques derived from linguistics for literary stylistics and narratology may be borrowed back for application to non-literary discourses with all the added explanatory power that such interdisciplinary sabbaticals can achieve.
An interesting example is the work of the deconstructionist critic Paul de Man, whose analytical prose is deeply dialogic, in the sense that it is a composite of different voices, cited, reported, paraphrased, conjectured, which are often difficult to distinguish from the critic's own commentary and judgement.
Besides attesting to the now well supported view that de Man suffered from a kind of multiple personality disorder, the effect is astounding, since it allows for the formulation of key linguistic tenets upon which the radical reputation of deconstruction rests without de Man taking personal responsibility for that formulation.
It would be hard to overstate the importance of this evasiveness.
In my opinion de Man owes his place in the history of ideas to the intriguing (sometimes irritating) blend he achieves in his prose between his own authoritative propositional voice and that which apparently mediates some metalingual allegory enacted by other texts.
Responsibility for the key tenets of deconstruction — the autotelism of language, the inability of language to refer, the figurality of all language, and the self-deconstructing nature of literary texts — is therefore ambiguously divided between de Man and the texts that he reads.
The task here is to analyse this evasiveness and its implications for what de Man, and deconstruction, have contributed to our understanding of language.
Allegories of Reading (1979), for example, is the place where de Man develops a critique of the referentiality of language in an argument which culminates regularly in his most cited declarations about the nature of language.
How are we to take these declarations?
Does the analysis of focalisation in Allegories of Reading alter the propositional force of these declarations?
2 Ventriloquy
There is a kind of ventriloquy at work in Allegories of Reading.
De Man makes the texts of Nietzsche, Rousseau, Rilke and Proust speak sometimes in citation, but more often in a mode akin to free indirect speech.
The texts seem to speak for themselves, but in fact they are subtly construed, translated and transformed by de Man's own voice.
Ventriloquy is a kind of artifice — a single voice presented falsely as a dialogue.
It could then be argued that ventriloquy is a better metaphor for fiction than criticism, because in criticism there are object texts which are not voiceless.
A novelist is free to invent whatever he or she likes, and free indirect speech is just one form in which fictional information can be presented.
On the other hand, a critic who represents object texts in a mode akin to free indirect speech operates under an obligation to represent with some degree of fidelity the texts that he or she purports to ventriloquise.
But for de Man the difference between literature and criticism is delusive, and writing about a book is no less a process of invention than writing about an imaginary world.
The metaphor of ventriloquy is therefore as appropriate to criticism as it is to fiction, since object texts, like fictional worlds, have no autonomous existence.
The conviction that texts are voiceless until vocalised by a reading has an up-side and a down-side.
The up-side is that the critic is free.
The down-side is that the critic's representation of the text has none of the authority that objectivity would lend to the analysis.
But de Man doesn't seem prepared to accept this.
By oscillating between the poles of discovery (objectivity) and invention (subjectivity) he enjoys all the freedom that results from the belief that literature and criticism are akin, while preserving the authority that such a belief subverts.
2.1 Forms of ventriloquy
How does de Man transform the texts he reads?
How does he recruit them to the cause of the critique of reference in language?
The categories of speech presentation help to answer these questions.
As Leech and Short (1981: 318–36) argue, fictional speech presentation is always mediated, but the degree to which that mediation is apparent varies among categories.
Thus, direct speech creates an illusion of unmediated access to characters, while indirect speech is more obviously mediated since it is embedded in a narrative sentence.
The category of free indirect speech is a more ambiguous mode, falling as it does between the categories of direct and indirect speech.
The speech presentation categories have their analogues in critical prose.
Citation of a text under discussion corresponds to direct speech, even if the citation forms only part of another sentence within the critical commentary.
Paraphrase and summary of the arguments of other texts correspond to indirect speech.
In both cases the analogy between presentation of speech and presentation of object texts is enforced by the convention of referring to those texts metonymically by the name of their authors.
Citation (and to some extent free indirect speech), though in a sense mediated through embedding, selection and recontextualisation, creates the illusion of unmediated access to other arguments.
Paraphrase, summary and other forms of indirect representation of other texts allow for a greater transformation of the object text, from minor rewordings to allegorical exegesis.
When different levels of mediation are combined, it is possible to create the illusion of unmediated objectivity in a critical discourse which construes its object texts in quite unrecognisable ways.
Consider the following passage from de Man's discussion of Rousseau's Discourse on the Origins and the Foundation of Inequality among Men ( "second Discourse" ): The first sentence of the extract is a kind of free indirect speech (FIS), the second and third are authorial commentary, the fourth is indirect speech (IS) announced by the reporting verb "describes" and the fifth is divided between FIS and direct speech or citation.
The FIS and IS in this passage can equally be understood as "narrative report of speech act" (NRSA)(Leech and Short 1981: 323–4) which is a mode of speech summary less faithful than FIS and IS to the actual verbal structure of the original; and the ambiguity is amplified by the suggestion in the third sentence that Rousseau's text autonomously "yields" information without intervention from a critic — a sentence which could also be considered as a form of NRSA.
The ambiguity between intervention and objectivity is also present in the fifth sentence which apparently justifies its FIS with direct citation, surreptitiously translating the text while conveying fidelity to it.
The co-operation of these voices might be seen as the very essence of critical commentary: to interpret the text while refering to it with varying levels of precision.
But unlike the fictional presentation of speech, in critical presentation of object texts the fidelity of the representation to the original is testable.
This will not be my project here, though it has certainly been a feature of my engagement with de Man's criticism in general.
My interest is in examining the argumentative effects of these different categories of text representation.
I do not mean to suggest that this is an exclusively de Manian composite.
This is an argument with implications for academic argument in general, my own included.
But de Man does seem to specialise in a kind of sustained ambiguity which this passage illustrates: between different levels of intervention, and therefore different degrees of translation and transformation of the object text.
Through the interplay of these voices de Man can disguise the extent of his own intervention and, like the ventriloquist, put words into Rousseau's mouth.
3 Ventriloquy and control
Discussing Nietzsche, de Man can advance his case against what he calls "the inside/outside metaphor" in literary studies while remaining inconspicuous.
When Nietzsche is quoted directly as arguing that "tropes are not something that can be added or subtracted from language at will; they are its truest nature" , de Man's paraphrase seems innocuous: The mode of paraphrase frees de Man from the obligation of theoretical presence in his discourse while still allowing him to translate Nietzsche's text into the terms of his own problematic.
In this way, Nietzsche's remark about the trope as language's truest nature is construed as "a full reversal of the established priorities which traditionally root the authority of language in its adequation to an extralinguistic referent or meaning, rather than in the intralinguistic resources of figures" (1979: 106).
By introducing the question of reference, de Man makes the most categorical statement of his case against the authority of reference without taking personal responsibility for its formulation.
In examples such as this, de Man's argument coincides with Nietzsche's, allowing him to use the mode of paraphrase, which is characterised by a degree of authorial absence.
But de Man's position as author of the discussion is mobile, at times intruding into the text with commentary.
At such moments the commentating voice differs sufficiently from Nietzsche's to make the mode of paraphrase unavailable: The intrusive authorial voice here asks the reader to stand back with him and construe Nietzsche for the purposes of his own argument.
This is the true point at which critical and fictional writing converge: where the strategies of de Man's argument become those of the third person omniscient narrator.
Wayne Booth (1961), to choose a narratological critic who deals exceptionally well with point of view, describes the interplay of inside and outside views of character as a control of distance which determines the reader's sympathies.
By allowing unmediated access to a character's mind the narrator constructs a close bond between reader and character based upon shared information and perspective, while at other times witholding the reader from that mind so that narrator and reader stand together in a position of judgemental distance.
In the former case, the illusion of direct access to the characters is achieved through absence of the narrative voice; direct (and, to a lesser extent, indirect) speech, and free indirect speech and thought create the illusion of unmediated experience of character.
The reader apparently makes up his/her own mind about the character, or will be disposed to share the judgements of the narrator, without the guidance of intrusive narrative commentary.
This structure of absence and intrusion corresponds to de Man's blend of quotation, paraphrase and commentary in Allegories of Reading.
De Man's dynamic of absence and intrusion controls our response to his texts — Rousseau, Nietzsche, Rilke and Proust — and therefore to an ongoing critique on reference, because texts, like characters, apparently speak for themselves in the modes of citation and paraphrase.
The more that de Man can encourage the illusion of unmediated congress between reader and text, the less obliged he is to formulate potentially alienating propositions of his own.
This rhetorical absenteeism is definitive of deconstructive reading where texts are seen to "undo" themselves, and the intervention of a reading "does not add anything to the text" (1979: 17).
De Man's discussion of Proust will illustrate this paradigm.
In Chapter 3 of Allegories of Reading de Man focuses on an episode from A la Recherche du Temps Perdu in which Marcel reflects upon the virtues of reading as a retreat from the outside world.
The passage sets up a straightforward opposition between what de Man calls "two apparently incompatible chains of connotation" : De Man's claim that these poles enter into a system of exchanges and substitutions becomes an argument that this opposition "also contains statements claiming the priority of metaphor in a binary system that opposes metaphor to metonymy" (1979: 62).
This is because metaphor is the trope of similarity and the mode of the creative imagination whereas metonymy, as the trope of contiguity, is the mode of the senses, working with literal, outside-world relations.
Marcel's reflection on the superiority of creative repose is therefore also a preference for metaphor.
What is more, de Man argues, metaphor overcomes the opposition between inner repose and outer action because Marcel's imagination gives him access to the outside world; of a kind that allows him to possess it "much more effectively than if he had actually been present in an outside world that he could then have only known by bits and pieces" (1979: 60).
The creative imagination reconciles inner and outer worlds in metaphorical synthesis.
This statement of the superiority of metaphor by Proust's text is subverted, however, by "the rhetorical structure of the text" .
The synthesis of inner and outer worlds which Marcel's imagination supposedly achieves is labelled by de Man as an "intratextual complementarity" : "the complementarity of the literal and the figural meaning of metaphor" .
But the synthesis is fractured when Marcel recognises an external world that can confound this absolute complementarity: De Man calls this appeal to objects in their "natural state" , the "test of truth" ; it reintroduces an objective world to challenge the intratextual complementarity of inside and outside worlds: the totalised synthesis of subject and object.
The conclusion upsets the superiority of metaphor over metonymy: In what sense metonymic?
What is de Man saying about metaphor here?
Quite simply that metonymy is about outside-world relationships accessible to the senses whereas metaphor is about relationships between inside and outside worlds.
Appealing to the "test of truth" , to objects in their natural state unmediated by consciousness, is an interference between these two sets of relationships and therefore a disruption of the opposition advanced by the text between metaphor and metonymy.
But is this a general rule about metaphor, abstractable from the context of discussing Proust?
I will discuss this in section 4 below.
The disruptive rhetorical structure in this case turns out to be the undecidability between inside and outside worlds within the figure of metaphor.
Since metaphor co-operates in this passage with the inner world of repose, its internal reliance upon the literal denotation of an outside world actually subverts its own function.
To illustrate the point, de Man considers, among others, Proust's image of the iridescent foundation, which "aims at the most demanding of reconciliations, that of motion and stasis" (1979: 68).
De Man places the image firmly on the side of the inner world, a metaphor that functions as the paradigm of the synthetic power of Marcel's imagination.
It is "infallibly associated with the thematics of metaphor as totalisation" and "the perfect analogon for the figure of complementarity" (1979: 69).
There is no doubt in de Man's mind that the image plays a central role in Proust's thematic opposition, but when one follows "Proust's own injunction" to submit the image to the "test of truth" , the function of the image is subverted: "statements or strategies that tended to remain unnoticed become apparent and undo what the figure seemed to have accomplished" .
This is a clever strategy.
It imputes to Proust's text the ability to contradict itself without intervention.
But the intervention is manifest to anyone who has read Proust without perceiving any explicit alignment of metaphor with the world of repose, metonymy with the outer world.
As with the discussion of Rousseau's "second Discourse" , de Man translates an opposition into the terms of his own problematic and then proceeds as if this translation had not taken place.
He justifies construing the opposition between repose and action, or inner and outer worlds as that of metaphor and metonymy on the grounds that the former is the trope of "imagination" and "totality" , the latter the trope of "senses" and "fragmentation" .
The insight that references to the outer world encroach upon, or are necessarily "always already" in the figure of metaphor — that metaphor works metonymically — is offered in support of the conclusion that the figural dimension subverts rather than co-operates with Marcel's valorisation of the inner world.
The conclusion is patently the wrong way around.
For if metaphor is indeed metonymic, either in general or specifically in Proust's choice of images, it demonstrates only that the alignment of metaphor and metonymy with the dialectic of inner and outer worlds was imperfect from the start.
Moreover, this imperfection is then attributed to Proust himself.
When de Man subjects the metaphor of the fountain to "Proust's own injunction" to submit the image to the "test of truth" , he apparently loses sight of the way that his own conception of metaphor as "intratextual complementarity" of inside and outside has led him towards the aporia.
The "test of truth" , which is de Man's own phrase, contradicts the idea of metaphor as an internal totalisation, in a way that Marcel's valorisation of an inner world is not contradicted by the idea that there is an external reality.
De Man's progress towards the aporia of hidden and manifest content in Proust is nothing more than the elaboration of his initial imperfect translation.
Yet the aporia reached between "at least two mutually exclusive readings" which "asserts the impossibility of a true understanding, on the level of the figuration as well as of the themes" is presented as the text's self-deconstruction.
And we didn't even see his lips move.
4 Controlling sympathy for a theory of language
This is more than just a subtle interweaving of his own and Proust's problematics.
This movement in and out of his own text also determines the persuasive force behind de Man's "theory of language" .
De Man controls the response of his readers to controversial propositions about language in two ways: by attributing these propositions to his object texts, and by controlling the distance between reader and object text according to his own oscillation between uncritical proximity and critical distance to those texts.
Let us consider the pivotal proposition of the section on Proust, that the "relationship between the literal and the figural senses of a metaphor is always…metonymic" .
The context of this proposition is de Man's description of the internal tension in Proust's text of metonomy and metaphor.
For the most part this description advances by paraphrase and quotation, so that de Man's own voice is relatively silent and unintruding.
The key word is "always" .
It turns from Proust's text and looks outward to the language system in general; and at the same time it represents de Man's voice speaking from outside and intruding into Proust's text.
The reader's relationship to Proust's text switches from the closeness, produced by paraphrase and quotation, of listening to the text speaking for itself, to a more removed perspective from which de Man and his reader stand back from that text and speculate on a general rule about language.
There is however an ambiguity produced by the juxtaposition of the two perspectives.
On the one hand we can consider de Man's intervention as that of the commentating voice formulating the rule that is illustrated by Proust.
On the other hand we can decide that this is not properly an intervention at all, but the paraphrased rendering of an insight about language whose formulation belongs not to de Man but to Proust.
This ambiguity obfuscates the distinct voices of Proust's text and de Man's and divides the responsibility for the proposition.
It is in this ambiguous mode between paraphrase and commentary that de Man articulates his most extreme propositions about the nature of language.
The following is a selection from Allegories of Reading of propositions implicated in this oscillation between the poles of paraphrase and free-standing theory: Each of these propositions is demonstrably embedded in the same ambiguous modality as de Man's presentation of Proust.
The phrase "all language" of quotations three and seven, the general term "language" of quotation four, and the use of "paradigm" in quotations two and eight, all function like the word "always" in the proposition discussed in the previous paragraph: they shift the focus of an immanent critique or paraphrase outward to formulate a general claim.2 The comparison between these propositions and the one already discussed is not perfect.
Quotation three, for example, explicitly announces its mode by naming Nietzsche as the source of the proposition.
In this case, however, the term "deconstruction" points to de Man's unfaithful translation of Nietzsche's argument into terms that serve his own argument: it therefore operates the same ambiguous structure of voices that we have observed in the discussions of Rousseau and Proust.
This ambiguity is not always recognised by critics, such as Christopher Norris (1988: 83), who cites quotation 1 as de Man's own argument without heed to its context as part of a paraphrase of an argument by C.S. Peirce.
Indeed this selection of propositions reads like a summary of what is generally taken to be de Man's contribution to the theory of language.
There is (to my knowledge) no critical discussion of who is saying what in de Man's work.
This ambiguity of voices co-operates with the rhetoric of textual autonomy whereby texts are seen to undermine themselves without intervention.
If Booth's (1961) narratology helps to clarify the function of this rhetoric as an unconscious condition in which the reader's judgements are controlled, it also helps us to understand the moral personality of the intrusive commentating voice: the tone of commentary at those moments in the argument when de Man speaks most unequivocally in his own voice.
In the discussion of Proust, a blank space interrupts the argument, signifying the end of the section in which A la Recherche du Temps Perdu is seen to speak against itself, and the re-entry of the commentating voice of de Man: The intellectual personality is unmistakable.
This is the detached voice of reason judiciously intervening without allegiances into a debate in which it has been for the most part silent.3 The intervention reinforces the distinction between what Proust's text does to itself and what de Man does to it, positioning him with the reader at a critical distance from, and therefore in shared judgement of, his own argument.
It aims to soothe the reader by articulating and appropriating any objection.
But this kind of charm must not deflect us from what de Man is saying.
Read his lips.
His final concern is for what he calls the "real movement of Proust's novel" .
Is de Man now going to tell us that his liberal construal of Rousseau carries the authority of objective validity?
Immediately before posing this question, an opposition has been set up between what de Man calls the "aesthetically responsive" reading and the "rhetorically aware" reading.
This is a choice between two types of reading, in that one can choose between them on the basis of whether the novel's contradictions are to be articulated and sustained in the act of reading ( "rhetorically aware" ) or suppressed by the reading ( "aesthetically responsive" ).
We have seen that de Man has insisted upon understanding the undoing of thematic patterns by rhetorical structures as something that the text does to itself.
The reading can therefore pay attention to or ignore this movement in the novel.
The idea that the text in some way performs a deconstruction upon itself effectively validates the rhetorical reading in terms of the text's actual movement: if the text "actually" contains these contradictions, the choice between "rhetorically aware" and "aesthetically responsive" paradigms is that between complete and partial readings.
The rhetoric of textual autonomy establishes an ontological justification for the choice of "rhetorical reading" as a paradigm.
The paradox then is this.
Under the rubric of the deconstruction of subject and object, the distinction between text and reading disappears.
Hence de Man's constant use of "reading" as a property of the text rather than an intervention from without.
Yet when it suits him, de Man reintroduces the subject/object distinction, as in this case where the reader is presented with a free choice between two approaches to reading, approaches which are then subject to validation in terms of the object.
Consider then the added confusion of viewing the reading activity as "allowing the text to deconstruct its own metaphors" .
The reading subject allows the object-text the freedom of its own auto- deconstruction, which is already a fusion of subject and object where reading is an autonomous property of the text.
For de Man the opposition of subject and object is neither conflated nor maintained, neither resolved nor left in any kind of productive tension, and the persuasive force of his argument depends upon the very slippage between these two rationales.
This confusion is the very essence of the concept of an "allegory of reading" .
De Man asks whether Proust's novel is "the allegorical narrative of its own deconstruction" .
That is to say, is it a coded account of its own contradictions that come out in reading?
A gross tautology is at work here.
If he answers his own question in the affirmative (which he clearly does) de Man will have read the text in a certain way and therefore construed it as an object, the discovery of which will then be used to validate the way in which the text has been read.
De Man expresses the universal significance of an allegory of reading in terms of this tautology: We can see the confusion here between the narrative of the novel and the narrative constructed by reading, effected by the idea that one is the allegory of the other.
Contradictions in the novel justify contradictions sustained by the reading, despite having been produced by the reading in the first place.
This relationship of mutual support between reading and text displaces the authorising criteria of true and false in critical activity.
De Man has two personae in his discussion of Proust, one which performs a rhetorically aware reading, and the other which decides rationally between types of reading.
Complicity between the two personae is betrayed by using the reading performed to justify the choice made.
But the passage hides this relationship in a structure of interplay between authorial presence and absence.
De Man can make both his boldest claims about the nature of language and his most subtle valorisations between methods of reading without himself pronouncing: in the fictional disguise of a narrator who is not always present.
In de Man's case, this structure confuses the issues of "the text as it is" and "the text as it is construed" .
It seems necessary to remind de Man (who claims that "deconstruction is not something that we have added to the text but it constituted it in the first place" ) of Todorov's statement that de Man himself quotes in Blindness and Insight:
5 Conclusion
This argument has a significant consequence.
One of the problems of opposing what deconstruction has had to say about language is that, according to deconstructionists like Miller and de Man, to do so is to oppose language itself.
But when the idea of self-deconstruction is seen as a fiction, no such tact is necessary.
I do not have the room to articulate this opposition here, but only to point to it via the already observed generalising tendency in de Man's thought.
In fact the critique of reference generalises about language in two ways.
In the examples that I have taken, he generalises from literary language to an account of all language.
And second, he generalises from what Jakobson (1960) would call the poetic function of language to an exhaustive account of an utterance's meaning.
Thus, whereas for Jakobson the "poetic function" co-exists in any given utterance with the "referential function" , de Man takes the poetic function as the sole function, not only of literature, but of language in general.
For Jakobson (1960), the poetic function merely dominates the referential function in literature, whereas for de Man, the poetic function negates the referential function and renders the entirety of language self-referential.
We might, while comparing de Man's absolutism to Jakobson's relational categories, add that there is no sign of a distinction at all in de Man's work between the poetic and the metalingual function.
For him, a message that draws attention to itself necessarily conveys information about the "code" or language system from which it is constructed.
Stories for de Man are, like Rousseau's parable and Proust's image, metalingual allegories, and this accounts for the ease with which he passes from specific examples to general rules about language.
In de Manian parlance, to generalise is to conflate and to totalise, and this means not only crossing but negating the boundaries between language and metalanguage, literature and criticism, and literature and non-literature.
But the critique of the critique of reference is not obliged to go through Jakobson or any other categorical linguist to re-establish these boundaries.
For the movement from immanent proximity to critical distance in de Man's authorial voice has already done that work.
It is a movement which reasserts, rather than negates, the possibility of authoritative validifiable reference to an object.
The power of stylistic analysis to reveal rhetorical strategy in non-fiction has applications beyond de Man and deconstruction.
De Man's writings on language theory, like his wartime journalism, merely remind us that it is sometimes important to hold the ventriloquist responsible for the pronouncements of his dummy.