

Where are we up to?
To look at er  tutorial programme for next year.
I'm sorry if I'm a bit switched off I don't  what you've been doing !
Qui qui er  I actually do feel quite drained, fairly
Yeah, I must admit I do.
length session with the old er  er  tax there  and somebody got quite heated and  whatever but  you know, got there.
Anyway
We heard.
Yeah?
Yeah we did yeah.
Yes we've been told.
Were you inside here were you?
We could hear it from outside .
Oh you could hear it?
Occasionally yeah.
Oh !
Really?
So 
Ah, there was  some disagreement it wasn't that bad.
Right
Expect I'll hear  
tutorial programme, we talked last, last term er and I said that  I'd like to  as soon as possible put up a complete programme of titles, it would be nice if we could have a little  er  what am I supposed to call them?
Programme of study outline to alongside it a a as all part of the erm  er  process of of of upping
the level of er  credibility if you like, of the tutorial programme.
So, really I don't know what's the best way to to to to start, just ask you give a brief resume of where you're at, if you've done  if you've got it in hand, if you haven't got it hand  erm  and then perhaps when we've done that we might er  look at possible resources and stuff  get off now.
Does that seem a reasonable way forward?
Can I
Yeah,
Sandra?
Well can I  point first though?
Yeah.
Reviews, targeted reviews  are they on the firing line or not?
I don't know, I never asked them I'm sorry!
Because
Do you want me to go and ask them?
Yeah cos if you could clarify that point it might  or tell the pressure we're under.
I'm  I I couldn't, I know I had a document and I said to you that we were .
I read it and we were out.
 

Yeah.
But then
Don't know how he does that.
But English weren't
But 
Are yo so just
Just said yesterday didn't he?
Yeah,co well if he clarifies it then we know where we are.
That means I get done twice!
And you need done as far as I'm concerned !
When is it, the end of September ?
Yeah but they're the week before.
as if we haven't got enough on our plate!
The thing 
Mm.
that is stupid Terry is key stage four!
It is an ordinary form .
key stage four , three weeks into key stage four!
I'm looking for that er  , you didn't ge you didn't find that planner did you?
What?
One of those planner things that Rod was talking, I couldn't find mine.
I haven't got one.
I've got , I've got a 
I looked.
blank one.
No.
I've never had one of them.
Well that wa I got a blank one.
 
What are those Marian, you don't get one of those last time?
I got  one of these.
Yeah.
Start planning, well you got those are the weeks of the year
Mhm.
so you can actually write in, you know the  at 
Oh!
half term, summer term 
Oh I see  
sorry!
Half term, Christmas term
Oh!
Is it half terms?
My  well, I've got technology and all sorts tha on there.
Do you want another one Mil?
Aye, cos I've .
Er, well I didn't have much  .
I'll find it when I get back to school.
Did you, got a copy of this Dave?
Yes, right.
It's right behind us.
Is it A three.
It won't do that.
It'll only do A four.
You want me to do two  you won't copy that very well but I'll give it a go.
It's just if Rod wanted to write notes this is the last blank one I've got.
Well I can only A four.
Have you got a blank on there that's not written on?
Yes.
Okay, if he needs a blank one you can give him yours.
Yes.
And I'll keep this master 
Yeah , mm.
and we'll do it
Okay.
it's just, I didn't want to use my last one up.
As I say, that's my last one as well.
Well i if we ke 
If you keep that.
Right, so he, well he might not need one 
If he needs it.
if I can give him that one.
That was exciting wasn't it!
Let's get you organised!
Well can I just say in in the interim 
What on earth do you take Anthony, that's what I want to know!
Just  .
Oh I can see your !
I get awfully excited when you start a conversation cos I 
Right.
say, and then you don't say a word!
a nice person, I didn't know this, I found it in resources, but this, I sent for this book and I don't, Rod's referred to it I think and is now  this bit.
that's the, this is this years!
Oh!
Oh God !
Er, I don't know what, and I think he,we he sent for that book, I sent for this   and its different issues  which you can possibly used in erm  P S D se er, etcetera  and  there's a number which I feel  work across the years  rather than just  you know, sort of one year book  for example there's a a unit there Terry and
Mhm.
that  it's on changing schools, hope and fears
Mm.
and anything that needs to be photocopied you've got er  a teacher resource  it's about feeling nervous, you know, what can you do?
And 
I'm  I'm sure my lot would like it.
and there's a thing here you know about   read about it  but it's erm  these are these
Just a minute.
what to do if erm  you know, you're arriving at your first day or  things like that.
Mhm.
Especially, is er  economics  no 
No.
it's not.
it's not a different 
Erm 
one.
Get bollocked by the year tutor!
There's one on homework
Yeah.
there's one for er  bullying
Mhm.
understanding industry  er  
And .
rights and responsibilities, air pollution  here you can you  develop and 
Yeah.
and pro , reviewing your progress which I think's good.
But there was
I've got a  what do you me call on that  roo , er an assembly on why we, why do we have rules.
Yeah, I think I have as well.
I mean, I'm 
Yeah.
trying to think of what new schools and what making a new start, this er, for your file
Mhm.
waste recycling er er, I can't remember where I read, I read it through somewhere it was I felt quite good.
I yo how green I mean 
Homework.
isn't that what 
My 
you do in year nine 
 
isn't it?
Although they'll be doing that last.
 
Small kind of  
Particularly in conjunction use ten and eleven.
Don't know, and I want  for as well for options cos I want to get everything done, I already forewarned them last time 
Would er 
that I want everything prepared  before I go.
It's just that I have arranged to meet him tonight sometime to sort out a few things for me  would of made a lot more sense if he'd been here!
Who?
Well Rod.
Mm.
Particularly  the latter half 
Oh!
of year nine and all of 
Yeah.
year ten and eleven.
Yep.
We work in conjunction .
Right there there's a there's an interesting sheet there, what should I do?
I mean that's the one example about arriving at a new school.
Mm.
What should I do if I arrive late and miss registration ?
Mm.
What should I do if I fall down and cut myself during break?
If I leave my packed lunch 
Yes.
at home  and I have haven't any money?
Lose something ?
I'll definitely use that
Get a headache ?
in getting to know 
Year seven 
new year seven 
Oh yeah for year seven 
Aha.
Definitely.
it's good, yeah!
What should I do if I leave school at eleven thirty because I've got a dental appointment?
Erm  I need to phone home because I have stay late?
My bike's tampered with?
I missed the bus?
Do you think  
I break a window ?
Mhm.
Is there really?
Well no, what do I do about  if I get given a detention?
Aha.
Any   you know the, and all these things  are sort of if .
And that's in the teacher's book?
That's the so , in their copy book.
Oh brilliant!
And  but to cover a  a number of issues that we deal with  in what, you know
Yeah.
so  I'm just making it 
Is this supposed to be ?
available.
What?
This  was supposed to be in here?
No.
Oh!
We might get somewhere.
Okay, I I was just tha while you were chatting to boss  these books came  and they have a  a number of  different things which  you know, from changing schools 
Did you send away for them then Sandra or did they 
Yeah, sections er, Longmans were in and they had them.
Oh Longmans were in were they ?
I  
Who was in  Longmans?
Longmans.
Oh!
Who they are?
I haven't heard of them!
I mean, there's a thing that might be very  prevalent  with bullying, you know why do people get bullied 
Yeah.
how do you feel about it?
And they're all very pupil friendly.
So there's  wa one 
And because we're doing this do we get them discount?
Okay.
Erm
I you know da I wasn't viewing your progress one, I had ta using that one 
Yeah.
just  but play safe  you know, fireworks, be safe 
Mm.
not sorry!
What is safety?
Pocket one.
So it's 
 
there we've photocopied both things.
You see there's a general principle there is quite a lot of information in that cupboard  that I keep saying's there, have a look and as we get stuff 
Oh yeah, I know what you mean.
hand it out.
I mean  how much is that set?
We  we we've got
Sorry, I'm just  I didn't do that, it just  
 
You come out from there 
 
Anne's looking for you!
I was looking for the Mr  because I remembered I said I would be here in this session and I'd forgotten.
By the bar.
He's he's gone in the bar just for 
Couldn't help but er  It's the single place, I di I didn't see him 
Yeah,
next door.
Yeah.
Oh!
I I 
It's er the act the the whole se , the teacher's book is seven forty five  no, the resource book seven twenty five, and the teacher's  fesh er, the book itself is four ninety five.
So 
Well I mean we've got money, haven't spent any money yet.
Well you'd only need four teacher's packs  oh and there'd be five, one for the tutor and  er, four teachers  so you could, you know
I mean da in fact, do people wanna have a quick look and se a and give me a
Mm mm.
over the next day and a bit, yeah go for it, get it!
We've got the money.
Mm.
I mean, it's one of the things  I wanna include in our discussion if we get round to it about  having more resources available.
yeah.
But I've just been talking to the head there and he said you know  that  you know  the tor tutorial programme, Mrs  started it all  erm
Miss   did she?
Ah!
six years ago, seven years ago and  you know it's moved on from there and I made the point, yes it was started in the point  a at the level of, there's a file it's got information, get on with it!
Get on with it!
We're passed that now  we're trying to give people more direction, get them involved  er  this is the first year we've able to do it  in a sense, properly cos it's been the first year, with all due respect to all the work you've done in the past, we've got five year tutors.
Mm.
Right.
Er  so, anyway  resources, that's 
 
part of it, have a look at it, Sandra, if you pa if you pass it onto each other and then just say that I think that's worth getting cos we do have the money now  er  to to start and look at things like that.
I've just asked him about the collaborative review  the focus is apparently on national curriculum so that means maths, English and , but they want to look ge more general issues and because they're in on a Wens Tuesday and a Wednesday  he said that they would go in a look at, three of them would go in a look at taught tutorial lessons  they will want to talk to me about the tutorial programme  I would hope that that would involve somebody else cos I've  got the  bit of the fence that I sit on  and  ask one or two of you to give your opinion if, if you're available.
So they would actually be in a lesson with tutors  we would nominate who you'd want them to go in with  so  I'm not saying do it now  you've all got your programmes  I assume, sorted for  the first half term anyway  an erm, pretty well tied up, should be  erm  so really it's down to saying who they're gonna go in with  er
When is the collaborative review?
Review.
Was it not the third Wednesday?
I think it's at the week.
We are being seen in Science, twenty ninth and thirtieth.
Oh that's a Tuesday and Wednesday 
the next one.
isn't it?
So 
That  fourth week.
Is that the fourth week?
Yep.
Yeah.
So it's this then.
That's the thirtieth of September.
I  by then.
I'm just giving you a spread sheet and this blank page and 
Oh bless you, thanks!
give you a  did you give him a blank page?
No, I said if he needed it!
If he need, right got one.
He might not need it!
Cos we've changed that very much didn't we?
Well we started working in this one that I've got here.
Okay, so you sort of nine, ten, eleven cos we had fun and games with
Do you want me to come round there so you can read 
 
this sheet as well?
No it doesn't matter you lot can keep me right.
Okay.
You lot, that sounds awful!
You lot !
was organised.
Right.
But  can you remember what you wrote down on yours?
I ca I ca I can't find mine, I found these papers  and I can't find what I've written in mine.
Well  first block, environmental awareness.
That was the first seven weeks.
Yeah.
Then there's a blank.
Then there's a blank for weeks eight to thirteen.
Mhm.
Then week fourteen  to nineteen was options
Curriculum choice  careers options.
involveme , involvement of careers officers.
That was next term.
As ja , that 
Yes.
no the er it's the la 
Yes, that's 
the last week of Christmas  term  and then the next week's  er then  the twe 
No , I didn't have it before Christmas.
I've got January the fourth, in 
Aha.
fifteen to twenty one on mine.
Mhm.
Fifteen, and so the ju what?
Fifteen to twenty one?
I've got fifteen to twenty one on my options curriculum choice, careers officer, Ian .
Oh okay,fifte , I'll  go with that.
I'm not gonna ar , I mean that's just what I've got down.
Oh that's er  er involvement career's officers
Sorry!
Does that have nothing else after that?
And anything, then national testing  I've got down the twenty four er, week thirty two to week  thirty seven.
What?
National testing  SATS.
National curriculum reporting, test er, SATS and national curriculum reporting 
Oh, gonna say something !
and parent's evening  is a that's all pulling together  and tha , that's it.
Anyone want a Mintoe sweet?
Please.
No.
Okay?
I'll find it 
Is that all?
to er tomor 
Mm.
er Monday when I get back, I can't find it at the moment.
So there's not a lot of point if I say well can you tell me what you're doing?
Aha.
No because  I had a meeting yesterday with the kid, with the kids! 
Freudian slip there !
And er  I had asked there was anything you know, they would be interested in  and they all agreed that they wanted to start with banking, and wha , see what Sandra had done last er ta last year with a group that they thought was very good  getting them to be aware 
Yeah that sounds .
Er , finding chance  doing a budget 
 

erm  er er er was it
Different types like loan services 
oh it was ah  now even  a resource pack 
 
that Sandra's just got recently  and  it's rather good, I rather liked it.
You'd better!
I don't think though, this might, it's a very  ones they're just like building society.
Right.
More into budgeting, the video etcetera.
Well, the thing is  what's happening, I thought we might spend some time on if wanted, what I wanted to do was to be sure in my own mind  that  by the second week I could put up a master sheet  with all the headings of what you were doing, that's gotta be done.
Of what we're doing now.
Right.
Yeah.
Right?
So you've gotta get your fingers out if you haven't done it and get it organised!
Aha.
That's number one.
That's not to say it's innumerable
Mhm.
because if something happens, I think  it's important for tutorial programme it can respond to what's happening
Mhm.
and if something happens that we feel is important and so one of your form tutors has something that they're committed to and you wanna bring that in that's fine.
Mm.
But you do have to look at looking at  you know, as I've said across the five years.
So at the start of the second week I will want to put a master sheet up with all the headings on
Mhm.
with what you're doing.
And I was just 
 
gonna say to you for my benefit 
We can tear that 
Yeah.
you've been stuck up against them.
For my benefit  would you just like to sort of give me a quick rattle through  as as as to what you intend to do.
Right,i is that fair?
Yep.
Do we start?
Well I'm 
Top up bottom down  bottom 
Well 
top down.
both really.
Go on then David.
Mine's a short list.
Well obviously week one  is just informal, sorting out any problems with time tables  changing the records etcetera  we agreed on that.
Mm.
I've then got  rolling  I A P's with  Rob and whoever it is that got to help us  with individual action planning
Right.
for two weeks  switching over after two weeks and repeat the same process, at the same time the other two groups will be doing personal statements.
Right.
I've yet to soc totally confirm the number of weeks Mrs  wants during the first two sessions  that's up to week fourteen  when she wants exactly to do the aids.
Right.
Again, which will be exactly the same as I A P  two classes in  doing the age whilst the other class is not, there they'll be doing personal statements
Mhm.
except for the form teachers with me helping them as well and Uncle Don
Right.
for the computer etcetera.
And you'll make sure Dave's in the picture about 
Mm.
personal statements and what you did to build on your experience etcetera, etcetera, etcetera etcetera.
Mm.
We
That's the sad thing because we're not in the same office any more.
Makes no odds.
Mm.
Oh a million miles away!
I know!
You can use my desk.
I tell you what, we'll get that  in  same as on what we've got.
Exactly !
Should of 
Shut up!
put Vil in the corner!
Mm.
Where your desk is.
I can just shout through the wall!
They could of just shouted through!
And the cracks would have appeared!
Go on Dave, sorry!
Twelve , thirteen and fourteen are  something I'm not very aut fait with  as regards tutors I'm not anyway  is the interim report that goes out  after 
Mm.
they've done their mocks.
I  Milly and I will sort you out on that.
Weeks fifteen to twenty one  is  subject specific and all the details that have to come in and make up  a record of achievement.
Pardon, what makes those Dave?
Fifteen to twenty one.
I've got down here I A P review.
Well I haven't  a we haven't yet have I!
Oh sorry.
You're gonna get a smack round the ear in a minute  you really are !
Just bear with me a moment  we can stay the same as we on subject specifics at the moment, we don't have to change that, I'm just trying to think in the light of national curriculum and what's happening 
No.
we don't have to change anything yet.
No, that stays the 
Cos we had a 
same.
there was a big discussion about the standard report, it won't cover five years and I said it doesn't have to cover five years, it never has done  it's only covered four cos we what we do in year eleven is different anyway.
That's okay, just 
Right.
bear with me.
Obviously completing  joint statements  booking in time to go on the computers to get them typed up nicely 
Mhm.
again, with myself  perhaps Milvia  if I need her, and obviously Uncle Don  cos he's the  the attack person.
Weeks twenty and twenty one we do the summative documents for the I A P  Sandra?
Twenty, twenty one?
Yes  has to be finished there.
The then that leaves me just basically five weeks or four weeks to tie up everything and get ready for the record of achievement  obviously
Where's your curriculum statements?
But I've said the 
But they're ongoing you don't have to worry about 
they're ongoing all the time.
tutorial do you?
That's subject specific.
No.
No!
Have I said  I've said those would come in from the departments.
You mean  the sheet that has all the subjects?
Mm.
Right.
Well I've got that written down as the beginning of what goes in but e , I don't actually do those the departments do them.
No.
No!
No!
Subject specific, curriculum statement is a summation of all the courses they're doing.
You need that in January.
That can actually be done , that can be done in two weeks.
Yeah, it's very simple.
As long as all the subjects have  the maths held us up for ages, and the science for ages!
What?
Not being able to decide where the
Mm.
Every course 
What 
every course is numbered
Yes I know.
and the curriculum statement, all the kids do  is on a sheet put the number of the courses 
Mm.
they're following  so that needs updating  and I'll, I'll go through that with you.
That needs updating and then they just indicate the number 
I've  studies on.
and get the sheet printed out that has all their courses on it.
And it .
And it goes in front.
That's not a problem.
There's no problem!
.
I I know!
But i i it's yo you can't do it  this term  because maths is never ready  it always has to be done  erm  next term.
So you need  to find, you can, I actually did it with Paul  's class in one week!
Yeah.
I just sat there, got them all out one at a time and did the whole damn lot!
But some people it took three weeks to do I don't know how the hell it did that, and I didn't even know 
I had to keep checking the only one I had to keep checking was Dick's.
Ah well.
I ended up doing Dick's.
And the only thing I need to ask you about is that bloody great, bloody great memo, I've said it so I'll say it again  it's pinned up in my old tutor's room  what do you want me to put down on the document for the record of achievement on attendance?
Now what do we actually want to put down?
Oh aye that's new isn't it?
Right, I think what we've 
You've got a frown Sandra, on the  notice board above the fridge  it says this is to be included in next years record of achievement which I presume will have to go into yours as well after my year 
It's on , it's on Dave's.
there has to be something said about attendance.
It can't be just figures it has to be some sort of er  summation doesn't it as well or not?
Well  I would pe , I would pe prefer what I've got a record of 
 
is is percentage.
written.
Mhm.
Well you can't just put numbers down can you?
Well let's have a percentage.
It's used as the criteria for S M B!
Then the question 
It's a big, ruddy big long sheet!
Well  yeah, but that's just it what am I supposed to put on?
Exactly, so it has to be written, some sort of written
The only way you can do it at any particular point that's the trouble.
That's a form tutor's  again isn't it?
Is it?
As I da da , as Dave says as an overall percentage or to do it as we always do as a, as a termly figure.
Alright?
already have for every child  in year ten
Smack him!
their percentages  for the first three 
 
terms all written down.
Aha.
Because as far as I'm concerned that is the best way er  that's how I do it for S M B, that's the criteria for that certificate that they get.
I'm doing that as well.
Mm.
Sandra?
Can I just
Got any objection?
Attendance  can I just erm  ask  is it  er  possible attendance less unexplained absence  or is it  actual attendance plus  explained absences  for attendance?
Well
Attendance  it is.
Isn't it?
You haven't got anything 
Attendance.
positive and you can't forget about the 
te 
negatives either 
No 
attendance.
but
it's an overall
what are the con it it's  with some schools are putting in
Justifiable.
are putting in  they have high attendance rates because they're including explained absences  you know, as justified  you know, and putting them with the actual attendance 
Well yeah.
figures.
Primary schools are doing that.
They are, they're doing that!
So what 
Right.
do they mean?
I don't know.
We need to Sue  
 
to get that clarified.
Well I'll tell you what  that's gonna be an awful job if it is!
Well
That could be a horrendous 
It's ju 
job!
You see my 
years so we're starting from scratch.
my attitude is  if you're not in school for whatever the reason you're absent!
I see no objection 
But it 
to putting down 
I thought 
hospitalised for six 
Yes!
months or something.
That does, seems reasonable.
But I'm not  I'm not in the frame of mind to be saying this kid was off for a week with flu then  and was off 
Mm.
for a week with 
Oh no!
No way!
No.
But what I'm saying is some schools  they might be here seventy five days out of a hundred  but for twenty of those
Does this make a difference?
She's talking with a sweet in her mouth!
On one of those tapes.
Longmans.
the quality of sou , have you listened?
No I haven't, I 
Oh 
haven't listened to it.
you listen afterwards, it's great!
continue
You might from the national
on seventy five days
She's eating a toffee as well!
but out of the ninety 
Mm.
Hard to talk !
he could be there  he's got a note for  fifteen  cos he had flu for three weeks  therefore he's  attendance.
Absent.
And sh excuse me but  what I do not want happening on records of achievement as regards cos we are totally honest  and I could name a school not too far from us
where they're including things like that
Mhm.
and they're attendance patterns look excellent!
Mhm.
Oh they 
Yeah.
do!
and my concern is  that our children are going to go into the er  work place  to try and  you know establish their own 
It's a disadvantage, yeah.
thing  at an advantage because we're being
It's true, we're being honest.
Totally honest.
Yet other areas aren't, that's true.
You see something like a doctors appointment or a hospital appointment I think deserves and attendance  because they're given er a dental card or yo you're shown it, you know, they've given to you to 
they're not classed as absent.
Are they not?
No.
They are as a rule.
They are  
They are?
if they go first thing in the morning.
If, if they don't go first thing in the morning I've seen people write down absence all day  or all morning.
Yeah, but we we're getting into the area there where form teachers are doing it as well, they are not absences!
Ah well!
Right.
They are if the chap 
Yes.
doesn't come to school.
If the child isn't in for the mark prior going to the doctors at ten o'clock  they're absent even if they have a note.
If they don't register their absence  according to our system.
Mm.
Or they're late  if they come in at ten o'clock.
Well at the end of the day ignoring those er  slight tangents  that's gonna be a horrendous job for all 
Right.
those writing that out!
What I will do, two things 
 
we'll talk to Sue  Dave that needs to be, to find out  if we can, what's happening elsewhere  cos she can through her colleagues  and I will also I I don't think I'll ring Margaret  but I'll give Terry  a ring  Morden who's the record of achievement guy there and get on quite well with him  just to find out  what sort of tap they're taking on it  cos er  yeah, I I take very much what Sandra's saying as don't want our youngsters to be disadvantaged in anyway if others are  lies, damn lies and 
 
statistics bit!
Yeah.
We'll go with it.
Sandra?
Before we move on because we're getting 
Just a slight er er, a slight 
bogged down with attendance.
it's a tangent it's just another thing to be aware of er  that certain  put their exam  but it's along the same thing cos I know what's happening  and they're not writing G C S E but they're writing exam entries  so many pupils  x number of subjects  so many passes  okay?
And what they're including  are unit acs  and things like that.
Well, yeah right.
But if  and that's if they were   attendance 
Mm.
is no better.
No.
, damn lies and statistics!
Yep.
Not playing that game at the moment.
Thank you for that
beautiful information
What I'll, it's your turn on .
So the only thing I need to address is finding time to put curriculum statement in and we need to clarify that situation  so you know why you're at and quite happy.
Yes, I'm quite happy I'm just building up with Rob  with the I A P's
I was going to say that needs  sort of tying in your  okay with that?
No problem.
Okay.
Remember there's a file on top on my filing cabinet where both Trish  worked out  sort of simple lesson plans  er, before we actually put them on  oh they're going up, not use the computer now are we?
We're not using the computer.
But it's 
Okay.
a way of making them aware if you want them to start doing  thinking of it, what was it, personal statements we did?
Personal development plans.
Right.
Sand ?
Right  I  have changed what I was going to do somewhat  after yesterday's meeting  erm
I  can I 
I put 
while I I think I shall ask you for a sheet with that  sort of 
Mhm.
laid out so I can pull it all together.
Right.
Erm
Everyone that is.
The year  erm  which was done last year myself, self assessment and that  I've actually my form tutor to suggest it and they are reasonably positive, like sixty five percent  to move into
God !
Damn positive, through those  
How how's sixty 
!
How do you work sixty five percent out when you've got four of them, this is interesting!
It's a majority 
You said seventy five?
isn't it?
Mm.
I've got two 
Two and a bit.
one will be with me  one will come with me cos they're always doing things wrong and then shout at them!
And the other two will do  the marginal bit.
 
Right.
Oh dear dear!
So that's the reasonable.
So which one of them do you want the er  advisor to go in with?
Fifteen love!
Oh dear!
So we've
I know which one I'm gonna put in !
Mhm.
Oh yeah,!
I'll be 
Mhm.
Isn't it a shame Dick  's left!
I know !
He hasn't!
Has he?
Has he?
No no 
No.
not really not in my year group.
Right!
Getting back to this  they're starting, the first two weeks I've for timetables, administration etcetera that's the  which was agreed whenever.
One week I thought we agreed, but never mind!
I hadn't amended that bit but I'll amend it and sta and write up proper.
I've asked them as well and this might take them into the second week er to start with their pupils  process on a Wednesday morning  whereby in each classroom there would be  a me master year plan  even if it means they have to buy four and divide it up  but I su I suggest that I would do something, you know, produce one  and on that they will write pertinent to the the form  to the form  er  and continue to add on that over, you know as and when it's relevant  er, dates for completion of course work, it might be module testing etcetera  and I'm going to ask at briefing that any  anything that a teacher has  put down for children, it might be just you know Mi Mr x's group  is mentioned at briefing  so  they can write down what's pertinent to them  and therefore
Good idea!
the teacher acts as a conscience  I I explained to them I'm not expecting them to make the child do the work, but to be their conscience so they can say look you've got three assessments coming in that week  if you leave it till Friday night you're up the creak without a paddle!
So they're going to be the conscience and the parenting for that year group  and I also suggested that at that time, I think what Rob's doing is getting the children to look at themselves  er, as regards what their strengths and weaknesses are and the P S D have got to clarify that.
I wanted them to ste start doing a self assessment on the child about their strengths and weaknesses  leading o , into the I A P  right  and coming through with that what they would like to achieve  in  where they'd like to go two years hence.
Part of that would be that they identify that that's, I'm going there two years hence that's the pathway  and it's too late to wait until  next January  a year from January and suddenly realise they need six G C S E's, a, b, c  when they've lost half their grades on the course work to date.
So  really  I need to firm up with them, I've dropped the seeds in to firm up the process  and they're going to work through that with the kids  at the same time  talking about what a record of achievement is, showing them what goes inside it, the importance of it etcetera.
And compact  I would like to think that when we've looked at the kids and what's required in the I A P that we can have an industry day with them  I'm trying, I'm suggesting  er, in January.
Right.
But I need clari clarification from the boss .
So are you talking, you're saying to me that's a full term's work?
I'm looking to be pushing because I, I I might ask them to get speakers in etcetera.
I don't really know where I, or I know where I'm going but I have to  take the troops with me  I had er, I got you see what is   parts of a I A P compact certificate  it might in fact, if the boss would let me do, if I could do an industry in December  right?
What I'd like to do is have  an industry day then  and then a parent's invitation to see what the kids had done  and a quick  feedback.
But an industry in December is 
December.
you're talking about  ah, a lot of weeks in between and my concern
I'm not talking a lot of weeks in between I'm talking erm  eleven.
I class that as a lot of weeks  for the likes of  oh we're not going to names, to to occupy the borderline children 
I'm ta , I'm talking elev 
Yeah.
eleven hours!
 
We're on the same side and you know and I know that some of the troops are gonna find that, I, my opinion is that some of the troops will find that hard going  for eleven weeks  unless they know exactly what the hell they're supposed to be doing in  
Well whatever it, I would like to do after this, my discussion with them on Thursday I may bring it down  I don't know what way, what they're going to throw in cos I won't be 
Okay.
able to take , I've never done an industry day
Right.
with  the form teacher and yo and you know that has to be fairly fluid to let i incorporate their ideas  erm  but I would then  put out, you know, week seven  er, you know  review what  er, a record of achievement is  it might be  what can write  try your personal statement about yourself.
Okay.
But we'll have  statement, but you know, do that practice bit.
The only thing that occurs to me er er and now yo your veteran day from last year a a does any of that, how does   you know, cos he does it, how does any of that sit with Rob  or  do we just say  right well we do cos 
Well when I've asked  Rob 
You didn't!
I asked  had a very heated discussion  erm  where I si wanting  to be having the careers teachers in  and working with the forms etcetera  and doing it, the er job wise  and he wouldn't entertain at all 
Mhm.
in year ten!
Right.
That's why I'm left back now  trying to do something without doing job wise, I'm just hoping that these children on the P S D group.
But er, you know, as I say I know what you're saying  I won't say to him I want that done over eleven weeks, I'll say this is what we're gonna do week by week.
You, you know how I feel, I mean er Rob does a lot of good work but he keeps it all to himself and we've gotta be bigger than keeping it to ourselves, it's everybody's responsibility vocational education from  right down from year seven right the way across the board, they've gotta 
Mm.
be aware of what's going on in the world in terms of not just employment but  further o opportunities.
Mm.
And it worries me still that we, we ain't shifting him enough  er 
Mhm.
There's the cat !
I think that's why we've 
There's cats as well here!
The bone 
Beca because it was focus ma my concern Dave was wanting 
 
to know  that we've got something tied up
Mm.
Right.
Five year programme.
A five year programme.
Something tied up, something in there as a heading so every member of staff knows that at such and such a time  they are working on a heading of environmental awareness  I would like us to have a precis of what that's gonna involve  but, I shan't worry if we haven't got that  we've moved on a step 
Aha.
from last year
Fair enough.
every year I'm looking for it to move forward a little bit.
Well, what I'm suggesting doing is thi it, what are my outcomes from this?
That the form tutor shou , is going to be a conscience and really what we call a form tutor's job is going to  you know, talk to the children
Aha.
review with them where they're at, record how they're doing, you know tra , I mean I can't tell them to do that, but actually ask them to spend five or ten minutes each session talking to different pupils and  what they've been doing and you know  even if it's a personal timetable  some people won't get into it but it's  you know, trying to get them to be  what are tutors are, you know, I'd like them to do.
So that's the first outcome.
The second outcome is  that all children would be aware of what's involved in the record of achievement.
Right.
Thirdly, that each child will have assessed themselves and done the first draft of the personal action plan.
Fourthly  that each child on that action plan would have outlined where they would hope to go  and following that  have found out what the requirements are, the possible pathway through  and if they aren't sure, I was gon , what I was gonna ask was, if I could have a careers teacher in  to talk to form  about possible pathway through,i in the general terms  so they've got these four outcomes there.
Right.
Include it in that, those twelve weeks because I know it's, you know, a bit erm  I would try and see if I could set up some sex education  with the health centre and the , you know , that she used to take them and they went through contraception and condoms and whatever  at the, and she used to take them down for an afternoon  it might well be  that they have  to miss  a lesson
Little bit of light relief in terms of sex education.
Mhm.
And then
the first day in health, if we can fit it in, but by Easter term
so at their half term, February half term  I would like to think they've got those four things on, we've got 
Yeah.
an in and ecta er, an industry day done  where  you know, it's about the qualities needed in the young person, they have a certificate that they're going to have to say they've got these qualities, right?
Right.
And a compact certificate, and they've got some sex education and possibly some first aid.
Right.
If the sex education doesn't work.
So you're talking about February half term, you're talking about three half term's work  right?
Then?
Erm  erm, A ten  it the there's various units  and as a unit  erm  are the family  and I felt that perhaps  at that stage are you not on the family and what it's about.
Okay.
Er, and I would like to pick up a unit  after  every half term  but around that, you know, somewhere along  get them into something really tangible
Has has has Anne  written a unit on the family?
No, I must do that  
Yeah  
I would have a word with Anne  jus , just from 
 
stuff I wo 
It's on the list.
stuff I was listening to this morning  I don't whether that was one of the things  but she's certainly looking at  areas like that.
Christian marriage.
Was it?
Might be worth talking to her.
She's written on the marriage one but she's got 
What I 
an eleventh grade.
Mm.
All I'm suggesting is  i it could link with her so
Mm.
you know 
I would like to think that after doing the stuff and the  and that, that they actually get down to something solid.
But, you see at February  we're then into review er  cro er  reviewing the PDP's for some reason or another, I've written down here  and profiling reporting to parents.
Right.
That takes me up to Easter.
Summer term?
Well er, summer term  er, looking back at year ten  erm  is work's experience a , they're writing that  owing to personal statements and end of summer term 
Right.
following the work's experience  there is a half term there, so it can either come before that or after it  and I'll do a unit  and it might be on  safety  or, if I can't erm  first aid I might get safety in and they'll do it like that  and we'll fill in some units.
Okay.
It needs, having
And it and it's, yeah.
It's it's a long stretch of time  the troops need pinning down  with it  that's all I'm saying.
Right.
Okay?
They'll need some dates for reviewing and I'll  I'll write it down .
Okay!
Mil?
And I say I I can't, I honestly cannot remember  what I was doing, I remember the environment one because I got a module written on that  erm  I remember that I had put in er I want to do first aid and safety in the home sort of thing  er, they were three modules that I wanted  er, to do.
Options naturally come around
Weeks 
Er 
fifteen.
Pardon?
January the fourth 
Week fifteen.
week fifteen 
Yeah.
you've got.
Er, and that term there  because after the half term they have to start making their choices  isn't that right?
Yeah, option
There a 
always used to be a half term's work.
Always used to be half term, but Milvia it can only be half an hour!
It's
There's to choose for them any more!
I 
Aye, I see what you mean, right, yeah.
There's nothing at all!
There is a certain amount of choice and
Yeah, but I'm being 
I 
facetious!
There's hardly any!
But there's still, we still I mean er er you perhaps need to talk to Rob to see what he wants  his input, it's always been a bit airy fairy and there, there are sheets! the choice is not the same but they should be aware of some of the implications if they choose to go down such and such a road.
There is a need for, and I say with all due respect, an unbiased  er, piece of advice  from people who ha , don't have an axe to grind in terms of specific subjects because  some children er  in my opinion  are sometimes lead down wrong avenues
Mm.
er, to gratify in inverted 
Mm.
commas  individual teachers and we do have to be very careful about that.
I was trying to hint at that this morning that we're looking at  a whole child and sometimes  they're not gonna succeed in a subject they've put it cos there's sod all else for them to put  and we need to be aware of that.
So there is some choice  and ah, yeah, we perhaps need to think about whether  you know better from last year whether it's still a half term.
It isn't a half term just pain , mainly now to go through the options and choose it but if you were perhaps  bring in as you co , I've got written down  your careers officer
Mm.
Mhm.
for one week, say, or perha , probably have to be two cos you 
Sorry ca , can I just interrupt there?
You know how  I do , I couldn't remember that I'd actually started the  the Easter term  doing the erm  choices  etcetera, I always thought it was the later half  of that term, the latter half of that term.
It isn't, so starting in January  
But we haven't been 
Well I hadn't I hadn't written it down here 
 
as being February the eighth you were starting .
February the what?
Eighth, er  yeah.
Week twenty to 
Fine.
I don't know why but I always thought it was some nearest
And we do , what the tenth year 
the other half of that term.
what the ninth years did this year was  Rob gave them a pep talk  and  and there's a booklet, Choices, he gives out and asks them 
That's right.
to work their way through it, along with the Choices there is a vi a video to go
Mhm.
and  then they're supposed to do some work with the form teacher talking about where the strengths and weaknesses li , you know again.
But this isn't in tutorial is it?
P S D would do it.
This is tutorial this year.
Tutorial.
Yeah!
Mm!
But then 
Well in year  in 
they 
year nine how can they do it in P S D?
That's right  
Oh aye , that's er  
but the  er, the careers 
 
officer came into to er do a ans question answer session on the last one  and it was too bigger form  you know, the kids wouldn't speak.
Probably in the  !
Erm  the  er er I
ca can I just say that  the introduction  of the Choices booklet need a real bit of  it was a bit 
Who did that?
She said Rob.
Mhm.
And the vid , you see the video really should come before the Choices, the 
Mhm.
video should be there before the magazine.
And before 
Mm.
the booklet choices  and then the discussion can get going  but the careers officer  for half an hour.
Right , but one of the things we have to remember is, and I know it's sort of a sha , but you have the experience of last year  and, that has to be shared  you know to to sort of cut the corners  yo you've gotta pass it back a year  or up a year, whichever  whatever happens  and you've made a very valid comment there and you need to make note of that that, you know  somehow you have to work round Rob  to get it
Bit better.
the way  round him with him buying 
Well 
  
a minute, is there any reason why he has got to do that, because he has no other contact with year nine at all?
But he should be having contact with year nine.
Yeah but 
Rob  should be working across the school.
Mm.
But it's  it's it's hard work!
I mean
So instead of me doing, let's say, the February
Do
the eighth
the twentieth week  you're saying I should be starting this for January term?
Well what I'm looking at is you haven't got anything at all right!
No, so I'm right then Sandra?
If  
I would do them later because I tell you what happens then, there will be a ch , there may well be a choice in two columns, I don't know if that 
Yes.
one's like this  but the problem we hit this year er, we didn't do it that early  was the kids had got the forms out  then the timetable and the financing came in  and we didn't know what was happening
We didn't what staffing was.
and we actually we actually had done the options
Aye.
and then it all had to be scrapped and by the middle 
They had to do it again.
Yeah.
midnight one night to produce another form
Mm.
so I would say closer
Right.
to er  you know, really  to er th the se the the second half 
Mm.
of the
Mm.
spring term coming up to easter  because until you know your budgets and your 
What's wrong with ?
staffing, and your numbers
What's wrong with that term?
you don't know what's gonna be offered.
Doing your choice then?
Yeah.
Because in the past Dave we've actually tried to tie it in with parent's evening to sort of use it as a bit of a motivator to jeer the, gee them up  before the end
But if I 
so  if you're putting it in the second half of the second term
If I come running along here  same old bug bear cos I'm science, I still have no confirmation from anybody yet  what about these SATS that the kids do?
You're gonna have three huge curriculum areas, maths, English and science  they'll have taken their SATS  we have got to report on them
And technology do SATS this year.
you're doing, well there's four, there's half the, nearly half the curriculum the kids are doing
I'm not quite sure yet cos we're   this   chicken and egg which starts first  I think we're gonna look at a  an an interim type report in year nine  a quicker type report  I can't remember what it's, it's written down in my other diary  because what I don't want to happen is to, people to have a onerous report at the end of year nine, cos they're gonna have to do a report there now
Well they've got no choice 
No choice.
it says so!
or  and the cho , it has, this is, it has to be there by , we can actually just do a national curriculum report which gives a level, that's all!
Bum bum, levels out!
Okay?
Or a fully comprehensive report so  there's a little bit of leeway in that yet.
No, we're not saying it's the leeway might be important,cos  as I said, these choices, and Sandra will agree, there's only two columns, that isn't gonna increase!
Er, and there's actually choices within columns as well, you know the , it's split up  its do your geography, or do your geography?
Mm.
Do you French, do you Spanish?
But there is .
But it's still
Yeah.
a long  
but at the same time they shouldn't just be looking at the subjects in isolation
Mm mm.
Yeah.
they should be actually looking forward to what, if I do these 
They're gonna do.
subjects what will that then lead me into?
Right.
Mm mm.
There's the process of evaluating what's happening and that's 
Mhm mm.
important.
And er I I would honestly put it in the, in the March period  it's on the second 
Can I ask 
half of the spring term.
do you know Ta I I know Tyneside 
See I find 
i side in in the  the  er  thing for Edinburgh University, you know when they do their  careers choice  their jobs and interests information guide from the Edinburgh?
They're doing what they call a job wise  which is probably som something, they fill in a  questionnaire which say whatever 
I think that's coming in now  things that you can  
Cos you  have  erm  is normally four, four, sorry  tenth and eleventh years in sixth formers, and they've also got a subject choice  section as well, which I have used in the past  for ninth years and  it wa , it just got them thinking about things in a completely different way from what we, they've ever done 
Mm.
before  and I, I thought the cho , the subject choice was er  was good.
So?
Can't give you an answer  sorry!
And I just wondered 
I've heard of  Jigcar 
Yeah I just wo , just 
Trish wa , mentioned it to you.
Mm?
Trish mentions it.
Ah.
You see 
Yeah.
the thing, the thing though 
Mm.
I just wonder whether nor , if North Tyneside have got a contract there is absolutely no reason why
There is reason, I mean that sort of thing 
why we should use it.
I mean the filling in of the form and that and, you know, which  you in , you know what grades you've got, you're interests, what you think you're good at, what you'd like, you know the  
Mm.
all that, and then the computer analyses and comes up with areas of where they think you might be
Mm.
whereas considering the co the jo families and 
Mm.
and things, job families  er, we've got that already and we've got, there's gonna be the computer thing on careers  but you see we've only managed  this year  to get it brought down from year eleven, somebody who went into this, keeping it very close to myself, to bring it down to year ten  they're actually  you know, it's very, very difficult to let them remove it and I can't see that you can then make that down to ninth year just yet.
It's 
But subject choice is a completely separate thing to the careers 
Section of it.
cho 
Yeah!
choice.
Mm
You know, I had to go and  and get trained in a separate 
Mhm.
course to do it.
Anyway
I just wondered that was all.
 
Oh yeah.
I i if we 
You know that 
if we've got
that was one part that 
Take a note that's avenue for you to explore.
Yeah.
That, that is one part of the tutorial programme, the ninth year that you can't change
Mm mm.
It has to be  er, that particular trend.
It certainly needs to be in that term.
Ya.
It can afford to be a bit later  but I don't se , I don't see that the 
Well I can remember then the last year when I was in the ninth year we did it in that half term, it wasn't the first 
It was always, it was 
part.
It was always before half term.
I've always done it 
Mm.
before half term.
I've always done it before half term!
Alri ee ee it!
I'd have had it tied up but then  staffing was constant, you knew what courses 
Mm.
you were gonna be offering
Right.
as Sandra says we've done it twice this year.
We had to do it later and later.
I was ru run ragged!
Yeah.
Last term then
However  never mind!
The thing is, I can't do the environment, well it's not that I can't do it  when I was talking to er  to the tuto the form tutors yesterday  er  they're biggest keen  I think Catherine had happened to notice some work that Sandra had done  that she found er, interesting enough and where the kids should be knowing about, it was about banking  how to sign a cheque, how to look after finances  erm  you know, do I have to  buy  a pair of trainers because it's got Reebok on them, this sort of thing.
And that caught the interest of everyone straight away er, budgeting, how to be able to look at banking etcetera, and I said well  and I want you to do that first so I don't mind  mainly because I was gonna work wi with Anne  about the, with the environments, and then it's science, couldn't cover with the with the environment that she would like me in tutorial to do  and er  she  hasn't, well it's not her now, unfortunately, I think it's Sue  that is supposed to be working with me  cos I want to do something on recycling of rubbish etcetera within the school and do a big sort of er  project on it.
Plus  within my environmental thing I would like to be able to see if we can get four areas within the school  and what I was thinking about, not the big areas outside in the gardens etcetera  but do you know as you walk along from our corridor up past the dining hall  and there's that little bit of enclosed space
Which is a  
a total mess that looks horrific!
Oh yes!
And there's another bit  by the science block  and there's another bit  I can't remember now where  but there was three areas that I suddenly identified, I'm thinking it's grotty, it looks awful 
When you're clearing up for lunch look out the window it's the  enclosed garden.
That's right.
Oh yeah!
Can we not do something 
And the Japanese  
maybe give it a class project in the six or eight weeks that that particular er class is looking at the environment, again,from school, cos remember we've got the bins and we've got little er 
Mm.
they're improvements that I started with ninth year.
So let's say we can say if we can get the kids to look at improvements on that way.
Now, they're not too bad, the form tutors agreed  the trouble is though I've got one in English  George  which is not too far away  one in science but it's that end of science
And Catherine.
and Catherine  now, Catherine is ideal because  she opens her double doors and she's out into a garden space  you know?
And she likes that garden and she doesn't mind working  for something on that.
I think that, you know  George wouldn't mind  er, and  Maria wouldn't mind, maybe it's Martin trying to find for  for our Martin.
One of the problems is  you ne , it's alright saying something on the environment, you have to tighten up what it is you're gonna do.
If it's practical how you're gonna occupy twenty  kids  what resources  
I've got it remember?
That er   I sent away.
Right.
You know?
So, well that's alright.
Yeah.
And you're time of year  cos if you 
This is the thing you see now 
If you're gonna be wanting to plan 
cos if you're gonna looking at
if you're gonna want 
Yeah.
to grow things you've gotta do it at a specific time  if you're gonna wanna plan 
And this is why I want to.
if you're gonna plan bare rooted trees and stuff you've gotta be doing it in the dormant season, so you're talking October, November  possibly October.
Well this is  this is what I was trying to work out  looking at the banking erm  module that Sia , Sandra's just given me  could for the nine weeks  right?
So therefore, if this term I've got one, two, three, four, five weeks roughly left  and I know that sometimes  erm  what's that?
Oh that's November, December  can we not be doing something  in those five weeks on the environment?
And then continue with it  later on in the year
It's up to you!
It's your  ee, as far I'm concerned I'm asking you to tell me what you're gonna do!
But you've gotta tell me which is the best season, say  if I wannit to flower!
Well what do you wanna do?
If you wanna put plants in you can't  you can't do it before ar before March.
Right.
So you do it 
There is one 
after you're
You've gotta, you're talking about, yeah.
Beginning of the summer term.
After Easter basically.
Yo you see talked about recycling.
You can't do that in the Christmas one?
No.
Co conservation planting er, is not recycling!
I mean I  you've gotta be clear what it is you actually want to do.
The environment is what she said!
See , Sue hasn't come back to me, the science department hasn't come to me so I'm not, I may leave that  and say, and do something like that next year in a module  or wait until I've finished  again  I don't mind, that's still something in my mind which I would like to do  but because talking to the form tutor's, what I had written down  as a fait a complet  erm  they're not  too keen  so therefore I opened up and say you know, which particular things they were interested in  the banking one they are very interested in  the environment one, yes, within the school tidy upping area that they would like to do  but I've gotta be able to, and I don't when planting season is or  if I wanna put, be able to put flowers in  etcetera, you see what I mean?
Mm.
You could do your planting there in that last five weeks there you could think about doing 
 
actually doing about  er, about 
The .
recycling.
Aha.
Yeah.
Well you can't go out then cos it'll be snowing right  
Yeah.
I mean, so therefore, it's gotta be  more a, of a  erm
A recycling.
a per , you know  a a theoretical thing innit?
Well it, it could be , well it could 
or writing to  
Oh writing inside.
Well you see that, that that's one of reasons why we're all sitting doing it cos Terry's just said  and I've got an environment thing, now that doesn't mean it's wrong.
No.
Alright.
Cos there's no reason why you can't have two projects on 
No.
the go, and they'll change almost 
Yeah.
by definition cos they're 
Right, right.
two years older  and they can do lots of other things 
Oh different  
One year older.
So I'm  still 
actually.
not happy that we've got 
 
time allocated
prompting you.
and I'm putting on the spot
I'd like you to start a bit earlier .
and all I'm gonna say, I'm not gonna ask you to say well I might, I might , I might  you need to have sorted out exactly what you're doing in there  whilst you give 
Mm.
tutors the chance to say what they've 
 
gotta do, you gotta be careful 
 
about complete negotiation  there's an element of deciding that's what we're gonna do and we're gonna do it and it's gotta be spelt out for them.
Oh they can't give me any more.
Get you a programme .
It was yesterday was that, only ten people come 
Get you a programme at tenth minute.
forward with, Catherine came forward with banking.
Six thirty?
 
So you've given her o so now you're into saying, get onto it!
 
I mean
Without me  yeah.
But one of the things that always we we don't  Dave did a project a couple of years on consumer awareness which I think 
Yeah.
went  brought newspapers in and all sorts of 
Mm.
things  that went down a bundle!
Well  
You had a great time with it!
Oh certainly, yeah!
They 
Your your classes ninth 
they were very good!
years weren't they?
Er, Tracey  and that lot was it not them as ninth years or something?
Tenth year.
Tenth year.
Tenth year, yeah.
Yep!
Which we haven't picked up on and perhaps, right  so  but you need that firmed up that's all I can say to you.
No, and I can give you a fair deal pack, remember  on consumer rights?
Mm.
Which might fill in those five weeks if you want it.
Right.
You can do money management  I mean, and 
 
then go onto consumer  affairs.
Consumer right, right.
That's right  you know.
And that takes your winter term and then you can,yo your clearing could be done  starting 
In the summer.
turn round the spring and the summer if you want.
Can I just say as we , one of the reasons we're talking through this if you have something that yo , ah that might be useful!
Will you please share it!
What I don't wa , I know it's handy sometimes you think, ah that covers a lot of things for me  and you may have come across something yourself  I'll  the there is a key, there should be a key to those things in my cupboard, those lifelines things  not the same as cha , I've got all sorts of ideas that you might pick out and say right we can use that as a lesson  you might even just say well sod copyright I'm gonna photocopy that and I'll use it!
Please look in them, just browse through the front cos
Mm.
what I've tried to do is not to  and we've had the money, is to buy one in each set  cos we haven't got the money to buy full sets, thirty books is a joke!
And I shall deny ever ha .
You're not got it  they don't do one 
I've got copyright there.
send it.
I've actually said it now, and it's down in  black and white or  red and green or whatever!
But, do you know what I mean?
Mm.
Not that you've ever 
It's about looking 
done that before!
No, never ever!
No.
No!
We must stop talking about that.
But there are resources 
Not in  books.
there and  I know they're not  great, but the there's quite a lot in them isn't them.
If you do your environmental recycling I've got a thing that I took out of a magazine that's got all the addresses of erm  of of the various thing for recycling paper
Mhm.
waste products  all sorts of stuff like 
There's a 
that.
And it's just, you know 
Well there's that green and grey thing that I keep passing onto 
I've got it.
you!
There's another one  I've got another here actually cos it's been 
I'll tell you what's in  the there's that school's  curriculum industry fi si simulation on the dustbin game.
It's an environment , and it's actually an activity that goes on in the classroom.
It 
Mm.
gives you the resources, and tell the teacher how to manage it  it's all about the, and it's that, you know it's not  listen , it is actually
What's it called.
I've got a copy of it  the dustbin game.
Dustbin game !
Remember we looked at it, it's an environmental awareness on 
Oh  somewhere in the back of my mind.
But at the end of the da , I'm sorry if I keep com , I want a heading and I I don't 
Mm.
want ages  I don't stacks written up 
But we'll get that now.
but I do 
Mm.
need an outline.
Gotta present it saying that this is what's happening.
I had one, as I said  I had it all.
You haven't 
Okay.
yet  what will happen towards the end of the year for  reporting on these after the SATS  will that effect her tutorial at all?
Oh yeah!
I mean, she's gotta watch that.
It's fourteen year olds isn't it?
Main modules do you take that for science tests as well?
Sorry?
Well we often lose a er a year 
Yeah.
for a module for a 
Just stuck it there to stop the door opening  
 
testing.
but er  what?
Not at all,the they ta , they take nine tutorial for science  tests wouldn't we?
They have  
Where?
Yeah.
If they missed a one
Not all year 
Well if they've 
groups gone out.
No the 
Oh!
no, only through the headmasters  only, and that was er originally when we always  exams at the same time and that was done as a school policy  not science department!
Exam 
English department did it last term.
Yeah yeah.
We've got certain rules that say  all children must sit certain exams at certain times, it hasn't been possible to do it in the labs 
Mm.
and it used to get bounced 
Well 
around the subjects.
 
Sometimes it was ours have been 
There are, it was English wasn't it?
sometimes it was maths.
 
Yes.
I have 
But 
to say the situation has improved dramatically because I have said if we're gonna
I know   
give tutorial credence it can't just be assumed you can take them out of tutorial and it has stopped tremendously.
But the head does it!
Oh.
Anyway, to get back to what I said 
Hold your breath !
you would have more information  on that than Milvia would have for that, after they done the SATS and they're marked  reports have to be sent out, we must report at the end of key stage three.
Milvia certainly wouldn't have a clue what a report looks like cos I don't!
I don't.
Nobody 
No.
else knows.
Not, mean just
We have just  er er   spent two hours looking at a report  whether that will be the report we'll use at that particular time needs to be agreed yet.
It may well be 
You mean you didn't have an agreement Mr ?
Well, we've got a report designed.
It may well be we decide all we're gonna send home is  the result of the SATS, and it may just be a sheet with the subject names on and levels in, full stop.
It may well be that we send what we consider to be the fuller report there.
Mm.
All we have to do is report  to the parents once a year  it doesn't say that everything has to be on the report sheet at the same time  it may well be some information goes at one particular time and some at another.
I'm sure it says a written comment must be made for each subject.
It doesn't say here .
But that, it doesn't say after the SAT, the written comment can be made  er, where we send er D and I reports home at the moment, i.e.  er, just after half term in the second term.
Doesn't say at the end of the year, I don't think.
Well I will ask on behalf of Milvia.
But we'll we'll  I mean, that's gotta be
But I will ask on behalf of Milvia what does everybody feel about that?
About what?
Well I would prefer to make the comment about how a childs done in the SAT at the end of key stage three than  than February time.
Mm.
Can I make the point that if you don't get to the parents of kids  kids, before the end of summer term you could be jeopardising  the chances of what they're doing  in the SATS  because if you get to the parent  erm  in the beginning of the spring term and say  you know, Fred is not doing particularly well because of this  the parents are then in a position to do something about it  but if you actually tell them once, basically the stable doors closed  what can 
Oh I 
they do?
quite agree.
So I think 
See what 
the fuller report and the contact with the parents should be happening prior to that stage.
But one of the problems  is   you're also reporting on year seven and eight then  at 
Yes.
the moment  you're now saying we've gotta do a full report on year nine  and you're 
Mm mm.
just at the start of G C S E exams.
Mm.
Now  you're alright, that's  everything should happen there  but it is not physically impossible  but it's gonna put staff under a lot of stress and we're gonna have to play the game  of making it workable.
I mean it's typical government policy, bang, there it is now you lot sort it out!
And I agree with you entirely it would nice there
No.
but I think the reality is we'll probably end up with the detailed report there  and SATS results sent home afterwards.
That fine  but it's not helping 
I think.
Milvia now!
We're on the same side, that's what I've just said!
You get, you get to the parents at stage in the 
Yeah.
game so they can have an effect on the child  so that the outcome is better  if you just  if you don't get to them till there the child's done the SATS and it's over 
Right 
and done with.
but whether that meets  what the government expects of us I'm not exactly sure  because whether they want the written report at the sa 
Won't change till next year anyway!
Well it probably won't.
I know it's just laid down as as   sheet as to what you're supposed to put down and all sorts but I can't remember exactly how detailed it's gotta be.
See, if it's just a one statement SAT 
Mm.
then the departments will do and Milvia get it  and that's it, she'll have nothing to do!
Oh sorry about this but 
Cor!
are you going?
No.
No.
It's a meeting.
Okay.
Sumalia.
 Beafra it used to be innit?
It used to be  Beafra picking the flies off the trees.
Yeah.
Right  are we okay then?
Where are we at?
Er 
Milvia's finished.
Year eight.
Right, must be me.
And then
Terry?
I've got one more module left 
Oh yes.
sorry 
You carry on.
that I wanted to do something about safety or first aid  and that's it.
Oh 
But, did you not talk 
da 
about doing safety or first aid?
Mine's 
Well 
year ten, it's year nine  
Oh well  
Year nine will be doing something different.
I'm doing mine to start off with.
Okay, well  so you need to be 
Cos I was talking to Lilian , she was thinking that each year she'd be given an update  it should be a five year  plan.
Right, but what needs to happen is  if we continue like this we're gonna be re-inventing the wheel every year and making a lot of work for yourselves.
Yeah.
Can I ma 
And that's what's happening at the moment, because we're not sitting down and saying, I mean, this is my worry about  oh we might do this there, that's why I want it tightened up because at the end of the day  we start, we have various modules at a later date, two, three years time whatever we might decide to sling out  but it should really be designed, worked upon so that the incoming person can use it as a basis  given their  limitations 
Mm mm.
or abilities and build on it  cos at the moment everybody's re-inventing the wheel and you're making a lot of work in my opinion.
Well perhaps to  se se se er, you know  streamline or rationalise what we're doing  I mean  you know, we can  we've asked  that we actually hand you in our  section on this, right?
If it's put together on one sheet  er  we can actually sa sa say right this is what we're gonna do this term.
When we've actually given you the full thing in, the minutes, the mights, and where  and whatever, you can look at it  and say  hey, there's too much of that  but what we're addressing is  the moral  aspect of a child's upbringing that perhaps we should be  and say well right fine  er, it might, I'm just taking on environmental, right, now the year children to do environment there, but it's really happening down there, I feel that these children in the past haven't he so  can we  take that out this year and bring in something totally new, totally different that you feel should go in  erm  so that it is more rationalised it's not just my people doing what they want  when you see the, the whole thing you can make suggestions and we come back and go back through it again  we actually say to the form teachers  this is what  this will definitely happen for this  term  but when we've looked at the whole five year sa side  we might change some things.
The other aspect I was gonna suggest is  I mean, I've said of stuff of the environment, Terry's not   if we take topics  and we say right there's a  I mean, I've got these boxes I will  donate  you know, like letter, you know  lo lo boxes  which can be labelled and all the information on environment goes in there  so that perhaps, we made up, you know plastic, hard plastic  .
So you're a , sort of under a topic under a theme heading?
Mhm.
Yeah.
So it's in year ten, Sandra does it er  does it  you did that for safety in the home?
Mhm.
Where Ann  wrote it for last year, for my ri 
Mm.
you know, for last years.
Mm.
But if we put, if I put box up the name of safety  of tha , er but make a point of the next time getting all in, in and put into that  and copies.
Mhm.
Then it's all there together.
Yeah I, one of the, yeah  yeah, I to started off doing a little bit like that but  you find things don't  actually sit in categories very well  that's  becomes one of the problems.
What's that , that's issues book is right  idea wasn't that 
Yep.
that was just issues one.
Yep.
Mhm.
I know.
And then that's the one that you gave us  copies  cos you had  you said you were gonna get five 
Mm.
five copies of of that.
I've got that somewhere, who's got that?
Have I 
 
handed those
You have.
You want what?
No, we've only got that.
We haven't got the book.
Well I've got the book 
We, you only gave us the themes.
Where's the book?
Got the book.
But they're the ones I ordered, do you order those under S M B?
Can't remember.
Yeah, the book  
I thought we'd got those books, I've put them in the cupboard haven't I?
Oh yeah,
I've seen the books.
The books are there.
Yeah, the books are there.
You have a look in the cupboard, I keep telling you to look in the 
Yeah.
cupboard!
You go to cupboard and look!
 
Okay!
Terry?
Right  year eight.
What I've done is  just taken over from Catherine  last year on her topics which  er, seem to quite successful  and I certainly know that Marian did them last year and found them good.
The first one was community  and I know, erm  that Catherine wasn't very happy about the community side of things and I've looked at the  the pamphlet things and it needs updating a little bit so I took the fact that the  Royal Quay's were down at our doorstep  and  contacted Linda   who was extremely helpful  and she's put together  erm, a package of things along with me, I went down last week  and the first week  the ninth is going to be explaining  to the classes what we're going to be doing, each form teacher  will be able to do that  and the sixteen and the twenty third there are visits down to the  Royal Quay's Education Centre  erm  for which 
Can we 
 
we'll walk down to that?
No.
No.
which is paid for by   Royal Quays 
Oh 
A grant.
I believe two coaches  erm, one for the R group and one for the G group
Is this September you said?
And that's in September 
Sixteenth 
sixteenth and the twenty third.
Mhm.
When one of the groups is down there  the  Mediwell Police Unit are coming up to to to talk to two groups, I thought it was better to talk to 
Mm.
two than four  about their input under the  Mediwell and then after that, on the thirtieth  Linda's coming  up to school  erm  and we're going to actually  well, Eleanor's in English  and Paul's in his room, Cath will be in with the tutors and Paul  will come into my classroom  that particular time she can go round all the groups and discuss what they've thought.
She's also produced  very kind of her  erm, a questionnaire about the  Royal Quays erm  to take home to their parents and grandparents to bring back  and about, probably get a couple of copies of that  and then when they've done that  the seventh and fourteenth  she's going to, or we're gonna select two pupils from each of the classes to go out with her, one group to go into the middle of North Shields
Thanks dear.
to ask questions about  what the  Royal Quay's are gonna be about  and a group to go into the  Mediwell itself.
Now, I volunteered to go into the  Mediwell because I'm  I don't like it down there  and er, Linda will go into  the centre of New into the centre of North Shields with a particular person  a a form teacher or whatever, probably.
When they're doing that  others will be collating the information and hopefully er, the television cameras, B B C have expressed an interest in coming down and so have the newspapers  to actually do  erm  some sort of documentary on that, and put a display up in the school  and also down at the  Royal Quays just linked to us.
Right.
So that's that particular, that's that first half term.
It may go on after half term  because she may not be able to come down on those two days, if that happens  then I'll have other back up material for them 
Right.
to do.
Erm, she asked if we were very keen to involve the school, I said yes we were  cos she said nobody really taken a great interest in the  Royal Quays not 
Mm.
that they hadn't but  schools, particularly high schools and I said well we were very interested as part of the  the programme here  because it was community  erm  not geography, because she's a geographer  and she says the geography side of it's fine  she will use information that the children collect  for her benefit, but she'll also use us  you know, to define the information but she 
Mm.
would also recognise that we've done it with her  not purely and simply just because we've been down.
So, she's very keen, so she's coming in quite a bit erm, over the first half term  and she hopes that'll continue  during the year, not particularly with just the year eight people but maybe get other people to involve themselves as well.
So that's the first term.
That's  quite simple  erm  and that's organised and done, she's quite happy to do 
Good!
that.
Great!
Sounds, that sounds quite exciting!
The  after half term  erm  the programme is enterprise  and I know Catherine has lots  lots of booklets here on it  and I'm gonna just update  bits and pieces and I see there's some 
Mm.
things in there, the issues, and 
Mm.
it's got er
You did a smashing thing on 
to be worked out.
Christmas didn't you?
That's right, Christmas decorations.
Yeah!
So obviously I'll be asking  well I'll be asking Catherine how to do things
But the heading is enterprise but it's open ended enough 
Well, yeah 
for the form 
Yeah.
tutors to do their own thing?
for the form, yeah.
That's right.
Erm 
I mean last year some, some of them did just sort of a paper exercise whereby the 
Yeah.
they worked out, and for example how you would organise a trip to er, Flamingo Land or something like that  and and 
Yeah.
all, everything that would be in involved  and er  but buts  a lot of the, what we did was, you know, erm  just how you would  er ta erm  how you would try and start there and and decorate a place and make it look better  which again, is part of your environment 
Environment 
thing  but we linked it right into Christmas decorations and how they would build them  and  how they'd make them, and how difficult it was  and  to to actually make something that  looked  er, reasonably good
Mm.
to put up in your room, let alone, something that was reasonably enough, enough that people may wanna pay money for.
Mm.
You know and and it actually sort of, it made them really sort of think about quality and excellence and su and stuff like that which 
Mm.
er, I felt was  was very very valuable.
   
I was down at T V I as well borrowing their video camera and er  Margaret  said that she'd be quite keen to come involved as well if I want any help from her
Mm.
so  I took the offer because she she she offered 
Mm.
so er  so I said, oh well fine, so I'll I'll leave options open.
Well, again it's no bad thing if i i 
They're not, no not erm 
it might well be that one of the one of the forms could go down there to have a morning as part of this project to do
Yeah.
carry out some particular activity.
Yeah, that's right.
I mean it's it's a dimension you can bring into it.
She offered that.
After  that's the spring term we're into now, after Christmas  erm  health  now  there was  there are packages and Catherine gave them to me  on personal hygiene, things like that  and I think Paul   erm  I know he would be keen he said, he'd be keen to maybe put a package together with the help of all the form teachers  plus myself and maybe do a bit into health, cos I mean you know it's it's 
Oh great!
and then you also pick that room and things like that just to demonstrate how that can be used 
Yeah.
Mm.
for health.
Er, I don't wanna put the onus on Paul to do that, I I've asked and said I  he said he'd be queen, you know be ke , that was before  the 
Mm.
summer, so I'll do that  with him.
Then I've got the environment  which again, comes right the way through until erm  just before half, well just after half term
That's week thirty three 
before half term.
is it Terry?
Yeah.
Yeah,
That's up to the fifth , the fifth.
Erm  there are again  there is information, there's lots of packages on environment there's boo , booklets on it which Catherine gave to me  and I think I need to think about specific areas in the school like Milvia's doing but not to overlap if Milvia does think about that, to try something else, some other way.
Er, there is an environmental officer  for the North Tyneside Council who goes into schools and di and discusses things as well, there's there's there somebody 
But I I 
actually on the on the 
Mhm.
council who do that  and er, they're quite happy to take you round all the er, take you down to the incinerator and see what happens, where all your different bits and pieces go.
What happened to the Keep Britain Tidy group, they were re-named?
They used 
Yeah.
to have er 
Right.
school support er 
Yeah yeah yeah.
people 
I can't remember where they are but they 
I never re realised we're doing a module in the eighth year was environment, I always thought it was always the ninth year?
Mhm.
Is this new 
 
new or was it the last year?
No, no I'm su , well this this work is all from Christine !
That's all Christine  's work as well, who went o 
That's two years ago!
two years ago now mind!
Mm , you see that's why we're sharing it!
We didn't we didn't 
Er 
do environment last year because we were into  .
Ah wa well  you see, now what I've done here is 
isn't it?
Well the environment bit there  erm  but I've missed out readathon
Yeah.
Right.
That that we did 
So that's why I've had to fit in.
Well 
that we did  
this  I haven't 
That's right.
bothered with the readathon, but then 
The whole readathon.
again, you know  er  but that's the environment.
Then it comes up to erm  the twelfth of May
Sorry, when was that environment, from where from
On
That's from
week twenty two 
 
that's week, that's the third of the third
Second half term.
Second half term.
Right, cos so it's that 
Only, so it's one, two, three, four, five weeks?
Five, yeah and then I sort of could extend it 
in English
alright, into the summer term but if necessary, but I think it will be five from what I can gather.
 
Yeah.
Then  obviously it's statements to parents and depending on what happens there because the parent's evening and I've put 
 
down here the fir , eighth year parents into the sixth of July  and judging, working back from weeks that we'll need  to collect information it could bring you right back into the twelfth 
Mm.
of May, so we'll need one, two 
Mhm.
three 
Mm.
four, five, at least six weeks to do that  then after that I've  
I I've assumed that we'll be doing a review and I think
Yeah.
looking at it I've allowed  one, two, three, four tutorial weeks
That's right.
for collation
That's right.
so prior, prior to that the deadline will probably be for 
Yeah.
half term for subject specifics or 
That's right.
immediately 
That's right.
after half term.
That's right.
I've  these are just ideas.
I mean I'll give one of these to each of my form teachers so they know, they're gonna write in bits and pieces whatever they want to know.
Actually Terry , do you have a blank sheet with just the dates?
No I haven't.
No, you've actually got 
No , I ju I did 
Aha.
actually  I did after.
Cos that, I mean that's the sort of thing which  we get over the problem 
Yes.
that  you worrying about  and it me means a bit more work for us 
Mm.
but if we actually said blow by blow what you're supposed 
Yeah.
to be doing.
I'm also putting on here 
I think so.
If that's an idea.
all the planning facilities 
could right 
as well.
Well but that's why I like this one, you know the one that you did?
Mm mm.
The master ones.
I I work from that and give out to form.
Mhm.
I still like that one, I know it's a smaller 
Yeah.
thing, it's an 
Yeah.
A four 
I like it.
I like
But
Terry's because you can write everything on it.
you can wri , they can write on it, I can 
Yeah.
see why.
Can I, could I say to you that I think that would be a good thing to do Terry.
That's a super idea!
Well I can do another one if you want.
I mean do another one.
But could I suggest 
A blank.
you do a blank Terry?
Yeah, I'll do a blank 
Mm.
one yeah.
And  er, what I also like about it is,a as Sandra's just said and you've just said you put in things like
Parents.
important dates
Yeah.
that are agreed 
I've put the planning things in instead of what the, what it's gonna be 
Yeah.
for the  
I think that's a damn good idea!
Now just a thought that I did.
No I think that's excellent!
Yeah.
If you did a blank that would be a value Dave.
Right, I'll do that.
Alright.
Mm?
And the last three weeks I've put on road safety  because I know there's a lot of road safety stuff 
Oh yeah!
and read up to the summer 
Okay.
holidays when they're gonna be on holiday, so I thought well that'll be
Yeah.
and that could be the er  the   
Yes that 
and the things you've got plenty on, and plus 
Right.
the things that are in
The class file.
You see the the the other thing there is  when you're actually doing reviewing and stuff yo yo you you do  I know review er profiling
Mm.
Yeah.
cos that's the process, it still is the 
Yeah.
process in there  but you actually could do with something that youngsters  wo work sheets, word quizzes whatever
Mm.
perhaps on a theme that they can get on with  while 
Yeah.
form tutors are talking 
Yeah.
to individuals
If they want to.
or when form tutors need 
Ah.
some support, you're going in or  you're using one of the policy 
Right.
group to go in and to spell them so they can talk to individual kids.
Well you see what we're do , what we did last year  was that there 
Sorry!
was erm  Terry   and supposedly Bill and supposedly  Colin, or between were, were looking after 
 
the rest of the year 
That's right.
groups
He's never done it before.
while  we had er er 
Aye?
maybe half a dozen kids 
 
it worked out that Terry actually was looking after year seven and year eight while all the tutors
That was year 
had 
eight .
erm  maybe half a dozen kids  doing the written work  talking individually to the member of staff, so you didn't have twenty odd kids all in
Talking
All at the same time, all 
Mm.
talking, all messing each other bits up, you had about six spread round your room  for that time, and it was so good and we got through it so quick, there were so few mistakes  because you only ever had  six maximum kids in your room at once at that was only because Terry  offered to put on a video  an and
Occupy.
occupy the rest of your class
Yeah.
while you got on with 
Mm.
the nitty gritty and it really 
And the form teacher actually said who they 
works!
wanted next .
Right, but perhaps what we should do now is  in-bill that  get your policy group member to agree it, even line your video up  and so they are committed and you put it on paper so all the form tutors see that
and the head or whoever it is is committed at that time to be taking the rest of the year so they can profile.
comments fair that he did, he did come in twice and se the third time he said I'm sorry I had to.
I'm sure he did!
You know and
but nobody else knows.
the situation is slightly different now  there are other tutors available  and I'm available.
Yeah.
And I, and I mean  it'll be Terry and I  available at the time cos I
That's good!
I would hire the form you see 
And they're talking 
That's right  
 
and Catherine had form 
Christmas party 
Mm.
you know, so we were unable to help Terry out 
Might even get afoot.
erm, and that's why Colin would 
Don't need a  not really any good.
and he did say they would have helped Terry if he didn't have all of 
He'd got , yeah.
Yeah but that's not
the rest of year seven and year eight 
start doing as well
but in practice that's 
 
not what happened.
What you do and what I do are different.
But in reality that's what was planned.
Well that's right.
And a from a form teacher's point of view
Have you got your ?
it was  
Well I know, I know you sometimes feel you don't have clout , if it's not happening you gotta come to 
Yes.
to me and say look I agreed and I will say to the other forms that they've go , they've all got 
 
a re a responsibility!
Yeah.
And 
Yeah.
I know it's not easy.
Cos it worked didn't it?
Oh it worked!
From from our points.
Did you not talk  the back of my mind about change to the report system?
Because it's becoming  unmanageable  too much paper
Mhm.
Is it still gonna be the same
No.
layout?
Just  
Well whatever system we have  we still need time 
We'll need time
to put it together.
Time .
You will still need ti 
But we're still gonna have pupil erm  input 
I do I 
aren't we?
What time do we finish here?
Five o'clock.
Half past five.
Five thirty.
Ah.
Well we'll finish at six, are you buying the round?
Do you mind going on a 
I'm booked fo 
little bit more?
Are you booked?
No, I'm booked for a game of croquet at half past five!
Pardon?
Aye, I'm sorry, listen you're here to damn well work you're not going off to enjoy 
But I'm working!
yourself lad!
Aren't we booked for a game of croquet?
No.
I didn't  
Ah beautiful!
Can I just say, very, very quickly  report system as it stands at the moment 
 
I think  it will be, there will now, we will go back to a subject specific report  because we we're obliged to have national curriculum details
Mm.
which will cu that, and they will all go home  that the format has been basically agreed.
But we will in a spirit of recording achievement have  a form tutor sheet if you like.
We will need,we we'll have to work on this which will involve the philosophy of having  er  perhaps a joint statement and perhaps on putting a short personal statement in.
Mm.
So we've actually  moved the process towards  the the complete er, record of achievement process.
We which I would hope when    will itemise the qualities and strengths of the child that you want to cover, like when we do personal statements or joint statements in the tenth and eleventh year  that if  the form teacher just can't write  well Fred's worked very well, he's done extremely well in English  we'll actually start to talk about him as an individual and his strengths and weaknesses.
Mm.
Well we now have
But
we should have a core a of people who've handled records of achievement and done records of achievement  and they should  you know not everybody has but we should  what staff are capable of in terms of doing this has has has moved dramatic and there's some still who struggle but everybody's getting more and
Bit of that that we do in year ten eleven  can that be transferred down the line  so that there's a similar type of thing 
Oh yes!
that's being done  using 
Yes.
similar word  tes , you know, not testing erm  er, commenting on  similar skills etcetera?
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
We spent a lot of time talking about general skill and abi , everybody will still comment on general skills 
Yeah.
and ability.
Right.
But it will be on a ten point scale and it'll be ticky box, ten points
Yeah.
cos it refers back to national curriculum.
Mhm.
Okay so  er  four, five and six are  average and 
Mm.
up to nine and ten 
Mm.
if anybody gets, and the criteria also 
Right.
and the general skills and ability.
You'll be able to, there will be a form  they'll be a subject tutor comment and then there's leeway within subject areas  for  the child to write a couple of sentences  their 
Mhm.
own comment  for it to be a negotiated comment, and I've left this to departments cos
Mm.
they need to, or  can't remember third one  it doesn't matter.
Mhm.
Teacher, the for , the teacher must comment
Mhm.
there is then a choice
Mm.
within the department, you don't have to, I would hope everybody could
Yeah
would cos that's an 
it's just 
accommodative  recording achievement, not failure
Yeah.
recording achievement.
I jus , I think that it is good to actually pin point  you know, the various things that we are definitely moving
Yeah  yeah.
and what we think is actually erm
I mean it whatever 
important in
That's right!
ju er er  making a judgement about that individual
Well I, that's right 
you know.
I mean it may well be we'll say in year seven, look the things we're looking for here and I want everybody to comment on is, A  er, how well they've settled down er  how well they're getting on with others  but there's no reason why you can't make those decisions.
Yeah  that's right.
You know or 
and things like, yeah.
do you know what I mean?
Cos it'll change from seven to eight 
Yeah.
and nine cos they expectation's 
Mm.
different isn't 
Yeah.
it?
Yep.
But I mean if, if for example we work on punctuality
Absolutely!
then then then things like 
The basic philosophy 
that
That's right!
whatever we've been working on then, yeah.
are reinforced all the way up the school.
Yeah.
Yep.
Yeah.
How we doing?
Terry?
Right  well that was it, that  
And you end up with loads of paper.
the last three weeks was the road safety one which I thought was
Mm.
was useful and that's  
Which actually is something I was thinking about doing with year seven but I mean as it's  it's it's 
Well 
far enough away in the distance  to to to think about something else.
But there is no reason why  you can't alter the slant on it
No, it's .
Erm 
It's, yeah
Well you said 
You know you might do road safety with a  with an angle on, I dunno
Mm.
Well go onto  railway safety, you could ro road safety  
 
Well  well it's us, I mean it's  espec I mean er, over the holidays I heard er  a thing on Radio Newcastle about how the metro
Mm.
has got a special thing where they will come and
Yeah.
do all these, they will take 
have them.
the kids onto the metro well 
 
 
for nor for North Shields and that, that they would er 
We had that little woman in cor she 
cos 
bored the pants off them!
Ooh sorry!
She didn't half tire them out!
 
Anyway 
I'm tal I'm talking four or five years ago, she was desperate!
Well there you are.
Ah ma na !
The guy the train driver was better, when he got up to, he was brilliant 
Yeah, oh the train driver was good yes.
with them!
Well the thing is you see I think  wha from what I've  gathered on from the radio programme is that the actual erm  the attitude of the kids to the metro  had got so  much worse that they're having  to do something about it 
Mm.
and they're having, and 
Especially the , yeah.
they've got  but they've got 
Yes.
this particular video apparently 
Yeah?
which is really, you know?
Terrific isn't it 
Mm.
yes!
Really gory!
Yes, yeah it is, we've seen it, yeah.
and what have you, and it shows you what happens if you use that you get  knocked 
Mhm.
over by a metro train at various er 
Or electrocuted.
Mhm 
erm  speeds etcetera.
Mm.
Christ!
And erm 
I, I'd be sick 
and you know 
I couldn't watch that!
Mm.
Mm.
so
But what I was gonna say if you can  might well be Terry 
Wou 
that work sheets for three weeks to sit alongside yo your road safety thing.
Oh yes!
Well I .
While people do I dunno I'm just offering that as a suggestion.
Yeah, there's a package there about road safety 
Mm.
and a video .
Right Marian?
Right 
You've  Milvia's left you and awful time cos she talked for so long, you've got two and a half minutes.
Right well we, we we begin 
!
erm with just on our basic administration and what have you and doing 
Right.
all the record cards etcetera.
And then we get into settling into school  er, for the first part  and looking at things about coming to a new school 
 
school routine, school organisation
  

who are the important people  around school and  you know i putting names to faces 
Care 
things like that, caretaker 
caretaker, Mrs  
erm  but the  the main thing I'd like to start with  erm  as er in particular with emphasis on  is homework  because 
Okay.
I think if you don't get their attitude 
At the beginning.
to homework in year seven you haven't got a hope in hell 
It's a  innit?
in the in the erm  the new er the  higher groups.
So what I would like to propose  is that I do a homework timetable for year seven  that that homework timetable goes round to all the departments  and that we ask the department to  stick to that timetable as far as they possibly can.
I would also like, and I know this is where I'll get problems  I would  if we are gonna try and get the kids into a routine over  them doing their work  I think the easiest routine  for them to have is that you do you, you get, you have your lesson you do your homework that night  and you hand it in the next day.
Mhm.
You mean instead of giving it erm
Instead of saying  hand it in next lesson.
next lesson.
Because I don't think that, I mean, given last year's year seven they cannot cope with that!
the pace, no.
It has to be done there then.
So I would like to propose that erm er  that we ha have it in that i it comes in the next morning and that the four form teachers know  that last night they have had  languages and history homework.
And that they, two people, you know somebody every week will collect in all the languages books and take them along  er, or the language homework and take them along to their language teacher  and the other one will take the history le , homework and take them on to the history teacher, and then they go off to assembly  alright?
It will take a matter of minutes once they get into a routine.
Don't usually have .
And then it's up to you know th er it just makes it so much easier for the kids  alright  but it also is much easier for the form teacher  to know who's not bringing in homework  who's  who's you know er erm  and what have you, and I just feel that that  helps the kids get into a routine and it will highlight immediately  the work problem  the kids who have got work problems  or problems about where they're gonna have 
Right.
having homework space at home  and  and things like that.
As, and if 
But before you  sorry, go on finish.
Sorry!
No finish.
But I mean would  that is the the the sort of the thing I would like to put an em emphasis on  in the first half of  the term.
Yeah.
Right.
And there's
No chance!
I mean there's all sorts of things wi in these  er books  erm the erm
are they settling in, there's also stuff in there  and  you know, getting to know the staff, getting to know your class school rules, coming to school prepared  what it's like on your first day  er, their first week, what you were worried about when you first came and  coming to scho , fears and realities and all 
Mm.
this sort of stuff.
Can I just sa , I mean Colin used to do the homework timetable for every year, dish it out and everybody ignored it!
Yeah.
Yeah.
Wa 
But 
waste, waste of time!
I mean it was always there as a defence mechanism so you 
Yeah.
could say to a parent but look the timetable says
Yeah  just something about it, it's not getting done 
I 
Well 
what I would suggest is  I mean I I I  I'm not picking that one up quite frankly I suppose but er  you know, people say it's well it's pupil management you possibly 
Right.
should.
Erm  because I think what you're doing's far more valuable, and I was going to say what you sho what you er er  perhaps a way forward is  to confirm with heads of departments that they will be giving homework
Yep.
I've actually  I've written something somewhere 
because one of the things that been discussed in C A C S is  marking policies, homework policies 
Yeah.
as part of the overall  er  assessment reporting and recording
Mm
procedures, because they are important.
Yeah.
Sandra?
About the homework bit er  I thought about it the other day and obviously  mine wasn't brought up  we're having a set detention night aren't we?
Tuesday nights.
Yeah Tuesday.
Yeah Tuesday nights 
Right 
yeah.
can I suggest  and I dunno, it might not work  we have a lot of children who find it difficult  to wo to work at home  could we hold a detention in the resource centre for the hour  so if other children want to use it, I don't know, is it open after school?
It it was
But then 
 
we will be there 
last term.
so a child could work for an and do any work they want to in that hour so we're doing a dual role, we're holding a detention there 
Mm.
Mm.
and it's u , there for manning it
One of the problems is this thing about some are being punished and have to there
Yeah.
and the others are doing voluntaril , doing it voluntarily 
Yeah.
and I I'm just bothered about
Yeah.
There's no differentiation between them.
That's right.
Mm.
Could we put it 
Yeah.
to the staff then that they volunteer one night and we do thir , and wa , you would come up once a week every thirty two weeks  to man the library one night a week
Yeah.
er, to do homework?
Or do 
I've worked 
resource work?
Mm.
I've worked that process once or twice.
Well you're only gonna do it once 
Mm.
in thirty two weeks.
But wha what about starting it out as a homework night for year seven and eight to start with?
Mhm.
Mm.
Yeah.
Are we talking about a night  every night of the week or ?
No, no one 
No, no, no one night a week.
one night every week.
One night a week.
What would be the mileage in  I know, homework diaries?
Now at th the last school they had these and they were, they're buying from the school shop 
Mm.
a lot of kids say to me  have you got your homework?
Oh I didn't write it down!
If 
Mm.
you've got proof, and I used to check it as a form teacher  every, at the end of every week  tick it and sign it  I I only had about what, twenty in the class  used to, every end of every week check and see they're writing their homework down and if any problems came of it  hadn't written it down they were in trouble!
But the kids bought them themselves those?
They brought, either bought them themselves or bought them posed to beworking with me  cos I want to do something on diaries  they've got weekly diary, little
Mm.
little booklets so you 
Weekly?
write them
Yeah, we had them.
Oh we have do we?
We had them.
But we we we 
We had them?
We used to just 
Mm.
hand out little  blue jotters as well.
Ah no we 
Yeah, those 
used to, yeah.
little pa those little books.
for anything , I mean not just 
Mm.
for homework though  
You can actually now  I'm sure som so somebody must have the skills  on an A five sheet to have it halved with a an internal diary  er  three of those you're , it's cost you the  five bits of paper and two staples!
And they,lose them quickly  mm.
Mm.
But they changed over quickly cos what kids get bored with is if they've got 
Mm.
a book that's lasting them a term  and they start getting trouble and he gets  you know messed about
the the the the they've got this book and it  it reinforces the failure.
What we , well you might want to think of is
On a weekly one or fortnightly one I was 
erm 
gonna suggest.
in technology we use a tracking sheet  which is an A four sheet doubled over  and it's got  a er it  the date beginning of the week and then it's, divide into the  the lessons, there's just three boxes
Mm.
that i when the child comes to you to si , you sign to show they're with you  now, perhaps Cath could amend that  so that you have it  you've actually got the week but five slots for homework
Mm.
on a monthly basis.
Mm.
I found the homework, homework diary was useful  because I used to check in, end of every of week they used to know if it wasn't there I'd want to know why it wasn't done!
And the form teacher  
How what did you use then Terry?
Did you issue one of the ne little booklets?
yes in little booklets but it was actually  homework at, it was produced but for the school, had a school name and crest so 
It's a half thing isn't it like that?
Well it's jus just a little booklet really
Mm mm.
that's all it was, like the old booklets and it used have  week beginning  Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday all the way along and they used to write their homework in, what they had to do
See we we had them done 
so it was written down.
didn't we?
But, that red fronted one.
I'm sure you had one.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Sixty quid they cost us!
Cost a 
Yeah.
lot of money!
That's a lot of money.
We tried it for a whole year.
But if the kids 
Mm.
But if the kids are gonna buy them
They used to buy these.
But you can't make 
 
them buy it!
No  they're about 
No you can't make them buy them, no.
I think we had them in our last and the they cost about fifty pence each.
Mhm.
Mm.
And I mean the kids  the kids that we yo yo some kids er, I mean they were just beautiful and other kids lost them within a couple of days!
Yeah, well I know.
I can supply you free of charge with the blue one  if you wish then  or we could think about it.
Or if it's worth pile it in and .
See I  I I think part of it 
What,?
is getting them into the habit  isn't it?
Yeah.
Yeah.
And saying, right we'll do them 
If they have to.
for the first half term
Mhm.
the trouble is if you stop some then think that it's not as important.
Not in , not 
No.
important.
No.
But you have to be careful that by doing something like that you're not making life  completely onerous
Aha.
Yeah.
for everybody.
Yeah.
I mean, to be honest  I was, I'm not so so
aye?
so bothered about the diary as as  actually trying to get 
That  about the first weekend.
The homework in.
the homework 
Mm.
in and the 
Mm.
organisation 
I think that would be better
cos for some of the kids 
yeah.
it's just another book to lose where, I mean 
That's right.
personally do is as a mo er er for my kids that I teach is they write their homework in the back of their exercise book  so their homework diary is the back  you know 
Mhm.
page of their exercise book 
Yeah, aye we do that as well, well I do it anyway.
erm so therefore  as long as they take their history 
Mm.
book home  they've got written in the back of the book what 
What it is.
they're supposed to be 
What it is 
doing.
Yeah.
Erm  what I  what I'd like to, I mean I've written out in rough you know, what I'd like to send out to departments with  the the the homework timetable  and it's just, you know I I'm trying to say to the members of staff I don't wanna interfere with the way that they organise their departments or their classrooms  but  I want to propose, you know that things like  all seventh year classes should have one homework per subject per week.
Mhm.
Good!
That homework should last approximately half an hour or whatever it consists of, erm  reading, written work, finishing off drawing research whatever  that homework should be handed in the next day, form teachers to remind classes of this and to co-ordinate delivery of the books, papers etcetera to the member of teaching staff  and that the non production of homework is to be the concern of the member of  of teaching staff and not the form teacher, although regular non producers will be the concern of us all.
And just that the proposals  if you want to opt out of the homework timetable then  they can but  they've gotta let 
Well would you 
me know.
Would you like me to mention it at briefing on Monday?
Mm.
Yeah.
Can I 
Then the heads of departments that you're going to 
Yeah.
communicate with heads of department 
Yes please.
Can I make a point?
and er then  leave it with you 
Yeah.
to
That  you know that is actually something  personally, I mean  you know if you take it back to the conversation we had this morning  with  what we do what what the eleventh year are ending up with
Mm.
I just feel that  you know, if you if in the seventh year  they get the opinion  that  you work in school and you do nowt out of school  come ninth year, tenth year, eleventh year  you ain't gonna change it!
Right.
Can I make
You also find Marian that  we were talking about that this morning as well we cannot cover the national curriculum without more  homework
Yeah.
and the first  
So will this, will this 
will they do it?
Yeah but will this proposal 
They have to.
of getting i the some sort of a working a relationship a at a more detailed  where in between, we're between the staff  the teaching staff and the tutor, the form tutors  help the teaching staff, especially and say in your department where you you're gonna have to give them more homework.
I would have to say on a personal point of view, no  cos I will deal quite 
Mhm.
severely with people who don't hand homework into me and it's 
Mm.
the first thing that I do at the beginning of the lesson is one sec 
Right.
right I want to see the homework, those that haven't got it etcetera.
Yeah, but will it 
But you have to agree, I mean
But will it help the members, will, but will help the child  if there's a co-ordination between 
Aha.
the member 
Yeah.
of staff
Well there's no argument 
and the tutor?
is there.
Course you got .
Aha.
Yeah.
Mm.
But I'm  as long as you're careful I mean some people 
I think if you  the next morning  this business 
Good!
would you 
 
agree to it being handed in the next day as opposed to the next lesson?
Well I'll, this is where I'm gonna hit you right in the head, no, I have it the next le , I'll have it in the lesson.
Why?
Why?
Because if I've, if it's handed into me, period one and I've got them period four  I'm not gonna mark it  I'm never gonna get round to marking it!
And I'm gonna hand the books back out
then I'm gonna have to take them back in again!
Well isn't that normal, or where do they normally put their books?
They give it to me at the end of the lesson.
Is that every le , I'm not talking about homework, I'm talking about every lesson that you have as science  where do they keep their books?
Their exercise books?
You keep them.
Well frankly half of them don't have exercise books.
Well she's .
They've got booklets.
We have booklets, we have all sorts of things 
Yeah, right, but  but
But if I'm  if kids are giving me work  first thing in the morning  and I've got them in the afternoon  they're gonna expect it to be marked!