

 

Sounds of the seventies
Bit depleted today.
Alright, it's alright 
Hey 
th they'll be here.
top minutes you got there Peter.
 
Th they're blacker than black I had a lot of trouble with the photocopier, right.
That's, that's like the Spinal Tap album.
The, the black on black album.
 
You want to see the agenda?
We can I well I 
The agenda's even better.
I wrote it on orange paper in blue ink and it all went horribly wrong when I photocopied it so I've put  an agenda on there right.
Becky do you mind being taped?
We can't have 
Mm?
any matters arising from minutes.
being taped?
Do I mind being taped?
No we can't have any that's like readable.
That's alright, it's all  anyway.
Well, near enough.
resemble him.
man
Right.
Right.
 

Good.
I'll never be mistaken for him in the street then.
Possibly.
Yes.
We're being recorded 
Be excited.
She's very excited.
No, no I'm  
Are you coming to one seat Tom?
Right.
Probably easier to write who's not here.
Right just.
The there's two lists going round, right.
One of them's just th the attendance list.
And one of them is cos the gentleman who's taping the meeting would like a sort of signature for the people's consent to tape it.
Oh God.
So like
I don't 
and he's interested in sort of accents and, well piss off then.
What are they like?
?
Could you all sort of pass that round .
 
over there er 
You can just look at the periodic erm  
Right erm Andy.
Right.
Er first,
Put me down.
Tom, put me down.
Yeah, well you have to sign it.
You gotta sign it.
You've got to actually sign it.
Oh is that, that the one you've got to sign?
Yeah.
Right.
Er
Er this looks quite good.
Shall I put my name?
Mhm.
We'll have an ap apology straight off.
Can I have a pen please?
Is it  today?
Andy?
 

Right apologies.
Has anybody got any apologies
Do you want to put that?
with them?
Yeah.
Well er  Julia what's her name,, can't attend cos she's having a reaction, in chemistry.
Have you got a pen?
I might have actually.
And  er 
Tony something's  arose suddenly and er
And fallen.
and had to run away, sort of.
 
Wanker .
I need a wee.
Right er plenty of minutes so I'll, I'll quickly read them out, and then if anyone's got any  matters arising they know what 
 
Er number one Wentworth are booking both not Goodricke.
Number two, I sent off a letter saying about people not coming and er Wentworth haven't sent a  I dunno.
Oh.
Er shall we affiliate to the  Christian Union.
I haven't been able to get any tickets for the Word as yet.
Er bookings, that's been sorted out.
Gossip scandal, Vanbrugh bop is being heavily restricted.
Er but in actual fact, it's like a major thing here, but he did very well.
Would you like to make a small report on that, Mr Vanbrugh?
Er yeah erm  the smoke machine thing we got away with now, we went to see them.
And er use our smoke machine as long as the porters can see how many are in the bop.
Long as the porters can see their own hands .
Erm yeah.
Basically, yeah.
It went okay went down to four hundred people 
 
in the whole area instead of five, but apart from that.
The, the bloke, the health  and safety man said it was all okay.
Well,
Except for the
will, will your take actually increase for four hundred?
No, cos before that
You were 
you always could get away five  
you were allowed five .
So y your limit has now been set at five?
Yeah.
Okay.
Erm yeah we can take things into the hall as well now.
Hurray.
Oh excellent.
Very well done.
Thanks very much.
So  sort of general appreciation to Vanbrugh for having their act together.
Yeah.
I think they deserve an  
Round of applause.
Right.
Any other business?
Right the quiet period I have some dates for the quiet period.
Ooh er.
Why?
Pardon?
 
Dates .
Do you wish to 
What like dried up, dried grapes  prunes that are no longer in top condition.
Okay, so if you're all gonna
make a note of this right.
by the way.
The quiet period  starts on the eighteenth of May  and it goes right through until  the twenty first of June.
Right er okay that's 
 
the quiet period.
Er Alcuin want twenty fifth anniversary but nothing's come about that has it John?
No.
What's that?
About the Alcuin twenty fifth anniversary even though it's now now 
No, no, no 
the twenty sixth.
No.
All the J C Rs are represented so we can't fine them.
Shame.
.
Right has anyone got anything they want raising from that list?
No.
Frank.
Number two, electrical safety.
I've had a letter  and er  there's various lists of people you might all have got one eventually, I don't know, but it's from the university engineer.
And it's about the free electrical checks for electrical gear.
And it says  the remaining dates for the free inspection and testing of equipment have been cancelled.
With all due respect to those who intended to avail themselves of the free offer, the first two appointments were not met with sufficient organization to permit cost-effective equipment testing.
My staff were faced with untidy heaps of apparatus  apparatus  in equipment rooms, and received little or no help from the student representatives   So and then it sort of  flabbers on a bit saying they're 
 
not happy.
I do hope that positive arrangements are made to contact me in writing and that we can continue to work together to provide safe working conditions.
Please accept my apologies if you're already working towards this arrangement of the new cancelled dates .
So that's a bit poor there, I feel.
So 
Yeah that's very poor.
Maybe so 
Who's er which colleges?
He hasn't, he hasn't named colleges.
Well I'm going to
 
our own 
the timetable Simon.
 
If the first two weren't very good, and we've got a copy of the timetable
 
We could we could deduce them if they don't own up.
I dunno.
It's just I imagine it was Derwent, I mean
   
It mightn't have been Derwent.
Yeah, well like please do take this seriously because it's, it's quite important as regards to insurance and having  As Vanbrugh proved last weekend,y we can do a good job with your stuff put together, and if like someone got fried, then you may end up in trouble.
And they wouldn't be happy.
personal.
The electrical man
from  Langwith.
Stevie  cos he tried to fry himself the other week  
Yeah.
If you're, you're plugging 
 
in and it sparks,
four way adaptor.
don't touch it.
Right, so I just feel I'd read that out, so please try and work with the admin, cos we don't want to upset them.
Cos it's a pain.
I imagine so .
Right.
Er number three I had a phone call, oh I forgot the term planner.
Never mind.
I have seen it though, it should be good.
I had a phone call last  er yeah Tu Monday night from Warwick University who were organizing a conference at the Youth Hostel Association in York.
Friday, Saturday and Sunday, week nine.
They're like, obviously that's like the first weekend of the holidays, and they wanted to book the P A and some stage blocks.
And I suggested charging them like sixty pounds for the three nights.
Because with it being 
What, per night?
Well, he was on a, aye he was going on oh how I hate  
what a band.
Never mind about the Hank Wangford Band.
Er but I said I couldn't give him a definite quote for a price, because I wouldn't have the Committee.
Now  normally like three nights would be a sort of 
Off campus.
Off campus.
We'll be getting two hundred 
Two hundred quid.
pound.
Plus
 
Is this the full P A though or is it just the speaking P A?
He wants the speaking P A and stage blocks.
Oh that's it.
So I think about a hundred and fifty pounds
Right.
for the er Can like th the late arrivals make sure you put your names on
Yeah, I've got my name down.
Sorry, I only just woke up.
Both.
Both.
Did you sign both?
Yeah.
Okay.
woman might want to slap her name down.
So  with it being another student union and it being like a conference in aid of the homeless and that, I didn't really want to sort of give them a load of grief so I suggested about sixty pounds.
Er does anyone have any comments on this, with it being money for Ents in general?
Well, it's money we wouldn't get otherwise isn't it?
It's money you wouldn't get cos it's in the sort of holidays.
Erm are they going to pick it up and set it up 
Does it involve us doing anything?
No, no .
Er well Tony's going to deliver it and pick it up on the Monday.
Oh that's all right.
And I said he'd have to pay extra for the minibus hire.
T to shift the gear, cos he wants a couple  
 
And obviously, they'll have to still give the deposit.
Yes.
Yeah.
But 
he's still not sure.
When he, but then he said, like he said is there anywhere else where he could get a stage from and I explained to him that people come and hire the stage off us like Saint Michael-le-Belfry church, who are paying in cash.
So I don't know I just think it's an extra little booking that we shouldn't really turn down cos it's money we wouldn't normally get.
Warwick University's really nice.
I've been there.
It's great.
But it's not in Warwick though is it?
It's south of it.
 
The the booking isn't in Warwick is it?
No.
 
No.
in York.
Right er  number four er the National Entertainments Conference organized by the N U S. I have since secured some money from Executive Committee to send two representatives to this Committee, and it's in the last week of the summer holidays.
I was sort of hoping any other people who were interested in standing for re-election might have came along to this Committee to show their
Support.
support, and interest in entertainments, but obviously they've not turned up.
Ah  
Mm mm.
Interesting.
Mm.
Er so it's at the remit of this Committee to decide who can go to the conference.
Er Exec was saying it was probably me and somebody else or would the Committee like to wait and see who's elected tomorrow, and then decide next week?
Like cos they said it's up to the Committee as a whole.
Is that not at the same time as Glastonbury and all that?
Oh wow.
Gla Glastonbury's the first week.
I'll tell you the dates of it.
It's er it's in the Easter holiday.
How are you getting down?
The sixteenth of 
 
between the sixteenth to the eighteenth of April.
Eh?
Oh.
Fair enough.
When's Glastonbury this year?
June.
Er it's the twenty sixth of June.
Yeah it seems a bit early though.
Yeah so  do you want to sort of make a decision now, or wait till next week or
Where is it?
It's in Oxford Brookes University, which is probably Oxford Poly  
It used to be Oxford Poly, yeah.
I know someone who went there.
Fifty pounds plus VAT plus travelling and then you sort of tick in er various boxes if you're a vegan or er 
Yeah.
whatever at the moment.
Well 
Sort it out then.
if you're a vegan really.
What is it?
What do you do?
I don't know, I've never been to one before.
But it's like basically a conference where all the record company reps and that turn up and try to get bookings for their bands.
Isn't that about the P A as well?
No, that's 
 
a different thing.
No, that's not .
Could erm
Aha.
 
Reaction's over.
Julia's reaction's now been completed.
It's finished, yeah.
Excellent.
You've got to 
I don't know if it's excellent but
Ah.
You've got to sign a thingy.
You've got two things to sign Julia cos we're being ethnographically studied.
Right so has anybody got any sort of strong opinions about who should go?
Or
Who wants to go?
Well I said I would go, but I might have been like un-elected
Deposed.
tomorrow.
In which case I won't have a
Leg to stand on.
post on this Committee.
Except Tony says I can return to being Security manager.
Yeah.
Quite correctly 
You haven't done it!
 
I've had nothing to do!
And I've done it very well.
Ah sure.
 
Right, I'll sort
Nobody's got a sort of decision on 
Oh is it?
that?
Look do w 
Right.
Does anyone 
 
want to go?
Does anybody like, do you want to go?
Want a free weekend out?
In Oxford.
In Oxford.
Yeah, well
 
Right, well, me and Andy  will go then.
That'll be a laugh.
No, I'm busy.
I'm washing my hair,me hair.
Yeah, but will you get to meet all  high-flyer 
 
record company executives.
Yeah you're bound t you're bound to get on the telly then, man.
It'll help your quest for stardom.
Yeah.
a bit odd though, it's a bit pointless, as 
Look 
I'm not going to be here next year.
Barry White might be there.
Never mind about Barry White.
Right, number, we'll come back to that next week, number five the post van.
On my way back from Ents Committee last week, erm the internal mail bloke was delivering some gear to computer services, and he left the back of the post van open.
And there was a stage board in the back  and when I said , what's that doing in there?
He said oh we use them as ramps.
 
heavy gear.
And I'm a bit distressed at this, cos they're not designed for 
That's ten quid a time isn't it?
 
Aye I think we 
Ten quid a day.
I think we ought to er 
And 
write to them  
there was a lot of trouble early on this term when people couldn't find stage boards, and like they were all missing and it turns out that they're like the
The university  
have claimed one.
At least one.
At least one.
Well, probably one for each van.
But like probably one for each van yeah.
So, there are, does this Committee think that I should like write them a letter saying
Definitely.
 
either we want like a lot of money,
No, I think we want 
Yeah.
a lot of money.
Tell them that we want we wanna be paid for them, and erm all we want 
Yeah, every day is ten pounds a day sort of thing.
Yeah and, and
Back pay.
and we either want them back or we want, or we want money to buy some new ones in addition.
Yeah, because the ones that we've  did cost like I think it was
Eight hundred 
ei 
pounds.
e eight hundred pounds for twelve, so that's seventy pounds each.
 Sheesh 
That's loads.
They were a lot of money.
So
They look really crap as well.
Yes .
You can either stand on them, or look very stupid on the stage.
So, right, well I shall write to them, and tell them that it's very naughty.
Cos I 
I am not ha not amused.
Okay.
They should send a representative 
 
to Committee for grilling.
Aye.
Head, head of postmen?
Head of internal mail   
 
come.
Right, any other business.
Has anybody got any 
Well 
other business?
bookings.
We got bookings.
Well I haven't done bookings.
But I'll, I'll put that into .
Right Ah, Julia's got something that's quite important, that's annoying her, about Derwent dining hall.
Which, which oh, that bit.
Erm
Derwent?
Give us, give us the tale Julia.
 
Okay, the, the tale is that in January I booked Derwent dining hall for a barn dance next week and got a phone call yesterday but I wasn't there and she rang back this morning,said  oh I'm very sorry, I'm very sorry, but you can't have it, I'm very sorry .
On and on.
So I said you know we've got P and P out, we've started selling tickets.
Erm we haven't bothered to book a stage because Derwent has one, etcetera, etcetera, etcetera.
And then later on, oh and then she was going to see room bookings and try to find me another dining hall cos I said it's pretty late notice, and she said  oh no, it's a week  and I thought well I had booked it two months ago.
well, it's a week for both of you.
Not just a week for you.
Well that's it.
What she'd had was a double-booking, effectively, cos she'd had this dinner which was meant to be in the private dining hall, but the numbers had suddenly shot up, and because they'd said originally they wanted either the private dining hall or the main dining hall depending on numbers, she should have really booked them both and decided later and told me to like try somewhere else, but she didn't, she told me yeah the dining hall's free.
Off you go sort of thing.
Erm  but then she rang back later, I don't know whether she contacted room bookings to try and get me a dining hall, but she said they might be able to have their dinner in the S C R. So that's alright, I'm okay.
If not has any one booked the    for next Wednesday night?
I don't want to book them now, but I'd just like to know.
I don't think so, no.
Right, I'll leave it for now.
Can I just say, this has shades of the Kingmaker fiasco?
Yeah, yeah.
 
Yes, it's like just walk all over the students again.
Erm 
For, for like 
It's her mistake, it's not the fault of the other people not booking, cos they had said they might want the main dining hall.
No but they're still giving, yeah but the priority 
But it's  
and, yeah.
Yeah.
For tho for those that, for those that missed that er, last year Alcuin J C R booked Kingmaker as part of their massive big mega-media global world tour.
And then a fortnight before the end of the, the summer holidays they were told they couldn't have the dining hall because the day after the Freemasons were having their
  
 
That was the day after.
And it wasn't even the same day, but the day after, and as a result, er a man called John ,
Who we don't like.
Who we don't like.
Er
And  who's descended from the .
Is he?
Gosh.
?
Yeah.
Oh there you are.
Yeah, anyway, he comes 
That's amazing.
from Gladstone and Gannon, and er he gave an awful lot of people at the S U and at Alcuin J C R a lot of grief over the provost, who then wrote them a letter saying I, Jim  am the fault of all this and just generally made the students look even dafter for  
As though they just couldn't organize .
They just couldn't organize anything and as a result that's why we'll probably never get Kingmaker or the Ned's Atomic Dustbin.
Or anybody else from Gladstone and Gannon.
Anyone else from Gladstone and Gannon.
So
We don't need them.
There's not a lot we can actually do.
Apart from, did you get your room booking form back?
Yeah, I've had it confirmed by room bookings.
Oh, I'll have to see wh she's going to ring me this afternoon and say whether they can do it in the S C R. I'm gonna try and persuade her that they can, because there are only forty people at this dinner and they'll look stupid in the middle of the dining hall.
Mm.
We could dance round them, there'd be enough space, you know.
 
Well offer the, offer the forty people reduced tickets for the barn dance.
But it's the way she's saying oh I'm so sorry but I have to go back on it when she's agreed to something.
write  a letter or not?
Well I think it's been done that's the problem.
Yeah, well 
Well, I'll write a letter obviously if she doesn't
Yeah.
sort it out.
If she sorts it out today then 
If, if, if, if it turns out that, yeah.
The point is that as far as room bookings are concerned 
Yeah, she may not have sent it through to 
You're, you're in the clear.
room bookings, the first one.
She probably just booked them 
Yeah, this is, this is the problem.
the private dining hall assuming their numbers would be quite low.
So it may not be a problem with room bookings it's probably a problem with Jo .
Mhm.
Yeah.
Had problems with  her before .
It's just the principle of the thing that a booking's a booking, whoever
Yeah.
Yeah.
whoever might have done it.
If you've booked it, then you 
 
should get it,
I mean just because it's next  
 
doesn't mean it should get priority.
Yeah, well she was going on about bringing lots of money into the college but she might have to pay two hundred and twenty quid for a barn dance band if she's not careful.
Yeah, well I think that she, yeah, they would be liable for that.
Didn't I mean the same, same sort of thing happened when Wentworth put on the twenty fifth of May, that a week before Sheila  said er oh you're not having this.
And that's it and the contracts had been signed and everything and it was 
Ha.
most painful and dangerous.
And I know it's worthless.
Yeah.
Ow.
Right so 
You stood on my toe then.
you have our full support, I'm sure.
Right, anybody got any bookings?
Oh I've got some any other business.
Erm
Oh alright  
Could we have it minuted that erm Derwent get a couple of P A hires free from .
Okay, yeah.
Ah well we'll discuss this.
This will come up in any other business.
We'll discuss this.
Right.
I believe on Saturday, you hired the S U P A?
We did.
Yeah.
And it was late?
Very late.
How late?
It was er, it was er 
Two hours late.
 
No it wasn't two hours late 
It was.
It was an hou 
Cos 
it was an hour late, which it was late enough  for us to not to know if it was coming, so we had to go and get another P A, otherwise we'd have gone to get, there was no other option.
We waited
 
Because the band were supposed to be soundchecking at six.
What, what time did the band 
 
arrive?
They pick the comedians arrived at six o'clock.
Right.
What, if the comedians had have been an hour late, would you have booked
Another comedian?
Some another comedian?
That's ridiculous really, isn't it?
Answer the question.
No it's not.
It's a serious question.
If the comedians had been an hour late, would you have booked another comedian?
The point is, that the S
No, I'm
the point is 
Please answer this question.
No, no just, just please answer the question.
Don't get all .
 
Come on.
the point of view that the P A was booked for four thirty, so that we could set it up 
Pete, that's not the point.
That's not the point.
for six, so that they could soundcheck.
Yeah,s s surely the, the point is, we'd have booked another comedian if it had been possible to book another comedian at that time, which it obviously wasn't.
But it was obviously possible to book another P A. I mean that's 
But 
why your question's irrelevant.
Just, just let me mention that you, you told me that you'd gone to Y S L,
Yeah.
and you were there for half past five.
We left here at half past five.
No, you said you were there for half past five, because you had to get there before half past five in order to book it.
We had, we had to get there before six, when they shut, we had to go at half past five,.
Well I was told you had to get there before half past five.
No.
No.
We left here at half past five.
An hour after we were supposed to meet you.
Is that, is that  don't want to cause any hassle,but you know 
Can't I like cut the baby in half?
what I mean?
Well I wasn't there so I don't know.
How much how much did it cost you to hire the one 
Hundred and fifty.
Hundred and fifty pounds.
Plus also .
No  loads more.
So you spent a hundred pounds more?
Yeah.
Than we would have done.
I hate having to make these sort of decisions.
 
Well I think we should vote.
I think we should give them two
I think we should get our 
free yeah.
two free goes.
Free goes on the P A.
That's not .
It's, but then you see that's not just a question of two free goes, it's all well and good for you to say 
Yeah.
two free goes, but this involves two nights by John.
Yeah.
Two nights  
Two nights out of John's like busy project 
Yeah.
time.
You've got to bear this in mind.
It's not as simple as you can have the P A, because you need someone to set it up.
Well give them the hundred quid then.
Yeah.
I know   
But we haven't got a hundred pounds to give them.
Yeah we haven't got any money.
Yeah,
I mean we could we could give you the P A for the 
 
bop, which would be, you know, doesn't involve as much effort.
What, yeah, what I would suggest is that if you have some existing bookings, then, if you have two existing bookings then you just have those, you just you, you, you
don't pay for those.
For like next week ?
Do y do you have a, you have a booking for the erm barbecue now?
For the P A?
Mhm.
You do, it's in my diary.
Is it?
Erm well erm,guess so.
Did you do that?
You definitely booked it.
 
If it's in the book.
I may have done it.
I don't put these things in automatically,
Erm
We're going to have a week three event possibly as well.
C could we erm get back to you on that one and talk to .
Well just, just find yourself a c couple of bookings, and we'll sort .
two.
Two bookings.
Two bookings,.
But it was an accident, I mean
 
Yeah I realize that but the thing is if we'd had a phone call to say look, we're going to be this late,
Yeah, well I wasn't 
then we'd have been alright.
I wasn't there, so I don't know.
Something that if ever, ever  sorted out the bleeper hopefully in future I'll be on bleeper, and then if that sort of thing happens 
 
bleep me 
But it'll still, yeah
 
Yes I mean fundamental point.
The porters do not have a key to the cupboard.
That is
I mean
that is against the law, because they have to have access to that cupboard in case there is a fire.
I think that's where the principle is, cos if we, if we 
That's where the real problem lies, if you could have had the P A, if you could have gone into the cupboard and got it, even though we'd turned up at ten past six,
There wouldn't have been a problem.
Yes.
there wouldn't have been a problem.
Because you could have put it in approximately the right places in the room, and we could have come along and we could have been running,
wired it up.
so erm for seven o'clock.
Yeah yeah, we could have had it going in twenty minutes.
Still a lot of  hass though, cos they don't know if you've just completely 
Yeah.
forgotten about it.
Yeah, that's .
Well no I mean 
we di couldn't contact any 
We have I mean 
I see, I see your worry factor here .
But if you, if you could have got the stuff over there, it would have been a lot simpler.
The thing is, the thing is, the thing is I can see where everyone's coming from, but it's, it's thinking about it in the future,
Well I do think that the porters ha should have a key.
And I think they sh be 
But the porters have also got the problem that they don't want to let just anyone
No, well what I was about to say 
 
was that you could, you could give them  then if we know it's going to be certain people, we can give them names.
I mean you know the, if you give the porters a form, they'll 
Mm.
give you a key for the minibus.
Yeah.
Now if you give the porters a form for a P A,
Mm.
they'll give you a key to the P A cupboard.
I mean, you know,
you might find  
I mean I can take a form up to the porters in Goodricke and they'll give me a key to a minibus.
Would that actually have solved anything, because if you hadn't turned up, they'd have still been without a P A.  
Well we're not saying that we wouldn't have turned up it's just that we were unable to turn up.
But we didn't know.
Yes  
No, I know that I know that.
But, I mean 
 
So that's all we're saying that .
It wasn't just us though, there's Rich as well you see.
I mean 
Yeah but if you'd have phoned us, then we would 
Yeah.
have known you'd have been late, and we wouldn't have panicked.
Yeah, but at that time we were s trying to speed back to York
breaking all known records.
I think I think  
I actually did it in record time.
Yeah.
And I fell asleep.
And he fell asleep.
 
went into a warp factor, just like on Star Trek.
Come on, settle down.
Settle down, okay?
Right, why don't we erm  give Derwent two free bookings, you know bookings that have already happened or are about to happen for free,
Mhm.
erm  explore the key 
off the slate that you 
explore the key issue with the porter, and erm, hopefully get the bleeper  sorted out or something , so that there's some system for shaking things up.
come down to a room and demand 
The absolute
the absolute fundamental problem is thes thes is that there's not 
There's not enough people running, the running the P A. 
There aren't enough people who know how to do that.
I mean like John's out just about 
I'm out every night this week.
every night this week.
In fact I'm out twice tonight.
So you know, it's not a fun 
 
job, really.
You know, if you ne if you're busy every night and 
 
you're a third year student trying to do projects, it's
Can you not train anybody else up?
Well, I've said I'll get trained up,
Yeah, well I mean 
 
I've, I've got to finish off this term's work  
You see there's peo the people have got commitments and they're not wanting to take them on.
And then there's other people that can do it, but, you know, people only come for like every couple 
Yeah.
of times and it you need to be out there 
And there are 
a lot to
there's possibly 
learn how to do it.
five or six other people on campus who could potentially do it with a just one night's look an and a diagram.
Just that they, they're not willing to do it for nothing, and it's going to cost you twenty pounds a time on top of the P A hire.
You know, when you get paid twenty pounds a night for driving the minibus, and you get paid nothing for running the P A, and it takes equally long if not, if not 
 
longer
Perhaps we should look into something .
and then you only get paid, well the P A gets forty quid.
Well people don't want to pay sixty quid for a P A, cos
Mm.
it's getting expensive then.
 
Why don't you ask one of the equipment reps if 
They can't .
It's already been proved that they can't  
Yeah, I mean 
in writing now.
I mean it isn't an easy thing 
 
to set up.
Yeah, yeah, I understand 
But potentially 
 
you, you can make a right mess.
But I'm not saying that people are incompetent, but it takes a certain amount
We want to be convinced.
Yeah.
Mm.
Right.
Prove yourselves .
Okay, we'll, we're digressing.
We'll look into this.
Right, er riot woman, or whatever you wish to be called.
Girl,.
 
Grrr.
to ask for some money for Monday's bop, cos we lost about forty quid.
I mean, we heard that if we'd come here before, you might have given us money, and we wondered if we could have it in retrospect.
What?
Pardon ?
There was a bop on Monday,
Yeah.
and we lost about forty quid.
And we 
Yeah.
wondered if we could get some money from the Students  
What, this, this is a bop put on by what was it, A F A M S was it?
No it was just it was just us.
And the money was g gone missing.
What us, though?
Just a group of people?
Riot Girl.
It's not erm any  society or anything it just .
Right.
I don't think 
 
you'll  any money out of the Student Union.
Sorry?
I really don't think you'll get any money out the Student Union, and you won't get any money out of Ents, because Ents is bankrupt.
To put it bluntly,any money.
If you're a society you might get, you know,
You should  
Societies grant.
we're not a society yet, so I mean  thinking about that, we have tried to become a society before.
I think  
For a start we haven't any money.
But er 
just to try to be a so try to become a society, and then make, make it clear 
 
you do have a debt.
Mhm.
What and  
I mean Rave Soc get away with it all the time.
It's just if you come  Finance Committee 
 
Oh we know about that, problems like being , so do you think we can become a society with a debt?
You can become a society  
Yeah, and because you can then use 
 
your erm what's it?
M R G. 
M R G to try and pay off some the debt,
If such a thing ex 
 
I don't know  
If you can manage to get  an M R G.
 
Yeah, one potential problem with that is that Finance Committee have allocated all the society grant 
Mm.
money.
Lot of money.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Well, now the thing is, right what I've thought might be like a good thing, er  cos we all like entertainments, is like if Riot Girl were to become a society,
Well we're trying to.
Yeah.
And everyone round this table could like join.
That would cost you a pound and that would give you some cash, and it would also look good, and what is it a pound fifty you've got to pay?
And I'm quite sure everyone would like pay a pound fifty to join this nice society,
And become like riot girls.
bops.
And could get 
 
into bops free.
 
And that would give you a bit of ready cash, and also it would give you a standing to try and get something from Finance Committee.
You see I mean you, basically you need to get a lot of people I know there's no money in Finance Committee at the moment but
I'm sure that could be rectified  ultimately.
 
I think you've come to really the wrong committee to try  and get money .
You've come to the wrong committee to try and get like a cash handout, but er  we do appreciate the problems of putting on entertainments, and bops on campus.
 
In a big way.
A four figure way.
 
Probably more, probably more so than any oth anybody else on campus, yeah.
But I think it would be very nice if everybody joined Riot Girl, just to show sort of affiliation of events on campus.
So I think we should put that to a vote.
Yes.
Having been down the pub, I ain't voting.
Yeah.
That was a yes.
For what?
For joining Riot Girl.
Everyone?
 
I believe in freedom of speech,fucking off for Ents, I'm sure.
All those ?
 
One two three four.
All those against?
Oh.
Ooh.
It was carried.
Yeah, get it in.
right 
Can I  please?
Yes,.
You get a societies pack, and have to fill all these names in.
 
 
Well we could
Yeah well  
get a photocopy of one of these lists, and  be alright.
 
Yeah get a photocopy of this.
Hang on.?
It's about .
Right.
You can vote.
I'll bring it back.
I'm not on the Committee.
Doesn't matter, still in the room.
 
stand in for any Committee member, if you  
Oh that's true, that's true.
You could be standing
I can think of several.
 
Ooh.
Right,
 
is there any more bookings?
 
Yeah.
Goodricke.
Can we book the P A  every Monday that's free next term?
Every Monday?
Every Monday 
Until the quiet period.
Oh God.
Yeah, until the quiet period.
Ah, they're taking over Alcuin's bop night.
When, when, when is it free next term, when is the P A free next term?
I've made a new term planner actually but I've forgotten to bring it.
 
It's never free, it always costs you 
 
Ah!
Er well, shortly after Alcuin decide Mondays is a dead loss and  
Alcuin's really good for one thing. 
 

would do.
One two three nine.
Can we leave it
No.
because we .
M and Monday's the last day.
I know, that's  
You can only have weeks one two and three.
Weeks one two and three?
What dates is week three?
Erm
Three week  
 
Twenty twenty six, three and ten.
 
Yeah.
Why can't they have week four I thought ?
Because quiet period starts
After Tuesday.
 
I suppose you could have it on Monday 
Well yeah, you could have it on
You'll get the last bop.
Last bop before the quiet period.
Yeah.
Whoo, very exciting 
 
Yes?
 
Okay.
Right, any more booking  
 
Is the P A free Thursday week ?
 
Week?
Thursday week two .
Oh.
It might be out all  
Thursday week two.
Er, yeah.
Er well could we have the P A and lights, we might be having an event 
 
that day so
What?
I'll let you know obviously .
 
Right, Vanbrugh yeah?
 
Yeah.
I'll bring them up later on.
 

Come in
Hello.
Is this Ents Committee?
Certainly is.
Right.
So?
Erm,
Well you'll have to wait, we're busy now.
Come in and join us.
Join the festivities.
Right, so your event  week two?
Yes.
Mhm.
Right 
Is that like just a bop or is it  
 
people, and  bands on campus, campus bands.
Okay.
And you're J C R?
Yeah.
Yeah, er when's the P A free in freshers' week next year?
No comment.
All week.
That will be left to the next entertainments secretary.
Er diary doesn't go that far.
Oh, okay then.
 
Yeah.
 
No concern of mine either.
Yeah.
Well it will, because I'm, I'm taking it with me when I leave, I'm sorry.
Right then,.
Right, okay.
Can we just get it clear, has Goodricke bop now changed to Monday, or is this not a permanent ?
Well as long as we  can't get it on a Tuesday .
Cos we've got it.
Yeah.
 

Yeah.
Never worked for Alcuin.
some crackers.
Shut up.
Anybody else?
Yeah, erm we've, the Amnesty's booked the P A for week three, Friday week three.
For the jazz thing?
For the jazz concert.
Yeah.
Erm, last year, we were given it for free, erm  
Right, I remember, yeah.
and someone and we've now been told that we have to pay for it, and I  
Yeah, I, I organized a cut price deal for Amnesty.
Right, can we organize  next year?
Well, that was for it, wasn't it?
That was 
 
There was only booking Amnesty ?
Mhm.
There was 
I think 
last year's and there was this year's.
And this year we're doing it for about half price or something.
I knocked, yeah, I knocked about twenty pounds off.
It's already done.
How much erm sorry I didn't  
Amnesty have already had a free booking.
They've had a 
Yeah.
free booking?
Well, a cheap 
Yes.
booking.
I gave them a  was it this term?
 
They have had a free booking.
Wasn't the Alcuin bop was it?
No no.
That, that was someone else.
It was er
 
No, I'm sure that that was, I'm sure that's the one mean, week three next term.
they came and they said we had a free booking.
We said we wouldn't charge them for the stage blocks.
And we gave them
Cos they wanted the blocks and the boards.
Right.
And I  said thirty five 
Yeah.
pounds instead of fifty five.
Right.
Okay.
Do you know what the arrangement was last time, because I think we got it all for free?
No, that was last year.
Yeah, but that was then
The arrangement was a fit of generosity.
we didn't have many bookings,
Right.
er, and we weren't very busy, so it wasn't such a fag.
Er
Thank you.
You you your  
 
just the same as the  
I know I didn't realize did I?
 
Don't make me take two .
Well, maybe they have, is that what you want, I mean I'm not  I mean 
Er 
what're you after?
You can always seek financial help from the Executive because they can give money out campaigns  selective.
Well, no, you can ask them.
 
But what you are saying is you're not going to give it for free?
That's correct.
 
 
What we're saying is we're giving you it for half price.
Ents won't, Ents, Ents won't give it for 
Or you can pay full price somewhere else.
free because they're too 
Mhm.
bust  
Like a hundred and fifty pounds.
But if you go and ask Executive, they might give you money, cos they're kinder in there.
 
They've got money  more solvent than us.
They're richer than us.
We've got a big hole to fill,and it's getting filled in forty pound lumps at the moment.
Right.
. Okay.
Is there any  any other business?
Right well now, the secret bit, this happens to be John's birthday,
 
and I've got a cake.
Great.
the candles
Er just wait, just wait, it'll all come good.
Ah look, she's back.
Here you go.
Is this, I mean is this real, will these people really join?
I will.
I will.
They're all here, and they didn't vote.
Well, there's a problem that men might not be allowed to join anyway because .
Ooh!
 
Can't do that!
No you can't .
There's no way you can affiliate to the er the Student Union if you don't let men join.
You can't be a un you can't be you can't be a society.
 
Well, Women's Group get special
I want to join.
erm
they already get special dispensation.
have to go to Executive Committee to discuss that..
Well again it's
I don't think it's allowed.
I think you should  
I don't think they'd ever let a men's committee 
 

Yeah.
a men's society.
There's blokes in Huggy Bear.
I didn't know he was .
 
this is relevant.
Anyway you're detracting here, the candles are burning down.
So I think we should all sing Happy Birthday to John, and it'll be like a really good end to this bloke's tape.
It's going to be on the tape!
Right, after three.
Happy Birthday to you, happy birthday to you, happy birthday dear John, Happy birthday to you .
Make a wish!
  

Go on, down in one.
 
Right, that's it.
The end.
Don't forget to vote for somebody tomorrow in the election.
Somebody.
.
Yeah, I'd stay until later as well