

Hello, hello.
What's this thing for?
Why's it here?
No, well what is it  here?
I don't know 
Just don't talk right.
Hello.
recording now.
What's going on?
Well we're actually recording.
Yeah right.
The lesson is being recorded .
Tha that gentleman's just  on the table for me and er  the lesson is being recorded.
We're not sure why  research  Right, so I'm going to carry on with  anyway  and we're going to start by looking at pages forty two and forty three, forty two  and as you can see the units is entitled Shouldn't Do it to a Dog.


and if you look in the blue box, bottom left to begin with it says this chapter looks at the way in which human beings treat animals.
We have immense power over nature, do we use it responsibly?
What would animals say about us if they could speak, what would they do to us if they have the chance?
There are suggestions talking and writing after each item.
Well it so happens that I did intend you to do a paramount of talking this afternoon, so it's quite convenient in a way that we are being recorded.
First of all I'd just like you to have a look at the well what there is on pages forty two and three some of there are cartoons, photographs, adverts  just have a quick look at them, six altogether.
Now the instructions are in the box, the white box bottom right on page forty three.
The visuals on these two pages were chosen to illustrate different aspects of the relationship between animals and people and you are asked to talk about these issues.
Number one  what is the point being made in each one  point, even if it's a cartoon that there will be a point of some sort.
Number two, which do you think is the most striking and why, the choice  there, you might not agree with the person next to you, but it doesn't matter, discuss it.
Number three, do you think any of them is in bad taste, if so what are your reasons?
Bad taste, do you, do you really rather disapprove anything that it is in any of them, do you think it inappropriate, not on, is there something in bad taste?
And number four, if you had to have two or three images to this collage, what would you choose and why?
Do you know that word collage?
Any offers?
How would you describe collage?
pieces  together to make a picture.
Right, erm, very often it's to do with making up a painting or a picture of some a picture of some kind isn't it, sticking different bits together, so if you get a, a collection of different things which makes a whole, whole with a w right.
So, erm you might not get on to number four, if you do, or I tell you to start, can you think of two or three images to add to it which would, which would fit in with the others.
See you just start off by going through them one by one and consider what point is being made in each and  those of you who'd like just to move round and join these two ladies .
I'll give you about five minutes on that, starting now.
Now, what is the point being made in, in each case?
We'll, we'll start with a fairly straightforward one, the National Anti-vivisection Society advert.
What do you understand by anti- vivisection first of all?
That's right  yes, er vivisection is erm  well actually to do with the cutting up of animals isn't it, testing, things like cosmetics,medicine medicines and so on, on animals and if you're anti to be that you're against it.
So what would you say was the point of the  advert?
Rachael?
Right,it it's really just expressing disapproval of the idea on this sort of testing isn't it.
Did you want to say something Evelyn?
It's all right saying, it's all right for  like the mothers of the animals wouldn't like if their children were killed and  your children were killed you wouldn't like that.
Yes,it 's it's presenting the points of view in quite erm  erm a dramatic way, isn't it.
It says erm the law still allows to squirt weedkiller in a baby's eyes, inject it with poison, grow cancers on its back, burn its skin off, expose it to radiation and eventually kill it, in unreliable experiments.
Then there's a gap before it's no longer it's only an animal.
So what in fashion are you given it  Claire?
make way of an animals  like a human being .
You're  that's right you 're you're giving the impression that it's about a human being  then it turns out to be about an animal, now come back to the question what point is being made?
But, in brackets but perhaps you shouldn't.
Erm yes,i it's er very much er erm an advert which is trying to discourage the deception.
Now, what about the other two on that page?
Did you get anywhere with what point is being made in  cartoons 
Yes.
Erm, what do you call that?
Sarcasm exactly.
fantastic parrot and it costs an arm and a leg.
Catherine?
Yeah,i it it's based almost you kn you know what I mean by cliche?
Based on the idea of a cliche, an often repeated phrase isn't it oh it cost me an arm and a leg, erm which isn't meant to be taken literally.
Obviously when when you say it is, just means well means what Lawrence?
I if I say it cost you an arm and a leg?
Yeah, cost me a lot, cost me a great deal of money.
That's right.
So it's erm I suppose part of the humour lies in taking the metaphorical to the literal isn't it.
When you say it cost me an arm and a leg, you're thinking in word pictures if you like  it's a metaphor and er in the in the picture it's  by the er Long John by the Long John Silver figure having not only one leg, but also one arm as well.
Ruins it doesn't it, a cartoon when you, when you analyse it like that I think.
One of the problems with humour is you've got to make an immediate impact sometimes if you try to analyse it into too much detail, it spoils it.
Anyway we might as well go ahead and spoil the other one now.
What did you make of that one?
I felt a bit sorry for him after I shot his elephant .
shot an elephant 
Right, no it it's all right to stuff the elephant, but  but  we thought we'd better not stop the human being as well.
Nicholas?
Erm it's like if you shoot an animal it'll effect people the people the person who owns it or actually  round it, it effects people as well as the animals.
Good point, yes.
Any anything else on the elephant one?
Right, what about the top one on page forty three?
Any thoughts on that one?
Describe what you see there.
It's like a dead small dog that's been 
A dead small dog that's been all dressed up and everything.
There's a really big dog there  because you can see its legs  and we can see some human legs, or at least boots.
Right.
Something to do with sizes and everything.
Does that strike a chord Michael?
No.
People  so we're  we'll  almost as if it's like a lady and  look after it so that it won't get old and have nasty sneezes, that sort of idea.
Yes I I'm  I I'm deliberately using that that sort of language because I think  I think that that is the suggestion in the future.
Any other ideas that anybody had about the little dog?
Can I  Can I anticipate what er we might say in the bad taste bit then, did anybody think one was in  in bad taste?
No?
Was no concern one way or the other?
Do you it's all to do with I suppose whether you whether you approve of dressing dogs up in little coats and  I know this one doesn't have a coat  or does it?
It does, does it?
So it's got its coat on as well probably matching the hat.
So what's your what's your reaction to the to the picture then?
Edward?
dress a dog up for your own amusement if that's what it's for.
You think it's for the amusement for the benefit of the owner rather than the dog, quite an interesting point.
David?
Pardon?
James, ah.


James the First.
You know like er 
I thought it was the name of the dog, sorry  yeah.
It's er a comment on the inability of some people right,t to distinguish to the human of animals of perhaps suggesting that humans are really more important.
that humans are more important, but some people think of animals as being more important.
You know there's a lot more moneys given to the R S P Cs R S P C A than the N S P C C  people  and so on same sort of ideas.
Yes, right.
was suggesting that er this person might not be able to have any children of her own and is therefore turning the  the little dog into a kind of child.
Right, what about the beware of the dog one?
The voice?
Correct.
Oh, I see  dog, dog strikes back, dog takes charge, dog bites man, no .
Yes, Sarah?
It could be that they're just classing the dog as a member of the family, so they do  really.
It's just a member of the family though is it?
No, part of the family's, a big part of the family cos they to  only getting the man getting very cross about it.
I mean if it was me being  dog, but.
Right.
Thank you, Russ?
The dog sided with the wife against the man.
Yes.
There is erm a chap down our road had a had a huge dog and when he when he took it for a walk, you know he used to he used to stagger along with him and my wife used to say there he goes again, the do what was it she used to say, the dog's taking the man for a walk again  and it i do you think it's that sort of idea you know that  in some households th the dog takes over from the er sort of central figure, even the dominant figure, things hinge round the dog, you know the holiday what shall we do with the dog, pouring down with rain but the dog has to go out for its walk and somebody has to take it.
Tha that's how   from it, but certainly er the dog has sided with the woman and thrown the man out rather than the other way round.
and the other cartoon, the final one with the the  is a bit more straightforward, we're talking about  Claire?
 
Yes, erm  tha that's that's an explanation really of what is in the  picture and somebody comments on it in in in order to suggest what the point being made is.
Naomi?
you have to kill the animal 
That's right.
Erm  I, I, I think there's an erm an imply of suggesting disapproval of the ivory trade er in  in the cartoon.
Let's move on to the er  to the third question there, just any quick points that anybody wants to make erm not necessarily things you talked about, something that occurs to you know perhaps.
Do you think that any of them  any of those six were in bade taste you know not  not really  not really very pleasant shall we say?
What about if I suggested to you that some people would think that being anti-vivisection was in bad taste, how would you answer the point?
Do you agree at all Sarah, or would you 
There's a tiny baby in the photo.
Oh  Sarah is suggesting disapproval because  because of what the baby in the photo   if you like would be subjected to  like a photograph album.
Yes, fair enough.
What were you going to say Catherine?
You've forgotten.
Yeah, we'll come ba I'll come back to you if you remember.
Any other points about the vivisection one?
What about the little dog oh, sorry Russ.
The end, the end justifies the means, you know that phrase.
Well you do know  th th that you're saying that they want to make a particular point strongly and er that  that might involve  erm  an elephant in of bad taste in order to make it striking and to make people look at it and think about it.
Erm, I'll just check with Catherine whether the thought's come back.
No?
Lost forever?
Right.
Naomi?
Erm I just want to say if if it was an animal who was like chained up, would it still be in bad taste .
rhetorical question is, you know is it is that a question you wanted to try to answer or are you erm
Yeah, just  any any any thoughts on that?
Erm it has been suggested I think Naomi's saying on this side of the room that  if there is an element of bad taste  because the baby is chained up or whatever and it's in er has had to be placed in an undignified or uncomfortable position in order to be photographed  and Naomi's question .
Naomi's question is would it be also would it also be in bad taste if an a if that were a picture of an animal subjected to a sort of  humiliation?
Any points?
Would it be the same  worse  less bad?
What do you think?
Katrina?
About the same?
Do you want to answer your own question before we move on 
Erm
Naomi?
I don I sir I don't think it's really in bad taste and I know it's terrible  but it's it's gotta it's out there to prove the point and it is the only way to prove it the revealing that is erm 
And it's really to make people to attract peoples' attention and to make them think about these issues.
After all it is the one out of the six that we've spent on  might be significant in itself.
Let's move on, forty four and five.
On page forty four  called the Newcomer.
There's something new in the river the fish said as it swam.
It's got no scales, no fins, no gills, it ignores the impossible .
There's something new in the trees I heard a bloated thrush sing.
It's got no beak, no jaws and no feathers, not even the ghost of a wing.
There's something new in the warren said the rabbit to the doe, it's got no fur, no eyes and no claws, yet digs deeper than we dare go.
There's something new in the  nest said the snow bright polar bear, I saw its shadow on a glacier as it had left no paw marks there.
Through the animal kingdom the news was spreading fast.
No beak, no claws, no feathers, no scales, no fur, no gills.
Lives in the trees and the water, in the soil and the snow and the hills, and he kills and he kills and he kills.
I'll give you a few minutes again just to consider these questions.
One, why is it so important for the newcomer.
Two erm can you think of an alternative title  tell us what it is about.
Three is it possible to imagine a world in which humanity does not kill and to kill and to kill.
What would it be like  and fourthly, is this poem there to human beings.
And to be fair to you I'm again going to give you a few minutes to talk about that, not quite as long as the other time, then I'll ask you to jot a couple of things down as well as, so I'm just telling you in advance.
Okay, start with the first question.
Right, it's your
You want to ask something?
So put the date in the drafting book please.
The eighth.
and erm  sorry the poem the new poem, but that we'll spell it with a  will be correct.
Now in number one I'd just like you to write down  an answer in your own way to this question.
What would you say the poem was about?then in number two  any alternative titles as in number two in the book.
Right er you will have gathered probably that Mark wanted to ask a question  I'll let him start  written down and also express his concerns here.
Mark?
first question erm  because erm the animals haven't seen a human before because erm they  find  certain places and neither buildings coming out from cities.
So what did you think the poem was about?
 

Was it something to do with man moving out into the world of nature?
W what about the concern that you have?
Well sir 
 
Oh yeah, that it says erm in here er it's got no fur and no eyes.
Yes,Mar Mark wanted you to look at the third line of the third verse where there is a reference to no eyes and wondered whether you have any ideas about that.
That man is  lying to animals or nature.
Russ?
Tha that's the answer to the general question I asked at what the poem' about.
You think it's about pollution?
Yes.
Right.
Can I just  take any views on the eyes before we take the er the wider view.
Gina?
You mean the animals can't identify what it is, but they  they feel that whatever is it's leading to their destruction?
Any more ideas on what the poem is about?
Let's have some alternative titles then.
Who's got one?
I've got five.
You've got five, pass it round then.
I've got The Man, The Arrival of Man 


Yes.
Right thank you.
The Arrival of Man.
Do  do you think  think the pictures help?
Consider those if that gets us anywhere.
Catherine?
Some of them are rather like cave paintings aren't they and have they've got this from my  a sort of tedious  association of the drawings and pictures and er Catherine's  it seems to be suggesting that  animals were  around, animals and other creatures were around a long time before human beings and that  human beings are in some ways intruders therefore in their  in their world.
We're running out of time as usual, so  if I can just come to that final line to you to  consider and give me some views on them before you go.
What do you make of the, the ending of the poem?and he kills and he kills and he kills.
Realistic.
It's realistic?
Maybe it is, but what does it mean  wh what sort of thing might it refer to  might think of a couple of fairly obvious ones.
Monique?
Right er  the killing of animals  yeah, the killing of animals for example for food.
Russ?
Be a bit more specific about everything.
Human beings just started destroying everything .
The earth, ah, so w we we're back to your environmental theme, okay?
Has it got three kills, they killed animals for meat, food.
They kill animals for food, they kill  everything which erm is affecting the environment, anything else that perhaps animals observing human beings think that they kill.
Do it in two words.
their habitat.
Their habitat.
Any, any other guesses as to what my two words might be?
Brilliant, thank you.
Each other I was also thinking of, I wondered if that was part of the point of the poem as well.
I like the other two ideas also.
Thank you for your contributions.
In front of you is the tape for prosperity.
Close your books now.


I'm waiting for you to settle down.
Right this morning.
It's afternoon Miss.
No this morning.
Stop it.


Can I have quiet now, please.
Yeah.
Right this morning  
 
to do and we're going to have the opportunity to do it in a slightly interesting way and you failed miserably because you sat and chatted and didn't get any work done.
we got there.
Okay .
Right.
This afternoon 
Oh please Miss.
I gave you an opportunity and you  
 
Quiet.
Stop talking, Patrick.


Stop talking Patrick.
Right, so  afternoon is the feeding of the five thousand.
Right some of you have read it already.


There are two  miracles in Mark's Gospel.
names of those two  miracles.
Bread and fish.
Yes.
miracle.
That was in  
 
Feeding of the four thousand.
No, no, no, no, no 
recording.
Quiet.


Richard do you have to make those noises?


Stop it.
Richard,
Yeah they're 
Right, to make sure that you all getting this down, I dictate the notes.


 

Excuse me,


 
 
This is on the tape.


Bring it down.


Amanda, that's a  failure from you and from all of us.


Right,the feeding of the five thousand.
Yeah, George.
So now settle a little.
General notes.
Wait a minute.
Are we going to  this?
Five thousand's got six Os innit?
called the feeding of the five billion.


Did you say billion or million?
Billion.
Six noughts is billion million.
Miss what's the sub-title?
General notes.
The miracle.
Miss  dictating 
The way it is normally your voices mingle into the  
 
This is the last lesson of the day,
Exactly.
I can keep you here for another ten minutes and  
 
I've got to 
Now get on with your work or get out of this classroom.


I bet everyone wants to do is to get their voices out.
Yeah I know 
 


Patrick, why are you looking that way?
Because 


Stop it.
Outside this classroom.
Shut up and get on with your work.
jam jars 


The details in this story.
Wait a minute 


The details.
In this story.
Details in this story.
Is  well like this.
I know, but I thought 
 
Story.
Show 


That possibly.
Possibly.
Possibly.
An 
An 
Told the story.
told the story?
Yes.
Miss, Miss.
I'll speak first.


Patrick.
What?






I'll decide how to teach this lesson, thank you 


Right, e g the grass being green.


more detail  miss out from the story.
Miss, the grass has always been green.


Let me explain.
In that particularly hot climate, it is quite often yellow.


Shh.
I was writing that sentence.
Well catch up.
I'm trying to, but I can't hear what she's saying.


Shh.
Quiet in the classroom.
Jesus is also seen to be like Moses.
Yeah 


Shut up.


I don't mind.
Have you got that sentence down?
Yes.
At his request
Miss how do you spell request?
R E Q U E S T  
R E Q U E S T  
Philip, shut up.


At his request God sent who?
How do you spell God?


Miss why  if they've only got one.
If you'd like me to work miracles
Sorry Miss, I was just asking.
 

Quiet.
What you'll get out to do some brain work.
miracles, what are we going to tell him 


The miracle also
The miracle also  reflects  the idea  of the banquet
How do you spell that then?
B A N Q U E T 
Miss that's why you're doing this 
get it all down.
Miss  chalk  and that is terrible of you implying that Miss is only doing it to get her voice on the recorder.


bring it out on the charts innit.


Specially with me on it.
If you'd be quiet, they'll be plenty of opportunity for you to  
 