

Creator and sustainer of all things and all people.
You are the source of all wisdom and light.
Enlighten our minds to receive your guidance so that you may lead us unto true wisdom.
May all that we say and do in the service of this county, whether as elected member or as officer, be in accordance with your will and for the good of your people.
Amen.
Yes we've got about two hundred people outside.
Firstly, evacuation procedure.
In the event, and this is a normal evacuation procedure, not with the circumstances.
In the event of having to evacuate the council chamber would everyone leave by one of the two exits at the rear of the chamber.
Officers will be at hand to assist any disabled persons.
Agenda item one, Chairman's announcement -visitors.
I welcome to this meeting all visitors and guest of members  and in particular to the Mayor and Mayoress of  Councillor and Mrs Mike .
Mr Robert  and Mr Ken .
I know members will be sorry to hear that Mr Robert  and Mr Ken  are both unwell and will wish me to convey to them the council's best wishes for a speedy recovery.
Here, here.
The, there are two hundred people I am told, in the hall at the rear  so I shall move shortly resolution to bring forward motion at the rear of the agenda forward, before that I shall deal with the routine council business of petitions, declarations of interest and members' questions.
After that I shall move the resolution to bring the motion forward.
Agenda item two.
I move that the minutes of the meeting of the council held on thirtieth of June nineteen ninety three, copies of which have been circulated to members, to be taken as read, confirmed and signed.
Item four.
Declarations of interest.
Are there any members who wish to do make declarations of pecuniary and non-pecuniary interests in respects of items on the agenda for this meeting.
Chairman, I wish to declare an interest on the social services erm item regarding elderly person's homes.
Mr 
an interest in policy and resources item B.
Mr 
I declare an interest in, on item nine part B.
Mr   the resources  issue.
Could we just clear whether those are pecuniary or non-pecuniary.
Could you confirm whether these are pecuniary or non- pecuniary interests please?
Could we start
Pecuniary.
Pecuniary.
Non-pecuniary.
Non-pecuniary.
Pecuniary.
Pecuniary.
Non-pecuniary.
Non-pecuniary.
Thank you.
No other interests, right.
Agenda item four, petitions presented under standing order seven.
Mr .
Thank you gentlemen.
I would like to present a petition standing my, in my name on the green order paper  signed by two hundred and eight  si signatures of parents of St Mary's Fields s school, erm I move that this be  be referred to the education committee for consideration.
Mrs   seconding.
Seconded.
Thank you.
Mrs 
Thank you chairman.
I wish to present the petition containing seven hundred and eighty three signatures of people who request the provision of a pedestrian crossing in Brook Side, Burghley following two recent accidents to elderly residents as elaborated on the green order paper.
I move that the petition be referred to the environment committee for consideration
Mr 
Second that.
Thank you.
Mr 
I'd like to move a petition containing four, two hundred and forty nine signatures of residents of  Broadstone who request a ped pedestrian crossing on  Broadstone Lane near  road.
I move that it be sent to the environment committee for consideration.
Mrs 
Seconded.
Mr Chairman
Er, Mr .
Thank you chairman.
I wish to present a petition containing seven hundred and ninety six signatures organised by the Bell Group community childcare, set up due to lack of affordable child care facilities in the  Belgrave area.
I move this petition to be referred to the Social Services committee.
Mrs 
Seconded chairman.
Mr 
I I move the petition in my name on the green order paper Chairman, to restrict the speed of of cars in Mossgate, Leicester on behalf of Weston Park Labour party.
I move that it be  referred to the environment committee.
Mr .
Second that.
Mr , J R 
I'd like to move this petition under my name on the green order paper, that it be referred to the environment committee for consideration today.
Mr Cyril 
Mr 
I'd like to move a petition containing two hundred and forty four signatures and my name on the green order page and I ask that it be referred to the environment committee for consideration.
Mrs 
Seconded chairman
Mr 
I move a petition containing nine hundred and sixteen signatures under my name on the green order page and I ask that it be referred to the environment committee for consideration.
Mr 
Seconded chairman.


Not quite as tall eh.
Mr .
I'd like to present a petition containing five hundred er plus signatures from residents in  road area who are concerned with traffic conditions on that road.
I ask that it be referred to the environment committee for consideration.
Mr .
Second.
Without seconding  seconded
Mr 
Thank you chairman.
I will  move that the petition containing some one thousand one hundred and nine signatures as of, as of today, erm of people who call upon the county council to reverse its decision to sell part of the land known as The Green, Doddington Heath in my ward for development purposes.
The petitioners further request Chairman, that the county council retain this land in perpetuity as an open space that is managed to conserve its considerable ecological value and recreational value  and I would urge that this committee, this this council refer the petition to the policy and resources committee and that the decision of the council is reversed on this matter.
Thank you unclear 
here, here 
I'd be delighted to second it Chairman.
Thank you.
Mrs .
Erm yes, thank you Chairman, erm I present a petition on behalf of the er people of the village of  Bradstone er concerned about the dangerous alignment of the highway and ask that this be referred to the environment committee.
Mr 
Er, seconded.
Mrs 
Chairman, I ask that you receive erm, the petition of eight hundred and sixty four signatures requesting a pelican crossing on  and ask it be referred to the environment committee, please.
Mrs 
Seconded.
Mrs  again.
Thank you Chairman.
The second one to present the petition of one thousand three hundred and seventy two signatures asking that, who are opposed to  Brady Hospital being turned into  specialised unit for adolescents and to ask the county council not to proceed with plans to develop a group three community home on the site, erm I ask it be referred to the social services committee.
Mrs 
Seconded.
Doctor 
I'd like to move a petition containing seven hundred and twelve signatures, residents of Broadstone who request the installation of a pedestrian crossing on Broadstone Lane, bottom end of Shakespeare Drive and propose that it is passed on to the environment committee for consideration.
Mr 
Seconded Chairman.
Mr 
I wish to move a petition signed by four hundred and one people organised by the  Hikehams Community Association asking the full county council to freeze its decision on of the  Hikehams and  Moat er merger issue.
I wish the petition to be referred to the policy and resources committee.
Mr .
Mr .
Thank you Chair.
Smallest petition of the lot, but the most important one  regarding  road.
Can I move that it be referred to the environment er committee.
 Ciao.


Mr 
Mr .
Sir I wish to present a petition containing a hundred and sixty six signatures of people who are opposed to the shutting off of the  road calling instead  for


the loco , the low cost tr er calming, traffic calming in the  area.
Thank you.
Mr 
I'd like to second that petition.
Mr 
Petition containing nine hundred and ninety three signatures  of people who are opposed to the  East West link road .
I move that the decision be referred to the environment committee for consideration.
Mr B 
There are other petitions appertaining to a motion they will be referred to when the motion is taken.
Now move on to agenda item five, questions under standing orders.
Miss er Mr  would you .
Thank you Chairman.
Chair, with with the, with one small exception in in her reply that of Hamilton Community College  would the Chairman agree that er the others she mentions in her reply to one  and I note that she doesn't agree with Keith  M P erm, would she, would she accept that the others are largely inaccessible to the youth of Nether Hall and what's she gonna do about it?
Mrs  supplementary
I don't know  I don't know who Mr  is referring to er Chair, but I presume you wish me to reply to some comments that came from across the other side of the room.
 
nice one sir  
I thought Mrs  you'd be capable of defending yourself.


Erm, I er have never known such a question asked in this council chamber where referring to members of parliament er in in er  and that is why I didn't feel it necessary  
Can you use the mike?
To comment on that in my reply.
I didn't think it necessary to comment about that in my reply to that, in fact I have, I was speaking with er Mr  when I saw this question down and reported it to him that his name was being used in such a way  erm.
I'd like to say that in reply to the question your Mr  will see that we are arranging a meeting to discuss the issues  of youth facilities  in erm the Netherhall area.
I think everybody in this council chamber could say we want youth facilities in my ward.
Here, here.
Youth provision is, is a county council responsibility  not a city council responsibility although for your information Mr , without the  er zodiac youth centre grant in the ninety one, ninety two figures  er, two hundred and thirty nine thousand one hundred and sixty six pounds were put in  by the city council into that s , into that specific area in the Humberstone ward and the amount that was put in there in this financial year was approximately the same, but the reason being that there is no mar more money available is because hundreds of thousand of pounds were cut out of youth and community facilities that should have been provided by this city council by the Tory budget which this council approved last February.
Thank you.
Would you ar er next question then Mr  any supplementary on those.
Thank you Chairman.
Erm, Chairman,w would the spokesman agree that the that the resources argument which she has just used is  is completely fallacious and would she rather expect
Mr 
Yes.
Mrs, this is Mrs  would you refer to members by name please.
Mrs  I do apologise to Mrs  Chairman.
Would Mrs  agree that the resources argument that she's just used is completely fallacious and would she not accept er that it's better to spend fifty thousand pounds 
can you please be 
on providing youth facilities in Netherhall than it is for five hundred thousand pounds 
 
on the  in Highfield.
We are dealing, with respect, we are dealing, I asked you to raise questions on the social services committee.
I I was asking under two Chairman.
Sit down old chap 
 

If if you would like to reply, you don't have to reply Mrs  it's up to you.
talking about Mr Chairman
Right, would you 
 
Mr  will you,Mr  will you please  ask er, put forward any supplementary questions if you have them, on  the next item of the spokesman of the social services committee please.
Thank you Chairman.
Erm, no questions on my second set but I'm very grateful for the er spokesman for their reply.
Erm, if I m 
If there's no supplementary well that's it really 
If I may Chairman on the third set of questions  erm those are 
which is?
You're talking of..?
the er, the young people in secure accommodation Chairman.
Erm, under number one  erm, is the Chairman aware that the er current talk in Whitehall which has given out the contracts for er new secure accommodation units in various counties that the current talk in Whitehall is that because Leicestershire doesn't know its own mind because of the recent votes over secure accommodation that it's unlikely to get one in the present er round and isn't that a damning indictment erm of the Liberal and Labour parties in this county.
 
Mrs 
It's Mr 
That's right, Mr  sorry
Mr 
I'm not entirely sure Chairman that Whitehall's ever made up its mind on anything


Erm, bearing in mind that Leicestershire currently I think er reserves two places for secure accommodation  and in the answers to my question, we have fifteen currently either needing or having secure accommodation with five being remanded because there is no place.
Erm, would the er spokesman not agree that there is a crisis in secure accommodation in Leicestershire at the moment due entirely to the stance of the Labour and Liberal parties on this authority.
Mr 
The need for additional secure places that can be accessed by Leicestershire is not at issue,what's still be investigated is how a regional service meeting varying types of needs can be provided  discussions are still taking place with Northamptonshire county council and into some other current secure unit provider authorities as to how best Leicestershire can work with other local authorities in the region towards this objective.
Neither Whitehall,nor government  nor this county council, nor the children we're talking about would welcome being used as a political football by Mr .
Here, here .
Thank you Mr .
Dr , any supplementaries on your question?
Yes er to the for former question er Chairman.
Er, what am I to tell the people in London and  partic in particular er when they say that the government and the county council is letting them down?
Mr 
Er, Chairman  the, the only advice that I can give Dr  on that point  is to say  that the county council is not letting them down  er  the funding for major road schemes is provided by central government and we make a contribution towards it but if central government do not give us permission to go ahead with the race road scheme in terms of a grant, then in fact it will not go ahead and in that situation they may be let down, that is their judgement and that should be reflected in the way they vote at parliamentary elections.
Mr , any supplementaries, thank you Mr .
Mr 
Thank you Mr Chairman 
any supplementaries 
I have two supplementary questions.
First one  concerning A. In view of the level of con concern expressed  on police funding, would the chairman of the Police authority agree that some f that some protection of Police funds locally and nationally may be necessary.
Mr 
Yes, thank you, thank you, er thank you Mr councillor   erm.
Can I can I say that in my opinion  that the county council's current budgeting strategy  which effectively imposes a two percent efficiency saving which I might add  in figures come to something like one point five million  erm is, is of concern but what is of greater concern is the further possibility  of a four percent  er reduction which is being sought in blocks of three percent and one percent next year for ninety four ninety five  which is to the amount of two point eight million at the current prices  will in my opinion decimate the  present level of service provision in policing.
Erm.
Community policing will be further marginalised  with priority going to intermediate response type of incidents  I am confident however that this council will make some  crucial and vitally important decisions during the next  er budget rounds and the importance of policing an inadequately funded service will be unanimously supported.
Can I also add that representations to the Secretary of State for the Home Office  will be central  er component to secure those adequate resources with the Leicestershire Police erm, erm service needs.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr 
Does the Chairman share my concern regarding the Home Secretary's proposals  containing the white paper on Police which will dramatically reduce local accountability of the Police service to the Leicestershire public.
Mr 
I'm grateful chair, once again for Mr  on that er  second supplementary.
The real danger of course is  the forthcoming Police bill  the proposal which were instituted by the  present er Treasurer,erm    er the Chancellor  er and instituted further on by the present Home Secretary would lead to a  centrally appointed Police committee at least fifty percent and a centrally appointed chairman, paid by the Home Secretary much rather like the Leicestershire Health Authority and of course this will severely undermine the local democratic accountability of the Police service.
Can I also add that  it will also instigate centrally determined policing policies, very much akin to  other government policies, particularly economic policies which have, as yet, done nothing to address the underlying causes of crime and  there are fears and I'm quoting here from the  er  the response made by the Association of Metropolitan  Authorities, the Association of County Councils and the Association of District Councils that it could lead to a national Police force.
But what is important is that there is opposition er  Chairman at the national level which is set to continue and once again representations are being undertaken  er to be made to local Members of Parliament and to Members of the House of Lords.
But it is of concern  and I do hope that in the next forthcoming  er house er when the the house sits in the forthcoming rounds, that they will be mindful of the representations which have been made nationally  and that the Police service and the proposals contained, particularly in the Police bill, will not be fully implemented in the way that they're currently proposed on the white paper today.
Could I point out to members that we did have er written replies to try and speed up the question process, could I ask members both in asking the question and especially in answering, not to make it another speech occasion because otherwise it destroys the whole purpose of having the written replies.
Please try and keep questions and answers to the point please, thank you.
Did you wish Mr  to raise your, on the, in that, that concludes you does it Mr ?
Okay.
Mr   you have a question.
Chairman, yes.
Thank you very much,yes point taken but a vitally important issue and I'm very grateful once again that you have allowed this  as an emergency question  erm.
My supplementary is will the Chairman of policy and resources committee make a statement to the county council to reassure  and inform the ethnic minority community  and the general public of Leicestershire of the need for tolerance and racial harmony  and reaffirm the county council's opposition  to all forms of racist dogma.
Can I further ask will he join me to congratulate the Chief Constable in an unprecedented move  in which he  actually formed links and created a an environment of partnership as recently highlighted in the Leicester Mercury.
Thank you.
Mr 
 

Thank you Mr Chairman, thank you Mr .
If it is not an emergency question, you are in time Mr  with your  question, in case anyone thinks that it was an emergency question was put down
It wasn't an emergency question.
It was not.
No it was, it was in the time limit.
I must say in that sense, thank you Mr  for your  question, because it's an an issue that's conc should concern  every member of this authority.
I would like the members of this authority to  to have a look at the reply  I make no apology for the length of the reply to Mr  's very important question.
On erm what you have asked for Mr .
I must say that I am happy to make that statement  and in view of some of the things that have been, that have appeared in the media recently  here's a statement that needs to be made  as for your your your ques , what the, the Chief Constable I welcome the statement and the actions of the  Chief Constable on this very concerning issue.
Thank you.
Mr  Have you any supplementary?
Yes sir, on the erm  first part erm  in in clarification if I might sir  the erm  question of er briefing the Chairman is in fact dealt with in paragraph forty seven of annex C of P P G twelve  although I'm grateful for information on paragraph forty eight, erm and it says amongst other things  that er there shall be a briefing and that briefing, the contents of that briefing shall be made public  can I press the er  spokesman for the environment committee to tell us  er  why in fact that wasn't done  and whether he thinks there can be prop proper public debate  if it isn't done.
Sorry about that.
Carry on Mr 
It is my understanding from the reply  there's a fairly clear statement there that that was done  erm  I indeed have a copy of the principal briefing paper which the Director prepared for the panel, Chairman  it outlined the background to the structure plan review, it referred to the previously approved  structure plans, copies of which were appended to the  briefing paper.
It referred to the regional strategy which is currently out for  consultation but was an emerging document and copies of that were again  appended  to the briefing paper  it outlined the county council's procedures which were followed in progress in the structure plan  it outlined a programme establishing the weight of opinion of objectors  it indicated our process in preparing policy amendments to be put to the panel  and all those matters were made public  It also requested the panel's view on the role of county council members at the enquiry in public the responses to that were not made public and were in fact a question which was clearly put to the panel.
The paper also discussed erm the proposed topics for discussion at the enquiry in public it explained where the county council's  er relevant policies would be found in the extra electory memorandum  it outlined the key objections and the proposed participants for each topic.
The first two of those were also included were made public, they are in the issue's papers  it did not  make  public  the county council's proposal as to who should be participants for each topic  since those were matters for the  the panel er to to ma take a view of  and I understood er from er  the question  er the answer to the question  that it had been made clear that er the information had been made public  except as always Chairman,er our legal office's of the council always like that caveat that in case anything had been missed out  I had just in fact suggested that perhaps not everything had been made public  so  I anticipated a possible supplementary question from Mr .
Thank you.
That concludes the questions and answers
No it doesn't sir 


Clarification  
 
The second question I have  with your permission sir.
Yeah.
Erm  should the erm  that, given that er, sorry, that the er, er O P C S in fact erm  er after every census makes er guesses about its accuracy  erm  would erm the spokesman, is the spokesman aware that in fact O P C S has said that a  fair  erm  representation of the intercensal increase in population in Leicestershire  er between nineteen eighty one and nineteen ninety one is in fact fifteen thousand people and doesn't he feel that to provide for fifty three thousand in the structure plan is a little over the top?
Mr 
Mr  makes  there was an under, enumeration of figures and that has been made clear in the reply  the reply is quite clear about the basis on which the structure plan  is being promulgated and the  total projected total population in two thousand and six  regards the historical data, that should be taken, as far as I'm concerned, as matters of fact, will of course not be absolutely accurate  and as far as projected data is concerned all that we can do  any of us can do  is to try and make the best estimates possible and I am satisfied that our officers will have done that.
I hope I've understood the supplementary question correctly, if I've not I apologise to Mr   but we are dealing in a technical area.
Thank you.
I have decided to exercise my discretion under standing order five so that agenda item nine B, notice of motion by Mr  on fox-hunting to be taken now.
In addition to the many personal representation made to members of the council on the subject of fox hunting on county council land, the county secretary has now received a total of two hundred and six written representations  nearly as many as me.
Of these a hundred and sixty eight contain expressions of opposition to fox hunting and thirty eight contain either expressions of support for fox hunting or that the county council should not be considering the matter for one reason or another.
I have also had passed to me a petition from Mr  containing four thousand five hundred signatures from the  national anti-hunt petition  er, there is a doubt of the petition or a letter from the tenant farmers but er, there is representation from them.
Erm, Mr  would you move the motion please.
Thank you Chair, erm 


In moving the motion this time I'm not going to be very passionate like I normally am on on subjects in this council chamber  I'm I'm actually gonna try and keep, I'm actually going to try and keep politics down to a low level  and er  because I believe there conscience on all sides of this chamber.
We have not got a monopoly on conscience  I know that certain Liberals  have debated this subject and as th the passions been raised in their group meetings.
I know also that some Conservatives that feel that perhaps what I've laid before you this afternoon  has some credence.
The reason I did this, because some  sixteen months ago, like over a year ago we brought it and lost it, it wasn't a victory for anybody or er or er a real loss for anyone because  it was lost by one vote.
By wrecking a motion at the time,rightly or wrongly placed  and once again I see this afternoon we've got a similar motion on the table.
What I want to do though is is kind of thank a few people for start off.
anti-hunt people, the League of Cruel Sports and all sorts of other organisations that have actually asked their members not to be here today, not to cause a problem, not to divert attention from the real issues in the debate er er and cause a crisis outside for all the press and the media to latch on to, that's not what they were about.
I respect the fact the Hunt are here, er I respect the fact the literature that they've sent us, from all sides of the fence, from the League Against Cruel Sports, the hunting fraternity, it's been very helpful.
It hasn't changed my view.
I also want to put right  it, er the facts that have been presented to me, that it's an urban erm view, it's city people  making a  er, their will, imposing their will on country folk, on the practices of country folk.
I am not a city person and have never lived in a city in my life  I represent a rural area, a hunting area, a  hunting area erm I believe the terrier men from the  some of them live in my area.
I can tell you this  the general public  have sent me literally hundreds of cards  I have had well wishing cards, I've also had some letters from the opposition, some of them, to be quite honest, have been disgraceful.
Some of them have  asked me about my parentage, some of them have asked me whether or not I am tinkering with the laws of God.
I will extract those to one side and say they not really followers of the hunt, they are probably  some weird faction that latch onto these type of things  during erm  these issues.
It's a shame also that we have to fill the council chamber on such a debate.
It's a pity that the general public don't come into this chamber  on, on a normal debate, about education, about children's needs, about social services, the very things that I've 
Here, here,
been attacked over the last few months  of not wasting time on the hunt  I spend an awful lot of time relieving heavy goods traffic in my area, concerned totally about the environment, about mineral extraction  quarries, mining, open cast, things of that calibre.
This is one debate, one small debate, hopefully put to bed within an hour with a decent result.
The motion itself  is a compromise  some on my side have said it's too much of a compromise  they've said you're tr trying to be all things to all people.
What I have done is hopefully brought together  a er a view of people, a clash of personalities and a way forward.
I want to answer the questions on jobs.
Those jobs can be protected, I know the hunting fraternity say they don't want to drag hunt.
We set standards, standards evolve  we are coming to the stage now in nineteen ninety three  the standards that are being set  are changing and at the end of the day the hunt have got to come along with us.
The gauntlet was down, the opportunity to talk to  arrange a forum, to come together, land owners, local authorities, the hunt's people, er the interested parties, to come together and look for a decent way of hunting  and that way is probably drag hunting and we're giving you a golden opportunity  to start that route.
It's gotta start somewhere, there's a motion, a tide of feeling going across the country on council from council, it won't be long before people like me are M P's and others around you that are M P's are in the  
 
and fellow members that will be down in Whitehall and eventually will put you to bed, if you bury your head in the sand and at the end of the day I'm afraid the country is going to knock it off.
The general public are saying  no.
Time has come for a change.
I want to thank also er the different organisations, cos you made an absolute profit for the G P O, er erm British Telecom, they must have  actually made a bomb in Leicestershire over the last few days.
I thank the League Against Cruel Sports for their literature.
Very, very informative.
I also thank the hunting fraternity for their  documentary they sent me on hunting the facts.
But I would like to point out  in this video, and on the  brochure that goes with it, actually says  the rest of the field are there to follow on horseback  or on foot or by car, very few people indeed actually witness the death of a fox.
The followers are there for a day out in the countryside, the opportunity to ride or to walk freely over private property  with the consent of the landowner.
I agree, sometimes I can tell you I have witnessed a hunt and on a cold, frosty morning  when er about forty or fifty horses are thundering across the ploughed field, it's enough to p the power of that sight is enough to make the hairs on the back of your neck stand up  that's not what we are against  the hunter that came to me and says Eh up lad, I won't go drag hunting because I'm sixty years old, I've done it all my life  and I like the ride, I like to be there  I never see a fox killed  that's fact, it's in the video.
So why is it important that the kill has to continue.
You can continue your sport  the decent side of the sport without the need for the kill  and and we will encourage, my motion actually encourages that, encourages the fox hunting fraternity to look at a way forward, come forward, talk to us.
If you're willing to go down the route to drag hunting  I am willing to support  any hunt that wants to go down that route and I am sure this authority would.
We can negotiate access to our land  and we will be only too pleased to do so  but whilst you are killing the fox er and at the end of the day, it is not on.
I've also said to certain factions of the  er direct action groups  this is the unacceptable face of protest.
Let's put that side of the protest to bed.
If you change now, Leicestershire has a golden opportunity, we are proud of the fox, we are proud of the fox in Leicestershire, our football team, the Foxes,our, our fox cubs  our Police emblem, it isn't the hunters, we don't support the hunters  at Leicester's  Street, we support the foxes and at the end of the day I think there is room  for the hunting fraternity to stay as part of the pageantry in Leicestershire.
When we get to the jobs  erm  side of it  the jobs I I I'm accused outside this afternoon  of of putting  in jeopardy one thousand something jobs  erm, this authority got rid of seven hundred jobs, education jobs  er only a few months ago  and there's many more, something on the region of two thousand jobs will be lost in this authority without a protest.
without protest from a parent, without a protest from a hunter  without a protest from er a anyone else, that is a shame, because I tell you what, if you go drag hunting, you can keep the jobs  the people are still going to have to shoe the horses   traders and people like that are still going to have to produce the carriages to take the horses with them and the only people  job jobs are in jeopardy are not the kennel staff  it's the terrier men  and to be quite honest, ladies and gentlemen, it's the terrier men who have actually ruined your sport, cos of what they get up to in nineteen ninety three is a disgust  and at the end of the day your P R has been absolutely wrong  and I hope this afternoon  that  Conservatives and Liberals can join with us and I've got to thank a certain Liberal because he's  he's put his head on the block on several occasions on this when we stood on the platform as individuals, not as  politicians, as individuals on this and I think that this afternoon  we've got a way forward, we can say to the hunt, come and talk  you change, we'll give you access.
Thank you Chair.
Have we a seconder.
No.
Thank you.
Did you wish to move an amendment?
Thank you sir.
Can I erm,er move the amendment that is in  my name.
This is fact is a debate about personal freedom  the freedom of our tenants to choose the quite legal activities  that take place on their farms  for whatever we  may think about the merits and de-merits of  angling or shooting  fox hunting, these are activities that Parliament has decided are permissible.
Chairman, I believe that this is just the sort of motion  that can only bring local government into disrepute  It's an abuse of power  the council holds lands in the county farms estate  for purposes set out in the nineteen sixty agriculture act.
It doesn't hold land  in order to allow ideologues to impose their views on our tenants  and impose it through a form of nineteenth century landlordism.
If  Mr   doesn't like field sports  he should seek, try to seek  to persuade Parliament to ban it  he'll have an excellent opportunity because he'll, he's told us  that he'll be an MP shortly  that's what's happening, that's what's happened  in the case of cock fighting and badger baiting  it hasn't happened in the case of fox hunting  and Mr  shouldn't abuse his position as a councillor to dictate to the council's tenants in the way that he proposes.
Here, here.
As well as being the sort of motion that brings local government into disrepute, I also believe  that this is the sort of motion that, that displays a lack of tolerance that should concern us all.
This county council has recognised that in Leicestershire  we live in a  society.
Labour members have been at the forefront in demanding  that ethnic communities be free to keep their traditions and cultures  yet here we are  Labour members trying to prevent countrymen  pursuing traditional country sports that have been followed by our forefathers for centuries.
I cannot see the consistency.
Must be your forefathers, not mine.


Yes,w well you said it  And I think we are entitled to ask Mr  whether he has actually  asked the tenants for their views.
Yes.
yes 
Has he asked them how this initiative could  affect their livelihood.
Yes.
Does he even care.
Yes, he does.
And what did they say, I can tell you what they said, because I happen to have a petition here, signed by  a hundred and four county council tenants out of the hundred and six that we have.
Oh well done.
And I will read it   as farm tenants of Leicestershire county council  we wish to retain the freedom to make the decision ourselves  as to whether fox hunting with hounds takes place on our land.
We do not consider  drag hunting to be an alternative.
Well done.
At our last meeting  we discussed the running of a community centre in the middle of Leicester.
We'll be discussing it this afternoon  and  Labour members  told us  and no doubt they'll tell us again  that the users of the centre have a democratic right to be consulted about how it was run  Don't tenant farmers  have the right to be consulted?
Where are their democratic rights  Is this the new, I quote, the new era of democratic rights about which  was talking yesterday?
One man, one vote.
Chairman.
This is  a vindictive and intolerant motion  it sets an unfortunate precedent  and in this debate about freedom we should support the rights of our tenants to choose.


Have we a seconder.
Served by 
Right, at present I have fifteen speakers, plus  the two seconders who have reserved the, their right.
We start off with Mr .
Thank you  Chairman.
I  rise to support the motion moved in Mr  name and I have always been  opposed to fox hunting full stop.
Hunting and all cruel sports which are totally  anachronistic in  present day society.
But I wish to relate to the council a particular episode, which I hope  will convey something to those people who are perhaps still wavering  erm, and whilst we all have principle stands on issues  it behoves us as members  to consider  the views of our constituents and the sorts of things that take place  in our wards.
And I  remind this council of something I said a few years ago  of an incident, incident concerning the Atherstone hunt  in my ward  where the hounds attacked  the dogs  of, a couple of dogs of a constituent of mine  in his back garden  totally uncontrolled, they were running amuck  right across land in  Ellistown this is  nothing the hunt could do  nothing the hunt tried to do  they were too busy off  still dashing ahead  chasing the fox or what they thought was a fox.
Meanwhile the owner  the person who lived a small terraced property, whose garden backs onto the fields  tried to get the hounds  several dozen hounds off these two dogs who were being savaged to death  and he had a heart attack  in the process, Chairman  and was hospitalized for several weeks  That Chairman  is the effect of the hunt on one of my  constituents  whose job it is  for me  to defend  the rights that I was elected here to defend the rights of my constituents, not to be harassed in this manner.
Of course he was released from hospital and he recovered  and of course we  we, he, we protested  to the hunt  and  they had the audacity to off to offer him  some fifty pounds compensation, which was a adding insult  to injury.
So that's how I can speak from direct experience.
I'd also like to say that I've received some twenty nine  representations from constituents in my ward  all of whom live in my ward  who are opposed to fox hunting and have asked me today to vote to ban  fox hunting on our land  and I've only received two representations from official bodies  the video and, and a representation from the British Field Sports  Association  erm, in favour of fox hunting.
So I think it's time that er  we dragged this county council  into  this century  and not into the century, or the centuries of Mr  's forefathers.
And that we actually op adopted a b a modern  sensible  er, reasonable attitude towards all living creatures  and that we do today  vote to ban  fox hunting  it is anachronistic as I said earlier, it is not necessary  it actually causes harm, not only does it cause harm to foxes, but at least in one case, which is sufficient for me  to continue my  support for the ban  damage to  the people  in my area.
I don't want to rehearse the arguments, I'm sure other members will put all the other arguments about cruelty, about the destruction of land  and so on.
But I'll finish Chairman, by saying that also I've received complaints from er, a tenant farmer, not one of our tenant farmers, but a p a person who farms  who actually has problems  because of the pressure that that farmer is under to allow the hunt  to go across their land  because they're surrounded by  by farmers who do allow them.
They don't wish it to happen, but it becomes an impossibility  almost for them to stand up to their rights, and Mr  talks about rights  and no rights is in abstract  and we all know how difficult it is  then to stand up as a minority when you're surrounded by that majority, but I've had personal representations 
They have the right to choose.
From them.
They do not have the right to choose because they, they virtually, the the hunt has always ignored  their wishes.
They have to buy and sell  their produce in that community  and there are restrictions operating on that.
So I think we must  today  level out  the rules on this and we must speak for what is the majority of opinion in this country, by every single opinion poll that's been conducted, and that is Chairman to vote to ban fox hunting on our land.
Thank you.
Thank you Mr .
Mr .
Thank you Chairman.
Er, Mr  said this is a debate about personal freedom.
Actually  it is a debate about personal conscience  Last night I had one of those phone calls that we've all been getting  erm the guy on the other end apologised for  not being one of my constituents erm, I said it probably wasn't his fault.


He went on to said he wanted to talk about the hunting debate, erm, it occurred to me to wonder why they couldn't find anyone in Stonygate in favour of hunting, I mean perhaps there aren't any people in Stonygate in favour of hunting.
I certainly have not received any communication  from any individual in my ward  in favour of hunting.
I've received a number against.
He asked me whether I was a country person  I asked what the qualifications were  he said country born and bred, well  I was born in Liverpool  spent my childhood and early adolescence in rural Nottinghamshire, moved to Highfields, emigrated to the West Indies  and now live in sub rural  Blavey so I don't know whether I qualify as a country person or not, but I'd like to bet  that I've milked more cows by hand than he has  if that's any qualification.
The conversation ranged widely through  wildlife management, the history of the landscape and of hunting  and he was on very shaky ground there I can tell you  control of pests, he likened a farmer  killing a rat with a dog, to the whole panoply of fox hunting.
As this conversation continued over an extended period, I was waiting to go out to dinner, erm it became apparent that he hadn't understood my position  it was apparent again, outside earlier today, that people do not understand the position that people like me take.
I tried to make it clear at an early stage  my petition is a simple, straightforward one  not involved with wildlife management,history or anything else like that, I simply believe that killing animals for fun is morally wrong.
Last Saturday night Channel four show showed Sex, lies and videotape  well, we got the lies and the video tape, I'd like to know what happened to the sex.
People keep writing letters to the Mercury saying  how can we afford to spend time and money debating this, well they can afford the time and the money employing out of work newsreaders to produce videos and writers and photographers to produce their glossy magazines, their glossy leaflets  I didn't need the R S P C A or the League  to tell me that er, the fox photo, this fox photo was a fake, I mean that's obvious to anybody  I didn't need them to tell me that the video was suspect, that too is obvious.
Perhaps the most interesting thing about this video tape is the involvement of loony   er, who's espoused every cause known to human kind.
Whether they had any merit or not.
Most recent of course, is euthanasia  it doesn't draw the line at killing foxes  I had this terrible vision in the early hours this morning,of Ron  closing all our elderly persons' homes, pushing all the old people out onto the street and the  hunt with  at its head hunting them down the countryside.


Look, it's alright to have a bit of fun with this, but the matter is deadly serious  and I use the word deadly  advisedly.
What it comes down to is  do we, or do we not approve of killing animals for fun  do we approve of allowing a pack of dogs to hunt an animal to its death.
If the answer's no we do not approve  then it's up to us, the onus is on us to do whatever we can, wherever we have any control to prevent it happening.
Let us today  do what our consciences demand and vote to stop this cruelty in just one small corner of this county.
Mr 
Thank you Chair.
I will be voting for the motion and I will be voting against the amendment.
I'd like to start before I explain that, just to refer to a few comments  that Mr  made.
Mr  made a comment about   Moats and Highfield.
I find this a little strange since he was quite happy to support us  when my colleague and I said that there was a greater good to be considered and that people had issues that had to be raised in that area above and beyond  the local community.
So we did suggest and I did believe your party to support  erm, a process where we did consult with local people but we also took other factors into consideration.
So I hope today you will take wider factors into consideration as well.
The other one, the other one that I find interesting is I hope Mr  will take his comments back to John , because John  's quite happy, I applaud him for once, it's about the only thing I do applaud John  for,erm, but John  's quite happy to turn round to Norway and say forget your centuries old traditions of killing whales.
Killing whales is not a thing that you should go round doing  and  and yet John  's quite happy to do that and I support John  in in that approach.
I'd like to address the reasons why I will be voting for this motion today.
It's often put that hunting  is  good for the countryside  that it's about controlling foxes  the scientific evidence rather puts that to pay  the scientific evidence certainly indicates that fox hunting makes very little difference to control of foxes in the countryside and there is some evidence to suggest that fox hunting actually encourages more foxes to breed and that we end up with more foxes, so it seems to be self defeating in that respect.
There is of course the argument about the maintenance of the countryside and that the countryside only looks the way it does, because of the fox hunting.
I think there are a lot of other factors that affect the countryside as we all well know.
The way we farm.
The nature of erm, subsidies from Europe and all others, other factors.
I think this argument's about the benefit of the countryside is somewhat debatable  to say the least  And these arguments that are put about why we shouldn't ban fox hunts because of all the benefits and the tradition  are exactly the same arguments that were put about otters and about badgers  and about other  sports that we have, that we no longer consider satisfactory  and have opposed.
From my point of view, one of the most powerful arguments that needs to be addressed is the argument about individual freedom  and this is always important to me  about, if you're going to take an action that limits somebody's freedom, you damn well have to have a good reason for it.
There is no legislation to ban fox hunting yet.
I'm quite sure that it will not be long before we see  that happen.
What we do have  and have had for a long time in this country is an acceptance within our law and an acceptance within our definitions of freedom that there are responsibilities with freedom  and those responsibilities in this particular case, we have long accepted the argument in this country, maybe not as much as  erm, well more in fact than some of our colleagues abroad and maybe they could learn from us from this, but it is not acceptable  to have the freedom to be unnecessarily cruel  and in fox hunting we have a sport that is unnecessarily cruel, there are ways in which you can deal with rogue foxes, there are ways in which you can actually ensure that the fox community does not destroy the whole, er farming countryside.
But fox hunting doesn't address that.
Fox hunting  falls purely and simply on the side of unnecessary cruelty.
Freedom, because there is not the freedom here.
I might suggest the other point, now I actually represent a city ward so I'm sure I'll hear the baying of the hounds that say why am I getting up and speaking.
Well actually  people in my area do have a concern about this, also though  I was brought up  in my teens at least within a rural area  and I know full well  that to hold certain views  even those of the majority within rural areas, are not necessarily easily expressed  and I have today been told of yet another example  of this being the case.
Where somebody goes to a public meeting  and doesn't say 
Near time.
anything but just listens  and what happens, what happens to that, the vets  that person's husband's livelihood is threatened, why are they threatened?
They are threatened because the hunt turns round and uses its power over its tenants to force people to withdraw their, their.
Time.
Thank you.
Thank you.
When.
 
I, I said near time, I advising people it's nearly time, when it is time they will most certainly know and emphatically it's time.
So when the first warning, it's near time.
Thank you.
Next speaker Mr .
Thank you Chairman.
Erm, I want to  er support er the amendment  moved by er, erm, Mr  and er  erm I want to oppose the motion  erm  since people are  tending to describe their, their background  in respect of fox hunting.
May I say that er, I've lived for  nearly thirty years  er, in Oakham  which is in the er, in the centre of er fox hunting country.
I've er, thank you, I've never seen a fox hunt  erm  I've er  I think once  er, once  I got along to Cutts Close where the Boxing Day meet occurs  and I can well accept that this Boxing Day meet  draws a larger crowd of people from Oakham than any other activity through the year.
So  I don't speak really as a committed fox hunt or anti fox hunter  er  I speak erm,after a consideration of the matter  er that  that what have at issue here  is er, the, the right of the tenant.
If a man is paying his rent to his landlord he surely has the right to use er the land he is paying for  and  in the, in that matter of using it, surely is included the, the sporting right.
erm.
Hunting, let me remind those on the other side here, is still a lawful activity  it's no good saying, ah, well Parliament's gonna pass an act against it soon.
It may well pass an act against it soon, it may well be that a lot of people from over there will get elected and you'll get your bill, but then again it may not.
Yes, yes
Surely, in this country we have to obey the laws that are there, not the laws that are going some day to be passed.
Sunday trading
Tenants have, let me, let's stick with the motion shall we.
The tenant  has surely a right to carry out this lawful activity.
Drag hunting's been mentioned from the tenant's point of view  er, drag hunting doesn't control the fox and one of the reasons why  the er, tenant er, allows fox hunting  is that the, the fox is controlled by it.
It's er,surely wishful thinking to assume that  sweep away fox hunting, they're all gonna go drag hunting and all those jobs'll be saved.
That's a fairly tenuous er  sort of platform to get rid of those er hunting jobs and I'd've thought that er, a party whose leader Mr  saw him, was it yesterday?,proclaiming the importance of er protecting employment and combating unemployment.
Well surely some of that might filter down to this chamber.
Let's not take chances er unnecessarily  with the right, er wi with the e employment  er of those in, in the hunting industry as it were.
I don't think er Chairman, this, this county council is, is competent  to do away with hunting.
That, that I, I say is  reserved for Parliament.
er,Can I enter a plea for tolerance, if  in a democracy it's very easy to get steamed up about things you don't like, things you find disgusting and revolting  but if everyone is going to come forward, have banned the activity they don't like then we're going to live, it may be a democracy, but it's going to be a narrowed, er and intolerant society in which we live.
Finally er, Chairman.
My history books told me about those wicked aristocrats of the nineteenth century, they used their position as landlords  to force their tenants  to, to vote in a certain way, to force their tenants in other words to take up a particular position on a matter of controversy.
Near time.
I'm interested, thank you, I'm interested to notice that this nineteenth century attitude is being repeated now by er, our friends over there in the Labour party, erm and I must say, that really confirm what I've always thought that a lot of their attitudes and their mental furniture do in fact belong to that century.
Er, Chairman I'd like to er, erm, oppose the motion and support the amendment.
Here, here.
Mr  
Thank you Chair.
I would like to support the motion put  in the name of Mr  and I would like to speak against the amendment.
I've heard  what's Mr  has to say.
It was good.
Yes, very good.
You may think it's a fun having a blood game on your hand, you may think that  your class used to also enjoy slavery two hundred years ago.
Here, here,
Listen, listen  so you may have a right to defend at any cost which you think is privileged society  the fact of the matter is  people out there  I received twenty seven letters in support against the fox hunting  I did not receive a single letter  asking me to support the fox hunting.
Always against fox hunting, why is that?
And it wasn't even from my constituency it was widely from the Leicestershire  and coming back to our, our friend there  Doctor er , I don't know what was the name there  when he mentioned about  what's the name?


It it's er really put me off the track there, I'm sorry I.
You're losing time.
I was coming back to  the fox hunting here, when it's mentioned  sorry about that Chair.
Men ,men , mentioned here by our friend, that Leicestershire has got no business to discuss about fox hunting, we are not elusive, there are other county councils who have banned fox hunting on their land, so do not make  this as a sacrosanct and  or something that Leicestershire are doing, they are not doing first, there are so many other county councils in this country and for your information, I was listening to radio four few days ago, even in Pakistan, a third world country, is banning hunting in their country, we should be ashamed of ourselves here to discuss, I agree with Councillor  when the discussion start and he said  move for the ward, because the logical thing was to move for the wards rather than discuss, if we all believe that this is  horrible, acrimonious and abhorrent in today's day and age, as the slavery was abhorred two hundred years ago.
So I move that we support the motion and speak against amendment.
Thank you.
Mr 
Thank you er .
Can I first of all congratulate my colleague Graham, Graham on his measured speech, he's certainly given us many things to, to think about and things that should be investigated.
Can I also say really I agree with Martin   when he said  erm, and has been saying for at least six months  that surely we have more important things to, to talk about than, than this  and I'm sorry for Martin that he had to erm, give in really and put this  I was the movement of the amendment in January ninety two  erm,which confirmed that the rights of tenants and old occupiers of land in county council ownership to  er allow or stop fox hunting over land in their care.
That was successful there  er, er on that occasion  and er of course I hope it, it will be successful again this afternoon.
At that time, we, we received a petition from the tenants  erm very much along the lines of the one that erm  erm, er Mr  has read out, at that time there was a petition from a hundred and eight county council tenants  and one hundred and five of them in fact signed it and they, they asked for it to be allowed to keep the erm  to have the freedom to decide whether or not hunting takes place.
I think erm  it is worth saying Chairman, it hasn't been mentioned yet, er that in fact we're talking about the  the tenant farmers and their livelihood.
Most of the tenant farmers i in this county I believe are dairy farmers  and in fact they have their life savings tied up in their stock.
They, they know what they have to do to protect that stock, to protect their life's interests and they, and they know they don't need to be told really by any officer here who are not in that  not, not in that game, what they have to do  that's what they're asking us to do and they certainly asked us to do that  on the erm, on the tour of county farms that we had only, only a few weeks ago.
I think it's also worth just bearing in mind that we're talking about  only one percent  of the erm  of the farmed land  i in this county, we're not talking about banning hunting in in er in Leicestershire,we're talking about what we're saying on one percent  there are tens of thousand of fields  in in this county  nothing can change overnight, even if this er motion goes through because the tenants will still have the rights  to decide, it's only when you actually start getting to new tenancy agreements that you will be in a position if you wish,to start to change things and therefore  I suppose at the end of erm, at the end of five years you might have a hundred or two hundred fields on which this ban will apply  but you will still have tens of thousand of fields on which the, the hunt will still be, the hunts in this county will still be free to, erm, to operate.
I think we have to try and keep this in in proportion, we are really into a  we are really into a gesture here  an important gesture possibly, but nothing is going to change overnight and in fact very little will happen erm, for years, for years to come.
I, I, do not understand Chairman that reading this motion, I've been trying to think about it, how on earth this is going to be  monitored.
How on earth are you going to  how on earth are you going to put a  a sign on certain fields that the hunt shall not pass?
Are you going to say  hunters will be prosecuted or something?
Or are you going to electrify the, these fields?
Are you going to have mounted policemen following the hunt round to ensure that they only steer their course along certain ways?
Are you going to have stationary policemen guarding fields to ensure that only the fox can enter and not the, and not the hounds?
Are you going to have countywide monitoring?
Are we going to have  er, erm, are we going to have some kind of reporting system, so that if a hunt actually enters erm, one of our fields, we're going to start denouncing tenants and have them hauled up in front of a disciplinary committee?.
There are all kinds of questions that this matter raises in my mind which  haven't been addressed.
I only repeat what I said last time Chairman that if the, that if people do not understand the management of the countryside, that they leave it well alone.
Here, here.
Mr .
Thank you Mr Chairman.
In all probability not a single fox will live or die as a consequence of any vote we take this afternoon.
As Mr  pointed out in outline,our county estate  of some eight thousand acres of which only three quarters or roughly six thousand acres is suitable for hunting, is less than one percent of the county's acreage of six hundred and fifty thousand.
If hunting were banned on all of that it would only have a small marginal effect  but we can as Mr  said only ban hunting on land we both own and control, land in hand, that actually totals a hundred and fifty eight acres, slightly smaller than Victoria Park  but that includes road, bridleways, land with no access, S S S Is, Sites of Special Scientific Interest, land awaiting disposal  the land capable of being hunted and in hand totals fifty two acres  about as much of Victoria Park as I can see from my front window.
If you have the country parks and already there is no hunting on those parts open to the public  there's just about another hundred acres, that's the Victoria Park or thereabouts in total.
But that's not the end of it  the Director of Property has very kindly plotted where this land is  and I will show you the plan, the yellow spots are the land in hand.
If the map of Leicestershire were a face it would have a few small pimples on its chin and they would take fifty years to come to a head.


If you draw a line from Loughborough down the A six, through the city of Leicester and on to Market Harborough  to the east of that line, in that part of the county where most of the hunting takes place, there is one small piece of land, less than one acre, somewhere near  Thorpe Satchfield which we actually control.
As I said, it would take fifty years before any decision we reach here, even made an impression on the one percent of land we do own.
So, those who do not support hunting will do nothing practical to protect foxes, if they vote for this motion today  in that respect it is and I suggest the people who move it know that it is, nothing but sanctimonious twaddle.
They would be voting to divert attention from the one place where the merits or otherwise of fox hunting should be decided and considered  amongst M Ps, you will note amongst MPs not by government, this is a matter for a free vote of conscience.
About the only decent argument I've heard on this, I have to say that because it was my daughter who advanced it, about the only decent argument I have heard is the one about badger baiting  where she said to me  but badger baiting is not allowed on your land and that is the point precisely that Mr  made, it is not allowed because that is the law of the land and that is where decisions about  the permission or otherwise of fox hunting should be made.
This is an issue of individual conscience of M Ps.
Whatever is happening elsewhere  there is not today, there is no one man one, one man one vote here.
We can all watch for the Labour block vote at the end of this debate  as a matter of principle, I could never vote in support of the Labour whip.
So this debate is not about saving foxes, it will achieve nothing for animal welfare  it is not about the merits or otherwise of fox hunting, from which it diverts attention, it is about the county council seeking to make hollow gestures against their tenants' rights.
Gestures which are not within the normal scope of the private landlord, gestures of a political kind that could be a dangerous precedence for other political  and possibly improper objectives in the future.
That is why I will support the amendment and if that fails
Near time.
I shall play no further part in this debate  which should not be taking place.
It can have no practical effect  and will only divert attention from where it should be pressed by those who feel strongly about it.
I do hope Mr Chairman that those members who oppose fox hunting will feel that they should do the same.
Thank you.
Mr .
Thank you Chair.
Erm  first of all I would like to make the point that er  it's typical of our friends over this side to arrange an ethic dimension when they were er opposing their amendment, it confuses the issue, it is racist and shouldn't occur.
As a Labour councillor of a rural part of Leicestershire, a very beautiful po part of rural Leicestershire  erm  I've taken a straw poll amongst my farming friends  and er when I talk about fox hunting  they er  roll and shrug their shoulders, there's no problem and if fox hunting is er  part of the culling process, they don't have a problem.
They don't have a problem at all it doesn't seem to  er be part of their daily lives  er, that said I do have a farmer of my acquaintance, when I say my acquaintance he happens to be my son-in-law.
He er, is a sheep farmer  and er, two or three years ago the Atherstone passed through his land and er  ran amuck amongst his flock and he lost actually three in lamb ewes who drowned in a local river.
At the same time the hunt passed further on and his wife, my daughter,er had two horses which bolted in a field and leapt the farm gate and er, took off and were caught two miles away.
That's the other side of fox hunting, which I think we don't hear.
When they complained to the hunt  er, the Master brought er a leg of pork round, not a leg of lamb I might add, a leg of pork  to er, appease them  er  one other point, ooh yeah, there was, is one other point actually, when my daughter challenged the hunt  she was appalled by the arrogance  of these pink coated  hooray Henrys  who totally ignored her plight  and er just carried on with whatever they wished to do.
One other point Mr Chair, if I could crave your indulgence  you will er, I think you all know that Leicester City Football Club are playing this evening at Middlesbrough.
I hope you'll soon be done.
and 
 
that, that, as a result of that we could be, Leicester City could be at the top of the first division, I know the Chairman follows the Philbert Street Foxes, I would hope that this chamber will support the Leicestershire foxes when it's time to take our vote.
Thank you.
Mr .
Er, Mr Chairman, I'd like to make some observations.
I'd like to make the observations because I'm of the opinion that most members came into this  chamber this afternoon with their minds completely and utterly made  up  and there is very little that we can do in this chamber  this afternoon to change people's minds.
So they are observations  and it is my feeling that this motion has taken on  significantly more importance  than its content  or indeed its effect.
I only wish  and I mean this very sincerely  I only wish we could spend as much time  and as often as is spent discussing fox hunting  on the county's homeless, on abused children, on the handicapped, on the increasing crime and on unemployment  and I only wish that the media and the public and even members of this council would take as much notice of that as they do about this debate on fox hunting.
I am also concerned that after this debate there will be no winners  not even the fox, for it will be killed  it will be killed in some way or another  and the feelings that are left between the two differing sides  will harbour grudges and resentment for many months to come  and I'd like to also  bearing in mind the comments that were made by Councillor   ask how committed  the people who have proposed this mo motion are against barbaric sport.
I regard barbaric sport, not only perhaps as fox hunting but also such things as boxing, where two people, two individuals  do their best to hit the life out of the other and it is watched by thousands of people.
Now the Labour party control the city council, may I say this, that if your feelings are against barbaric sport as much as that, why don't you use your contr , your controlling power on the city council  and then ban boxing in all the city establishments, then you will show me that you mean what you are saying and that you are not just using the present position of this council for a political measure and political gain  and I'd like to also ask what this has cost the council  what this has cost  could be thousands.
The very meeting itself is thousands of pounds, the time we have spent on it is thousands of pounds.
Many times in this council when we've been discussing more important points, when we've been discussing the needs of people who have real needs, we have not been able to have our priority  we have not been able to have our priority because we could not afford it.
Can we afford not only the debate today  but can we afford it in another eighteen months?
I don't think so  I believe  that the hunting fraternity is not blameless  and indeed the, all their arguments are not quite correct in every sense  but I firmly believe  that there are more important matters for this council to to debate and spend its time and money on.
Thank you.


Chairman, the last speech was  really explaining what I want to get over  the fact that so many people want to talk on the issue and to complicate the issue.
The debate on fox hunting has become unnecessarily complex  and that can only suit the pro hunters because the basic objections to hunting are obscured.
The more complicated you make the issues, the more the basic objections become obscured.
The fact is that any so called sport which involves the exhaustion, distress and eventual death of an animal has got to be obscene in the eyes of any human being.
The county council has not got the power to ban fox hunting  in total it can only ban it on the land which it owns or controls  and that's what that motion seeks to do today.
On the one hand we have the hunting fraternity  saying that because they rarely catch and kill foxes, some say a two to three percent efficiency rate, er that it's not cruel  yet on the other hand, they say that it's the most efficient and humane way to control the fox population.
They can't have it both ways.
I urge members, Chairman, not to hide behind this shabby amendment but to vote according to their consciences and their beliefs and to vote according to the views of eighty percent of the population that we represent and I urge other members to be as brief.
Mrs 
Thank you Chairman.
Shabby amendment, come off it
Really shabby amendment, agree?
No 
Really shabby 
Will you let the lady speak please, you've had your turn.
 

Mrs  would you like to speak.
Thank you Chairman.
Once again we meet to debate and vote on this highly emotive subject and it has always almost, it has already been apparent that it is very emotional.
Barely eighteen months ago after the last time, what are we doing?
I see my job as a county councillor as one of running the county council so that it delivers services to the people cost effectively and efficiently.
Not telling some of the people in Leicestershire how to run their lives.
Once again we see the Labour group in their true colours.
 
Yes  red.
They are now the largest party in county hall but instead of, try 
  
It's no good congratulating yourself until you've actually achieved something  primarily, you are  address 
 
Chairman, instead of primarily addressing the issues of overspending on the education budget  and the future of the elderly persons' homes and also the securing of a secure unit  these are pushed into second place when the Labour group can see the opportunity of headline grabbing  and satisfying their overriding need to tell everyone how to live.
The country dwellers are saying leave us alone to run our own lives, after all when it comes to funding they are left to run their own lives anyway.
Witness a paltry hundred thousand pounds for a new village hall, compared with the one million pounds on the Highfields Community Centre.
Here, here.
I hate hunting.
I hate angling  just because the fish doesn't scream it doesn't mean the hook didn't hurt when it was inserted and then taken out when the fish is thrown back into the water because it isn't big enough.
People in the know say that the animal kingdom is cruel.
But would, should we compound the issue by being cruel to the animal kingdom?
But what I hate above all  is this constant sanctimonious attitude of the socialists  that they think they know best and their continuous craving to create a nanny state.
I cannot vote  for the banning of fox hunting on county council land  as I see this as another attempt to limit freedom of choice.
The county council tenant must be left to manage his business and land as he sees fit and this includes his individual conscious decision as to whether to allow fox hunting across his land.
Chairman, I support Mr  's amendment and finally I would like to say that there are foxes alive and well in suburban Bristol in my parent's garden.
Thank you Chairman.
 
Mr .
Chairman, erm, as I understand it this afternoon is, is a free vote  and I, for that reason end there, I hope that persuade any waverers  er one way, erm, at the moment we've got agreements with tenants and it's up to them to decide what to do with their land.
We don't inter interfere with that and I don't think we should either.
Those arrangements or agreements with, with us are within the law and that  they're between  consenting adults, I don't know what else they're gonna think of banning.


Erm, it's a matter of choice  a free choice within the present laws of this country  er, even more important perhaps than that, that it really is up to the hunts  to convince those farmers that the, that the farmers want them.
I do ask any of you that are wavering to support the amendment which leaves the tenants with the right to manage their holdings, how they like and not to interfere with those rights.
Here, here.
I will observe, Chairman, that there are reasonable and honourable and relatively well meaning people  who truly believe that they have a natural right to hunt down foxes with dogs indeed to call the dogs hounds  and believe that nobody has the right to interfere with their pleasures  er,i in press they would no doubt speak of the right of free born Englishmen to do what they like  but I'd like them to consider Chairman,views  of what it is right and proper for human beings to do have changed, as readers of John  's diaries will recall, barely three hundred years ago, he saw a woman being burned to death er in London for murdering her husband  and people watched  and no doubt thought that it was the right of free born Englishmen to enjoy the spectacle.
Not many lives  ago  there were public hangings in this country and people certainly thought it was their right to watch and enjoy in fact, they even paid for seats to see public hangings, if they could afford to  and as Mr  has pointed out, er it 's not long ago  er that bear baiting and badger baiting and cock fighting were seen as right and proper and no doubt spoken of as rights of free born Englishmen.
Now, they would be thought obscene  public perception has changed  and understood that animals are sentient beings  and that  we demean our humanity  if we  are cruel to them or permit cruelty.
I can't believe  knowing er some of the people who do hunt, that their motive is actually  that they want to see a fox torn to pieces.
I believe the motive is in fact the enjoyment of riding a good horse fast over open country  and I can understand that.
They don't have to hunt foxes to do that  the motion, the main motion not the amendment suggests drag hunting  er they could, there there my, I think it means proper drag hunting not one  er to previously er l l laid out er objectives  er they could race each other, they can have treasure hunts, er  there are plenty of ways in which they could enjoy riding.
If their motive actually is  er to enjoy seeing a fox torn to pieces er then I suggest to them er that is unbearable cruel  there are of course objections to er this motion and to its further extension the banning of fox hunting altogether.
We are told that foxes are vermin and it is necessary to hunt them down.
Mr Chairman, if  decent people find it necessary er to kill animals they believe be vermin  they don't dress up in red coats and call them pink and er charge er, er, er, about er drinking st stirrup cups and tooting horns, er they go out and kill the vermin, it's a necessary job that has to be done and of course, er there are many ways in which foxes could be killed without cruelty  if it is necessary to kill them.
As a matter of fact, the hunt is a very ineffectual way  of controlling foxes, er they record the number they kill and it's very, very few, a tiny percentage of the number of foxes there are in the countryside  clever foxes er, as indeed I think Mrs  mentioned, live in towns nowadays  er, but there are still quite a lot in the countryside fortunately and they will survive  er, though zoologists tell us er that er by instinct er they see that their numbers are controlled.
Another objection is that jobs will be lost and certainly that would be a serious objection but it's a speechless one, of course, people who can afford it will still ride  and will still employ the same  people who are now hunt servants  er to look after their horses and themselves and those who can't afford horses will continue no doubt to enjoy the spectacle  er, that argument doesn't hold water  and the other objection of course er is that er it would mean the hounds were killed, but since I understand er hunting people kill their hounds anyway when they get too old to keep up, er I think er  we can dismiss that argument and leave it to them  er to see that the hounds are decently dealt with.
Mr , main argument of course er was er wholly spacious er with that proposed in the main motion would not stop any activities which are the proper aim of the agriculture act.
It's true I think er as Mr  said at some length  er that er this measure would not prevent hunting in in most of the area in which it it takes place, through plenty of it happens of course well to the West of the A six  er perhaps it might even get out there from time to time but our duty clearly is to see er that the right thing is done in the territory which is our responsibility and our other responsibility is surely to set an example of decent humanity.
I invite er Mr  and his supporters to get out of the age of Dickens and into the twentieth century.
Well done.
Mr 
Yes, thank you Chair.
er, erm, speaking in favour of the motion against the amendment, quite strongly against the amendment because I don't believe it moves that debate any further and the debate, as a number of speakers have said, will go on beyond this chamber, Chair.
I hope 
I am not a chair, this is the chair, I'm the Chairman please.
My apology Chairman.


My apology, your prerogative.
Chairman, the motion before us today if passed, will act as a lever a lever against the weight which is rolling inextricably forwards.
Parliament will debate this issue and I'm quite sure as a number of people are, that Parliament will vote in favour of a ban.
Can I, for the benefit of members opposite who, who always seem to believe that people on this side of the chamber are townies and don't know anything about anything other than street lighting  for the benefit of  members opposite and for the public gallery outside, can I say that in my younger days, a million years ago, I rode with hunt.
Ooh, ooh.
I followed on foot, by car and by horse, I enjoyed it.
But like a number of other people before me  I turned  and I turned in response to totally unnecessary violence.
Like speakers before me this afternoon Chairman, I object to barbarism.
I object to the attitude that we have a right to kill to dispose of.
The argument has been made clearly and repeatedly that fox  fox hunting with hounds is not effective.
Farmers themselves will say there are better ways of controlling fox population.
Rubbish.
It might be rubbish, try talking to a farmer occasionally.
Should you have declared an interest Mr ?
Chairman, we are debating a motion which will  we are debating a motion this afternoon Chairman which will ban fox hunting on land that we control.
The object of the exercise is to move the debate forward to another place where another group of individuals will also have a free vote and it's quite rightly been said.
I used to be a hunt supporter, I used to be a hunt follower  I gave up because I object to an attitude of a society of people that life is disposable  having seen wounded fox hounds  and that is the proper term  having seen wounded fox hounds despatched with a revolver  because they've got a broken leg  having charged full pelt across a public road and hit a motor car coming the other way and fortunately not injured the occupants of the motor car  having seen the damage that a pack of hounds in full cry can do to land that they are not entitled to be upon  because fox hounds can't read.
They don't know which side of the road they're supposed to be, all they know is they are bred and trained to chase.
Having seen the damage that a pack of hounds will do to domestic pets  it far outweighs in my mind Chairman, any damage that a fox can do, that a fox hound can stop them doing.
There are methods available to control foxes.
The age old argument about the damage that a fox does in a hen coup is clearly un unfounded
A farmer who allows a fox to get into his hen coup deserves everything he gets.
 
Chairman as a former supporter of fox hounds I have to say I am no longer a supporter of fox hounds, I would see the law of this land used to ban hunting with hounds and I support the motion.
Thank you Chair.
Mr Bernard 
First of all I'm surprised at the outburst that was given to us by Mr  I would regard as my er  yahabeebee and  sadiki if you wish er, but he mentioned in fact the er, what used to be barbaric ac , barbaric er practice in er Pakistan.
I wish he could use his Saudi influences to prevent the barbaric practice of decapitation of human beings which takes place every Friday in the square at Riyadh in Saudi Arabia.
Now the other thing I would say, I support in fact Mr  amendment  and I oppose the motion.
Destruction of vermin on county council owned farms is within the remit of the tenant farmer.
Also I express surprise at the Labour leader's volte face a short while ago in the press  he reported that he had more important matters to think about, or discuss insofar as fox  fox hunting was concerned or words to that effect.
To its enthusiasts hunting and especially fox hunting  is more than a sport  it is a national institution enjoyed equally by all countrymen and I emphasis all countrymen.
Institutions enjoyed equally by all countrymen, I again emphasise  that in the hunting field social distinctions do not exist  and those who follow houn hounds start equals  receiving consideration exclusively through their own  merits.
However, what is the lynchpin as I see it, of the debate today  is the deprivation of civil liberties  as proposed by the Labour group.
All be it a tenant,whether or no a tenant farmer must have the privilege of deciding who is invited onto his farm.
Also  for that matter, a tenant hand, a householder  has the rights  to invite who he wishes into his own house, this one sided dictatorial attitude of the Labour group to determine who can, who cannot enter his home is  er contrary to my philosophy anyway Chairman.
Thank you.
Mr 
Unlike Mr  I have always found fox hunting distasteful, I have never participated in it, I have never followed it  and I don't think that I I ever want to  and er, I have I am not convinced by either economic or the  put forward in its favour.
I shall nevertheless vote against the motion  and I shall vote for the amendment although as much as I wished it had happened or,or erm  a different proposal to Mr  because I don't think it helps your argument when you call your opponents  instead of arguing face and er unlike Mr  I actually do believe its in subsidiarity and I think  we should accept Leicester and Leicester only and what the Leicester hunt will do should be decided here in Leicester, not in Westminster, er any more than the composition of our offices should be, should be decided in Brussels  and I believe in subsidiarity.
The reason I shall vote against the motion and for the amendment couldn't have been put more succinctly than it was by Mr , I think Mr  made the most pertinent remark that has been made in the debate today, when in opposition to what  Mr  said about  individual freedom he said  this is a matter of personal  conscience.
This is a matter of personal conscience  and what every member  in the council chamber today must be aware of, is that there is a vociferous and committed group of people  we know that because we've all had a great deal of  communication from them  and interestingly enough I have  and most of the communication I've had has been in favour so victory, people who write must be extremely perceptive in, with er  marketing the  that's not the point, we all know that there is a committed and vociferous group of people whose consciences do not lead them to the same conclusions as Mr  's conscience  and the issue really is, do we in a  liberal and democratic society  have the right  to impose our consciences on those of other people who live in the community and quite clearly and quite determinedly take a different view.
That's the issue.
Now  I believe that you test the liberal democracy, not by the ease with which majorities  get their way  but on the extent to which  you accommodate the views of committed minorities  and we've lived so long with majority rule, masquerading as democracy, that we've forgotten that that is more akin to dictatorship than anything else.
So for that reason I do not believe that I  feeling strongly as I do  should im impose my views on others.
This issue comes up time and again for example there is an equally divided community in Britain, a divided position  on matters like abortion.
There are some people who say abortion is murder, it should be  not allowed 
 
that, that there are others equally  we say that we  women to determine what happens to their own bodies and their destiny is for them, I respect that view too but in those circumstances you don't resolve problems by  the majority whatever it happens to be  determining what the minority will do.
You in fact, leave the matter open  so that each of us as individuals do what our personal consciences tell us.
I would never hunt, I will also not demand that anybody else hunts  and I don't think other people should say to me  what I should and what I should not do  and I think that's the issue.
 
Mrs 
Thank you Chairman.
Erm, I would like to say at the start.
I don't hunt.
That makes a lot of horses in Leicestershire very happy 
 

What I would say Chairman is that I will defend the right of the tenant farmers to make their own minds up, just as much as I will defend the rights of council house tenants to say what goes on in their houses.
It is the very same thing  erm  could I say that  two people have written to me, two of my constituents and I do agree that  that they have a point.
They are asking that I should support the ban on fox hunting.
One is a Mr Fox and the other one's a Mrs Fox, the cards  are here if you'd like to see them .


I also Chairman have the easy answer to the control of pests.
Don't vote Labour at the next election.
 

Right, we've come to the end of the speakers, we now have  we now have the.
Wait a minute I'm coming to that.
We now have the right of reply in the er second reserved remarks of Mr  er Mayor er Mrs  and then finally Mr .
So will you like to come in now Mr .
Not a lot to say Mr Chairman, I think it's all been said one way or the other.
But a few comments which seem to be apposite erm, we don't want to kill animals with cruelty  do we not?
What about the Halal meat, in this county where three years ago we had a meeting and they decided that animals that were slaughtered without being stunned  with sheer terror, who are allowed to bleed to death because this is what a particular group believed in and we did it.
Er, Mr  brought slavery into it, but no one had more slaves than India  and the Moguls  and what about suttee where widows were burned alive on the funeral pyres of their husbands and still leap and still the system was des er was stopped by the English  Just a moment the door was opened by Mr  talking about slavery  we don't shut it  on 
 
harems and eunuchs and all sorts of things.
I also remember Mr  at a previous meeting told us we have no right  to pontificate on Moat Centre because we didn't live there
but you've got every right to pontificate on the on the hunting even though you don't live there  er, Mr  I dunno, barbarism, is this, is this for the Labour a free vote.
I don't think the Labour'd know a free vote if it bit him on the leg.


I accept the Liberal's is and so's the Conservative, but I'd be interested to know whether anyone allows a free vote ever in the Liberal party.
Mr   when he proposed this er amendment  said precisely what it was.
We are not talking about the merits and de-merits of fox hunting  we are not talking whether they die slowly or fast or what should be done.
We are talking here about the rights of the tenant farmers to use the land which they have from you  and what do you suggest that it be done?
At the moment the tenant has the right to ban any fox hunting from his f er er land if he wants to.
That of course will go  and what's more there's going to be some drag hunting on his land  of which he will not be consulted  because if you had to negotiate with organisations for controlled access to its land for the use of drag hunting.
I presume a committee here will decide and sit as to which land shall have dag, drag hunting  and the er the land the tenant will have no rights in that at all and if you're thinking you can control horses that are taking part in a drag hunt any more than you can control horses taking part in a fox hunt, you've got to have another think.
You'll still have the same trouble.
You are taking rights away and you are giving them no consultation at all.
This says quite clearly what Mr  moves.
There's one person, group of people not mentioned in his amendment  in his proposition and that is the tenant farmers.
Can he remember Moat Centre?
Can you remember we had a judicial review?
He went there and back  and do nothing to the people bol er er involved, being consulted  and we've had that going on for two years  no consultation here has taken place with the people who it affects and there's nothing in your motion to say it will.
I think this ought to be thrown out  not necessarily on the rights or wrongs of fox hunting but on a procedural thing  that you've brought about where a dictatorial attitude is brought about by the Labour party that have the right apparently to say exactly what'll happen on someone else's land.
Now if you want to do this in a proper way, then you do it in a proper way.
I don't mind if you write to all the tenants and say  please don't have foxes on your land, we don't like it.
That's alright.
But you're not right for you t start passing laws, which any case you can't adhere to until you have new er er tenancy, you can't enforce them.
I don't know  whether it makes any difference for the price you will get in the land, for the land, from a tenant, if you restrict his rights to use it.
Don't forget that in his  tenancy agreement, he has a duty to control pests, which includes foxes.
You put that in his deed  but the way that most of them do it through foxing  through, through er hunting, you're taking away from them.
This is a whole of a mish-mash, I think we ought to go back to what we did in nineteen ninety two, its the twenty ninth of January and to confer the rights of tenants and other occupiers of land  to allow or stop fox hunting or any other hunting  over land in their care and least trust some people instead of this business of we know best.
This is not about democracy, this is dictatorship, your trying to practice over a minority of people in this county.
Here, here 
please.
Er, the debate this after er this afternoon has centred on adult views of fox hunting.
Well I'd like to say that it's not only adults who have an interest in this subject and have been watching what the county council is going to do about it.
At the weekend I received a letter and a petition from a young girl called Frances aged nine years old and it brought it home to me that it isn't an adult centred er erm issue, that it's one for everybody who lives in Leicestershire.
Unfortunately it was received too late to  go through the formal council procedure, but I do hope that you allow me to hand it to the council secretary later who it is addressed to.
The letter is short and I would like to read it.
It starts  Dear county secretary.
I am writing to you on my views of fox hunting.
I was against this sport all along, but it is only now that I have read the page in the Leicester Mercury that I feel bold enough to speak out to you.
Sport I agree, can be played, but I don't call fox hunting or cub hunting a sport.
It is an inhuman, heartless massacre  a murder, an unasked for and undeserved murder, a murder of innocent, lively, living, intelligent foxes.
We have a fox that lives near us and I have spent many a night and a morning watching it frolicking and jumping about  and it breaks my heart to think that many of its kind are suffering death at its worst.
Imagine if you were a vixen scared and frightened, seeing her cubs destroyed.
Many suffer this way yet some people don't care.
Some people like and enjoy it.
There are jobs around that don't involve animals.
Now I talk fox hunting.
Think it and dream it.
In my mind I won't rest till I know that I have done something, no matter how small to bring this ban closer to a stop.
I look forward to hearing your opinion on this matter.
Signed Frances, aged nine.
Nine
And this child.
 
That's right and that's a credit to the education system of Leicestershire.
Here, here   
And Frances has also collected a petition  of sixty four children at her school which I will also hand over to the county secretary.
I think it's very clear that its fox hunting should be banned in Leicestershire.
I support the motion of Councillor  and Councillor .
Thank you Chair.
Er, before I call Mr  can I  compliment the council on the way that this debate has gone.
A lot of people anticipated a lot of ill feel , well  a lot of ill feeling being expressed.
Thank you for not doing that.
Thank you for the complimentary way you've acted.
Mr .
That's stumped my reply.
  
Now I, I won't, I won't go for this vote because at the end of the day I I don't think it'd be er er productive, it'd be counterproductive  erm, I do hope  that you around the chamber tonight, do look inside and say  look if you're fed up with it coming to the council  Mr whatever your name is, I forget, the new guy  er, it will only come back next year.
Get rid of it now.
Vote for our motion and go for higher places.
Mr 
Er, I I do apologise but erm  I've never known a fox yet  drop a cattle, a stock, er something that big, when, when you said farmers and their cattle, their d mostly dairy farmers and all the rest of it  I've never seen a fox do that.
In actual fact I've got a friend and I go potholing with him, we meet, he's a Kendall farmer, he's a a sheep farmer  and er, we meet and he says  you know what I've got a problem with  on my land, not foxes  dogs and walkers that haven't got them on the leads  and crows at lambing time cos they peck their eyes out  and things of that calibre, he says yes, I'll tell you what I'll bet you I've had animals taken by foxes  he, he says I probably have, he said but I've not had this kind of  unindeighted killing as.