

Well I'm not  down are they?
Now tell me tell me about ?
Right you know they're at export price list?
Yes.
Yeah, er Steven er Steve  their er designer
These were the people I wrote to the other day ?
That's right, Roy  and Jerry .
Steve works in the engineering office and has taken over some of the er you know purchasing function as well, like enquiries and stuff.
Yeah.
He's just been on to Maureen, got a couple of orders  bearings and an Anglia contact.
I explained to him about what we've done up to date and the fact that we've yet to sort the account out properly.
Yeah.
Er and what he's saying is, well can I have a price for these items?
So I said, well I I explained, now look, you were on an export price list now, one of the things Jerry didn't like  
 
but we've got to look at is more comparable with U K.
Yeah.
Erm so what I've done is said, Are these for use in U K or export? and these are for use in the U K. Right so I've said well we'll probably give you a price relating to that then.
ball bearings and and what was the other one?
And an Anglia contact bearing as well.
.
Yeah.
Right er 
Now you know, to be to be honest I was talking about it, I couldn't tell you what the  average percent  is from last year.
Yeah.
Er in fa I don't know
Could I  I could from those statistics couldn't I tho Or or haven't we sold anything to  this year?
Erm I'm not sure whether we have or not.
Won't it be on this lot?
Er I'm not sure actually whether they would appear on them or not, I haven't seen the new statistics so I don't know.
Wh who no no no these are old statistics, these are your
Mine?
No they won't be on because they're export.
No they're not on January's.
Oh because they count as export?
That's right.
Although they're at home.
Ye they've only just been put onto a home account.


You think you've got problems.


Yeah.
Right.
So now I can't tell you but I 
Right.
know I know it'll be say thirtyish percent.
Yeah as 
Right.
opposed to the forty in the U K so we've got to get it up a bit.
Erm but I've just thought, you know, get this away, let him get you know, buy them, go in at say forty percent as an O E margin
What would I mean if it wasn't , if it was if it was erm think of another U K customer .
A similar sized U K customer
Yes.
Well 
We'd be looking at making forty percent margin.
Between thirty five, forty percent margin.
Well you better price them accordingly.
Right okay.
It's just that and then we have got to get this sorted out long 
Yeah.
term obviously.
Yeah.
So  
Well i apart from anything else, it's stating our position
Sure.
isn't it?
Yeah.
Now where erm  Yeah I mean does that 
You see .
does that compare them with the  customers?
U K customers ?
I haven't even looked at  yet.
Oh on those, no we charge them a lot more.
The  ones we c we manage to sell at about fifty, fifty five percent margin.
Right.
Because although that's 
three o'clock.
It's not three o'clock is it?
Oh it is.
It's three o'clock.
It's two minutes to.
Right okay.