

Right have we got any apologies for absence?
Yes?
Yeah they're on the l the list which is er circulating .
Yes.
I think there's five so far.
Right.
Er, I would like er to welcome you all to tonight.
Er I would particularly like to welcome John Rothwell who many of you know.
Erm  I've known John for many years.
I can remember delivering er leaflets in Boothstown.
  
Er  we were finding out how long it would take us to deliver leaflets in Boothstown.
That'd take us a lot longer now,.
Mm.
Er but he he is the agent for the European elections, the Liberal Democrats agent, and he's gonna say a few words about that later on.
Er thank you all for coming tonight.
Er I think it's the er I think it's the third General Meeting  er of the Worsley Constituency Liberal Democrats.
Er I know that there's at least one other attraction tonight, especially if you've got Sky Television, or 
 
have a ticket for er Burnham Park, and I know at least one of our members found the attraction of the match too tempting.
Lindon Greensit, who by the way would like to come onto the committee sends his apologies.
Where?
It's been a peculiar year, a sad year, we have lost some loyal members, Mr Williams, and John Norton Grimshaw.
Sybil Mann, a Liberal member for many years.
It was only two years ago however that er Bob discovered her, and George, and she's been an inval valuable member of the c committee ever since.
We have missed her bad badly, especially in Astley , where she was  to organize things, and I'm sure er the meeting sends George er our condolences.
Mm.
Yeah.
Nationally however,


nationally it has been a stimulating time.
The party conference was bubbling with enthusiasm.
There were good debates on racism, transport and crime pre prevention.
In the latter debate there was not enough emphasis o on the inner cities.
Home watch schemes are not much good when many of the neighbours are criminals  and they terrorize the rest.
In Worsley frank f f f frankly, er actually it's been disappointing.
Firstly we've had no elections, which means that we've had little to focus on.
Usually after elections we have an upsurge in memberships, so this year, thanks mainly to Tom Hilton, er it's been good that we've managed to maintain our membership.
The membership unfortunately have seemed rather passive.
A dinner was organized for the Euro campaign, we sold about ten tickets, we had to cancel.
We had a room booked for the Christmas dinner and we didn't have the courage to go ahead with it, because we didn't feel we could sell the tickets.
Both lost money.
We or we are organizing a hoe-down on the twelfth of February,eight eight P M, tickets five pound fifty.
There's been a poor response from members.
However, we've managed to sell eighty three tickets through sa through various ways, and er now every ticket that's sold will make a profit, and we need the money.
Perhaps I'm wrong to blame members, perhaps it's the fault of the committee or the Chairman.
Perhaps we need to involve members in er other ways.
I feel that we need now new blood on the committee, and coupled with the fact that I've done one one more year than the constitution says I should, I'm not standing for reelection as Chairman.
We must now look to the future.
The Tories are in disarray.
They promised ta tax cuts, they promised to cut crime, they promised to look after the environment, they promised to improve e education, they promised to improve the the democratic process, they're now the party of careful housekeeping.
They deliver nothing.
They deliver the opposite.
We should replace them as the Labour Party's main op opponents.
We have we have elections to fight, we need money, we need candidates, we need workers, and ideas, we need help.
For the local elections I would like to appeal to you to put your name forward as a candidate.
We cannot afford to let the Labour Party go on unopposed, cos I feel that the Conservatives are struggling for candidates, in fact I know they are.
Please, let's get going.
Right Bob, the minutes of the last A G M.
Very good.
to you.
Oh while I'm at it, might as well dish out the agendas as well since we've already started .
I thought you were gonna say raffle tickets.
 

Gonna say, I haven't got a , limitless  
  



 

Yes they all squashed onto one sheet you see.
 

Thank you.
here  in nineteen sixty two.
To  fifty nine.
  

You've got a copy from  John .
Oh sorry , yeah.
I'll have a read.
There we  are then.
I can't read that sort of  
  

Do you accept that these are a true record?
Yes.
Anybody to second that?
Alright?
What if I propose that that's a true record?
Yeah?
Right?
Seconder?
Right.
All in favour?
All right, thank you.
Any matters arising?
Nothing?
There's just one thing if I might add to that.
Erm  we we were supposed to have had a a guest speaker at the last er  A G M and that was the result of the the video being shown on its own.
Might I just point out that that he did send his apologies, and er he also sent us a a donation of twenty pounds.
Right, thank you.
Mm.
That's excellent .
It was most welcome.
Yeah.
Have we given him a receipt or anything?
Or acknowledgement, or anything 
Yes.
We we  .
Excellent.
Any other matters?
Right.
Reports..
Right.
I like this phrase in paragraph eight of the  
Oh.
of the minutes Mr Chairman.
Oh, what's that?
Talking about the closing of mines.
Yeah.
And it says  The Tory government which must which must take responsibility for setting up a rapacious duopoly of generating companies .


Beautifully worded.


Well I c I ca I can die happy now,praised by  
 
 
by Arthur Smith .


That that's something.


Not many people have er enjoyed that.
Can we have an action replay of that?


Yes.
Erm  yes, er erm er another bit of paper to dish out to have a look at er for those that er are not too familiar with the motorway project which has has taken up erm  quite a lot of my time  .
erm I did see I did see you on television.
Er oh I've been on.
Oh yeah.
 
Not every week.




Er yeah.
Er  Yes erm the these erm  exemplify two of the effects of the motorway proposals.
Er the the the top one er shows erm one or two of the houses which are due to be er demolished er if 
Corner of Glenn Avenue, are they?
Row Green?
Er yes.
Yeah.
That's right.
Er so the the  er proposed additional motorway would in fact virtually cover the whole of the er site shown in in that picture.
Mm.
Er the the l the lower picture is of the er traffic island er the present traffic island outside the Courthouse  er together with in the middle distance the existing motorway and behind it erm St Mark's Church, and as part of the scheme er that existing motorway would be dug up and moved er to cover the existing island in the foreground roughly up to where that white car or van is.
 
So there'd be two er and and then the new motorway would be built er at roughly er ground level as it were er where the existing motorway is, but it would be lower  and there would be a a footbridge  an ornamental  landscaped!footbridge built over both motorways to get from the viewpoint to St Mark's Church.
Er   well  er a l a lot of my time has been spent in another context er as Secretary of  er Residents Against the Motorway which is er an all-party thing er but we've er we've also taken some action  as er a political party as well in that er fairly early on sixth of July ninety two er we we wrote to er Nick Harvey who is er MP who is our  Transport Spokesman er and we gave him some er initial details er of the scheme er to which he er replied erm reminding us of what we knew already which was the Lib Dems' transport pali policy in application to roads.
Er at the last conference er both Kerry and myself buttonholed him er and proposed that we er push it a bit further and er the re upshot of that was that we wrote him a much more detailed letter  er  on whatever date it was, er first of November ninety three, and we've now had a er a reply  er to that er giving us carte blanche to quote him er w with er a number of er quotations which we'd drafted and put into his mouth, so er a all the quotations that we've asked him to approve we can use.
Now er Paddy Ashdown has also said that anything that Nick Harvey approves of er he will approve of so we can quote Paddy er the same er at er at some suitable point, for example in advance of the May elections.
We've also submitted er on your behalf er motions to the er regional conference er and to the er Cardiff er  federal conference, which I mistakenly referred to as a national conference.
Er the upshot of that is er that  the  motion for Cardiff conference er has been ruled out er because it's not a national conference it's a federal one,so I've got caught out on on a technicality there, er but we have put in er an amendment to  another motion submitted for Cardiff er   not that one   erm  a motion submitted er  by South West Herts er which concentrates on the M Twenty Five.
So we've we've put in erm an amendment to that one to make it include reference to the M Sixty Two relief road.
Er I've got the text of those here, I don't propose to go through it all now, but if anybody er you know wants to have a look at that they're they're welcome.
The regional conference one, er since there is a regional transport paper coming up for debate er in in which I had  er a hand as regional erm policy chairman, er the the the Worsley motion er will in fact be taken as a an amendment er to that regional paper which is coming up er at the Southport conference.
So we've er we've done I think what we can er as a party about that motorway project and er there will doubtless be more to do.
So that's the er the motorway thing.
I found out er today I don't know whether anybody else has er heard of this that there is a proposal coming er up to er for for the Isle of Man company which owns most of the Ellesmere shopping centre site er to purchase the Market Hall and er convert it er or whatever  er the suggestion is into a supermarket.
Er the market traders er are up in arms about this and I found them er in the process of trying to get a petition together but it it wasn't put together right, they were just getting people to sign blank pieces of paper.


So er when I  found out about this  I've equipped them with a er 
  
with a proper petition er and er I have a copy here if er you would like to c circulate it and er sign it.
Erm 
Might I just add to that that er I have heard that they also want to take over the Pembroke Hall.
Whether there's any truth in that  
Yeah the the way it was put to me was that the Pembroke Hall would be part of the deal er but that the Isle of Man company was not particularly enthusiastic about having the er the the the poison pill of the Pembroke Hall wrapped in with the deal cos it doesn't make money.
Er  so that's that's as it was told to me by er the th their their Chairman erm  Win Winder.
E Winder.
Winder .
Winder is it?
Mhm.
Yes.
So  er no details are are available er for what the er Isle of Man company proposes to do with the Market Hall or or with the Pembroke Hall for that matter.
Er er it seems that the Council have known about this for six months er and it's only within the last week or two er that information has got out  so it seems to me that that's something that er that we ought to take an interest in.
Er  next there is an item er for Kerry.
Er we have now written to the Council about the excess traffic on Ringlow Park Road and Chapel Road  caused  er by erm  the traffic calming measures which have been put on er to Hazelhurst Road.
So all the traffic that used that as a rat run to get on the East Lancs Road


is is  now going er through Ringlow Park Road and some of it through Chapel Road, er and those roads are even less suitable for traffic than  er for commuter traffic er than Hazelhurst Road.
So that's er been attended to.
I think  that's 
 
I think that's all I want to report er Mr Chairman.
Right.
Er 
I don't know whether it's now is the appropriate time Kerry but 
Go on.
could I ask if i if it is appropriate whether whether Bob could elaborate on on what the proposals are for the Market Hall and .
Yes, I've I've 
Yeah.
only had this sprung on me er today  er when I went in to the Hall and and and saw them with a notice and a table collecting signatures.
Er now  it s it seems that the idea is for this Isle of Man company I think you kn you know the name of it don't you which I've forgotten.
It has several guises.
Anglo International is one of them.
Anglo International yes.
Er well it seems that that they've put in a bid to er purchase the  th the market place er and as Peter said quite rightly apparently wrapped in wi with it er I don't know why but wrapped in with the the proposed deal is the er Pembroke Hall.
Er  but  nobody could tell me for certain what it was that they intended to use it for, er but it was apparently not guaranteed that it would continue to be used er as a market hall.
I actually heard that it was going to be used as a food hall.
Purely a food hall.
Right.
Yes.
Which would then expel the market traders and I think the i well the ploy was to try and get them into some of the er the vacant lots in within the Ellesmere centre.
But when you look at the cost of those units
Yes.
in comparison with what they would be paying for a market stall then it would be it's way out of their their 
That's right.
their their range.
So I mean it it was it was represented to me er and I felt that there was some logic in it that that this company would not be discussing this deal unless it felt it could make money out of it and that money in the end would have to come out of the local people here.
Yep.
 
Right.
Could I make could I make er erm
Sorry.
 
a question ?
Mm.
 
Yes Alec.
George.
It doesn't seem to have .
It doesn't
Yeah.
it doesn't look as though the 
Yeah.
That's right.
initiative has come from Anglo International.
Er  if part of the package cont contains something that they don't want
Mm.
then I would suggest that perhaps Salford Council have approached them.
Erm 
It's not impossible because er 
Well  
of of this secrecy that's apparently surrounded the whole thing.
But if if if Pembroke Hall is part of the package and they would never have volunteered to take on
Yeah.
Pembroke Hall surely if er if it's something they don't want.
 
I would have thought the mo Without knowing anything about it I would have thought the most likely explanation for that is that  that the property company who own the precinct have suggested to the Council that they would like to buy the Market Hall and the Council have been sitting on it and pondering it and some bright spark has come up with the idea, Yes you can buy the Market Hall if you also buy Pembroke Hall .
Could be.
I would have thought that was a more likely erm  But er we're obviously we're speculating and it's perhaps
Mm.
fruitless 
Yes I know.
to do so.
Would you wish me to write to the Council and ask them what's going on?
If you think there's any chance of a re of a reply I would very certainly .
 
Well if they refuse to 
 
reply or reply saying that it's 
 
confidential the then er that's all grist to the mill as well isn't it?
 
I think it would be a good idea yeah.
Yes.
It looks like a nice er subject  for the campaign for May.
Yes exactly.
Maybe an open letter in the pre in the press er would be suffice better.
Well er depending on what we get from from the Council .
Aye.
as a next step perhaps.
Yeah.
I was thinking.
Yeah.
Well you've got to react you've gotta act fairly quickly on that though haven't you.
Mm.
Oh yes.
You know if you send an open letter you you've gotta do it fairly Otherwise somebody else is going to write in and 
Yeah.
Erm or I might ri ring 
And then you're just replying to what they've said aren't you.
Or I might ri ring ring them up and ask them.
Yeah ring them up and ask them and then write a letter 
Yeah.
to the paper.
Yeah.
I thought.
Yes.
Excellent.
Good.
Right er  er that Secretary anything er else on Secretary's report?
No?
Er Membership Secretary.
Yes well Mr Chairman  members.
You will see that er at the last  meeting the membership total was a hundred and four.
That's rather more than a year ago of course.
Er it was in October in ninety two.
And it followed a general election  which of course is always a 
Yeah.
good recruiting period and we had er thirty o thirty one I think it was or thirty four new members who came in at the general election.
Inevitably we haven't held er er they haven't been able to hold up that  new members this year and er the main job has been trying to er keep quite a number of the members who were recruited er to the gen following er the general election.
Several of them were fringe members who we have not been able to keep on to some of them especially in er  in Little Hulton and Irlam 
Mm.
where I think we've  er lost track of about eight or nine people.
So er we're still hovering around a hundred but instead of being four over the hundred the present total is ninety six by my reckoning.
Er  we'd dearly like to get it up to three figures again obviously because a amongst other things this affects the number of representatives that we get for  conferences and so on.
If you get over a hundred you get an extra extra one there.
Hopefully we may be able to do that.
Er ninety three was not a good year for recruiting from the point of view of elections as has already been said because we didn't have any elections and therefore er it wasn't possible to  er to canvas  and consequently er we were struggling to recruit new members.
We did we did manage to recruit nine during the year  but we lost er four by death as Kerry has mentioned, three by removal or one or two elderly people moving into  er sheltered or into homes and things like that where they're no longer contactable, and there were ten  lapses making a total of seventeen that we lost  er as against nine  new members recruited, which meant that we have a nett have a nett loss of eight from a hundred and four to the present total of  ninety six.
What has been er what has been pleasing is that a n a number of the people who've come in on the last two or three years or so er are younger people, people in their er late teens or twenties.
Er it's been one of my  hopes that we might be able to get  er a small youth section or youth committee coming   er  from amongst these people.
The latest the latest recruit is a young man of of twenty three from Astley .
Once again we have this problem of  keeping in touch with the wing wards,Astley and er  East it's not all that easy to do but er there are people there who are  showing an interest and I hope that we can .
Obviously with the coming of two elections shortly we have the opportunity to do a lot more canvassing and  contact more members of the public and to draw in new members from there.
We also have in the area a tremendous number of new houses  which  have never been contacted by us or for  by any political party and I would hope that we might be able to to do er something about the area behind the   church there  is er an area that comes to mind which could well be  fruitful, and I would hope that we might during this year get er some kind of literature out to these places apart from election literature.
So at the moment it's ninety six.
If anybody can help me help me to get it up to three figures again  personal contact  could be er very useful in these cases if you come across anybody who you might think  we could interest.
You don't have to do it, just tell me and I'll I'll tell them.
Right thank you Tom, thank you for your work again this year, especially following up the  the er members who lapse.
I know it's difficult.
Thank you.
Er  next is Treasurer's report.
Peter?
Mr Chairman er loyal members.
Erm whilst I've not been able to produce an audited er set of accounts I do have er a set of figures for you erm  and as you said at the the beginning of your opening er speech Mr Chairman that erm we had one or two losses during the year, those er in actual fact didn't erm affect us in thi this particular financial year as they were aimed at the September December period, but therefore they will be reflected in next year's figures not or in the current year's figures or the next annual general meeting's figures.
Er we started off the year with er a current account balance of two hundred and thirty three pounds ninety four and we ended with two er three hundred and twenty seven pounds twenty nine pence.
The deposit account it makes me wonder why we've got money on on deposit in in a bank.
Erm we've got we had two hundred and pounds fifteen pence on deposit which has raised us one pound ten pence interest over the year, leaving us at two hundred and twenty one pounds twenty five pence.
Some of the expenditure er some of the income came from erm  the Cheltenham Gold Cup which ra actually realized us the sum of ninety four pounds in comparison with twenty fo twenty four pounds the previous year.
The President's dinner raised us erm fifty five pounds and a profit on the hoe-down of thirty five pounds.
And thanks to Tom chasing up membership that actually brought us in a hundred and ninety nine pounds seventy er throughout the year.
Expenditures, er some of the the er higher amounts are printing at ninety pounds fifty,cons conference fees at sixty pounds, er Euro Election er donation of twenty five pounds, photocopies of forty pounds, er bank charges  Which er was a point that I took up with the bank erm  Mr Chairman last December.
Er they wanted to charge us eighty pence per transaction, and after a lot of argument we managed to pin them down er at er ten pounds for the at at the rate of two pounds fifty per quarter.
Er had they got their way every time we put a cheque in or took one out or moved money from one account to another it would have cost us eighty pence, which meant that had anybody paid their their fees to the er and made the cheque payable to us directly, we would have had to bank that cheque and then reissue another cheque  er to the appropriate department and that would have cost us one pound sixty, for which we'd have got nothing.
Mm.
And that one pound sixty would be eroded erm in the amount that comes back on our erm  direct payments from Downing Street.
Erm we have we had in in this particular set of accounts thirty five pounds on two occasions for rooms er which we had to let go and computer data er which is still being processed I understand at a cost of forty pounds.
Those are the the figures as they stand  as of thir at the thirty first of August nineteen ninety three.
Right.
How do we stand now?
Pretty much the same at the moment because I'm I'm sat on a couple of bills for Salford Council who I'm sure can afford it for the moment.
So
But we w we we are solvent.
Right.
Any questions?
Perhaps I could just add something to the the the item about the  data processing.
We er that that was that that er er election software wasn't it ?
That's right.
EARS.
Yeah.
Er we have now received a package from them.
Incidentally I I think when you when you net it all out that that forty pounds er is partly offset because I think we got er twenty five pounds from the  Spastics or something.
That's right yes.
Er so the actual cost is fifteen.
I've had a package at long last er back from EARS er  but I haven't actually erm put it onto the computer yet because it's erm it's proving a bit temperamental at the moment and I didn't want to risk overloading it with with yet another er software package u until I've had it seen to.
Er   I suspect that what they've sent us is the software but not the database for any wards and the the deal was that we would get er at least er the database for two wards er and a printout annotated with telephone numbers of the er electoral register.
So we we may have to pursue that further but there has been some progress after all this time and expenditure of  money and and time.
Where's that from Bob?
Sorry.
It's a  it's a thing called  EARS er which is an acronym for  Starts with Election anyway.


And what it enables you to do is er to to either type in the electoral register or er read it in from the corporation's disks, er maybe after translation, which is what one of the jobs that EARS did for us, er and you can then tag it with erm er serv erm canvas er returns and telephone numbers and things like that.
Well the reason why we were attracted to it was of course the very point that that they would translate the disks for nothing, we wouldn't have to type out the register, and they would also add the telephone numbers without us having to look them all up so that we could do telephone canvassing .
Mm.
Mm.
Er so I suspect it's not worked out quite as we intended er and it I mean the main problem is that it's it's it's cost us time, cost me time which I would rather have spent on something else but there we are.
Yeah the other the other factor is now that that data is getting on for twelve months old
Oh yeah.
and new registers will have been er made, composed, disposed of,
Indeed.
and recomposed.
Yeah.
Th th there is supposed to be an updating or editing  mode for EARS .
 
Yes.
Er 
Can I ask you how you've provided them with the data to to actually produce the erm 
We we bought it from Salford and from Wigan.
Er it was a deal done with the Spastics Society er on a at a national level in that er the individual local parties would buy this data er from the appropriate councils on on either disk or tape, er  EARS would translate them and the the cost of the translation would be borne by the Spastics er Society, and the cost of the disks, would be borne by the Spastics Society, and I think it was about a hundred and thirty quid or something like that altogether.
Er the Spastics Society would obtain the data for the purpose of trying to identify street agents for them er and er we would get the the database when completed.
Now er we we already had a license for an earlier version of EARS which in er in fact was in Aled's name from the last general election but  one.
T or two.
Erm  er that that was for a B B C computer.
So er  the  forty pounds was for the update of the license to erm er an I B M compatible.
That was offset as I say by er this er I think it was I think it was twenty five pounds er sweetener from the Spastics Society.
So the the whole operation has cost us fifteen pounds.
Er whether we've got anything usable out of it still remains to be seen.
Mm.
Right.
Might I just add that if anybody does actually pay their fee by cheques erm please make it to the right department  er as as Tom will give you erm  the co the correct er name for  for your cheque.
It saves us er handling and
Yeah.
erm 
So you they pay it to Who do they pay it to then Tom?
Who do you pay a cheque to ?
Er just pay it to  Are are we talking about er s subs?
Subs yeah.
Memberships.
Er well the Liberal Democrats or even S L D if you want.
You don't have to write very much.
Yeah.
Liberal Democrats.
The the point Peter er is making is don't make it out to us because if you if you give me a cheque to Worsley I've got to go to Peter's house and  and then get him to give me a cheque and then I've got to go to either Kerry or Bob and get them to 
Mm.
countersign it and er    
Lot of messing.
The the other factor is that 
we used to get .
We used to get exactly the same rebate, the only  thing is we have to wait three months for it.
We do get a regular cheque every three months erm of a rebate of thirty percent.
The the other factor is that that the negotiations with the bank erm to pay two pound fifty per quarter erm should have been  erm reviewed last December.
They've kept quiet and so have I.
Yes.
So therefore until they stay char start charging me some more money on it I'm gonna keep quiet.
Mm.
Mm.
Right.
Any  any other?
Could I suggest erm Mr Chairman er our our Treasurer has been under er some pressure recently.
Yeah.
Erm could I suggest that er that the incoming committee be given authority to erm  obtain erm audited accounts and to approve those accounts on on your behalf when available?
Can I move that?
Yeah.
Any seconders?
Yeah.
All in favour?
Right, passed.
Right.
Er  D says  Social  here Bob, what does that mean?
Are we does it mean we're having one?
Er no.
What it what means is er er a report from anybody that will admit to any responsibility for the social activities.
Er 
Er well I think I've said quite a bit about it.
Do you do you want to say anything Peter  in particular?
Er not not particularly apart from that er that the the s the support from from the Party in general wa was very poor from the members in general was relatively poor.
Erm 
Yeah.
and though these sort of things were the  the best way I I saw it er of of raising funds for  for the coming two elections the Euro Election and the next local elections.
Yeah.
And whilst we had no opportunities last year for canvassing or erm  for getting members we we could have I I felt er put on more fund-raising events as we had a quiet year and we could have probably at the same time persuaded one or two people to to actually join us.
It er I I mean I  as far as I'm concerned it's er extremely difficult to get people to er come to social events.
Mm.
Yeah.
Er  if you advertise them too early er they forget about it.
If you advertise them too late they've booked up something else.
Er so I I don't know where we are.
I've er this, the the er hoe-down, I've been  advertising since before Christmas er and er  although we didn't inform the members till about three weeks ago something like that er I've been telling everybody about it and I've had more  response from non-members than I've had from members for it.
Er I t I suspect that most of the tickets have gone to to people who you know who who are who I know and have rung up er not  It's no good putting notices out,no nobody responds to that.
Mm.
You've got to ring people up and ask them.
And then you've gotta ring them up and ask them again to see who's   to see who  Cos they usually say, Well I'll see what I can do, and then you've got to ring them up again and see if they've done anything, and and er and then sometimes you've gotta ring them up again.
Er so it's very very difficult.
I managed to get rid of about eighty and if we do sell these extra what twenty or thirty that's going to be between a hundred and a hundred and fifty pounds  profit .
about that profit yeah.
Yeah.
Because although the hotpots cost a pound er most people er  will will buy drinks at the bar and er we'll make fifty P out of them in the evening at the bar so you know we'll make five pounds from anybody we sell tickets to from now on.
Mm.
Er so if you can if you can talk to y r ring up anybody you know and just ask them.
You know.
Mm.
Did you say talk to or torture?
Torture.
 
Torture them.


Yeah.
But er it's less than a fortnight now.
Er I also need people to help me on with the bar wi serving on the bar.
Chris promised to help me buy the drinks and organize the that side of it getting the drinks.
And help on the bar.
And help on the bar.
Right.
Er  so we'll need some help on in the evening on on the bar when also er  we want some cakes as well cos we usually serve cakes with the hotpot, so if anybody would like to make a cake I'd be very grateful for that.
Er I've already had some promised but it depends on how many people we get there you see.
If we're going to get over a hundred we're going to need quite a  a lot of cakes.
Any er any questions about socials ?
I'll promise one.
You'll promised me a cake?
Well done John .
Ah excellent.
Well done John.
What would you like?
Cherry pie?
Cherry pie'll do fine.


cherries.
Cherries, right.


Right.
 
Yeah.
A ques a question about the er raffle tickets.
Oh right.
Mm.
Yes they've stripped me of my cash  for tonight .


Should I really have supported this venture rather than the raffle tickets?
What are what what are we gonna get out of 
Both.
What are we gonna get out of the raffle tickets?
Er we get er three pounds er per complete book er out 
Right.
of the five pounds for a for a full book
Right.
Fine.
er of the raffle tickets.
Just so that I've got some idea of er 
Yeah.
Yeah.
If I could just er just add to that, erm  th the Cheltenham Gold Cup, er as I said earlier, produced us ninety four pound last year.
Erm  if we actually get into the th th t the top selling bracket er or the top ten as it were, erm  bearing in mind that the top sales were one thousand three hundred and nineteen pounds,


that particular group got an additional five hundred pounds as a prize for selling the the most tickets.
Mm.
The next figure down was nine nine hundred and ninety two pounds fifty.
They got an award of two hundred pounds.
Er that was at at Beverley.
Erm  the the third prize was erm seven hundred and fifty eight pounds sales from South Suffolk, they got a hundred pounds, and seven other er constituencies who sold between six hundred and ninety three pounds seventy five and five hundred and one pounds' worth of tickets


got an extra fifty pound each.
Over the  erm four years th the last four years, er on aggregate, the income from the erm  erm  the draw has been one  a hundred and thirty thousand pounds, er of which ninety five thousand pounds has benefited the Party, and most of that is at constituency level
Mm.
as against er Head Office.
Mm.
Er anybody that  actually wants to see a list of the prizewinners from last year, from the actual race, I do have a copy  er
Yeah.
which gives na 