

CONVENTIONALISM
Its Structure
"The law is the law.
It is not what the judges think it is, but what it really is.
Their job is to apply it, not to change it to fit their own ethics or politics."
This is the view of most laymen and the anthem of the legal conservative.
Read word by word, it says almost nothing, certainly nothing controversial for us.
Everyone in our sample cases agreed that the law is the law and must be enforced; they disagree only about what the law in fact was.
But the slogan, however carelessly drafted, means something more than banality; it stands for an attitude that is important and open to challenge.
It is this: that collective force should be trained against individuals only when some past political decision has licensed this explicit in such a way that competent lawyers and judges will all agree about what that decision was, no matter how much they disagree about morality and politics.
The first of the three conceptions of law I introduced in the last chapter, which I called conventionalism, shares the general ambition of the popular slogan, though the interpretation it builds is more subtle in two ways.
First, conventionalism explains how the content of past political decisions can be made explicit and noncontestable.
It makes law depend on distinct social conventions it designates as legal conventions; in particular on conventions about which institutions should have power to make law and how.
Every complex political community, conventionalism insists, has such conventions.
In America it is settled by convention that law is made by statues enacted by Congress or the state legislatures  in the manner prescribed by the Constitution, and in England that decisions by the House of Lords are binding on the lower courts.
Conventionalism holds that legal practice, properly understood, is a matter of respecting and enforcing these conventions, of treating their upshot, and nothing else, as law.
If Elmer has a right to the inheritance according to a convention of this sort — if he has a right to it according to social conventions about who has power to legislate and how that power is to be exercised and how doubts created by the language are to be settled — then he has a legal right to it, but not otherwise.
Second, conventionalism corrects the popular layman's view that there is always law to enforce.
Law by convention is never complete, because new issues constantly arise that have not been settled one way or the other by whatever institutions have conventional authority to decide them.
So conventionalists add this proviso to their accounts of legal practice.
"Judges must decide such novel cases as best they can, but by hypothesis no party has any right to win flowing from past collective decisions — no party has a legal right to win — because the only rights of that character are those established by conventions.
So the decision a judge must make in hard cases is discretionary in this strong sense: it is left open by the correct understanding of past decisions.
A judge must find some other kinds of justification beyond law's warrant, beyond any requirement of consistency with decisions made in the past, to support what he then does.
(This might lie in abstract justice, or in the general interest, or in some other forward looking justification.)
Of course convention may convert novel decisions into legal rights for the future.
Our own convention about precedent convert any decision the highest court makes about Elmer, for example, into law for future murdering heirs.
In this way the system of rules sanctioned by convention grows steadily in our legal practice."
There are obvious resemblances between conventionalism and the positivist semantic theories I discussed in Chapter 1  But there is this important difference.
The semantic theories argue that the description just given is realized in and enforced by the very vocabulary of law, so that it would be a kind of self-contradiction for someone to claim that the law provides right s beyond those established through mechanisms sanctioned by convention.
The conventionalist conception of law, on the contrary, is interpretive: it makes no linguistic or logical claim of that kind.
Instead it takes up the double aspect, Januslike posture of any interpretation.
It argues that this way of describing legal practice shows that practice in its best light and therefore offers the most illuminating account of what lawyers and judges do.
It insists that this is therefore the best guide to what they should do, that it points out the right direction for continuing and developing that practice.
Conventionalism does not deny that many lawyers hold rival views about the best interpretation of the practice they share.
It claims that these lawyers are wrong, lacking in insight and perception, that they misconceive their own behaviour.
But it does not deny that they mean what they say, does not suggest that they are talking nonsense.
Conventionalism makes two postinterpretive, directive claims.
The first is positive: that judges must respect the established legal conventions of their community except in rare circumstances.
It insists, in other words, that they must treat as law what conventions stipulates is law.
Since convention in Britain establishes that acts of parliament are law, a British judge must enforce even acts of parliament he considers unfair or unwise.
This positive part of conventionalism most plainly corresponds to the popular slogan that judges should follow the law and not make new laws in its place.
The second claim, which is at least equally important, is negative.
It declares that there is no law — no right flowing from past political decisions — apart from the law drawn from those decisions by techniques that are themselves matters of convention, and therefore that on some issues there is no law either way.
There is no law on emotional damages, for instance, if it has never been decided by any statute or precedent or other procedure specified by convention either that people have a legal right to compensation for emotional damages or that they do not.
It does not follow that judges faced with such an issue must throw up their hands and send the parties from court with no decision at all.
This is the sort of case in which judges must exercise the discretionary power described a moment ago, to use extralegal standards to make what conventionalism declares to be new law.
Then in future cases the convention of precedent will make this new law into old law.
The heart of any positive conception of law, like conventionalism or law as integrity, is its answer to the question why past politics is decisive of present rights.
For the distinctions a conception draws between legal rights and other forms of rights and between legal arguments and other forms of argument, signal the character and limits of the justification it believes political decisions provide for state coercion.
Conventionalism provides one apparently attractive answer to that question.
Past political decisions justify coercion because, and therefore only when, they give fair warning by making the occasions of coercion depend on plain facts available to all rather than on fresh judgments of political morality, which different judges might make differently.
This is the ideal of protected expectations.
The first of the two post-interpretive claims of conventionalism plainly serves that ideal.
The first claim insists that once a crisp decision has been made by a body sanctioned by convention, and the content of that decision is fixed by conventions about how such decisions should be understood, judges must respect that decision, even if they think a different one would have been fairer or wiser.
ITS APPEAL
It is not so obvious that the second, negative claim of conventionalism  also serves the ideal of protected expectations.
But a reasonable case can be made that it does.
The negative claim insists that a judge may not appeal to the law's warrant for his decision when he cannot show that conventions force him to do what he does, because the ideal is corrupted by any suggestion that past political decisions can yield rights and duties other than those dictated by convention.
Suppose it is clear that convention does not dictate an answer either way in McLoughlin: convention requires that precedents be followed, but only so far as a new case is like the precedents in relevant facts, and no past case has decided whether damages must be awarded for emotional injury away from the accident's scene.
Suppose a judge then announces, in the style of law as integrity, that the precedents do establish a right to damages because that reading of the precedents makes them in retrospect morally sounder.
That is dangerous from the point of view of the popular ideal.
Once it is accepted that principles can be part of the law for reasons not reflecting convention but just because they are morally appealing, then a door is opened for the more threatening idea that some principles are part of the law because of their moral appeal, even though they contradict what convention has endorsed.
Conventionalism protects the authority of convention by insisting that conventional practices establish the end as well as the beginning of the past's power over the present.
It insists that the past yields no rights tenable in court, except as these are made uncontroversial by what everyone knows and expects.
If convention is silent there is no law, and the force of that negative claim is exactly that judges should not then pretend that their decisions flow in some other way from what has already been decided.
We should protect convention in that way, according to conventionalism, even if we think judges should sometimes, in dramatic circumstances, flout convention.
Suppose the conventions of American practice make past decisions of the Supreme Court part of the law.
These conventions establish that the Court's decision  in Plessy v. Ferguson should be followed in the future until the Constitution is amended.
If a conventionalist thinks that the Court should have disregarded Plessy in Brown because racial segregation is especially immoral, he will insist that the Court should have made plain to the public the exceptional nature of its decision, that it should have admitted it was changing the law for nonlegal reasons.
The convention list conception of law, which forbids the Court to claim any law beyond convention, would force it to do just that.
Conventionalism's negative claim might also be thought to serve the popular ideal in a different way, though this depends on adding a set of claims about how judges should decide hard cases when convention has run out.
The conventionalist holds, as I just said, that there is no law in cases like McLoughlin, and that a judge must therefore exercise a discretion to make new law, which he then applies retrospectively to the parties to the case.
There is ample room in that account of the situation for the further stipulation that the judge should decide in a way that engages his own political or moral convictions as little as possible and gives as much deference as possible to institutions conventionally authorized to make law.
Once it is made clear that the judge makes new law in these circumstances, as conventionalism insists, then it seems plausible that he should choose the rule he believes the actual legislature then in power would choose, or, failing that, the rule he believes best represents the will of the people as a whole.
Of course that is not as good, from the point of view we are now considering, as finding an actual past decision made by an authorized body.
The judge may be mistaken in his judgment of what the legislature would have chosen, and even if he is right, this hypothetical legislative decision has not been announced in advance, so the ideal of protected expectations has in that way been compromised.
But by hypothesis this is as close to serving the ideal as the judge can come.
Suppose, on the other hand, that he is guided by law as integrity, which does not limit law to what convention  finds in past decisions but directs him also to regard as law what morality would suggest to be the best justification of these past decisions.
This judge decides McLoughlin by employing his own moral convictions, which is just what the popular ideal abhors.
Once he is satisfied that the law as he understands it is for Mrs. McLoughlin, he will feel justified in deciding in her favour, whatever the present legislature thinks and whether or not popular morality agrees.
Conventionalism is a conception — an interpretation — of legal practice and tradition; its fate depends on our ability to see in our practice conventions of the kind that it considers the exclusive grounds of law.
If we cannot find the special legal conventions conventionalism requires, it is defeated in both its interpretive claims and its forward-looking, post-interpretive instructions.
It will not fit our practice well enough to count as an eligible interpretation, and its normative program will be empty, because it instructs us to follow conventions that do not exist.
So we must begin our inspection of this conception by asking how far our legal practice can be understood as exhibiting conventions of the required sort.
Even if we do find such conventions, the appeal of the conception still depends on the political ideal of protected expectations.
We must ask how attractive that ideal really is, how well the conception serves it, and whether it can be served as well or better through other conceptions of law.
LEGAL CONVENTIONS
I begin, however, with the more immediate question whether we have the conventions conventionalism needs.
It does not claim that all lawyers and judges are already conventionalists.
It concedes that some actual judicial decisions and practices are very different from those a conventionalist would make or approve: these it is prepared to count as mistakes.
Nevertheless it insists that legal practice as a whole can be seen as organized around important legal conventions  and this claim requires showing that the behaviour of judges generally, even those who are not conventionalists, converges sufficiently to allow us to find convention in that convergence.
At first sight this project looks promising.
Almost everyone in Britain and the United States who has any acquaintance with law believes that Parliament and Congress and the various state legislatures make law and that past judicial decisions must be given credit in later ones.
Indeed, all this seems self-evident, for these propositions are among the central legal paradigms of our day.
Moreover, for most people the law these institutions make is the law that counts in their lives.
All the legal rules vital to them—the rules fixing taxation, welfare payments, labour relations, credit arrangements, and rent were born and live in particular acts of legislation, and litigation is increasingly a matter of judges finding pertinent sections in some statute or set of administrative regulations and deciding what these mean.
No doubt many fewer laymen are aware of the parallel legal practice of precedent.
But most of them have some vague understanding that past judicial decisions must be respected in the future, and anyone's practical experience with litigation will confirm this sense, for the opinions of judges are stuffed with references to earlier decisions of other judges.
So the crucial interpretive assumption of conventionalism, that our legal practice can sensibly be seen as structured by central and pervasive legal conventions about legislation and precedent, seems to be reflected in ordinary experience.
Now take a closer look.
Assume for the moment that in the United States the Constitution, the statutes enacted by Congress and the legislatures of the several states, and past judicial decisions are, by convention, all grounds of law.
According to conventionalism, an American judge is therefore obliged, by the best interpretation of the practice to which he belongs, to enforce whatever these conventions declare to be law in particular cases, whether he approves of that law or not.
But in order to  do this he must decide in each case what these conventions declare the law to be; in order to do this he must decide what the content of each convention really is.
He must decide, for example, whether it actually follows from the assumed convention of legislation that Elmer has a right to his inheritance because of the statute of wills, or from the putative convention of precedent that Mrs. McLoughlin had a right to compensation because of past judicial decisions.
But we have already noticed that judges and lawyers very often disagree about the correct answer to questions like these.
They have different theories about how statutes and past decisions should be read.
The New York judges who sat in Elmer's case, for example, all agreed that they must not disobey the decision of the legislature reported in the statute of wills.
But they disagreed about what this requirement actually requires when the "literal" meaning of a statute suggests a result that strikes them as odd.
Judicial disagreement of this kind presents an immediate and obvious problem for conventionalism.
It shows that something more must be said about what a convention is, about how much and what kind of agreement is necessary in order that a particular proposition of law can be true in virtue of a particular legal convention.
When philosophers discuss conventions, they usually have in mind very precise and limited ones.
The most important recent book on convention, for instance, discusses conventions about which party should call back when a telephone call is disconnected.
In the imaginary society of Chapter 2, courtesy began as a set of conventions like that.
People obeyed flat rules about who takes off his hat in which circumstances.
But when they began to take an interpretive attitude toward their conventional practices, the situation became much more complicated.
For then they disagreed about what their conventions of courtesy "really" required.
And then their moral and political convictions were engaged, not in contrast to the demands of convention, but just in deciding what these demands were, properly understood.
If the leading legal institutions like legislation and precedent are conventions, they are conventions of this different, more open kind.
Lawyers agree on certain abstract formulations of these conventions they agree that legislation and precedent are, in principle; sources of law.
But they take the interpretive attitude toward these abstract propositions, and their opinions about Elmer's legal rights express an interpretation rather than a direct and uncontroversial application of the institution of legislation.
Two lawyers are likely to differ about the best interpretation of the practices of legislation or precedent in a particular case because their general political and moral convictions differ.
So the distinguishing claim of conventionalism, that law is limited to what has been endorsed by legal conventions, might seem ambiguous.
We can expose the ambiguity by introducing some technical distinctions.
We define the "extension" of an abstract convention, like courtesy or legislation or precedent, as the set of judgments or decisions that people who are parties to the convention are thereby committed to accept.
Now we distinguish between the "explicit" and the "implicit" extensions of a convention.
The explicit extension is the set of propositions which (almost) everyone said to be a party to the convention actually accepts as part of its extension.
The implicit extension is the set of propositions that follow from the best or soundest interpretation of the convention, whether or not these form part of the explicit extension.
Suppose there is a convention in some legal community that judges must give both sides an equal opportunity to state their case.
Everyone agrees that this means both sides must be heard, but it is disputed whether it also means that both sides must have equal time even though the arguments of one side are more complex or require more witnesses than the other.
The explicit extension of the abstract convention then includes the proposition that both sides must be heard, but it does not include either the proposition that they must have equal time or the contrary proposition that the party with the more difficult case must have more time.
Everyone  thinks the implicit extension includes one or the other of these latter propositions, but they disagree which, because they disagree which solution best interprets the abstract goal on which they agree of equality of opportunity in court.
Now we can distinguish what might seem to be two forms or, versions of conventionalism.
The first, which we might call "strict" conventionalism, restricts the law of a community to the explicit extension of its legal conventions like legislation and precedent.
The second, call it "soft" conventionalism, insists that the law of a community includes everything within the implicit extension of these conventions.
(A group of judges who were all soft conventionalists would disagree about the exact content of the law because they would disagree about the content of this implicit extension.)
It makes a great difference which of these two forms of conventionalism we are to consider.
Strict conventionalism would be a very restrictive conception of law for us because the explicit extensions of our putative conventions Of legislation and precedent contain very little that has much practical importance in actual litigation.
If we tried to describe a theory of legislation sufficiently uncontroversial to command close to universal assent among our lawyers and judges, we would be limited to something like this: if the words of a statute admit of only one meaning, no matter in what context they are uttered, and if we have no reason to doubt that this is the meaning understood by all the legislators who voted for or against the statute or abstained, and the statute so understood achieves no results not intended by all those who voted for it and would be so understood by all the members of the public to whom it is addressed, and could not be thought by any sensible person To violate any of the substantive or procedural constraints of the Constitution, or otherwise offend any widely held view about fairness or efficiency in legislation, then the propositions contained in that statute, understood in that way, are part of the community's law.
TWO KINDS OF CONVENTIONALISM
That seems a comically weak claim.
But Elmer's case and the snail darter case show that we could not report a much more robust explicit extension for the convention of legislation.
We could not claim, as part of the explicit extension, that if the words of a statute are clear in themselves the law contains that clear meaning, for example.That proposition has much support among lawyers, and even more among laymen, but our sample cases show that it does not command anything like universal assent among judges in the United States.
Nor does the contrary proposition, that the law does not contain the clear meaning if the legislators did not intend it and would have rejected it if it had been brought to their attention.
If conventionalism is strict conventionalism, then, its positive claim offers no help to judges faced with problematical lawsuits.
For strict conventionalism gives only the negative advice that judges must not pretend to be deciding such cases on legal grounds.
This explains the attraction soft conventionalism has had for a recent generation of legal philosophers.
The positive part of soft conventionalism instructs judges to decide according to their own interpretation of the concrete requirements of legislation and precedent, even though this may be controversial, and this advice is not irrelevant in hard cases.
It would be easy to demonstrate, moreover, that all our judges, including those who decided our sample cases, have really been following that advice all along.
All those judges agreed on the abstract propositions that statutes make law and that precedent decisions must be allowed some influence over later decisions.
They disagreed about the implicit extension of these supposed legal conventions.
The majority in the snail darter case thought that the best interpretation of the convention about statutes required  them to enforce the literal meaning of the Environmental Protection Act unless it could be proved that Congress intended otherwise.
So they thought the implicit extension of the convention included the proposition that the TVA dam must be halted and the snail darter saved.
The minority took a different view of the convention, and their conclusions about the implicit extension were correspondingly different.
They thought it included the contrary proposition that the law did not protect the fish.
Since the disagreement was only about the implicit extension of conventions they all recognized at a more abstract level, they could all be said to be soft conventionalists.
Strict conventionalism must claim a "gap" in the law, which calls for the exercise of extralegal judicial discretion to make new law, whenever a statute is vague or ambiguous or otherwise troublesome and there is no further convention settling how it must be read.
Or when the dimensions of a string of precedents are uncertain and lawyers disagree about their force.
A soft conventionalist need not concede any gap in such cases, however.
He can argue plausibly that there is a correct, if controversial, way to interpret the abstract conventions of legislation and precedent so that they decide any case that might arise.
He can say that according to the correct elaboration the snail darter is saved (or abandoned) by the law or that Mrs. McLoughlin is compensated (or denied compensation).
He then claims these propositions for the implicit extension of legal conventions; that is, he claims them for law on his conception and so denies any gap in the law.
Indeed, a soft conventionalist would be able to deny that there were gaps even if lawyers disagreed about these abstract conventions, even if many lawyers denied that statutes make law or that precedents exert some influence over later decisions.
With a little imagination the soft conventionalist could draft some even more abstract proposition everyone does accept, which he might then elaborate in such a way as to validate a proposition of law about snail darters.
If there is  a consensus that the Constitution is the fundamental law, for example, he might argue that this consensus provides an abstract convention whose implicit extension includes the proposition that statutes must be enforced because the best interpretation of the Constitution requires this, even though many lawyers deny it.
He could then proceed as before to argue from that intermediate proposition to some concrete conclusion about snail darters.
Suppose there is not even consensus that the Constitution is fundamental law.
The soft conventionalist could search for a more abstract consensus yet.
Suppose, for example, that the suggestion I made in Chapter 3 is sound: that there is widespread if tacit agreement that the ultimate point of law is to license and justify state coercion of individuals and groups.
The soft conventionalist could find in that exceedingly abstract consensus a convention that judges must follow whatever conception of law best justifies coercion, and he could then argue, via the route of declaring some conception best on that standard, that this abstract convention actually includes, within its implicit extension, the proposition that precedent cases must be followed when there is no difference in moral principle between the facts presented in the precedents and those in the present case.
He then announces, only somewhat out of breath, that the law guarantees compensation to Mrs. McLoughlin, whatever anyone else might think.
Other lawyers and judges who were equally soft conventionalists would disagree.
They would have a different view about which more concrete conception provided the best justification of coercion, and so would have a different view of the implicit extension of the abstract convention in question.
I hope it is now apparent that soft conventionalism is not really a form of conventionalism at all in the spirit of the tripartite distinction among conceptions we are now using.
My initial descriptions of conventionalism, in the last chapter and earlier in this one, did not fit it, as we can now see; they fit only strict conventionalism.
It is, rather, a very abstract, underdeveloped form of law as integrity.
It rejects the divorce between law and politics that a conventionalist theory with the motives I described tries to secure.
A so-called soft-conventionalist judge is not barred by this spurious brand of conventionalism from engaging his own controversial moral and political convictions in his decision.
On the contrary, it is precisely these conviction — about the best techniques for reading a statute, about the proper place of statutes in a constitutional structure, about the connection between a constitution and the idea of law, about the soundest conception of justice — that will determine for him which elaboration of abstract convention is best and therefore what the law requires.
Nothing in soft conventionalism guarantees, or even promotes, the ideal of protected expectations, that past decisions will be relied on to justify collective force only so far as their authority and their terms are made uncontroversial by widely accepted conventions.
Nor does it protect that ideal in the further ways I described, by identifying as special those cases in which there is no explicit past decision to follow.
For under soft conventionalism our sample cases are all cases governed by law, and soft conventionalist judges deciding these cases would have no reason to defer to their beliefs about what the present legislature would do or what the will of the people is.
On the contrary, they would have the normal reason for disregarding any belief or information on that score: that the law is the law and must be followed, no matter how unpopular it might be in the present climate of political opinion.
If conventionalism is to provide a distinct and muscular conception of law, therefore, with even remote connections to the family of popular attitudes we took it to express, then it must be strict, not soft, conventionalism.
We must accept that the positive part of conventionalism — that judges must respect the explicit extension of legal conventions — cannot offer any useful advice to judges in hard cases.
These will inevitably be cases in which the explicit extension of the various  legal conventions contains nothing decisive either way, and the judge therefore must exercise his discretion by employing extralegal standards.
But it may now be said that, so far from being a depressing conclusion, this states precisely the practical importance of conventionalism for adjudication.
On this account the positive part of that conception is the huge mass of the iceberg that lies beneath the surface of legal practice.
This explains why cases do not come to court when the conditions of my comically weak description of the explicit extension of our legal conventions are met, which is most of the time.
In hard cases, on the other hand, the negative part holds the stage.
It tells judges that when statutes are disputed and precedents are of uncertain impact, they should set aside any idea that their decision can rest on rights already established through past political acts.
They should face up to their fresh legislative responsibilities candidly.
In any case it is the strict version of conventionalism that we must test as a general interpretation of our legal practice.
Strict conventionalism claims that judges are liberated from legislation and precedent in hard cases because the explicit extension of these legal conventions is not sufficiently dense to decide those cases.
We must ask how well this interpretive claim fits our sample cases.
But we should at least notice how the new emphasis on the negative part of conventionalism deflates the hypothesis I mentioned earlier, that the negative part supports the political ideal of protected expectations by marking off cases in which that ideal cannot be satisfied.
As the positive part of conventionalism shrinks in practical importance in court, because there are so few occasions for judges to rely on law as conventionalism construes this, so this particular defense of the negative part becomes weaker, for the exceptions steadily eat up the rule.
If all the cases that attract attention, because they are argued in important appellate courts before public scrutiny, are occasions on which judges are scrupulous in denying that they are serving the goal of protected expectations through their decisions, this  can hardly do much to reinforce the public's faith in that ideal.
I come at last to the case against conventionalism.
Strict conventionalism fails as an interpretation of our legal practice even when especially when — we emphasize its negative part.
It fails for the following paradoxical reason: our judges actually pay more attention to so-called conventional sources of law like statutes and precedents than conventionalism allows them to do.
A self-consciously strict conventionalist judge would lose interest in legislation and precedent at just the point when it became clear that the explicit extension of these supposed conventions had run out.
He would then acknowledge that there was no law, and he would have no further concern for consistency with the past; he would proceed to make new law by asking what law the present legislature would make or what the people want or what would be in the community's best interests for the future.
DOES CONVENTIONALISM FIT OUR PRACTICE?
Convention and Consistency
If the judges in Elmer's case had been strict conventionalists they would have decided that case in two stages.
They would first have inspected judicial practice to see whether almost all other judges were agreed either that the words of a statute must be given their "literal" meaning, even when that was not what the legislators intended, or the opposite, that the words must not be given their literal meaning in these circumstances.
The judges in that case would have answered that question quickly in the negative, for obviously other judges were not all agreed in either direction.
Neither Earl nor Gray could have thought that his view was part of the explicit extension of the convention of legislation because each knew that many lawyers thought the other was right.
So they would immediately have turned to the second, legislative stage: they would have tried to discover which decision was more sensible or just or democratic or would otherwise better serve the community.
They would not have pressed on with the kind of arguments they actually did use, probing the statute, obsessed with the question whether one decision was more consistent with its text, or spirit, or the right relation between it and the rest of law.
These latter arguments, fixed in different ways on the question of how the statute should be read, make sense only on the assumption that the law judges have an obligation to enforce depends on the "correct" reading even when it is controversial what that is; this is exactly the assumption conventionalism denies.
Nor is Elmer's case unusual in providing this kind of counterexample.
In the snail darter case the justices of the Supreme Court argued about the proper way to read the Environmental Protection Act.
They disagreed whether they were obligated by the correct theory of legislation to enforce the most literal or the most sensible reading of the statute in the absence of any reliable evidence about what Congress actually intended.
The judges who decided McLoughlin worried about the most accurate description of the principles underlying the precedent cases cited to them, although they knew that nothing in the explicit extension of any convention settled what these principles were or what weight they should be given.
In Brown the Supreme Court argued about which scheme of justice was presupposed by the structure of the Constitution, about the place of the equal protection clause in that scheme, about the true impact of that clause on the legal power of Kansas to legislate a school system, even though each justice knew that none of this was settled by convention.
I do not mean that a self-conscious conventionalist would ignore statutes and precedents altogether once it was controversial what force these should be given.
He would not treat them as sources of law past that point, but his general responsibility when he believes that law has run out is to make the best new law he can for the future, and he might be concerned  with past legal doctrine for special reasons bearing on that issue.
If he believes he should make new law democratically, in the spirit of the present legislature or the present climate of popular opinion, he might turn to past decisions as evidence of what the legislature or public is likely to think or want, for example.
But he would then be treating the past as evidence of present attitudes and convictions, not as important for its own sake, and he would lose interest in the past as it aged and was therefore of less evidential value.
He would very probably find better evidence of present attitudes in his own political experience or in the popular press than in even fairly recent statutes enacted by a legislature most of whose members are now gone.
Nor would his evidentiary interest require him to examine past doctrine, trying to chart its place in the law as a whole, in the obsessive way judges do.
If it is a nice and finely balanced question whether the statute of wills is more consistent with traditional principles of law if it is interpreted to forbid murderers to inherit, then wrestling with that question is hardly a sensible way of deciding what most people would now favour.
If it is a matter of delicate legal analysis what the best interpretation of the precedents cited in McLoughlin would require in that case, then any answer provides very weak evidence about which decision would be most popular or most beneficial for the future.
It may now be said, however, that a self-conscious conventionalist would indeed ponder over past doctrine in the way actual judges do, not for evidence of popular opinion but more directly, because any lawmaker must take care to make new law consistent with old.
The search for consistency, on this account, can explain why judges are so concerned with the past, with the various statutes and precedents lying in the neighbourhood of the new law they create in hard cases.
There is a point in this suggestion, but we cannot see it unless we are careful to distinguish between two kinds of consistency a lawmaker might seek: consistency in strategy and consistency in principle.
Anyone who makes  law must worry about consistency in strategy.
He must be careful that the new rules he lays down fit well enough with rules established by others or likely to be established in the future that the total set of rules will work together and make the situation better rather than pulling in opposite directions and making it worse.
A conventionalist judge exercising his discretion to make new law must pay particular attention to this danger because his power to change existing law is very limited.
Suppose that before he looks to the legal record he thinks it would be best to decide for the defendant in McLoughlin because it would be cheaper for the community as a whole if prospective victims insure against emotional injury than if drivers insure against causing it.
But when he discovers from his review of the precedents that mothers already have a legal right to compensation for emotional injury suffered on a direct view of the accident, and therefore that drivers must already insure against causing emotional damage in those circumstances, the question of insurance costs becomes more complex.
He must now ask whether, given that drivers must insure anyway, it would be more or less expensive to force potential victims to insure against emotional injury in the very special circumstances of Mrs. McLoughlin's case, and he might well decide that splitting the risk in this particular way would be so inefficient as to offset the gains from assigning this part of the risk to the victims.
We have, in this simple example, a paradigm case of a legislative judgment dominated by consistency in strategy.
But consistency in strategy would not require a judge to probe the past to discover the "best" interpretation of a statute or the Constitution when this is controversial or the "correct" account of a past judicial decision when lawyers disagree how it should be read.
For a statute or a past decision poses problems of consistency in strategy only when it has assigned people legal rights that a judge forming a new rule is for some reason powerless to change, rights that would work badly with the new rights he wants to create.
The conventionalist  judge we just imagined, who worries whether deciding against Mrs. McLoughlin would be efficient in virtue of the precedents that mothers may recover for emotional injury sustained at the scene, has no need to look for any larger underlying principle "embedded" in these precedents or to defend one controversial view about the content of these principles.
His interest in the precedents is exhausted, for this purpose at least, once he is satisfied that according to his conception of law they establish only that mothers at the scene have a right to recover, and this is clear immediately and with no reflection about larger underlying principles whose nature is a matter of dispute.
Consistency in principle is a different matter.
It requires that the various standards governing the state's use of coercion against its citizens be consistent in the sense that they express a single and comprehensive vision of justice.
A judge who aimed at consistency in principle would indeed worry, as the judges in our sample cases did, about the principles that should be understood to justify past statutes and precedents.
If he were tempted to decide against Mrs. McLoughlin, he would indeed ask himself whether any principled distinction could be drawn between her case and the case of mothers who recover for emotional damage suffered at the scene.
If he were inclined to decide against Elmer, he would worry whether this decision is consistent with the position statutes occupy in our general scheme of jurisprudence, as he understands this.
But conventionalism differs from law as integrity precisely because the former rejects consistency in principle as a source of legal rights.
The latter accepts it: law as integrity supposes that people have legal right — rights that follow from past decisions of political institutions and therefore license coercion — that go beyond the explicit extension of political practices conceived as conventions.
Law as integrity supposes that people are entitled to a coherent and principled extension of past political decisions even when judges profoundly disagree about what this means.
Conventionalism  denies this: a conventionalist judge has no reason for acknowledging consistency in principle as a judicial virtue or for dissecting ambiguous statutes or inexact precedents to try to achieve it.
Of course, if conventionalism were just the semantic theory that the phrase "legal rights" should not be used to describe rights people have in virtue of consistency in principle, then a conventionalist judge could indeed take a lively interest in that form of consistency under a different description.
He could say that when explicit convention runs out, people have a moral right to what law as integrity claims as their legal rights.
Then he would decide difficult lawsuits exactly as his integrity-minded brethren do.
But we are studying substantive interpretations of legal practice, not semantic theories, and our present interest in conventionalism lies in its negative claim that convention exhausts the intrinsic normative power of past decisions.
Conventionalism is a theory about people's legal rights in the sense we identified as crucial for jurisprudence, not a proposal about how "legal" should be used.
Anyone who thinks that consistency in principle, and not merely in strategy, must be at the heart of adjudication, has rejected conventionalism, whether he realizes he has or not.
So the very feature of our own legal practice that seemed to make conventionalism a good interpretation of legal practice — the deep, constant concern judges and lawyers show about the "correct" reading of statutes and precedents in hard cases actually an embarrassment to that conception.
It provides a near-fatal argument against conventionalism as even a decent interpretation of our practice.
But I shall offer another line of argument against conventionalism, because exposing each flaw in that conception helps point our way to a more successful one.
The argument just concluded studied legal reasoning in cross-section, the details of  controversy case by case.
I have not yet challenged the assumption with which conventionalism begins: that whatever consensus lawyers have achieved about legislation and precedent is properly seen as a matter of convention.
Is it?
That question asks us to change our focus and consider our legal practice not in cross-section but over some stretch of time.
Convention and Consensus
Assume that almost every lawyer and judge in Britain accepts that if a statute is duly enacted by Parliament with royal assent, and there can be no real doubt about what the language of the statute means, then the law is what the statute plainly says it is.
They all think this "goes without saying," and they count it among their paradigms of legal argument.
This assumed consensus has two possible explanations, however.
Perhaps lawyers and judges accept that proposition as true by convention, which means true just because everyone else accepts it, the way chess players all accept that a king can move only one square at a time.
Or perhaps lawyers and judges all accept the proposition as obviously true though not true by convention: perhaps the consensus is a consensus of independent conviction, the way we all accept that it is wrong to torture babies or to convict people we know are innocent.
The difference is this.
If lawyers think a particular proposition about legislation is true by convention, they will not think they need any substantive reason for accepting it.
So any substantive attack on the proposition will be out of order within the context of adjudication, just as an attack on the wisdom of the rules of chess is out of order within a game.
But if the consensus is one of conviction, then dissent, however surprising, will not be out of order in the same way, because everyone will recognize that an attack on the substantive case for the proposition is an attack on the proposition itself.
The consensus will last only so long as most lawyers accept the convictions that support it.
Which explanation provides the better description of how lawyers and judges treat propositions about legislation that "go without saying" ?
We are unlikely to find much evidence  one way or the other just by reading judicial opinions at random, for judges are unlikely to explain why they believe what everyone believes.
We must look to the pattern of judicial decisions over time.
If we compare settled styles of legislative interpretation or doctrines of precedent in periods separated by, say, fifty years or more, we find considerable and sometimes dramatic change.
Judicial attitudes in both Britain and America have changed sharply over the last two centuries about the issue common to Elmer's case and the snail darter case: how far and in what way legislative intention is relevant in reading statutes.
How shall we explain such a sea change in the dominant theory of legislation?
The facts are plain enough.
Practice changed in response to arguments made in the context of adjudication, as arguments about what judges should do in particular cases, not in special miniconstitutional conventions.
The successful arguments were drawn from more general movements in the political and social culture and so formed a part of intellectual as well as legal history.
But they did have a distinct legal life.
They appeared in law school classrooms and law review articles, then as lawyers' arguments in particular cases at law, then as judicial arguments in dissenting opinions explaining why the majority opinion, reflecting the orthodoxy of the time, was unsatisfactory, then as the opinions of the majority in a growing number of cases, and then as propositions no longer mentioned because they went without saying.
All these arguments assumed, throughout their long careers, that the settled practices they challenged were orthodoxies of common conviction, not ground rules of convention.
Such arguments would have been powerless, even silly, if everyone thought that the practices they challenged needed no support beyond convention or that these practices constituted the game of law in the way the rules of chess constitute that game.
Of course, the rules of games do change over time.
But when these rules have become accepted as a matter of convention, then a crisp distinction has necessarily taken hold  between arguments about and arguments within the rules.
If a world chess congress were convened to reconsider the rules for future tournaments, arguments would be made in that congress that would clearly be out of order within a game of chess.
And vice versa.
Perhaps chess would be more exciting and interesting if the rules were changed to allow the king to move two spaces once a game.
But no one who thought so would treat the suggestion as an argument that the king can now, as the rules stand, move two steps once a game.
Lawyers, on the other hand, often call for changing even settled practice in midgame.
Some of the earliest arguments that legislative intentions count were made to judges in the course of lawsuits.
Important changes in the doctrine of precedent were also made in midgame: judges were persuaded or persuaded themselves that they were not in fact bound by court decisions their predecessors had taken as binding.
Or what comes to the same thing judges changed their minds about what aspects or features of past decisions they were required to follow.
Once again these changes, though dramatic over time, were changes within judicial practice, in response to shifting assumptions about the point of precedent and of judicial decision more generally.
They were not the result of special agreements to have a new set of conventions.
This argument does not prove that absolutely nothing is settled among American or British lawyers as a matter of genuine convention.
Perhaps no political argument could persuade American judges to reject the proposition that Congress must be elected in the manner prescribed by the Constitution, as amended from time to time in accordance with its own amending provisions.
Perhaps all judges do accept the authority of the Constitution as a matter of convention rather than as the upshot of sound political theory.
But we can safely draw two conclusions from our discussion.
First, nothing need be settled as a matter of convention in order for a legal system not only to exist but to flourish.
The interpretive attitude needs paradigms to function effectively, but these need not be matters of convention.
It will be sufficient if the level of agreement in conviction is high enough at any given time to allow debate over fundamental practices like legislation and precedent to proceed in the way I described in Chapter 2, contesting discrete paradigms one by one, like the reconstruction of Neurath's boat one plank at a time at sea.
Second, so many features of our own constitutional practices are debated one at a time in just this way, that it is implausible to claim conventionalism as a good interpretation of the process by which our legal culture shifts and develops over time.
Conventionalism fails here as it fails in cross-section, in explaining how particular hard cases like our samples are debated and decided.
Our judges treat the techniques they use for interpreting statutes and measuring precedents—even those no one challenges—not simply as tools handed down by the traditions of their ancient craft but as principles they assume can be justified in some deeper political theory, and when they come to doubt this, for what-ever reason, they construct theories that seem to them better.
A conception of law is a general, abstract interpretation of legal practice as a whole.
It offers to show that practice in its best light, to deploy some argument why law on that conception provides an adequate justification for coercion.
We have so far been concerned wholly with one dimension on which any general interpretation of that sort must be tested.
It must fit our practice, and we have discovered important reasons for believing that conventionalism does not.
What about the other dimension?
If, contrary to my argument, conventionalism did fit our legal practices, would it provide a sound or even decent justification of them?
I described, early in this chapter, an argument that it would.
This argument appealed to what I called the ideal of protected expectation, that collective force should be used only in accordance  with standards chosen and read through procedures the community as a whole knows will be used for that purpose, procedures so widely acknowledged that they are matters of general social or professional convention.
We must now ask whether that ideal is sound, and how far it actually supports conventionalism.
DOES CONVENTIONALISM JUSTIFY OUR PRACTICE?
We must clear away one possible source of confusion.
It might be thought that the ideal of protected expectation is a distinctly democratic ideal, because it proposes that coercion be used only when authorized by procedures to which the people have consented.
This appeal to democracy, however, confuses two issues: Should the people have the final say, through democratically elected institutions, about how judges decide cases?
Which theory about how judges should decide cases should the people choose or approve?
In both the United States and Britain, and elsewhere in democratic countries, the people have residual power to alter whatever judicial practice is in place.
They can elect legislators who have the power to impose their will on judges through one means or another.
We are asking now for answers to the second question.
Can we find some reason why these legislators should choose a conventionalist system of adjudication?
Fairness and Surprise
Someone might say: "The conventionalist system is best because fairness requires that people be put on notice when their plans may be interrupted by the intervention of state power, depriving them of liberty or property or opportunity.
Intervention of that kind is justified only when the occasions of intervention have been announced in advance so that anyone who is listening will hear and understand.
Conventions must therefore be established and followed strictly, about the manner in which such instructions are to be given and their content fixed, so that it cannot be a matter of dispute what these instructions are.
Of course, no matter how explicit these conventional procedures are or how scrupulously  they are used, some cases will arise, as the sample cases showed, when the instructions will be seen to be unclear or incomplete.
In such cases judges will cause some surprise no matter what decision they reach, so the idea of law, which counsels against surprise, is no longer pertinent.
Then the judge must do his best for the community as a whole, frankly and honestly, not pretending to "discover" some law beneath the surface of statutes or precedents that only he can see.
For the pretence hides the fact that in this case the point of law has not been served but unavoidably deserved.
If we pretend there can be law when it is not clear what the law is, we will lose sight of the intimate connection between law and fair warning, and our politics will be less just in the future.
Only a system candidly committed to conventionalism, which admits no law beyond convention, can provide the protection we need."
This argument assumes that reducing surprise is a valuable and important goal of political morality.
Is that true?
Surprise occurs when people's predictions are defeated, but this is not in general unfair, even when the defeated predictions are reasonable, that is, well supported by the antecedent balance of probabilities.
It is not unfair when my horse loses, even if I was confident, with good reason, that it would win.
Surprise is, of course, unfair in one special circumstance: when a prediction has been specifically encouraged by those who deliberately defeat it.
If conventionalism were so single-mindedly practised in a particular jurisdiction and so often announced and confirmed by public institutions that people were thereby entitled to rely on that style of adjudication, of course it would be unfair for some judge suddenly to abandon it.
But that is not true for us, as the argument up to now has established.
We are considering arguments that try to justify conventionalism on political grounds, arguments that would hold, for example, for people deciding whether to institute conventionalism on a clean slate.
The suggestion that conventionalism reduces surprise must assume, then, not that surprise is unfair but that it is  undesirable for some other reason: that it is inefficient, for example, or imposes unnecessary risks, or frightens people, or is otherwise not in the general interest.
But conventionalism cannot be justified on the sole ground that surprise is inefficient or undesirable in these ways, because conventionalism does not protect against surprise as well as a simpler and more straightforward theory of adjudication would.
We have already noticed the sense in which conventionalism is bilateral: it insists that if no decision of some case can be found within the explicit extension of a legal convention one way or the other, the judge is obliged to make new law as best he can.
No convention decides either that Mrs. McLoughlin has a right to compensation for her emotional injury or that Mr. O'Brian has a right not to be made to pay it.
So neither one has a right to a decision in his or her favour, and the judge must decide the case according to whichever rule he thinks best for the future, all things considered.
But if he decides for Mrs. McLoughlin, then he has intervened in Mr. O'Brian's life even though the latter was not warned that this would happen.
The political argument for conventionalism I set out a moment ago supposes that this kind of situation is inevitable, that no theory of adjudication can prevent it.
It defends conventionalism as protecting people from surprise as much as possible.
But if we had that aim in mind exclusively, we would choose a different theory of adjudication, which we might call "unilateral conventionalism" or just "unilateralism." 
Roughly, unilateralism provides that the plaintiff must win if he or she has a right to win established in the explicit extension of some legal convention, but that otherwise the defendant must win.
It insists that the status quo be preserved in court unless some rule within the explicit extension of a legal convention requires otherwise.
So unilateralism says Mr. O'Brian must not be made to pay damages for the emotional injury he caused Mrs. McLoughlin even though the judge thinks the opposite rule would be better for the future.
In one department, criminal law, Anglo-American practice is very close to unilateralism.
We believe that no one should be found guilty of a crime unless the statute or other piece of legislation establishing that crime is so clear that he must have known his act was criminal, or would have known if he had made any serious attempt to discover whether it was.
In the United States this principle has the status of a constitutional principle, and the Supreme Court has on many occasions overturned criminal convictions because the supposed crime was too vaguely defined to give the necessary notice.
But our legal practice is not unilateralist in this way over the broad reaches of the private law that we have mostly been discussing in this book-judges very often decide for the plaintiff, as they did in McLoughlin, when according to conventionalism the plaintiff had no legal right to win.
Our practice would be very different if it were generally unilateralist.
Many fewer lawsuits would be started because a plaintiff would sue only if he had a clear right to win, in which case the prospective defendant would never defend but would pay instead.
People might still sue when the facts were in dispute, because each party might hope to convince the judge or jury that his view of the facts was historically correct.
But no cases would be started in the hope of convincing a judge to "extend" an uncontroversial rule in a controversial way, and (what is even more important) no one would ever adjust his conduct in anticipation that a court might extend a rule if for some reason his affairs were brought before it.
So unilateralism is not even a remotely eligible interpretation of our legal conduct and practice.
Strict conventionalism seems more eligible than unilateralism precisely because it is bilateral.
It does not stipulate that the defendant has a right to win a lawsuit whenever and just because the plaintiff does not: it insists that neither side may have a right to win.
But that very fact requires a conventionalist to find a more complex political justification than the one I just described.
He must argue not merely that  surprise is inefficient and undesirable but that in some circumstances surprise must nevertheless be accepted because of some other, then more important, principle or policy.
He must show that the bilateral structure of conventionalism effectively distinguishes between different circumstances: those in which surprise should be avoided and those in which it must, for these competing reasons, be tolerated.
Some legal philosophers offer an argument attempting exactly that.
They try to explain why surprise is generally undesirable and also when it should nevertheless be accepted.
I shall present this argument in what I think is its most persuasive form.
"The point of conventionalism is not just to protect litigants against surprise, but instead the more complex goal, which includes this one, of achieving the social benefits of coordinated private and commercial activity.
People need rules in order to live and work together efficiently, and they need to be protected when they rely on those rules.
But encouraging and rewarding reliance are not always of decisive importance; it is sometimes better to leave some matter unregulated by convention in order to allow the play of independent judgment both by judges and by the public in anticipation of what judges might do.
This balance between reliance and flexibility is made possible by the bilateral framework of conventionalism.
Convention establishes certain procedures so that when clear rules are adopted according to these procedures, people can rely on state intervention in their behalf; they can also rely on the state not to intervene at the behest of other citizens except as these rules stipulate and can plan and coordinate their affairs accordingly.
But when these procedures have left gaps, people know they have no right to rely on anything, except that if their activities do provoke litigation judges will decide their fate by constructing what is, in the judges' opinion at least, the best rule for the future."
Convention and Coordination
This account of the virtues of conventionalism falls in neatly with the difference I described earlier between agreement by convention and agreement in conviction, and also with recent philosophical explanations of what a convention is.
A convention exists when people follow certain rules or maxims for reasons that essentially include their expectation that others will follow the same rules or maxims, and they will follow rules for that reason when they believe that on balance having some settled rule is more important than having any particular rule.
The convention that when a telephone call is disconnected the person who made the call will call back and the other party will wait follows that model exactly.
So do the conventions that make up rules of the road.
Our reason for driving on the right in America and on the left in Britain is just our expectation that this is what others will do, coupled with our further belief that it is more important that there be a common rule than that it be one rather than the other.
In the rules-of-the-road case we have no reason to think that either rule is better.
But even if we did have some such reason — even if we thought it slightly more natural for right-handed people, who form the majority, to drive on the right —our reasons for wanting everyone to drive on the same side would still be much stronger.
In the contrasting situation, when there is no convention but only agreement in conviction, everyone follows the same rule but principally because he thinks it independently the best rule to follow.
We all think it wrong to inflict pain gratuitously, but our reason for obeying this principle is not that others do.
It may be that if others did not follow the rule we think best we would have, in that fact, a reason not to follow it ourselves.
Perhaps if no one else thought it wrong to kill or steal we would be ill-advised to act on our present scruples.
But that would be a case of our having a competing or countervailing reason that conflicted with our main positive reason for not killing or stealing.
In the present circumstances, when most people have the same beliefs about  killing we do, that fact is not our dominant reason for acting as we think we should.
Our new argument for the political virtues of conventionalism uses these distinctions to show why the line this theory draws between cases decided by law and cases calling for judicial legislation strikes the right balance between predictability and flexibility.
"It is very often the case that agreement in the rules of private law is more important than what rules these are, at least within broad limits.
It is desirable to have conventional procedures like legislation and precedent so that people may rely on whatever decisions are actually reached through these procedures.
It might be very important, for example, that it be settled, and settled decisively, whether and when careless drivers are liable for emotional injury to people other than their immediate victims.
Insurers can then fix premiums intelligently, and people can make intelligent decisions about what kind and how much insurance to buy and what risks to run.
That does not mean it makes no difference to social welfare which rules we settle upon.
Rules of liability are not like rules of the road.
It might be more or less efficient or more or less fair to assign liability to one party or the other, and this is why it is important that the legislature or the courts, whichever first have occasion to set the rule, make the right substantive decision.
But once some set of rules has been established in this way, we might well think it more important that these rules be publicly regarded as settled, so that people can plan accordingly, than that they be the best rules that could have been found; this provides a reason why courts should leave the rule untouched even when they think the wrong choice was made in the first instance."
Now suppose a unilateralist were to object that since coordination is so important in this area, convention should be allowed to occupy the whole area in the way he recommends.
We should take it as settled that drivers are liable only for such damage as has been explicitly stipulated in clear statutes, so that drivers and potential victims can insure  and otherwise plan their affairs accordingly.
The conventionalist now has a convincing defense of his bilateralism against this objection.
"Since it matters to some extent (and perhaps a good deal) which rule is chosen, we do best to use convention only to protect decisions that some responsible political institution has actually taken on the merits and to not include under that umbrella decisions by default, that is decisions no one has actually made.
If a decision has been taken about liability for emotional injury one way or the other, and there can be no controversy what decision that is, then everyone should have a right that that decision be enforced until it is publicly disavowed in the same way.
But if no decision has been taken either way, then the court should be free to decide on the merits, making the best decision for the future, though of course taking into account strategic consistency."
The defense of conventionalism we have now constructed has two parts: first, that wise adjudication consists in finding the right balance between predictability and flexibility and, second, that the right balance is secured by judges always respecting past explicit decisions of political institutions but not enforcing decisions by default in the way unilateralism does.
The second part seems more vulnerable than the first.
Who does that rather rigid policy secure the right balance, rather than a more sophisticated policy that could be sensitive to the competing merits of predictability and flexibility case by case?
The second general conception of law I introduced in the last chapter, legal pragmatism, holds that people are never entitled to anything but the judicial decision that is, all things considered, best for the community as a whole, without regard to any past political decision.
They have no right, that is, that the collective power of the state be used for them or not be used against them just in virtue of what a legislature or another court has decided in the past.
Conventionalism and Pragmatism
We shall shortly see that pragmatism is less radical than this description makes it seem, for it recognizes reasons of strategy why statutes should generally be enforced in accordance with their plain and intended meaning and why past judicial decisions should normally be respected in present cases.
Otherwise government would lose its power to control people's behaviour, and this would obviously make the community as a whole worse off.
But these are only reasons of strategy, and a pragmatist believes judges should always be ready to override such reasons when he thinks that changing rules laid down in the past would be in the general interest overall, notwithstanding some limited damage to the authority of political institutions.
A society frankly committed to legal pragmatism would be different from a self-consciously conventionalist society.
Suppose Mrs. McLoughlin had been at the scene of the accident; according to conventionalism she would have a legal right to recover in virtue of past decisions.
A pragmatist judge might possibly decide, in such a case, to overrule these past decisions.
He must be sensitive to considerations of strategy, which will include a concern for the virtues of coordination.
So even if he believed that from an economic point of view the best decision would be to deny any recovery for emotional injury, he would still ask whether the role of law in encouraging reliance and coordination would be much damaged if he ignored the precedents, and, if it would, whether this loss would be made up in the gains he foresees from the change.
But he might conclude that the damage to law's role would be small and the economic gains great, and so decide to award no damages.
The practical difference between the two theories of adjudication is therefore this: in a conventionalist regime judges would not think themselves free to change rules adopted pursuant to the reigning legal conventions just because on balance a different rule would be more just or efficient.
In a pragmatist regime no conventions of that sort would be recognized, and though judges would normally enforce decisions  made by other political institutions in the past, they would recognize no general duty to do so.
In a conventionalist society someone planning his affairs would be able to count on past decisions endorsed by convention.
But in a pragmatist society he would have to predict whether the judges would be likely to consider his case as one in which the virtues of predictability were less important than the substance of the law, and whether, if they thought substance more important, they would think a decision for him better or worse for the community.
Pragmatism makes it somewhat harder to predict what courts will do in what, from the point of view of conventionalism, are easy cases.
But pragmatism has corresponding advantages.
It leaves judges free to change rules when they think changing them would at least marginally outweigh whatever mischief would be caused by the change.
It also encourages the community to anticipate such changes and so achieves a good part of the benefit of change without the waste of litigation, or the expensive, uncertain, and awkward process of legislation.
Which of these two different regimes—conventionalism or pragmatism—seems likely to produce the better balance between predictability and flexibility, and therefore the most efficient structure for coordinating citizens' actions in the long run?
We have no reason to think one or the other would be best for all communities at all times.
Too much will depend on details of economic development, patterns of commerce, technology, ideology, kinds and levels of social conflict, and the rest.
Of course, these features of a society will themselves be influenced by its dominant style of adjudication.
But this makes it all the more unreasonable to suppose that any a priori argument could show that one strategy will always be the right one.
We have, just in this fact, an argument that if we had to choose one of the two strategies for the indefinite future we would do better to choose pragmatism, because it is so much more adaptive.
If the economic and social structure of our community develops in such a way that in retrospect it seems a conventionalist  strategy would have been more suitable, then pragmatism will already have brought the reigning pattern of adjudication very close to conventionalism.
For both judges and ordinary people will have come to see that the area that should be dominated by predictability is very large, and citizens will make their plans assuming that judges take that view and so will not often reverse settled legal practice.
But the reverse is not true.
The conventionalist system lacks the capacity to reach anything like the flexibility of pragmatism, because any relaxation would inevitably involve the defeat of publicly encouraged expectation.
I do not mean to endorse pragmatism.
Its merits and faults are the subject of the next chapter.
I mean only to provide the following answer to the argument from coordination as an argument for conventionalism.
If we are tempted to choose conventionalism on the ground that it provides an acceptable strategy for reaching the most efficient balance between certainty and flexibility, then we should choose pragmatism, which seems a far better strategy, instead.
We can summarize.
In the earlier part of this chapter I argued that conventionalism fits our legal practices badly.
I asked whether that conception would justify these practices, by providing an attractive picture of law's point, if it fit well.
We have now seen that it would not, that we have no reason to strain to make it fit.
The failure of conventionalism as an interpretation of our law is complete: it fails on both dimensions of interpretation.
Pragmatism and personification
A skeptical conception
Many readers must have been shocked, and therefore some delighted, by my first description of legal pragmatism in Chapter 3.
I must now replace it with a more complex, but I hope still arresting, account designed to bring out the main difference between pragmatism and law as integrity.
The pragmatist takes a skeptical attitude toward the assumption we are assuming is embodied in the concept of law: he denies that past political decisions in themselves provide any justification for either using or withholding the state's coercive power.
He finds the necessary justification for coercion in the justice or efficiency or some other contemporary virtue of the coercive decision itself, as and when it is made by judges, and he adds that consistency with any past legislative or judicial decision does not in principle contribute to the justice or virtue of any present one.
If judges are guided by this advice, he believes, then unless they make great mistakes, the coercion they direct will make the community's future brighter, liberated from the dead hand of the past and the fetish of consistency for its own sake.
Of course judges will disagree about which rule, laid down in which circumstances, would in fact be best for the future without concern for the past.
They will disagree in some cases because they disagree about the likely consequences of a particular rule, and in others because they have different visions of what a good community is like.
Some will think that a good community never lays down coercive rules except to enforce moral duties, and therefore that Mr. O'Brian  should be made to compensate Mrs. McLoughlin if, but only if, he has a moral duty to do so.
Others will think that the value of a community depends on little beyond its prosperity, so Mr. O'Brian should be forced to compensate if a practice of requiring compensation in these circumstances would increase the wealth of the community as a whole.
Pragmatism as a conception of law does not stipulate which of these various visions of good community are sound or attractive.
It encourages judges to decide and act on their own views.
It supposes that this practice will serve the community better-bring it closer to what really is a fair and just and happy society—than any alternative program that demands consistency with decisions already made by other judges or by the legislature.
A person has a legal right, according to our abstract, "conceptual" account of legal practice, if he has a right, flowing from past political decisions, to win a lawsuit.
Conventionalism offers a positive, non-skeptical theory about what legal rights people have: they have as legal rights whatever rights legal conventions extract from past political decisions.
Law as integrity is also a non-skeptical theory of legal rights: it holds that people have as legal rights whatever rights are sponsored by the principles that provide the best justification of legal practice as a whole Pragmatism, on the contrary, denies that people ever have legal rights; it takes the bracing view that they are never entitled to what would otherwise be worse for the community just because some legislature said so or a long string of judges decided other people were.
Legal rights and duties are a familiar part of our legal scene; you might therefore be surprised that anyone would propose pragmatism as an eligible interpretation of our present practice.
Pragmatists have an explanation, however, of why the language of rights and duties figures in legal discourse.
They argue, on pragmatic grounds, that judges must sometimes act as if people had legal rights, because acting that way will serve society better in the long run.
The argument  for this as-if strategy is straightforward enough: civilization is impossible unless the decisions of some well-defined person or group are accepted by everyone as setting public standards that will be enforced if necessary through the police power.
Only legislation can establish tax rates, structure markets, fix traffic codes and systems, stipulate permissible interest rates, or decide which Georgian squares should be protected from modernization.
If judges were seen to pick and choose among legislation, enforcing only those statutes they approved, this would defeat the pragmatist's goal because it would make things not better but much worse.
So pragmatism may be an eligible interpretation of our legal practice after all, if it turns out that our judges declare people to have legal rights only, or mainly, when a self-consciously pragmatist judge would pretend that they did.
Pragmatism might be less radical in practice than it appears to be in theory.
It was made to seem very radical by the academic lawyers I mentioned in Chapter I, who called themselves legal "realists." 
Some of them took great satisfaction in provocative statements of their position: there is no such thing as law, they said, or law is only the prediction of what the courts will do or only a matter of what the judge ate for breakfast.
They sometimes put these dramatic claims in the form of semantic theories: some of them said that propositions of law are synonymous with predictions of what judges will do, or are only expressions of emotion and so not really propositions at all.
Realism is now out of fashion, in large part as a consequence of those silly semantic claims.
Obviously propositions of law are not disguised predictions or expressions of desire.
So professors of jurisprudence teach their students that legal realism was an unnecessary exaggeration of facts about legal practice better described in a less heated way.
But pragmatism is an interpretive conception of law, not a semantic theory.
It is, as I shall try now to show, a more powerful and persuasive conception of law than conventionalism, and a stronger challenge to law as integrity.
We should begin our test of pragmatism by pursuing the question raised a moment ago.
Do judges and lawyers recognize legal rights mainly in circumstances that could be explained on pragmatist grounds?
We must ask what strategy a self-conscious and sophisticated pragmatist judge would adopt in pretending that people had legal rights.
He would try to find the right balance between the predictability necessary to protect the valuable institutions of legislation and precedent and the flexibility necessary for himself and other judges to improve the law through what they do in court.
Any general strategy for achieving this would be tentative; a pragmatist judge would stand ready to revise his practice by enlarging or contracting the scope of what he counts as legal rights as experience improved the intricate calculations on which any such strategy would depend.
DOES PRAGMATISM FIT?
He would undoubtedly, for the reasons canvassed, include in his list of as-if legal rights the rights that clear legislation purports to create.
But he would not necessarily decide to honour all rights provided in all statutes.
He might well exclude old statutes like those forbidding contraception, however clear and precise these might be, if they are only the relics of long-abandoned policies, if they represent no contemporary political decision and therefore serve no useful role in coordinating social behaviour now."
He would in general recognize as as-if rights those declared by other judges in past decisions, but again he would not include all such decisions.
He would think judges should retain the power to overrule past judicial decisions, if they were especially ill-advised, even when they were clear enough to provide crisp guidance to litigants.
So a sound as-if strategy would produce an attenuated doctrine of respect for statutes and precedents.
But a sophisticated pragmatist might nevertheless be tempted, for reasons he would believe fully respectable, to  disguise these attenuations.
He might think it best sometimes to pretend that he was enforcing an old and obsolete statute or a mischievous and silly precedent when he was really ignoring it.
In that case he might offer his decision as a surprising interpretation"of the statute or precedent when it is really nothing of the kind.
A thoroughgoing pragmatist would regard the question whether and how far to disguise his actual decision in this way as just another strategic question.
Is the community so anxious that its judges not behave as pragmatists that this "noble lie" will help him serve its true interests better in the long run?
Or will the people discover the lie and then be less ready to accept and be guided by his rulings than if he had been more open from the start?
Or will it be a worse society if it has been deceived, just for that reason alone, because it is never in people's true interests to lie to them, even if they never discover the lie?
This need not be an all-or-nothing decision: a pragmatist might make his conception as openly pragmatic as he dares, disguising only those element—his doctrine of obsolescence, perhaps—that the community is not quite ready to accept.
So a self-conscious pragmatist might well decide cases in ways, and even in words, that are familiar to us.
He will have other reasons, quite apart from any strategy of the noble lie, for falling in with certain familiar practices that he might be tempted, at first look, to discard.
An imaginative pragmatist judge might be tempted, for example, to divorce the question of what rule he should lay down for the future from the question of how he should decide the case before him.
Suppose he notes that Elmer is likely to use the inheritance in ways that will benefit the community more than any use Goneril and Regan are likely to make of it.
He will invest it while he is in jail, and use it in socially beneficial ways when he is released, while they will spend it on imported luxuries.
Who not achieve a forward—looking coup: preventing future  murders by declaring that in the future murderers must not be allowed to inherit, but improving social prosperity by allowing Elmer himself to win.
This subtle strategy would depend on other judges following the new rule when murderers appeared before them claiming inheritances, rather than themselves deciding whether the murderer would spend the money more usefully than the residuary legatees.
But our judge might be able to guarantee this by making plain that he intends the new rule to govern all future cases, and that the exception for Elmer was made possible only by the fact that no judge had laid down a similar rule before Elmer committed his crime.
A Case Study: Prospective Rulemaking
But if the pragmatist judge thinks the matter through, he will in the end reject this technique of "prospective-only" rulemaking, except in very special circumstances.
For he will realize that if this technique became popular, people who might benefit from new, forward-looking rules would lose their incentive to bring to court novel cases in which these new rules might be announced for the future.
People litigate such cases (which is both risky and expensive) only because they believe that if they succeed in persuading some judge that a new rule would be in the public interest, that new rule will be applied retrospectively in their own favour.
If they are denied that prospect they will not litigate, and the community will lose the benefits the new rules would provide.
If, on the other hand, a pragmatist judge almost invariably applies his new rules retrospectively and encourages other judges to do the same, this will achieve a further, very great benefit for their community.
We noticed this benefit in discovering why conventionalism does worse in coordinating social behaviour than pragmatism.
If people know that a new rule will be applied retrospectively they will behave in accordance with whatever rules they imagine courts would think in the general interest, and this will provide a great part of the advantage of such rules without the need actually to enact or adjudicate them.
Suppose it has never been decided  whether people who accept a check they have reason to believe is forged can nevertheless collect on it.
The legislature has never had occasion to speak on this matter, and the issue has never come to court.
But it is clear enough to anyone dealing in checks who thinks about the matter that it is in the public interest to deny collection in those circumstances.
If someone who is offered an obviously forged check believes that if the issue is litigated a court will lay down a rule denying recovery for the future and apply that rule against him, he will not take the check in the first instance, and society will have the benefit of the better rule without actually paying the costs of litigation or incurring the disadvantages of bad commercial practice before the case is litigated.
It suddenly appears that pragmatism, so far from fitting our legal practices worse than conventionalism does, fits them better.
We tested conventionalism against two perspectives on our practice: in cross-section, as an account of what particular judges do about particular cases, and over time, as a story about how legal culture develops and changes as a whole.
Conventionalism failed from the latter perspective.
Its picture of law as a matter of convention—as a game with holes between the rules—gives a most distorted account of how settled practices come to be questioned and changed.
Pragmatism tells a more promising story.
It points out that strategies for pursuing the general interest that seem obvious in one generation will come to be questioned in another, and so will be changed naturally, from within the judicial process, not outside it.
Conventionalism also failed on the first perspective.
It could not explain the most prominent feature of adjudication in hard cases like our samples: the constant and relentless concern judges show for explicating the "true" force of a statute or precedent decision when that force is  problematical.
Does the as-if strategy of pragmatism allow a better explanation?
Or does it also stumble before this hurdle?
The Old Hurdle
A pragmatist judge has no direct reason for worrying, as the judges in Elmer's case worried, about the intentions of the legislators who first adopted the New York statute of wills.
He thinks the only good reason for enforcing statutes whose wisdom he doubts is to protect the legislature's ability to coordinate social behaviour.
He therefore sees no point in trying to enforce statutory instructions that are so unclear that any reliance on them would be speculative, so vague that they cannot aid coordination in any case.
In particular he sees no point in trying to discover the intentions of legislators long dead, intentions that must anyway be obscure or controversial and unavailable to the general public.
He thinks it plainly better to insist that when a statute is deeply unclear it cannot be the source of as-if legal rights at all, that the right rule is whichever rule is best for the future.
So the pragmatist judge will behave like Earl in Elmer's case only if he has an indirect, noble-lie reason for pretending that legislative intentions are relevant.
It is most unlikely that he will see any reason of that kind.
For it hardly damages the contemporary legislature's ability to work its will if judges decline to speculate about how to read cloudy rules from the dead past or what the intentions of people very different from contemporary legislators would have been if they had thought about a problem they actually ignored.
A pragmatist judge will find room in his working theory of as if legal rights for some doctrine of precedent.
People can plan their affairs with more confidence if they have more guidance about when and how the state will intervene, and the community will therefore be better off if it can reasonably look to past judicial decisions to predict future ones.
But once again this justification for respecting precedent does not hold when the scope of a past decision is unclear and controversial.
So a pragmatist has no direct reason to strain to discover the "true" ground of that decision by attempting  to read the minds of the judges who decided it or by any other process of divination.
Nor does he feel compelled to decide later cases "by analogy" to earlier ones, at least when there is room for disagreement about whether a later case is really like or unlike them.
Imagine a pragmatist judge deciding McLoughlin.
He sets aside the question whether there is any important difference of principle between the case of a mother who suffers emotional injury watching her child hit by a car and a mother who suffers the same sort of injury seeing her child bloody in a hospital.
He insists that these two cases be divorced.
There is direct precedent in the first case, and he knows that sound strategy might require him to follow that precedent.
There is no direct precedent in the second, so he thinks himself free to decide as he thinks best, on a fresh slate, whether or not there is any difference in principle between the two cases.
Linking the two cases does not promote planning, since the link is in any case controversial, and flexibility is improved by separating them.
Once again, pragmatism can be defended as providing a good fit with what judges actually do and say in hard cases only if we assume that a pragmatist would have noble-lie reasons for constructing and deferring to the best account of the principle underlying past cases in these situations.
Once again, this assumption is very implausible.
The public will not be outraged if it is told that precedents will be confined to their facts.
The general power of precedents to guide behaviour will not be much jeopardized if judges refuse to follow them when the advice they give is garbled or murky.
So pragmatism can be rescued as a good explanation for our cross-section picture of adjudication only by procrustean machinery that seems wildly inappropriate.
It can be rescued only if we do not take judicial opinions at face value at all; we must treat all the judges who worry about problematical statutes and precedents as practising some unmotivated form of deception.
They must be seen as inventing new rules for the future in accordance with their convictions about  what is best for society as a whole, freed from any supposed rights flowing from consistency, but presenting these for unknown reasons in the false uniform of rules dug out of the past.
Pragmatism requires epicycles to survive as an eligible interpretation of our own practice, and these epicycles can be tolerated only if pragmatism is so powerful along the second dimension of legal interpretation, so attractive as a political justification for state coercion, that it merits heroic life support.
Does it?
Pragmatism is a skeptical conception of law because it rejects genuine, nonstrategic legal rights.
It does not reject morality, or even moral and political rights.
It says that judges should follow whichever method of deciding cases will produce what they believe to be the best community for the future, and though some pragmatic lawyers would think this means a richer or happier or more powerful community, others would choose a community with fewer incidents of injustice, with a better cultural tradition and what is called a higher quality of life.
Pragmatism does not rule out any theory about what makes a community better.
But it does not take legal rights seriously.
It rejects what other conceptions of law accept: that people can have distinctly legal rights as trumps over what would otherwise be the best future properly understood.
According to pragmatism what we call legal rights are only the servants of the best future: they are instruments we construct for that purpose and have no independent force or ground.
LAW WITHOUT RIGHTS
It is possible to miss this important point about pragmatism, however, and we should be careful not to fall into the trap.
Lawyers who think that judges should take a pragmatic attitude toward legal rights sometimes say the community has actually decided that they should, at least tacitly.
The community has decided, that is, to delegate to  judges the power to decide lawsuits in whatever way they think is in the best interests of the community as a whole and to invent working as-if theories of legal rights, including theories of legislation and precedent, with that purpose in mind.
This is a bold attempt to unite pragmatism and conventionalism.
It takes pragmatism to be the content of a vast, overarching convention that judges should decide cases in the pragmatist way.
Since conventionalism is at best no more powerful a conception of law than pragmatism, this marriage would hardly improve the case for the latter.
But in any case the marriage is a fake.
It is not true that Americans or Britons, for instance, have tacitly agreed to delegate legislative power to judges in this way.
The pragmatist may say: judges decide on pragmatic grounds all the time, and the people do not revolt or call for impeachment.
That begs two questions.
First, it assumes that pragmatism provides the best explanation of how judges actually decide cases.
We have already seen that it leaves unexplained one prominent feature of judicial practice—the attitude judges take toward statutes and precedents in hard cases—except on the awkward hypothesis that this practice is designed to deceive the public, in which case the public has not consented to it.
Second, it assumes that the community believes and accepts the pragmatist explanation of how judges decide cases, and that assumption seems just wrong.
Surely there is no convention that judges may adjust their views about legal rights for purely strategic reasons.
On the contrary, as we began this book by noticing, most people think that judges who act in this way are usurpers.
So if we want to support pragmatism on the second, political dimension, we must accept and then exploit its central feature, its skepticism about legal rights.
The pragmatist thinks judges should always do the best they can for the future, in the circumstances, unchecked by any need to respect or secure consistency in principle with what other officials have done or will do.
This idea explains the exciting rhetoric  of the early "realist" movement I mentioned earlier: why they said there is no such thing as law, that law is only a matter of predicting what judges will do.
These supposedly extreme propositions are much better understood as provocative statements of a political position than as semantic claims.
I do not say this in any triumphant way.
The fact that a true pragmatist rejects the idea of legal rights is not a decisive argument against that conception.
For it is not self-evident that the idea of legal rights is attractive.
Or even sane.
On the contrary, it is quite easy to make that idea seem foolish.
The pragmatist will pay whatever attention to the past is required by good strategy.
He accepts as-if legal rights in that spirit and for reasons of strategy will make mostly the same decisions a conventionalist would make when statutes are plain or precedents crisp and decisive.
He will reject what a conventionalist accepts as law only in special cases, when a statute is old and out-of-date, for example, or when a line of precedent is widely regarded as unfair or inefficient, and it is difficult to see what of value is then lost.
He rejects, it is true, the very idea of consistency in principle as important for its own sake.
He denies that the decision in McLoughlin should turn on whether any distinction in principle can be found between the case of emotional injury suffered at the scene of an accident and the same kind of injury suffered later.
But why should it?
He knows that mothers who suffer such damage at the scene will continue to receive compensation unless and until the legislature decides otherwise.
But if he believes this a matter for regret, if he believes the decisions that established that "right" were either unjust or inefficient or both, he sees no reason why he should extend the principle underlying these decisions any further than other judges already have.
He acknowledges that if he finds against Mrs. McLoughlin the law of emotional injury will then be incoherent in principle.
But he counts that no disadvantage; he denies that this is, in itself, a matter of injustice.
If he thinks recovery for  emotional injury is unjust, he will have made the future less unjust in the only way that counts for him: fewer people will suffer the injustice of being made to compensate for this sort of injury, which is better than more people suffering that injustice.
Of course he thinks it would be better still from the point of view of justice if no one was made to compensate for emotional injury.
But he may not have the power to overrule the precedents; in any case, reasons of strategy argue against this.
So he does the best he can to limit the damage done by the past, in efficiency or justice, by deciding against Mrs. McLoughlin; if we object, we seem to have succumbed to a fetishism of doctrinal elegance, slavery to coherence for its own sake.
It is not a good objection to his argument that different pragmatist judges will make different decisions about how best to limit past damage in hard cases.
Of course they will, but in hard cases judges must make controversial judgments of political morality whichever conception of law they hold.
One party or the other will almost always be in a position to complain that the judge has made a mistake, that the "right" was his, not his opponent's.
Pragmatism claims to risk error at least about the right issue.
If judicial divisions and controversial judgments are in any case inevitable, the pragmatist asks, why should the controversy not be about what really matters, about which decision will produce the least inefficient practice or the fewest occasions of injustice in the future?
How can that goal itself be unjust?
How can consistency in principle be important for its own sake, particularly when it is uncertain and controversial what consistency really requires?
These are the questions we must answer if we wish to sustain legal rights against the pragmatist challenge; they are in no way easy questions, nor is this a feeble challenge.
If we cannot meet it — if we cannot sustain the importance of consistency in principle against the charge of fetishism — we must reconsider the popular disdain for pragmatism as an interpretation of our legal practice.
For the rationality of our practice would then be in question, and a  pragmatic interpretation, with all its epicycles, might be our only shield against a terrible indictment.
The great classics of political philosophy are utopian.
They study social justice from the point of view of people committed in advance to no government or constitution, who are free to create the ideal state from first principles.
So they imagine people living in a pre-political state of "nature" writing social contracts on blank slates.
But real people in ordinary politics act within a political structure as well as on it.
Politics, for us, is evolutionary rather than axiomatic; we recognize, in working toward a perfectly just state, that we already belong to a different one.
THE CLAIMS OF INTEGRITY
Ordinary politics shares with utopian political theory certain political ideals, the ideals of a fair political structure, a just distribution of resources and opportunities, and an equitable process of enforcing the rules and regulations that establish these.
I shall call these, for brevity, the virtues of fairness, justice, and procedural due process.
(These names are somewhat arbitrary; different names are often used in political philosophy, and sometimes one of the virtues I distinguish is treated as a case of another.
Procedural due process is often called a kind of fairness or a kind of justice, for example.
I include due process as a separate virtue because I do not believe it collapses into either of the others as I describe these, but my arguments in this and the following chapters will pay much more attention to fairness and justice, and I shall mainly ignore procedural due process.)
Fairness in politics is a matter of finding political procedures—methods of electing officials and making their decisions responsive to the electorate—that distribute political power in the right way.
That is now generally understood, in the United States and Britain at least, to mean procedures and practices that give all citizens more or less equal influence  in the decisions that govern them.
Justice, on the contrary, is concerned with the decisions that the standing political institutions, whether or not they have been chosen fairly, ought to make.
If we accept justice as a political virtue we want our legislators and other officials to distribute material resources and protect civil liberties so as to secure a morally defensible outcome.
Procedural due process is a matter of the right procedures for judging whether some citizen has violated laws laid down by the political procedures; if we accept it as a virtue, we want courts and similar institutions to use procedures of evidence, discovery, and review that promise the right level of accuracy and otherwise treat people accused of violation as people in that position ought to be treated.
These quick distinctions are prologue to a crucial point.
Ordinary politics adds to these familiar ideals a further one that has no distinct place in utopian axiomatic theory.
This is sometimes described in the catch phrase that we must treat like cases alike.
It requires government to speak with one voice, to act in a principled and coherent manner to ward all its citizens, to extend to everyone the substantive standards of justice or fairness it uses for some.
If government relies on principles of majoritarian democracy to justify its decisions about who may vote, it must respect the same principles in designing voting districts.
If it appeals to the principle that people have a right to compensation from those who injure them carelessly as its reason why manufacturers are liable for defective automobiles, it must give full effect to that principle in deciding whether accountants are liable for their mistakes as well.
If government says that a unanimous verdict is necessary for criminal conviction because special moral harm is suffered when someone is unjustly convicted of a crime, then it must take that special moral harm into account in considering, for example, the admissibility of confessions under various circumstances.
This particular demand of political morality is not in fact well described in the catch phrase that we must treat like  cases alike.
I give it a grander title: it is the virtue of political integrity.
I choose that name to show its connection to a parallel ideal of personal morality.
We want our neighbours to behave, in their day-to-day dealings with us, in the way we think right.
But we know that people disagree to some extent about the right principles of behaviour, so we distinguish that requirement from the different (and weaker) requirement that they act in important matters with integrity, that is, according to convictions that inform and shape their lives as a whole, rather than capriciously or whimsically.
The practical importance of this latter requirement among people who know they disagree about justice is evident.
Integrity becomes a political ideal when we make the same demand of the state or community taken to be a moral agent, when we insist that the state act on a single, coherent set of principles even when its citizens are divided about what the right principles of justice and fairness really are.
We assume, in both the individual and the political cases, that we can recognize other people's acts as expressing a conception of fairness or justice or decency even when we do not endorse that conception ourselves.
This ability is an important part of our more general ability to treat others with respect, and it is therefore a prerequisite of civilization.
I began this discussion of ordinary politics, and of its departments of political virtue, in the shadow of the pragmatist's challenge to the idea of legal rights.
If we accept integrity as a distinct political virtue beside justice and fairness, then we have a general, nonstrategic argument for recognizing such rights.
The integrity of a community's conception of fairness requires that the political principles necessary to justify the legislature's assumed authority be given full effect in deciding what a statute it has enacted means.
The integrity of a community's conception of justice demands that the moral principles necessary to justify the substance of its legislature's decisions be recognized in the rest of the law.
The integrity of its conception of procedural due process insists that trial procedures that are counted as striking  the right balance between accuracy and efficiency in enforcing some part of the law be recognized throughout, taking into account differences in the kind and degree of moral harm an inaccurate verdict imposes.
These several claims justify a commitment to consistency in principle valued for its own sake.
They suggest what I shall argue: that integrity rather than some superstition of elegance is the life of law as we know it.
It will be useful to divide the claims of integrity into two more practical principles.
The first is the principle of integrity in legislation, which asks those who create law by legislation to keep that law coherent in principle.
The second is the principle of integrity in adjudication: it asks those responsible for deciding what the law is to see and enforce it as coherent in that way.
The second principle explains how and why the past must be allowed some special power of its own in court, contrary to the pragmatist's claim that it must not.
It explains why judges must conceive the body of law they administer as a whole rather than as a set of discrete decisions that they are free to make or amend one by one, with nothing but a strategic interest in the rest.
The adjudicative principle of integrity furnishes our third conception of law.
We shall study law as integrity, and I shall commend it, in the chapters that follow.
Many readers will be troubled, however, by one aspect of political integrity, which we might well take up in advance.
Political integrity assumes a particularly deep personification of the community or state.
It supposes that the community as a whole can be committed to principles of fairness or justice or procedural due process in some way analogous to the way particular people can be committed to convictions or ideals or projects, and this will strike many people as bad metaphysics.
COMMUNITY PERSONIFIED
We personify groups in ordinary conversation.
We speak casually of the interests or goals of the working class, for example.
But these expressions are often only convenient figures of speech, shorthand ways of talking about the average or representative members of a community.
My account of political integrity takes the personification much more seriously, as if a political community really were some special kind of entity distinct from the actual people who are its citizens.
Worse, it attributes moral agency and responsibility to this distinct entity.
For when I speak of the community being faithful to its own principles I do not mean its conventional or popular morality, the beliefs and convictions of most citizens.
I mean that the community has its own principles it can itself honour or dishonour, that it can act in good or bad faith, with integrity or hypocritically, just as people can.
Can I really mean to personify the community in this vivid way?
Do I really mean to attribute to the state or community principles that are not simply those of most of its members?
Yes.
But I must be clearer what kind of personification this is.
I do not intend now to resurrect the metaphysical theory I said in Chapter 2 that we do not need.
I do not suppose that the ultimate mental component of the universe is some spooky, all-embracing mind that is more real than flesh-and-blood people, nor that we should treat the state or community as a real person with a distinct interest or point of view or even welfare of its own, nor that we can ask the range of questions about a state's principles—for example whether it accepted them freely or was misled or misunderstands them—that we can ask about aspects of a real person's moral life.
I mean only to endorse a complex, two-stage way of reasoning about the responsibilities of officials and citizens that finds a natural expression in the personification  of community and cannot be reproduced by a reductive translation into claims about officials and citizens one by one.
Two Arguments about Group Responsibility
Suppose an automobile manufacturer produces defective cars that cause terrible accidents in which hundreds of people are killed.
Set aside the question of law, whether the corporation is guilty of a crime or legally responsible to compensate victims or their families.
And the question of efficiency, whether imposing such liability would reduce accidents or contribute to a more efficient use of resources.
We are interested now in the question of moral responsibility.
What sense does it make to say that the corporation is morally responsible to compensate victims from the corporate treasury, with the consequence that its shareholders must bear the loss?
We might proceed in the following way.
We bring to bear on the various officers and employees and shareholders and others associated with the corporation our ordinary standards of personal responsibility.
We ask of each person whether he did anything he should not have done such that he should be blamed for the deaths that followed, or whether he contributed to the accidents in such a way that, blameworthy or not, he should bear some portion of the damage or loss.
We might find someone to blame.
Perhaps some employee neglected an inspection, perhaps some officer approved a design he should have known was faulty.
Maybe the chief executive officer or some member of the board of directors had reason to doubt the standing procedures for reviewing design and failed to improve them.
But we might not find anyone to blame.
Perhaps no one acted in a way we can judge wrong by personal standards of conduct.
We would then be unlikely to find any non-question-begging moral argument why a small shareholder should bear any part of the loss himself.
A shareholder is no part of the causal chain leading to the accidents; he added no capital to the corporation's resources just by buying its stock on the exchange.
Someone might say: it is a principle of personal morality that if someone shares in the gains of another's action he must also share the responsibility for wrongs that other person does.
This suggestion begs the question, however, for we still lack any reason to suppose that any wrong has been done.
That is, our problem is not one of vicarious liability, of finding some reason why a shareholder should share some other person's or group's primary responsibility; it is rather that we can find no one else who is primarily responsible and in whose responsibility he might share.
We might, however, have used a different method of argument.
In that different method we frame our question in the first instance as a question about corporate responsibility.
We suppose that the corporation must itself be treated as a moral agent, and then we proceed by applying facsimiles of our principles about individual fault and responsibility to it.
We might say that anyone who has had full control over the manufacture of a defective product has a responsibility to compensate those injured by it.
No individual employee or shareholder has had that control, but the corporation has.
Then we ask, as a further and subsidiary question, how the various members and agents of the corporation should be seen to share in that fault or responsibility.
But we approach that independent question using a different set of principles, among which might be found the principle just mentioned, that any member of the corporation who is entitled to share in its profits must share in its responsibilities as well.
That principle would justify paying compensation from the corporate treasury, and thus from the account of shareholders, rather than, for example , deducting it from the wages of employees who actually played a causal part in the unfortunate story.
If we decided through the first of these two methods, which begins with moral assessment of each individual's record one by one, that each shareholder was indeed responsible for a share of the loss, then we might well report our  conclusion in the language of personification.
We might say that the corporation was liable, meaning only to summarize in a convenient way the responsibilities we ascribed to each of the shareholders.
But this personification would be idle; it played no role in our argument and only decorated our conclusions.
If, on the other hand, we reached the same conclusion through the second method, which begins in considering the responsibility of the institution as a whole, then the personification would have been not idle but working.
For our conclusions about the group would then be in every way prior to any conclusions about individuals; we would have relied on principles of responsibility that draw their sense from a practice or way of thinking to which the personification is indispensable.
Indeed through the second method (but not the first) we might come to some decision about the responsibilities of the group or institution while still in doubt (or disagreeing among ourselves) about the consequent liabilities or responsibilities of the relevant individuals.
The personification furnishes not only a necessary step on the way to judgments about particular people, but a plateau we can occupy to consider these judgments.
None of this means that in the second method, when we begin with the group, we are interested in group responsibility for its own sake.
There would be no point to developing or applying principles of group responsibility if we did not assume that these were connected to judgments about how real people must now act.
But we can separate the two issues, reserving the question of individual responsibility as one to be taken up only after we have decided whether the group as a whole has met the standards appropriate for it.
The personification is deep: it consists in taking the corporation seriously as a moral agent.
But it is still a personification not a discovery, because we recognize that the community has no independent metaphysical existence, that it is itself a creature of the practices of thought and language in which it figures.
The idea of political integrity personifies the community in the second way, as a working personification, because it assumes that the community can adopt and express and be faithful or unfaithful to principles of its own, distinct from those of any of its officials or citizens as individuals.
Of course we must say what that means by describing how a community adopts or betrays a principle, and this will be part of constructing our conception of law as integrity.
But we should take this chance to notice how the deep personification figures in ordinary ways of thought that are quite independent of law.
Consider the phenomenon of communal electoral responsibility.
At the height of the Watergate scandal bumper stickers appeared that read, "Don't blame me; I'm from Massachusetts." 
They did not say, "Don't blame me; I voted against Nixon," and the difference is important.
People asked exoneration from a mistake made by a group to which they belonged-the nation-not in individual innocence but in membership of a different and more immediate community that had acted well, a state that had not voted for a dishonest president.
There are more important examples of group responsibility.
Germans not alive when Nazis ruled their country feel shame and a sense of obligation toward Jews; white Americans who inherited nothing from slaveholders feel an indeterminate responsibility to blacks who never wore chains.
Some of us are puzzled by this phenomenon, because it seems incompatible with another idea we cherish, which is that people must not be blamed for acts over which they had no control, nor held responsible for unfair gains when they have gained nothing themselves.
So philosophers have struggled to reconcile these conflicting ideas, by finding ways in which all white Americans have profited from past discrimination against blacks, for example.
These arguments ring hollow because they misunderstand the mode of responsibility in question.
They suppose that collective responsibility  can be assigned only through something like the first method we noticed in the accident example.
In fact, the convictions these arguments try to explain are the product of the second approach, of a deep personification of political and social community, and that is why they do not challenge the Kantian thesis that no one is to blame for what he has not himself done.
Of course it would be absurd to blame contemporary Germans for what the Nazis did; but, because this judgment lies at the end of a different and independent mode of argument, it is not absurd to suppose that contemporary Germans have special responsibilities because the Nazis were Germans too.
These are examples of collective responsibility for past wrongs.
We find other and even more important examples of working personification in the logic of individual political rights against the state.
We argue about whether everyone has a right that the state protect him from assaults by other citizens, or provide him a decent level of medical care, or guarantee his security from attack by foreign powers.
We agree or disagree before we form any concrete opinions about which institutions or officials must act and what they must do in consequence of whatever rights we declare people have.
When we say that individuals have a right to be protected against assault, we do not mean that this protection must be achieved through some particular scheme we already have in mind.
But only that the community as a whole has a duty to provide adequate protection in some way.
We can debate the scope of the community's duty and leave for separate consideration the different issue of which arrangement of official duties would best acquit the communal responsibility.
My next and last example draws on our most abstract and widely shared convictions about political justice and fairness.
We believe political officials have responsibilities we could not defend if we had to build these directly from the ordinary requirements of individual personal morality most of us accept for ourselves and others in nonpolitical life.
We  think they have a special and complex responsibility of impartiality among the members of the community and of partiality toward them in dealings with strangers.
That is quite different from the responsibility each of us accepts as an individual.
We each claim a personal point of view, ambitions and attachments of our own we are at liberty to pursue, free from the claims of others to equal attention, concern, and resource.
We insist on an area of personal moral sovereignty within which each of us may prefer the interests of family and friends and devote himself to projects that are selfish, however grand.
Any conception of justice in personal behaviour, any theory about how the just person behaves toward others, will limit that area of personal sovereignty, but no conception acceptable to most of us will eliminate it entirely.
We allow officials acting in their official capacity no such area at all.
They must, we say, treat all members of their community as equals, and the individual's normal latitude for self-preference is called corruption in their case.
We cannot establish this special responsibility of officials merely by applying our ordinary convictions about individual responsibility to the circumstances of their case.
Some officials have very great power.
But so do many private individuals, and we do not believe that a citizen's sphere of personal freedom necessarily shrinks as his power and influence grow.
(Thomas Nagel reminds us, in his article about the responsibility of political officials, that even giants have personal lives.)
We apply the strictest standards of impartiality even to officials whose power is relatively slight and substantially less than that of many private citizens; we have no sense that an official's duty of equal concern wanes as his power diminishes.
Someone may say that an official lies under a special responsibility of impartiality because he has accepted his office subject to that understanding, so these responsibilities are drawn from ordinary morality after all, from the morality of keeping promises.
But this reverses the order of argument most of us would endorse: we share an understanding that  our officials must treat all members of the community they govern as equals because we believe they should behave that way, not the other way around."
We cannot explain the special responsibilities of political office, therefore, if we try to build these directly from ordinary principles of private morality.
We need an idea that cannot be found there: that the community as a whole has obligations of impartiality toward its members, and that officials act as agents for the community in acquitting that responsibility.
Here, as in the case of the corporation, we need to treat group responsibility as logically prior to the responsibilities of officials one by one.
These various examples of working personification of the community fit together as partners in a general system of thought.
Once we accept that our officials act in the name of a community of which we are all members, bearing a responsibility we therefore share, then this reinforces and sustains the character of collective guilt, our sense that we must feel shame as well as outrage when they act unjustly.
The practical principles of integrity I cited-integrity in legislation and in adjudication-take their places in this system of ideas.
The adjudicative principle is our special interest because it provides a conception of law antagonistic to pragmatism.
If that principle can be sustained, pragmatism must be rejected.
Integrity
Agenda
We have two principles of political integrity: a legislative principle, which asks lawmakers to try to make the total set of laws morally coherent, and an adjudicative principle, which instructs that the law be seen as coherent in that way, so far as possible.
Our main concern is with the adjudicative principle, but not yet.
In this chapter I argue that the legislative principle is so much part of our political practice that no competent interpretation of that practice can ignore it.
We measure that claim on the two dimensions now familiar.
We ask whether the assumption, that integrity is a distinct ideal of politics, fits our politics, and then whether it honours our politics.
If the legislative principle of integrity is impressive on both these dimensions, then the case for the adjudicative principle, and for the conception of law it supports, will already be well begun.
Integrity would not be needed as a distinct political virtue in a utopian state.
Coherence would be guaranteed because officials would always do what was perfectly just and fair.
In ordinary politics, however, we must treat integrity as an independent ideal if we accept it at all, because it can conflict with these other ideals.
It can require us to support legislation we believe would be inappropriate in the perfectly just  and fair society and to recognize rights we do not believe people would have there.
We saw an example of this conflict in the last chapter.
A judge deciding McLoughlin might think it unjust to require compensation for any emotional injury.
But if he accepts integrity and knows that some victims of emotional injury have already been given a right to compensation, he will have a reason for deciding in favour of Mrs. McLoughlin nevertheless.
DOES INTEGRITY FIT?
Integrity and Compromise
Conflicts among ideals are common in politics.
Even if we rejected integrity and based our political activity only on fairness, justice, and procedural due process, we would find the first two virtues sometimes pulling in opposite directions.
Some philosophers deny the possibility of any fundamental conflict between justice and fairness because they believe that one of these virtues in the end derives from the other: Some say that justice has no meaning apart from fairness, that in politics, as in roulette, whatever happens through fair procedures is just.
That is the extreme of the idea called justice as fairness.
Others think that the only test of fairness in politics is the test of result, that no procedure is fair unless it is likely to produce political decisions that meet some independent test of justice.
That is the opposite extreme, of fairness as justice.
Most political philosophers—and I think most people-take the intermediate view that fairness and justice are to some degree independent of one another, so that fair institutions sometimes produce unjust decisions and unfair institutions just ones.
If that is so, then in ordinary politics we must sometimes choose between the two virtues in deciding which political programs to support.
We might think that majority rule is the fairest workable decision procedure in politics, but we know that the majority will sometimes, perhaps often, make unjust decisions about the rights of individuals.
Should we tamper with majority rule by giving special voting strength to one economic group, beyond what its numbers would justify, because we fear that straight majority rule would assign it less than its just share?
Should we accept constitutional  constraints on democratic power to prevent the majority from limiting freedom of speech or other important liberties?
These difficult questions arise because fairness and justice sometimes conflict.
If we believe that integrity is a third and independent ideal, at least when people disagree about one of the first two, then we may well think that fairness or justice must sometimes be sacrificed to integrity.
I shall try to show that our political practices accept integrity as a distinct virtue, and I begin with what I hope will strike you as a puzzle.
Here are my background assumptions.
We all believe in political fairness: we accept that each person or group in the community should have a roughly equal share of control over the decisions made by Parliament or Congress or the state legislature.
We know that different people hold different views about moral issues that they all treat as of great importance.
It would seem to follow from our convictions about fairness that legislation on these moral issues should be a matter not just of enforcing the will of the numerical majority, as if its view were unanimous, but of trades and compromises so that each body of opinion is represented, to a degree that matches its numbers, in the final result.
We could achieve this compromise in a Solomonic way.
Do the people of North Dakota disagree whether justice requires compensation for product defects that manufacturers could not reasonably have prevented?
Then why should their legislature not impose this "strict" liability on manufacturers of automobiles but not on manufacturers of washing machines?
Do the people of Alabama disagree about the morality of racial discrimination?
Who should their legislature not forbid racial discrimination on buses but permit it in restaurants?
Do the British divide on the morality of abortion?
Why should Parliament not make abortion criminal for pregnant women who were born in even years but not for those born in odd ones?
This Solomonic model treats a community's  public order as a kind of commodity to be distributed in accordance with distributive justice, a cake to be divided fairly by assigning each group a proper slice.
Internal Compromises
Most of us, I think, would be dismayed by "checkerboard" laws that treat similar accidents or occasions of racial discrimination or abortion differently on arbitrary grounds.
Of course we do accept arbitrary distinctions about some matters: zoning, for example.
We accept that shops or factories be forbidden in some zones and not others and that parking be prohibited on alternate sides of the same street on alternate days.
But we reject a division between parties of opinion when matters of principle are at stake.
We follow a different model: that each point of view must be allowed a voice in the process of deliberation but that the collective decision must nevertheless aim to settle on some coherent principle whose influence then extends to the natural limits of its authority.
If there must be compromise because people are divided about justice, then the compromise must be external, not internal; it must be compromise about which scheme of justice to adopt rather than a compromised scheme of justice.
But there lies the puzzle.
Who should we turn our back on checkerboard solutions as we do?
Who should we not embrace them as a general strategy for legislation whenever the community is divided over some issue of principle?
Who is this strategy not fair and reasonable, reflecting political maturity and a finer sense of the political art than other communities have managed to achieve?
What is the special defect we find in checkerboard solutions?
It cannot be a failure in fairness (in our sense of a fair distribution of political power) because checkerboard laws are by hypothesis fairer than either of the two alternatives.
Allowing each of two groups to choose some part of the law of abortion, in proportion to their numbers, is fairer (in our sense) than the winner-take-all scheme our instincts prefer, which denies many people any influence at all over an issue they think desperately important.
Can we defend these instincts on grounds of justice?
Justice is a matter of outcomes: a political decision causes injustice, however fair the procedures that produced it, when it denies people some resource, liberty, or opportunity that the best theories of justice entitle them to have.
Can we oppose the checkerboard strategy on the ground that it would produce more instances of injustice than it would prevent?
We must be careful not to confuse two issues here.
Of course any single checkerboard solution of an important issue will produce more instances of injustice than one of the alternatives and fewer than the other.
The community can unite over that proposition while disagreeing about which alternative would be more and which less just.
Someone who believes that abortion is murder will think that the checkerboard abortion statute produces more injustice than outright prohibition and less than outright license; someone who believes women have a right to abortion reverses these judgments.
So both have a reason of justice for preferring some other solution to the checkerboard one.
Our question is whether we collectively have a reason of justice for not agreeing, in advance of these particular disagreements, to the checkerboard strategy for resolving them.
We have a reason of fairness, as we just noticed, for that checkerboard strategy, and if we have no reason of justice against it, our present practice needs a justification we have not yet secured.
We are looking for a reason of justice we all share for rejecting the checkerboard strategy in advance even if we would each prefer a checkerboard solution on some occasions to the one that will be imposed if the strategy is rejected.
Shall we just say that a checkerboard solution is unjust by definition because it treats different people differently for no good reason, and justice requires treating like cases alike?
This suggestion seems in the right neighbourhood, for if checkerboard solutions do have a defect, it must lie in their distinctive feature, that they treat people differently when no principle can justify the distinction.
But we cannot explain why this is always objectionable, so long as we remain  on the plane of justice as I have defined it.
For in the circumstances of ordinary politics the checkerboard strategy will prevent instances of injustice that would otherwise occur, and we cannot say that justice requires not eliminating any injustice unless we can eliminate all.
Suppose we can rescue only some prisoners of tyranny; justice hardly requires rescuing none even when only luck, not any principle, will decide whom we save and whom we leave to torture.
Rejecting a checkerboard solution seems perverse in the same way when the alternative will be the general triumph of the principle we oppose.
The internal compromise would have rescued some, chosen arbitrarily, from an injustice that others will be left to suffer, but the alternative would have been to rescue none.
Someone may now say: nevertheless, though checkerboard solutions may be desirable for that reason on some occasions, we do better to reject their use out of hand in advance, because we have reason to think that in the long run more discrete injustice will be created than avoided through these solutions.
But that would be a plausible prediction only for members of a constant and self-conscious majority of opinion, and if such a majority existed so would a self-conscious minority that would have the opposite opinion.
So we have no hope of finding here a common reason for rejecting checkerboard solutions.
But perhaps we are looking in the wrong direction.
Perhaps our common reason is not any prediction about the number of cases of injustice that the checkerboard strategy would produce or prevent, but our conviction that no one should actively engage in producing what he believes to be injustice.
We might say: no checkerboard statute could be enacted unless a majority of the legislators voted for provisions they thought unjust.
But this objection begs the main question.
If each member of the legislature who votes for a checkerboard compromise does so not because he himself has no principles but because he wants to give the maximum possible effect to the principles he thinks right, then how has  anyone behaved irresponsibly?
Even if we were to accept that no legislator should vote for the compromise, this would not explain why we should reject the compromise as an out-come.
For we can easily imagine a legislative structure that would produce compromise statutes mechanically, as a function of the different opinions about strict liability or racial discrimination or abortion among the various legislators, without any legislator being asked or required to vote for the compromise as a package.
It might be understood in advance that the proportion of women who would be permitted an abortion would be fixed by the ratio of votes for permitting all abortions to total votes.
If we still object, then our objection cannot be based on the principle that no individual should vote against his conscience.
So it seems we have no reason of justice for rejecting the checkerboard strategy in advance, and strong reasons of fairness for endorsing it.
Yet our instincts condemn it.
Indeed many of us, to different degrees in different situations, would reject the checkerboard solution not only in general and in advance, but even in particular cases if it were available as a possibility.
We would prefer either of the alternative solutions to the checkerboard compromise.
Even if I thought strict liability for accidents wrong in principle, I would prefer that manufacturers of both washing machines and automobiles be held to that standard than that only one of them be.
I would rank the checkerboard solution not intermediate between the other two but third, below both, and so would many other people.
In some cases this instinct might be explained as reflecting the unworkability or inefficiency of a particular checkerboard solution.
But many of those we can imagine, like the abortion solution, are not particularly inefficient, and in any case our instinct suggests that these compromises are wrong, not merely impractical.
Not everyone would condemn every checkerboard solution.
People who believe very strongly that abortion is always murder, for example, may indeed think that the checkerboard abortion statute is better than a wholly permissive  law.
They think that fewer murders are better than more no matter how incoherent the compromise that produces fewer.
If they rank the checkerboard solution last in other circumstances, in the case of strict liability for manufacturers, for example, they nevertheless believe that internal compromise is wrong, though for reasons that yield when the substantive issue is very grave.
So they share the instinct that needs explaining.
This instinct is likely to be at work, moreover, in other, more complicated rankings they might make.
Suppose you think abortion is murder and that it makes no difference whether the pregnancy is the result of rape.
Would you not think a statute prohibiting abortion except in the case of rape distinctly better than a statute prohibiting abortion except to women born in one specified decade each century?
At least if you had no reason to think either would in fact allow more abortions?
You see the first of these statutes as a solution that gives effect to two recognizable principles of justice, ordered in a certain way, even though you reject one of the principles.
You cannot treat the second that way; it simply affirms for some people a principle it denies to others.
So for many of us, our preferences in particular cases pose the same puzzle as our more comprehensive rejection of the checkerboard solution as a general strategy for resolving differences over principle.
We cannot explain our hostility to internal compromise by appeal to principles of either fairness or justice as we have defined those virtues.
Astronomers postulated Neptune before they discovered it.
They knew that only another planet, whose orbit lay beyond those already recognized, could explain the behaviour of the nearer planets.
Our instincts about internal compromise suggest another political ideal standing beside justice and fairness.
Integrity is our Neptune.
The most natural explanation of why we oppose checkerboard statutes appeals to that ideal: we say that a state that adopts these internal compromises is acting in an unprincipled way, even though no single official who voted for or enforces the compromise has done anything which, judging his individual actions by the  ordinary standards of personal morality, he ought not to have done.
The state lacks integrity because it must endorse principles to justify part of what it has done that it must reject to justify the rest.
That explanation distinguishes integrity from the perverse consistency of someone who refuses to rescue some prisoners because he cannot save all.
If he had saved some, selected arbitrarily, he would not have violated any principle he needs to justify other acts.
But a state does act that way when it accepts a Solomonic checkerboard solution; it is inconsistency in principle among the acts of the state personified that integrity condemns.
Checkerboard statutes are the most dramatic violations of the ideal of integrity, and they are not unknown to our political history.
The United States Constitution contained at its birth particularly hideous examples: the problem of slavery was compromised by counting three-fifths of a state's slaves in determining the state's representation in Congress and forbidding Congress to limit the original states' power to import slaves, but only before 1808.
Integrity is flouted not only in specific compromises of that character, however, but whenever a community enacts and enforces different laws each of which is coherent in itself, but which cannot be defended together as expressing a coherent ranking of different principles of justice or fairness or procedural due process.
We know that our own legal structure constantly violates integrity in this less dramatic way.
We cannot bring all the various statutory and common-law rules our judges enforce under a single coherent scheme of principle.
(I discuss some consequences of that fact in Chapter 11.)
But we nevertheless accept integrity as a political ideal.
It is part of our collective political morality that such compromises are wrong, that the community as a whole and not just individual officials one by one must act in a principled way.
Integrity and the Constitution
In the United States this ideal is to some extent a matter
of constitutional law, for the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth Amendment is now understood to outlaw internal compromises over important matters of principle.
The Supreme Court relies on the language of equal protection to strike down state legislation that recognizes fundamental rights for some and not others.
The Constitution requires states to extend to all citizens certain rights —the right to free speech, for example —but leaves them free to recognize other, non-constitutionally required rights if they wish.
If a state accepts one of these nonconstitutionally required rights for one class of citizens, however, it must do so for all.
The Supreme Court's controversial 1973 abortion ruling, for example, allows states to prohibit abortions altogether in the last trimester of pregnancy.
But the Court would not allow a state to prohibit an abortion in the last trimester only to women born in even years.
This connection between integrity and the rhetoric of equal protection is revealing.
We insist on integrity because we believe that internal compromises would deny what is often called "equality before the law" and sometimes "formal equality." 
It has become fashionable to say that this kind of equality is unimportant because it offers little protection against tyranny.
This denigration assumes, however, that formal equality is only a matter of enforcing the rules, whatever they are, that have been laid down in legislation, in the spirit of conventionalism.
The equal protection cases show how important formal equality becomes when it is understood to require integrity as well as bare logical consistency, when it demands fidelity not just to rules but to the theories of fairness and justice that these rules presuppose by way of justification.
We can find another lesson about the dimensions of integrity in the constitutional system of the United States, a lesson that will prove important later in this chapter.
Integrity holds within political communities, not among them, so any opinion we have about the scope of the requirement of coherence makes assumptions about the size and character of  these communities.
The American Constitution provides a federal system: it recognizes states as distinct political communities and assigns them sovereignty over many issues of principle.
So there is no violation of political integrity in the fact that the tort laws of some states differ from those of others even over matters of principle.
Each sovereign speaks with a single voice, though not in harmony with other sovereigns.
But in a federal system integrity makes demands on the higher-order decisions, taken at the constitutional level, about the division of power between the national and the more local levels.
Some scholars and politicians opposed to the Supreme Court's 1973 abortion decision now argue that the Constitution should be understood to leave decisions about abortion to the various states, so that some could permit abortion on demand, others prohibit it in all circumstances, and others adopt intermediate regimes.
That suggestion is not itself a checkerboard solution: each state would retain a constitutional duty that its own abortion statute be coherent in principle, and the suggestion offers itself as recognizing independent sovereigns rather than speaking for all together.
But a question of integrity remains: whether leaving the abortion issue to individual states to decide differently if they wish is coherent in principle with the rest of the American constitutional scheme, which makes other important rights national in scope and enforcement.
I shall offer no further argument for my claim that our political life recognizes integrity as a political virtue.
The case is now strong enough for the weight of interest to shift to the other dimension of interpretation.
Do we do well to interpret our politics that way?
Is our political culture more attractive if seen as accepting that virtue?
I have already described, in Chapter 5, an obvious challenge to integrity.
A pragmatist anxious to reject integrity would attack the deep, working  personification we use to define the ideal.
We say that the state as a whole does wrong in accepting an internal compromise because it then compromises its principles.
The pragmatist will insist that the state is not an entity that can have principles to compromise.
Neither the state nor its government is a person; they are collections of people, and if none of these separate people has acted in any way inconsistently with his or her own principles, what sense can it make to say that the state they represent has done this?
IS INTEGRITY ATTRACTIVE?
The pragmatist who makes this argument tries to build political responsibility out of ordinary, nonpolitical principles of morality.
He proceeds in the fashion of our first argument, in Chapter 5, about the responsibility of shareholders for defective automobiles, applying ordinary principles about the responsibility of one person for injury to another.
He asks what each legislator might do, in the position he happens to occupy, to reduce the total number of incidents of injustice or unfairness according to his own views of what justice and fairness require.
If we follow the pragmatist in this order of argument —if we begin with individual official responsibility —we will reach his conclusion because we will then lack any appropriate explanation of why a vote for a checkerboard solution is wrong, any explanation of why a particular official should regard the compromise as a worse outcome than the outcome he regards as more uniformly unjust.
If, on the other hand, we insist on treating internally compromised statutes as the acts of a single distinct moral agent, then we can condemn them as unprincipled, and we then have a reason for arguing that no official should contribute to his state's unprincipled acts.
In order to defend the legislative principle of integrity, therefore, we must defend the general style of argument that takes the community itself as a moral agent.
Our argument must be drawn from political virtue, not, so far as this is supposed to be different, from metaphysics.
We must not say that integrity is a special virtue of politics because the state or community is a distinct entity, but that the  community should be seen as a distinct moral agent because the social and intellectual practices that treat community in this way should be protected.
Now we confront an obvious and deep difficulty.
We have grown accustomed in political life to arguing about social and political institutions in a certain way: by attacking or defending them on grounds of justice or fairness.
But we cannot hope to defend integrity in this normal way because we know that integrity will sometimes conflict with what fairness and justice recommend.
We must expand the breadth of political argument if we are to claim political integrity as a distinct ideal on its own.
But how?
Here is one suggestion, though not the only possibility.
French revolutionary rhetoric recognized a political ideal we have not yet considered.
We should look for our defense of integrity in the neighbourhood of fraternity or, to use its more fashionable name, community.
I shall argue that a political society that accepts integrity as a political virtue thereby becomes a special form of community, special in a way that promotes its moral authority to assume and deploy a monopoly of coercive force.
This is not the only argument for integrity, or the only consequence of recognizing it that citizens might value.
Integrity provides protection against partiality or deceit or other forms of official corruption, for example.
There is more room for favouritism or vindictiveness in a system that permits manufacturers of automobiles and of washing machines to be governed by different and contradictory principles of liability.
Integrity also contributes to the efficiency of law in the way we noticed earlier.
If people accept that they are governed not only by explicit rules laid down in past political decisions but by whatever other standards flow from the principles these decisions assume, then the set of recognized public standards can expand and contract organically, as people become more sophisticated in sensing and exploring what these principles require in new circumstances, without the need for detailed legislation or adjudication on each possible point of conflict.
This process works less effectively, to be  sure, when people disagree, as inevitably they sometimes will, about which principles are in fact assumed by the explicit rules and other standards of their community.
But a community that accepts integrity has a vehicle for organic change, even if it is not always wholly effective, that it would not otherwise have at all.
These consequences of integrity are practical.
Others are moral and expressive.
We noticed in our initial, cursory discussion of integrity in the last chapter that many of our political attitudes, collected in our instinct of group responsibility, assume that we are in some sense the authors of the political decisions made by our governors, or at least that we have reason to think of ourselves that way.
Kant and Rousseau based their conceptions of freedom on this ideal of self-legislation.
The ideal needs integrity, however, for a citizen cannot treat himself as the author of a collection of laws that are inconsistent in principle, nor can he see that collection as sponsored by any Rousseauian general will.
The ideal of self-government has a special aspect that integrity promotes directly, and noticing this will lead us into our main discussion of legitimacy and political obligation.
Integrity expands and deepens the role individual citizens can play in developing the public standards of their community because it requires them to treat relations among themselves as characteristically, not just spasmodically, governed by these standards.
If people understood formal legislation as only a matter of negotiated solutions to discrete problems, with no underlying commitment to any more fundamental public conception of justice, they would draw a sharp distinction between two kinds of encounters with fellow citizens: those that fall within and those that fall outside the scope of some past political decision.
Integrity, in contrast, insists that each citizen must accept demands on him, and may make demands on others, that share and extend the moral dimension of any explicit political decisions.
Integrity therefore fuses citizens' moral and political lives: it asks the good citizen, deciding how to treat his neighbour when their  interests conflict, to interpret the common scheme of justice to which they are both committed just in virtue of citizenship.
Integrity infuses political and private occasions each with the spirit of the other to the benefit of both.
This continuity has practical as well as expressive value, because it facilitates the organic style of change I mentioned a moment ago as a practical advantage.
But its expressive value is not exhausted, as its practical value might be, when citizens disagree about which scheme of justice is in fact embedded in the community's explicit political decisions.
For the expressive value is confirmed when people in good faith try to treat one another in a way appropriate to common membership in a community governed by political integrity and to see each other as making this attempt, even when they disagree about exactly what integrity requires in particular circumstances.
Political obligation is then not just a matter of obeying the discrete political decisions of the community one by one, as political philosophers usually represent it.
It becomes a more protestant idea: fidelity to a scheme of principle each citizen has a responsibility to identify, ultimately for himself, as his community's scheme.