

The Origins of the Left
The period between the wars was an unhappy one for the British people in general, and particularly for the majority who belonged to the industrial working class.
Between 1914 and 1918 almost 900,000 British Empire soldiers had died in the trenches, most of them from the working class.
In the 1920s the basic industries of coal, textiles and heavy engineering went into long-term decline.
Major industrial centres such as Glasgow, South Wales, Lancashire and the Northeast coast collapsed inexorably.
Eight years after the end of the war Britain experienced its only general strike, in defence of the miners.
It was a dismal failure, and was followed by restrictive legislation against the unions and by victimization of many union activists.
Fourteen years after the war there were almost three million unemployed, and in the North-East and South Wales at least one-third of all breadwinners were out of work and being steadily pushed onto the meagre relief provided by the Poor Law.
Twenty-one years after the end of the First World War the British people were subjected to a second war, which, while it produced only half as many British military casualties as the first, struck more radically at the lives of ordinary civilians.
Throughout the whole period Britain remained "Great" in the sense of ruling over the largest empire in human history.
Its parliament, most of its ministers and nearly all of its higher civil servants, continued to be chosen from a narrow social class, which had drawn its income from industrial areas now derelict, from agriculture now unable to support its labourers and from an empire which was even more depressed than the "Mother Country" .
The ruling class was clearly visible in terms of its life-style, attitudes, accents and political and  social dominance.
It was also surprisingly incompetent and reactionary, and it was unable to comprehend what was happening within Britain or what was happening to Britain's relationship with the rest of the world.
The recent ancestors of those who ruled Britain had been innovative, adventurous, intelligent, sometimes radical, always thrusting.
Their descendants were none of these.
The only politically important area of British life which was not dominated by these less than adequate children of the Victorians was the labour movement.
But that movement itself, despite rapid expansion, was also a child of the Victorians and of Liberal radicalism.
The British labour movement, the Labour Party and the trade unions, emerged from the First World War greatly strengthened.
The extension of the franchise in 1918 gave rise to a rapid expansion of the Labour vote accompanied by a rapid decline in Liberal support and organization."
Labour Party members had taken part in government for the first time under the wartime coalition of Lloyd George and with the support of the party's National Executive Committee.
Parts of the labour movement, however, remained or became hostile to the war.
This was particularly true of the Independent Labour Party, which was the dominant influence on local political organizations sponsoring Labour candidates.
The ILP's opposition to the war was the major element aggravating existing tension with the trade-union officials who dominated the federalized machine of the Labour Party.
The Trades Union Congress and most union officials supported the coalition government but there was strong and growing antipathy towards it, particularly among miners and engineers in Scotland and Wales.
The years immediately preceding the war had seen massive industrial unrest and propaganda for syndicalism, which seriously challenged the constitutionalism of established union leaders.
In South Wales and Clydeside a radical tradition established itself which emphasized direct action as an alternative to labour representation in parliament.
Much of this was spontaneous, although a number of small syndicalist and Marxist parties were able to exert some influence.
The Glasgow "rent strikes" of 1916, the engineers' strikes led by the Clyde Workers Committee and the political agitations of John Maclean marked a growing radicalism in Scotland which was largely outside established parties, although it was a major factor in  the electoral sweep of Glasgow seats for Labour and the ILP in 1922.
The Russian and Irish revolutions stimulated this radicalism still further and the period between 1910 and 1926 has been extensively treated as a potentially revolutionary period.4 Certainly there was a revolution, but it created the Irish Free State rather than the Socialist Commonwealth.
Much of the support for syndicalism and for selfstyled revolutionary and Marxist parties was concentrated outside England in the increasingly "depressed" areas of central Scotland and South Wales.
They were remote from the centre of political power in London and were even regarded as peripheral by many of the leaders of the labour movement.
The Miners' Federation, possibly because it was the largest and most militant component of the Trades Union Congress, gradually found itself isolated from the TUC General Council and its full-time officials in London.
Miners were represented by elderly and fairly conservative MPs who had worked their way up the union hierarchy in the days when mining areas were controlled by the Liberal Party.
Engineers were dominated by craft unionism which divided them by organization and levels of skill even within the newly created Amalgamated Engineering Union.
Those who were employed in expanding industries like motor and electrical engineering had a diminishing common interest with those in the depressed shipbuilding and railway engineering industries.
Thus when the General Strike came in 1926 it marked the end of a period of working-class militancy and collective resistance to industrial decay and stagnation.
The enthusiasm and militancy of 1919 no longer existed in the areas and industries where it had mattered most.
Working-class voters had already elected one Labour government in 1923 and following the General Strike they elected another one at the first opportunity in 1929.
The General Strike ended a major epoch in the history of the labour movement.
It destroyed the myth that a nationwide work stoppage could lead to a fairly bloodless revolution in which the system simply "collapsed" .
It showed how firmly union officials had become embedded in the governing structure and how reluctant Labour politicians were to jeopardize the chances of gaining office.
The notion of "betrayal" took hold on militants in the labour movement and partly accounts for the bitter resentment between the Left and most union officials during the 1930s.
The initiative in  the TUC and, increasingly, in the Labour Party passed from the miners and engineers to the general workers' unions with less tradition of direct action and less membership participation in the making of decisions.
The Labour Party in parliament did not immediately suffer from the reaction against the General Strike.
The first Labour government of 1924 had been ineffective and supported by the Liberals.
Nonetheless, despite its defeat, a shift continued towards the Labour Party of millions of former Liberal voters or new voters who were put off by the factionalism of the Liberal Party.
Between 1918 and 1929 the Labour vote rose by over six million to the total of 8,364,883 on which a Labour government with Liberal support was returned in 1929.
But this too marked a climax and the end of a political epoch.
The collapse of the MacDonald government in August 1931 weakened and divided the Labour Party as effectively as the General Strike had demoralized the trade unions.
Two major "betrayals" in five years were more than enough and created the permanent attitude of mistrust towards leadership which characterized radicals in the labour movement from then onwards.
Like other party leaders before and since, Ramsay MacDonald had been regarded as on the Left before his election, particularly because of his opposition to the war and his domination of the Independent Labour Party after Keir Hardie's death in 1915.
In fact MacDonald was as much a "gradualist" as the Fabians or as the cautious trade-union officials who initially regarded him with much suspicion.
His leadership of the party, although seldom challenged, took it far away from the radicalism which had encouraged the adoption of a socialist objective in 1918.
The fall of the Labour government in 1931 and MacDonald's defection to lead an essentially Conservative National Government, marked the lowest point ever reached in the morale of the Labour Party.
It completed the disillusionment begun by the failure of the General Strike.
The ten years which followed had certain peculiar characteristics.
There was a noticeable discontent with parliamentary practices and institutions.
New problems had arisen which the old parties, with their controversies over free trade or the gold standard seemed unable to solve.
The world depression further demoralized the labour movement, as it had begun in Britain under a Labour government and struck hardest at the major centres of unionism and Labour support.
Even the Labour  Party, a new and selfconsciously "progressive" party, had shown that its solution to economic problems was both ineffective and unoriginal.
In Europe new movements were arising which were totally different from previous political parties, and the conventional wisdom of British foreign policy was quite irrelevant in dealing with them.
To all who had looked for a "new world after the war" the 1930s proved particularly depressing.
In an attempt to find the causes for their disappointment many who would normally have been content with everyday party politics turned to more radical solutions.
Many short-lived groups appeared with formulae for fundamental change.
All failed because they were unable to gain either electoral backing or the support of sections of the existing parties.
During the 1930s a strong pacifist movement came into being which was not tied to a major party although most of its supporters were Labour or Liberal voters.
Pacifism and support for the League of Nations (which were not always compatible) appeared to have mass support, particularly in 1934 when the "Peace Ballot" was launched.
Even the National government and the Conservative Party leadership felt obliged to pay some attention to a movement with which they had little sympathy; they frequently referred to pacifist feeling as a reason for slow rearmament and later for "appeasement" of Germany and Italy.
But pacifism did not convert itself into an electorally oriented party and its position in the Labour Party was seriously eroded when George Lansbury resigned from the party leadership in 1935 (see below, pp. 163 — 72).
The Labour Party was not immune to the new ideas and movements which were springing up.
Most trade unionists had been indifferent to any political theory beyond an instinctive syndicalism which was itself largely confined to industrial disputes.
The parliamentary Labour leaders were inhibited by their acceptance of the conventions and habits of British democracy."
The individual member of the Labour Party was, however, particularly susceptible to all movements of protest.
In the peculiar circumstances of the 1930s vague feelings of unrest with the Party crystallized into something more concrete.
The Labour Party was developing from the federation of industrial and political organizations set up in 1900.
The various socialist minorities in the party were being eliminated as autonomous bodies and their members forced into the less independent  but more electorally effective local labour parties.
The constituency parties formed in 1918 were directly under the control of the Party's National Executive and professional organizers.
Unlike affiliated unions or socialist societies they had no collective voice but were regarded as subsidiary units.
This did not stop them from associating together nor did it stop the spread of a vague common ideology.
Many members of the Party saw the rapid growth in the constituencies as providing the basis for a new form of unitary political party growing out of the political wing and resembling the mass socialist parties of Europe.
Both within the political wing of Labour and in outside groups within the broader labour movement an identifiable "Left" began to emerge as a major influence.
 "Leftism" suggests opposition to existing policies or institutions, and within the labour movement it had come to mean dedication to rapid socialization of the economy whether through parliamentary or revolutionary methods (see below, chapters 12, 13, and 15).
There had always been a "Left" within the Labour movement.
Before the formation of the Labour Party it had been represented by the Independent Labour Party and the Social Democratic Federation working within the unions for the formation of a party representing labour.
During the 1920s there had been a "Left" opposition to MacDonald centred around Lansburys Weekly, an unofficial Labour paper, and later around the Independent Labour Party from which MacDonald eventually resigned.
Outside the party the syndicalists had formed a "Left" of the unions and this had been taken over to some extent by the Communist Party of Great Britain, founded in 1920.
The fluid political situation in the 1930s made it inevitable that the "Left" was strengthened as it was in all other democratic societies.
 "Leftism" came to mean opposition to the National government and criticism of the Labour Party's failure to express that opposition more strongly.
Among the politically active the appeals of the Left were often more attractive than those of the Labour, Liberal or Conservative Parties.
All the major parties were committed to some extent to discredited policies and persons.
The Left never formed a unified whole.
It was kept together by basic ideas held in common, by joint activity between the many Left minorities and by traditions of "united action" .
Despite this apparent vagueness there came into existence a body of individuals who may be referred to collectively as "the Left" , who were  described as such by themselves and by their opponents and who acted together during the 1930s on most political issues.
By the end of the decade this tendency was firmly established in the political wing of the Labour Party and had done much through its propaganda to discredit the National governments, which ruled the country from 1931 until 1940.
The Depression: 1931 — 1934
British politics in the 1930s were often disillusioning for the labour movement, starting with the defection of the Labour Party's leadership and the Party's electoral eclipse, and ending with the Second World War, which destroyed the party's hope of peace through disarmament and the League of Nations.
At no time in the intervening period was there any possibility of the Labour Party replacing the National, predominantly Conservative, government.
The defections of MacDonald and Snowden were to harden an already present suspicion of powerful personalities in the Labour Party, and to confirm trade-union suspicion of "intellectuals" .
Union leaders reacted by taking a more constructive role in the policy discussions of the party.
The Left now completely rejected MacDonald's concept of "gradualism" which had not been subjected to searching criticism until some three or four years before he left the party.
There was a tendency to radicalism in the labour movement.
In the general election of 1931 Labour Party representation was reduced to forty-six.
All the former Cabinet Ministers who remained with Labour were defeated except for George Lansbury, who became party leader by default in place of Arthur Henderson.
The latter was not re-elected until 1933.
Although the Labour vote was still six million, its numbers were lower than at any time since 1910.
Consequently, until 1935 the labour movement is of more interest when studied in its extra-parliamentary role, which centred largely around the issue of unemployment.
Not until after the general election of 1935 was the Labour Party able to take a decisive stand in parliament, and by that time foreign rather than domestic policy had become the main consideration of the political  parties.
Before that Labour was a vocal if ineffectual Opposition under the leadership of George Lansbury, C. R. Attlee and Sir Stafford Cripps.
Nearly all its remaining MPs were from the coalfields and it looked once more like the Labour Representation Committee of the pre-war period.
Unemployment was the most important problem facing the labour movement.
During 1930 the total of unemployed had more than doubled to 2,600,000.
The financial crisis which brought down the Labour government caused a rapid increase in the cost of unemployment assistance, an increase which pre-Keynesian economic theory held to be highly undesirable.
The "Anomalies Act" passed in July 1931 was the first major attempt to reduce such expenditure.
Under the National government this was followed "by the" means test", a deeply resented measure which was operated with a lack of compassion by many local Public Assistance Committees.
Over one million claimants were denied further guaranteed payments and the amount of relief was fixed by Public Assistance Committees on the basis of family resources.
What had been a right to receive benefit was replaced by grudingly distributed charity with all that implied in the era before the abolition of the workhouse.
The majority of insured unemployed were subject to the means test and there was naturally widespread resentment of this.
In 1932 there were violent demonstrations, several of them leading to serious riots.
The TUC, though deploring such activities, urged a return to the system operating in 1930.
Unemployment reached a peak of just under three million in January 1933 and the total number of unemployed did not fall below one million until the outbreak of war.
In 1934 a new unemployment Act was passed which went some way towards relieving a gradually diminishing problem.
The level of benefit was restored and the unemployment Assistance Board created to administer the work previously done by PACs in distributing relief.
Locally elected authorities subject to local political pressure were thus by-passed, limiting localized agitation by the National Unemployed Workers Movement.
The latter had grown rapidly and become well known for its imaginative if sometimes desperate tactics.
The Labour Party and the TUC remained "against any form of Means Test at all" , but they discouraged association with the NUWM which was under the control of Communists, particularly of Wal Hannington and Harry McShane.
As unemployment receded it left behind the problem of the Distressed Areas whose situation often worsened as the general employment position improved.
Real wages were rising for those in, work, and living standards improved markedly in the Midlands and the South-East, serving both to diminish the political impact of unemployment and to increase the differentiation of the country.
In South Wales, the North-East, Lancashire, Cumberland and central Scotland permanent unemployment and steady dereliction became characteristic of once-prosperous mining and industrial areas, most of which were represented by Labour MPs after 1935.
The Labour Party published the result of its own enquiries in 1936 and began a campaign for more effective measures, but the compulsory control of industrial location had to wait until the war and the post-war Labour government.
Public reaction to unemployment was largely one of stunned submission.
Labour kept the issue alive in parliament to the extent possible with its small numbers.
The NUWM was at the centre of most of the violent clashes with the police in the early 1930s, though this tactic was later changed to the more peaceful and probably more effective "hunger march" which took the unemployed through the countryside and down to London rather than leaving them isolated in the Distressed Areas.
The centres of militancy of the previous decade were among the hardest hit, Labour MPs nearly all came from constituencies with massive unemployment, and the unions were faced with the protection of their employed members through organizations weakened by declining funds and membership.
Industrial militancy naturally declined, and the problem of the unemployed almost completely preoccupied the labour movement until 1934.
There was no disagreement in accusing the National government of callousness and indifference.
But most Labour leaders were moving towards the adoption of Keynesian solutions and the improvement of existing unemployment benefits: the Left, on the other hand, saw in the situation final proof of the collapse of capitalism and the failure of all amelioration.
After the initial shock of the 1931 election had been overcome, the Labour Party tried to revise its programme and to improve its organization.
A policy committee of the National"Executive Committee, established in December 1931, was responsible for preparing reports embodying the programme of a future Labour  government.
The 1932 Conference reflected a radical reaction to the defeat of 1931 and particularly to bankers, who were held responsible for the financial collapse in Britain and throughout the Western world.
Conference decisions were taken out of the hands of the National Executive on several major issues, indicating a spirit of defiant independence which was rare in the Party as a whole.
The Conference decided "that the leaders of the next Labour Government and the Parliamentary Labour Party be instructed by the National Conference that, on assuming office, either with or without power, definite Socialist legislation must be immediately promulgated, and the Party shall stand or fall in the House of Commons on the principles in which it has faith" .
Despite the opposition of Arthur Henderson, a series of resolutions bound the Parliamentary Party to Conference decisions and to extra-parliamentary guidance.
Discussions on workers' control and the general strike to stop war also showed that an important section of the trade unions had reacted against gradualism, at least in words, and was returning to the syndicalist notions fashionable some ten years before.
However the industrial basis for syndicalism was lying in ruins as a result of the Depression and in later years the unions strongly opposed the idea of industrial action for political ends.
Trade-union membership remained low for some time, affected by unemployment and by the movement of industry to less highly unionized areas in the South of England.
Union affiliations to the Labour Party had been confined to those "contracting in" under the Trades Disputes Act of 1927, and the total of affiliated unionists stood at two million throughout the 1930s.
In consequence the numerical significance of the unions within the Labour Party structure was declining in contrast to that of the expanding constituency Labour Parties.
By 1937 there was one individual Party member for every five affiliated from the unions.
This apparent weakening of trade-union domination of the party machine was, however, somewhat illusory.
After 1937 the centre of power in the Party appeared to be moving towards the individual membership, but in 1939 the union leaders showed their strength in ensuring the expulsion of Sir Stafford Cripps and his supporters.
Despite appearances of a "Leftward swing" after 1931, or of a lessening of trade-union influence, there was little real change in the underlying gradualism and stolidity of the Labour Party.
It was in the elaboration of its programme rather than in its  Parliamentary Opposition or in campaigns in the country, that the Labour Party made the greatest advances in recovering from its collapse.
Socialism and the Condition of the People, the new programme presented to the Hastings Conference of 1933, initiated the controversy which was to drive Sir Stafford Cripps and the newly formed Socialist League into opposition to the official policy of the Party.
Cripps and his supporters objected that the Labour leadership had failed to absorb the lessons of 1931 and were not Prepared to deal with the inevitable "sabotage" of the Labour programme by capitalist interests.
At Hastings and at Southport in 1934, controversy centred around the issue of "Emergency Powers" , i.e. the granting to a future Labour government of "authority to take over or regulate the financial machine, and to put into force any measures that the situation may require for the immediate control or socialization of industry" .
By 1934 the Labour Party was Preparing for the next election and the delegates at Southport resisted the attempts of the Socialist League to change the programme For Socialism and Peace into a radical appeal for a rapid transformation to socialism.
The Left of the Labour Party found itself in an increasingly unfavourable PoSition.
Ernest Bevin, leader of the new force in the unions, the general workers, resented the attempts of intellectuals like Cripps to elaborate a new Party Policy which ignored decisions taken by the Trades Union Congress.
The unions were not Prepared to Support any form of "direct action" , despite the resolutions carried at earlier Congresses in favour of the use of strikes for Political ends.
By 1935 the dominant force in the unions led by Bevin and Walter Citrine, the TUC secretary, was tired of Cripps's radicalism and of Lansbury's pacifism and decided to demolish Cripps and Lansbury Politically.
An important change in the balance within the industrial movement, and hence within the Labour Party, was brought about by the decline in numbers and influence of the Miners' Federation of Great Britain.
With the decline of the mining industry and the isolation of the MFGB after the General Strike, it could no longer retain its dominant position and was replaced by the Transport and General Workers Union.
Through the TGWU, Ernest Bevin became the leading figure at the Labour Party Conference, using his influence increasingly against the Communists and the Left and in favour of rearmament against Germany.
For after 1933 the labour movement internationally was faced with a problem  which was to preoccupy it and to change its focus from domestic to international affairs.
The Labour Party was a member of the Labour and Socialist International and the TUC was affiliated to the International Federation of Trade Unions at Amsterdam.
But the heart of European Socialism lay with the German Social Democratic Party and the largest Communist Party outside the Soviet Union had also been in Germany.
Although the Soviet Union had become the major influence on revolutionary socialist movements since 1917, the Communist International had always looked upon Germany as the next most likely centre for a proletarian revolution.
In 1928 the Sixth World Congress of the Communist International began a violent onslaught against Social Democracy the main representative of which was the German Social Democratic Party.
At the same time the small National Socialist Party began to win a growing following for its attacks on the Weimar Republic, the maintenance of which was a prime aim of German Social Democracy.
Thus the Communists and the Nazis had a common interest in the destruction of the Social Democrats and this fact was frequently referred to by the Labour Party and the TUC in the early 1930s as a reason for opposing both movements with equal vigour.
The German Communists believed that, after a temporary victory for Hitler, they would be able to gain power in the ensuing confusion.
This was an illusion and the Communists were forced into semi-legality after Hitler's appointment as Chancellor in January 1933.
The Nazis polled over seventeen million votes on 5 March 1933 and began the transformation of Germany into a totalitarian state.
The European labour movement lost its heartland, and no distinction was made between Communists and Social Democrats, between workers or intellectuals.
The German Communist Party had not only failed to carry out.the revolution but had vanished as rapidly as the Social Democrats.
Apart from underestimating the strength of the Nazis and overestimating their own, the Communists had directed their main attacks since 1928 against the Social Democrats.
British Communists continued to blame the Social Democrats for Hitler's victory while at the same time trying to organize common anti-Fascist activities between Communists and the Left of the Labour movement.
This merely confirmed the distaste for Communists which Bevin and other union officials had acquired in the 1920s.
In the following year it became clear that fascism was not confined to Germany and Italy but was a development common to all European countries.
This was underlined by the transformation of Sir Oswald Mosley's New Party into the British Union of Fascists and its organization of a bloody and violent rally at Olympia in London in June.
Previously existing fascist groups, which had been oriented towards Italy, were bullied or out-organized by the BUF which followed German Nazi example in becoming increasingly anti-Semitic.
The mass circulation Daily Mail, encouraged by its owner Lord Rothermere, gave support to fascism and the BUF until discouraged from doing so by a marked drop in readership.
The event which finally drew the attention of the labour movement to the threat posed by fascism was the overthrow of democracy in Austria in February 1934.
It is evident that the defeat of the Austrian Socialists was felt more strongly in Britain than that of the Germans, who had failed to put up an armed resistance and who were divided by the struggle between the Communists and the Social Democrats.
The British TUC had given £10,000 to the Austrian Socialists as a contribution to their defence.
Hundreds of Labour Party members had gone to "fled Vienna" in the past and all were distressed at the news of its bombardment.
Fascism and Communism were both foreign creeds with very limited followings in Britain before 1929.
The experiences of 1933 and 1934 suggested to many that European politics was likely to intrude increasingly into a previously insular British labour movement.
The politically active came to see Britain's problems in international rather than exclusively domestic terms, an important change for many in the Labour Party.
To some extent there was an unwarranted transfer of European analogies to the British situation.
The battles between Fascists and the Left which began in 1934 looked superficially like those which had marked the last years of the Weimar republic.
But they did not presage the same collapse of democracy nor the rise of the BUF and the Communists as mass parties.
Nevertheless, a major lesson was drawn from the German and Austrian situation by many in the British labour movement.
Communists and Socialists had been equally suppressed and imprisoned.
It was fatal for them to emphasize their differences in the face of armed attack from the German Nazi or Austrian Christian Social autocracies.
It was foolish to attack parliamentary  democracy when the real alternative being offered in Europe was not the Socialist Commonwealth but the Third Reich.
The leaders of the labour movement concluded from this that the British government had a responsibility to defend democracy against fascism and were increasingly bitter about the apparent indifference or even acceptance which characterized the response of many Conservatives to dictatorship in central Europe.
The Left drew the less tenable if understandable conclusion that all socialists should unite in a single organization to oppose the threat of fascism, without placing any reliance on the British state to protect domestic political institutions.
Thus there was no substantial difference in the labour movement about the nature of fascism, but much disagreement about how to deal with it.
A Sectarian Left
Despite its shattering defeat in 1931 the Labour Party had established itself as the dominant political force opposed to the Conservative Party, as the unchallenged controller of local government on the major coalfields and as the Party to which the great majority of trade-union officials gave their loyalty.
All this had been achieved at the expense of the Liberal Party which had monopolized all three areas before 1910.
In another sense the domination of the Labour Party had also been achieved at the expense of other claimants to the leadership of the socialist movement and the working class.
Prior to 1910 it was by no means clear either that Labour would replace the Liberals or that it would move So far ahead of these rivals as to reduce them to marginal sects.
Between 1910 and 1914 the whole concept of parliamentary Labourism was seriously threatened by syndicalism in those areas such as South Wales where the parliamentary representation of unionized workers had first been pioneered.
The Liberal loyalties of the older generation of miners' officials had been challenged not merely by the idea of independent labour representation but also by the notion of direct action, based on industrial power and leading to a system of "workers' control" which would supplant parliamentary institutions.
Such ideas had their major influence in South Wales where nearly all men were engaged in mining and could envisage a pure "class struggle" between themselves and the coalowners which would at the same time be a political struggle between the great majority and the rich minority.
In other parts of Britain such ideas were more difficult to put across except to relatively small minorities or in the predominantly proletarian areas of central Scotland where miners, engineers and shipbuilders also constituted the majority of wage earners.
Apart from syndicalism, whose appeal was thus confined to limited and peculiarly class-conscious districts, the total domination of the Labour Party had been challenged before 1914 by a variety of organizations representing two important traditions, ILP "independent socialism" and Marxism.
When the ILP had been a founding organization of the Labour Representation Committee in 1900, its opposition to the "Liberal-Labour" position separated it from many trade-union officials and earned their Suspicion.
The ILP founder, Keir Hardie, although a miner, had not entered parliament as the nominee of the Miners' Federation and most ILP Members were nominated by local Party branches or Trades Councils rather than through the national trade unions.
Thus the ILP was both "in the Labour Party" and "apart from the Labour Party" even before 1914.
With the outbreak of war the ILP put itself in opposition to the trade-union leaders by its refusal to support the war and by its criticism of those Labour Party members who either joined the government after 1916 or gave it their loyal parliamentary support.
By 1918 there were many Labour Party parliamentarians and trade unionists who would willingly have excluded the ILP from the party, were it not that opposition to the war had spread quite widely and had partly justified the ILP position.
An essential ideological difference remained.
The ILP was specifically socialist "while many Labour unionists and politicians were essentially" labour"in that they regarded the protection of living standards and of trade unions as their primary reason for entering parliament.
The socialism of the ILP was based partly on egalitarian and pacifist beliefs of Nonconformist religious origin.
These were based on a faith in the rationality and cooperative character of man and in the possibility of building a more harmonious society once inequality and exploitation were removed through state action.
They stood much closer to the mainstream of political thinking in the working-class movement than the Marxists and were able to tap a tradition of radicalism which extended back to the Chartists of the previous century and further.
After 1918 the ILP was also able to recruit Liberal radicals from the middle classes to what had always been a predominantly working-class party.
The Marxists, by contrast, had only been able to build a viable organization, under  the name of the British Socialist Party, for a few years before 1914 and were always bedevilled by sectarianism and schism.
Unlike the ILP, Marxists tended to be ambivalent about parliamentary socialism although most of them accepted the combination of revolutionary and democratic ideas which had been formulated in the German Social Democratic Party by Kautsky and Bebel.
The Marxists never quite reconciled themselves either to the policies, the leadership or the tactics of the Labour Party.
They joined it, left it, joined it again, but only to oppose its acceptance of the war.
During the upsurge of industrial militancy between 1910 and 1914 Marxism and syndicalism became closely intermingled, a development influenced by the writings of Daniel de Leon.
This tradition was clearly counterposed to that of the founder of British Marxism, N.M.
Hyndman, who became a patriotic supporter of a war to which most British Marxists were opposed.
Until the Bolshevik revolution the question of whether Marxists should be inside or outside the Labour Party was very much a matter for themselves, as for all other radical and socialist groups.
The Labour Party was a federation of autonomous organizations, all of them older than the party itself.
Until 1918 it was a "movement" in the sense of having little central discipline and being bound together by an agreement to accept all ideological positions critical of existing society and postulated on social change through political action.
It had no orthodoxy, unlike the European social-democratic parties.
It had no individual membership within a centrally-controlled structure and thus no means, or desire, to exclude those who wished to join.
Only within the Parliamentary Labour Party was there an attempt at collective discipline and that was so loose that the Independent Labour Party was to maintain its right to direct its own members within the PLP as late as 1931.
The strength of the Labour Party lay in its ability to win votes, which became increasingly clear in relation to the Liberals after the granting of manhood suffrage in 1918 and had been clear in relation to other socialist groups ever since 1900.
AS trade-union officials came to recognize this ability they swung their organizations behind the only Party which has ever secured any significant working-class representation in the British parliament.
They did so all the more readily because they were not expected to adopt any ideological formula but, rather, were able to put the stamp of their own opinions on the policy of a Party which had no set position of its own.
After the Bolshevik revolution and the creation of the Communist International in 1919, most British Marxists were put into a situation which had never previously existed for any part of the British labour movement.
The Second International had been intellectually dominated by the German Social Democratic Party and the small British Socialist Party and Independent Labour Party seem to have accepted this without feeling bound to follow the directives of a single foreign party, let alone a government.
The Communist International quite deliberately set out to create "sections" under its detailed control, which would be more easily disciplined than the Second International parties which in Lenin's eyes had been too independent to act together on the outbreak of war.
The collapse of the previous International was also attributed by Lenin to the deviant ideology of its leaders and the Comintern was consequently designed in see that orthodoxy was imposed centrally upon all sections.
Moreover the Communist International was located in Moscow, the capital of a Communist state, derived its funds from a governing party, and could not have functioned without the help of its largest member, the Soviet Communist Party.
Many British Labour leaders were already hostile to radical Marxists for their opposition to the war and their encouragement of syndicalist movements challenging existing trade-union practices.
The creation of the Comintern gave them an opportunity to exclude from the Labour Party, for the first time, Marxists who wished to join it.
As those Marxists were receiving guidance and money from a party and government which declared their dedication to the destruction of "the MacDonalds and the Hendersons" (as already of "the Kerenskys and the Martovs" ) this exclusion was hardly surprising.
It hastened the process by which the Labour Party developed into a unitary political party in alliance with the trade unions and with a commitment to parliamentary socialism and against authoritarian socialism.
The Communist Party of Great Britain, which was thus excluded from the Labour Party on its foundation was by far the most important Left minority in existence in the 1930s although it had to compete with the ILP for that position at least until 1935.
The Party's formative years were marked by controversy over its relations with the Labour Party, over its internal reorganization along "Bolshevik" lines, over its attitudes towards parliamentary democracy, but not significantly over its allegiance to the  Communist International and the Soviet Union.
Its attitudes towards and behaviour within the broad labour movement steadily antagonized activists.
officials and leaders, including those calling themselves "socialist" who were sympathetic to the Soviet revolution.
Until 1925 it had been possible for Communists to be represented in all sections of the Labour Party but at the liverpool Conference it was decided to exclude them from membership.
In 1926 over a dozen Constituency Labour Parties were disbanded for accepting Communists into individual membership and for being controlled by the Leftwing Movement.
the aim of which was to reverse the Liverpool decisions and to recruit Communist support within the Labour Party.
The Trades Union Congress of 1927 enforced the disaffiliation of local Trades Councils from the Minority Movement, formed in 1924 as the British branch of the Red International of Labour Unions.
In the following year the TUC General Council was authorized to conduct an enquiry into the activities of "disruptive elements" , a category which included the Minority Movement and other subsidiaries of the Communist Party.
While Communists had taken an active part in the 1926 General Strike and earned some support within the Miners' Federation, most trade-union officials looked upon them as enemies trying to control the movement in the interests of a foreign organization.
At this moment of crisis the Communist International began an onslaught on Social Democracy, despite the strenuous opposition of the leadership of the British Party.
The Comintern described Social Democracy as "social fascism" and forced its constituent sections to break off all relations with the official Labour movement.
The Central Committee of the British Party showed no enthusiasm for the new policy and were reluctant to declare "all-out war" on their comrades in the unions and local Labour parties.
While the Comintern policy was nominally accepted in Britain it was only vocal extremists, backed by the Comintern, who wished to see it rigorously enforced.
After a disappointing vote of 50,622 in the 1929 general election this group was able to blame the "reformist" Central Committee for the weak following and small membership of the Party.
At the Eleventh Congress, held in December 1929. a completely reformed Central Committee was elected with Harry Pollitt. an upholder of the Comintern's policy.
elected as General Secretary.
It became increasingly clear in the next two years that the change in leaders and policy had served only to weaken the  Party still further.
The rigid application of the "social fascist" line did more to alienate the Communists from the labour movement than any previous actions.
If the Communists were steadily driven out of the Labour Party and expedited the process by withdrawing themselves from the official levels of the labour movement, the Independent Labour Party drifted uncertainly into opposition to the Labour leadership and finally expelled itself from the party it had helped to found.
A separate political party within the federation created in 1900. the ILP remained the most important avenue for taking an active role in the Labour Party as an individual socialist.
The new constitution of the Labour Party made it possible in 1918 for members to join local labour parties without being enrolled in an affiliated organization.
Ten years later there were 215,000 such members, dwarfing numerically the 30,000 members of the ILP.
Within the Labour Party the ILP remained more important than its size would indicate.
Campbell Stephen prophesied as late as 1932 that the Labour Party would not function if the ILP disaffiliated from it.
Exaggerated though this proved to be, the ILP was still providing much of the enthusiasm in the Labour Party.
As Attlee wrote in 1937,"its influence lay not in its numbers, but in the intensity of the work done and in its political consciousness.
After its opposition to the war the ILP had become deeply influenced by the political currents produced by the Russian revolution.
For a short time entry was considered into the Communist International which the Left in the ILP saw as a continuation of the Second International of which the ILP had been an affiliate.
On receiving the Twenty-one Conditions for entry the ILP decided instead to link with the Vienna or "Two-and-a-Half" International which included various Left Socialist groups in Europe.
The ILP Left, led by S. Saklatvala and C. L'Estrange Malone MP, joined the Communist Party and represented it in parliament in the 1920s.
There were few Marxists in the ILP but it was disproportionately strong in Scotland and came under the domination of the "Clydesider" MPs returned in 1922, from acutely overcrowded and poor constituencies which seemed to call for extreme social measures.
Feeling themselves isolated from Ramsay MacDonald, who had been helped into Labour leadership by the "Clydesiders" , the ILP became receptive to the radical socialism of the Scottish MPs.
James Maxton, Member for  Bridgeton, became chairman of the ILP in 1926 and was its leading figure until his death twenty years later.
In 1928 Maxton started a campaign with A.J. Cook.
secretary of the Miners' Federation, to arouse Left activity with the Labour Party.
The ILP also subscribed to the Socialism in our Time (or "living wage" ) programme with MacDonald and the parliamentary Labour leaders found too radical.
The 1929 Carlisle conference of the ILP adopted conditions for membership of the Parliamentary ILP Group which.
in effect.
would have turned it into a distinct party separate from the Parliamentary Labour Party of which it formed nearly a halt Candidates were asked to avoid "commitments with other organisations of such a nature as to militate against their effectiveness as ILP Members of Parliament" .
A further step was taken at Birmingham in 1930 when the Conference instructed the National Administrative Council: to reconstruct the ILP Parliamentary Group on the basis of acceptance of the policy of the ILP as laid down by decisions of Annual Conference and as interpreted by the NAC. and to limit endorsements of future ILP Parliamentary candidates to nominees who accept this basis.
In a letter sent to all ILP Members of Parliament on 30 July 1930, the general secretary.
John Paton, defined ILP policy as being based on the Socialism in our Time programme.
Throughout the summer of 1930 attempts were made by Maxton and Henderson, secretary of the Labour Party, to reach an agreement which would leave the ILP free to declare its principles without endangering the majority of the Labour government.
These negotiations were unfruitful and the ILP continued to press its Members for acceptance of the conditions for group membership laid down at Birmingham.
Written acceptance was made a condition of membership in a circular of 27 October 1930 and only twenty-seven MPs conformed.
Membership of the ILP had been largely a formality for the remaining four-fifths of the original group, though some active ILP members like Dr Alfred Salter and Emanuel Shinwell were among those severing their connections with the party.
Tension between the ILP and the Labour Party had increased in June 1930 when the National Executive refused to endorse John McGovern as labour candidate for Shettleston, Glasgow.
This  seat, which had been held by John Wheatley was an ILP stronghold and McGovern was elected as an unendorsed candidate.
At the end of November the Executive took similar action against the ILP candidate in East Renfrew who had declined to accept the new Standing Orders of the Parliamentary Labour Party.
These would have bound him to support majority decisions, even where these decisions were not accepted by the ILP Group.
Maxton, writing to Henderson on December 30, felt that the ILP could not accept these Standing Orders, "without substantial qualifications and reservation" .
Realizing the serious implications of further disagreement, the ILP National Administrative Council appointed a sub-committee in February 1931 to consider the Party's relationship with the Labour Party.
The conflict between "practical" and "idealist" politics had become too bitter for it to be abandoned on the collapse of the Labour Government.
Despite the vindication of much of its criticism, the ILP refused to see its opposition to Labour "gradualism" as in any way affected by the new situation.
The Labour Party, on the other hand, continued to press for the acceptance of its Parliamentary Standing Orders.
A fruitless correspondence between Paton and Henderson was carried on throughout July 1931.
It revealed an inability to compromise which remained unaltered after the fall of the Government in August.
The Labour Party settled the issue to its own satisfaction at the Scarborough Conference in October.
An alteration to the Party Constitution forbade selection as a candidate to anyone who "does not undertake to accept and act in harmony with the Standing Orders of the Parliamentary Party" .
The Independent Labour Party was thus forced to accept full responsibility for continuing the dispute.
Twenty-two Labour candidates lost their endorsement in the General Election of October 1931 for refusing to accept Parliamentary Standing Orders.
They secured 285,462 votes and five ILP Members were returned, Maxton (Bridgeton), McGovern (Shettleston) and Wallhead (Merthyr) under the Party's auspices, and Buchanan (Gorbals) and Kirkwood (Dumbarton Burghs) as Trade Union nominees.
The National Administrative Council met on the following weekend to discuss the situation which had arisen.
George Lansbury had approached the ILP Members after their election to suggest negotiations for uniting the greatly reduced Opposition.
But he would not countenance a "Party within a Party," and the NAC had to face up to the consequences of maintaining a separate party in Parliament.
The diversity of views within the ILP on future relations with the Labour Party was fully represented in its leadership.
A majority believed that the ILP should remain within the Labour Party until forced to withdraw.
John Paton. as General Secretary, pointed to the organizational hazards of withdrawing from the Labour Party: The practical difficulties of maintaining and developing the organisation outside the Labour Party were enormous and it might be that it would involve a risk of the complete disintegration of the ILP.
Maxton led the opposition to this view, claiming not that the Party should disaffiliate immediately, but that it should not hesitate to do so if its freedom to advocate the Socialism in Our Time policy were limited.
No definite decision could be reached.
The special November Conference which had been proposed was abandoned, again in the hope that the ILP would not yet have to commit itself.
The two major traditions represented by the Communist Party and the ILP had become enshrined in increasingly sectarian parties.
Consequently their influence on the Left of the Labour Party was greatly diminished and for several years after the departure of MacDonald the Labour Left was mainly represented by small groups based on defectors from the ILP and, to a lesser extent, from the Communist Party.
The Communists had abandoned the Leftwing Movement in 1929 and it had immediately collapsed.
Communist influence within the Labour Party was probably less between 1929 and 1934 than at any time before or since.
The Communist Party was engaged in a campaign of abuse and violence against the leadership of the unions.
Communists continued to have some success among the unemployed, many of whom felt betrayed by the Labour government and ignored by the TUC.
Not only was a large proportion of Communist Party membership unemployed but it was in the shattered heavy industrial areas that there seemed some possibility of gaining support in the "revolutionary" phase through which the Party was passing.
The National Unemployed Workers Movement, under the leadership of Wal Hannington and Harry McShane, was comparatively influential, particularly in the depressed areas of South  Wales, Lancashire and Scotland.
The sudden increase in unemployment after 1930 gave it further importance.
Unemployed workers were encouraged to look on the NUWM as a "trade union of the unemployed" acting as far as possible as their representative.
From 1923 to 1925 the TUC had maintained a Joint Committee with it, but had discontinued its cooperation and attacked the Movement as Communist-dominated.
Partly to counteract its influence the TUC created official Unemployed Associations in 1930.
The NUWM was essentially a political movement, unlike the TUC Associations or the Social Service Centres which were largely educational and recreational.
The Movement"looked upon these associations with hostility and opposed them.
Later, under the influence of the Communist Party, this attitude changed and there began a movement for unity and common action."
All the spectacular demonstrations of the unemployed were organized by the NUWM, including the Hunger Marches of 1932, 1934, and 1936.
In 1932, at the peak of unemployment, it claimed 386 branches and 50,000 members.
Conflict with the police led to serious riots at Birkenhead and Belfast during the campaign against the Means Test in 1932.
The Movement put up municipal candidates and worked with the Communist Party and the ILP for the "immediate demands" of the unemployed.
It took an active part in the National Charter Campaign of 1931 and in the Bermondsey Unity Congress of 1934.
In those areas where unemployment was endemic, the NUWM was able to establish roots in the community and to establish a legitimacy as a political movement which usually evaded the Communist Party.
This was particularly true in Lancashire and the North-East, where the Communist Party was weakly organized.
The Communist Party undoubtedly regarded the NUWM as its subsidiary.
Tom Bell wrote that"its leading comrades were Party members and worked in the closest collaboration with the Party Central Committee.
The Party indeed was the main inspirer of the whole of this movement."
Despite this liaison, the NUWM was organizationally more successful than the parent Party and reached a much wider audience during the "social fascist" phase of the early 1930s.
The founder of the Movement, and consequently one of the best-known Communist leaders, Wal Hannington had constantly to assert the autonomy of the NUWM.
At the Prague conference on  unemployment, organized by the Comintern in August 1931, he complained: The unemployed movement has been regarded as a section of the Minority Movement and there have been tendencies in the Minority Movement towards disbanding the existing unemployed movement and substituting it by a special section of the Minority Movement.
That is why we have not become a stronger mass movement.
Hannington clearly resented this domination by the almost defunct and hopelessly sectarian Minority Movement which was currently antagonizing union officials by supporting "breakaway Red unions" .
The constant complaint of the British Party against the NUWM was that it had failed to use its influence with employed workers and trade unionists.
The Movement increased its membership from 5,000 in 1929 to 40,000 two years later at a time when the Communist Party was at its lowest ebb.
It was hoped that by using the NUWM prestige the Communists would be able to regain their lost influence in the unions.
The Minority Movement had not only failed to increase Communist support in the unions but was itself fading away.
In general the tactic of maintaining a parallel organization within the unions was a failure.
The Communist Party Central Committee complained in February 1932: The Minority Movement is a small self-absorbed organization of leaders who have nothing to do with the real struggle of the workers and who instead of going to the workers, working among them and fighting against the reformist leaders in the Trade Unions, simply approach the workers with the invitation to take part in a highly elaborate organisational structure.
The Battersea Congress of the Party, to which this complaint was later addressed, gave official backing to a scheme which had been projected for some time, a Revolutionary Trade Union Opposition to unite the various unofficial movements which had been growing up in many important unions.
While this did not expressly exclude the Minority Movement, the growth of Communist-led "rank and file movements" did in effect bring an end to the MM and to all formal Party subsidiaries within the unions.
Communist fractions, of course, remained in being but they did not breach the  basic principle of British trade unionism that there should be no separate organizations based on ideology or religion and standing in opposition to the TUC.
At the Seventh Congress of the Comintern in 1935 the trade union policy pursued since 1928 was tacitly admitted to have been a blunder.
It had been particularly disastrous in Germany and Britain, the countries for which it had been designed.
Wilhelm Pieck said of the Minority Movement: The most striking example of sectarianism in the trade union movement was provided in Great Britain where…the Communists adopted such unfortunate and sectarian tactics that the Minority Movement actually fell to pieces.
The failure to recruit for "reformist trade unions" and the attempt to use the MM as the nucleus for Red Trade Unions had greatly reduced Communist influence, argued Pieck.
In fairness to the much maligned British Communists it might be added that Lozovsky, the RILU leader chiefly responsible for the discarded policy, had to admit to its failure throughout the world.
The unemployed movement served to increase Communist influence, but was attacked for not doing so fast enough.
The Minority Movement undeniably limited Communist influence in the Labour movement and earned the undying hostility of most trade-union officials.
In October 1934 the TUC issued Circular 16 (called "Black Circular" by the Communists) banning Communists as members of Trades Councils.
Encouragement of "unofficial movements" only strengthened TUC hostility to the Communists and this was, of course, reflected at Labour Party conferences and on the Labour National Executive, both of which were dominated by full-time union officials.
TUC opposition also limited the effectiveness of the NUWM, which became an embarrassment to the Communist Party once it left its sectarianism behind it.
Pollitt reported in January 1936: The Central Committee believe that whilst everything possible should be done to support and strengthen the NUWM we must now open up the wider perspective of one united unemployed organisation identified with, and part of, the Trades Councils and the Trade Union Congress.
As the TUC would not negotiate with the NUWM this logically  implied an end to the Movement which finally dissolve on the outbreak of war in 1939.
Apart from the South Wales Miners' Federation, it had been almost the only major working class organization through which the Communists had consistently exercised influence.
The Communists were busily isolating themselves from the labour movement; the Independent Labour Party was about to do the same.
The Labour Party, in august 1931, suffered the most severe blow to its pride, solidarity and sense of mission ever experienced in its history.
The spectacular rise to power throughout the 1920s suddenly came to a halt, betrayed by the leaders who had inspired it.
The trade unions were disillusioned by the General Strike, shackled by the Trades Disputes Act and demoralized by the Depression.
Of the three component political groups which had founded the Labour Representation Committee thirty years before, the Marxists had mostly isolated themselves within the Communist Party, the ILP was ready to depart and the Fabian Society was moribund.
If the Labour Party was to recover intellectually from the collapse of MacDonald's "biological gradualism" and to build its local organisation it needed support from radical intellectuals and from the youth.
In June 1931 G. D. H. Cole and several of the younger Fabians founded a Society for Socialist Inquiry and Propaganda which, it was hoped, would have a more popular appeal than the Fabian Society.
The Labour Left was to centre around the Socialist League, a successor to SSIP formed in October 1932.
It was also to attract increasing support from youth and students.
Youthful enthusiasm was welcomed by many of the older members of the Labour Party but it was difficult to control within the constitutional and political limitations of the Party organization.
Youth sections of the Labour Party had been formed in 1924, but not until the ILP had created a successful national organization, the Guild of Youth, did the Labour Party reorganize the 150 youth sections into the Labour Party League of Youth.
After the collapse of the MacDonald government and the dispute with the ILP, the Labour Party made a concerted effort to increase the strength of the League.
The United Front From Below
At the depths of the Depression, when the case for radical working-class action in favour of a socialist programme seemed incontrovertible, the labour movement was divided and demoralized.
The militant socialist minorities were at each other 's throats and were completely disillusioned with the Labour Party.
The Party itself had lost its leaders and its parliamentary strength.
It was looking for a new programme and trying to consolidate its confused followers.
Thus during the worst crisis in British industrial history neither the labour movement nor its radical Left were able to take advantage of the situation.
The Conservatives were supreme, even in many of the worst hit of the Distressed Areas.
The Labour Party, with considerable justification, saw itself as the "united front of the working class" and found little reason for joint activity with sectarian minorities on the Left.
Within the Left however there were strong practical reasons in favour of some co-operation with others.
In isolation the Left minority could have little influence.
It had to combine with others, to "capture" larger organizations or to assume leadership of wider groups.
Moreover, despite the ideological differences on the Left, which were most acute between 1929 and 1934, there were strong sentiments in favour of "working-class unity" in the abstract.
The Communists, who were most active in stressing their differences with others were also most active in calling for unity.
The Communist Party had most to gain by combination with other groups, for with its strong discipline it could always hope to attract supporters from allied groups without losing many of its own members.
In combination with other less tightly controlled groups the Party always had the great advantage of internal unity, coupled with an elaborate  scheme of infiltration which had been designed to take advantage of the United Front tactic.
Throughout the 1920s the Communist Party leaders remained intent on affiliating to the Labour Party and on working with Labour Party members.
By 1928 some of the Party was prepared for the radical change of tactics authorized by the Sixth Comintern Congress.
The group around Harry Pollitt and Palme Dutt was able to take over from the older leaders, Inkpin, Bell, and MacManus and to commit the Party to the new tactic of the "United Front from Below" .
Palme Dutt and Pollitt, presenting a minority report to the Comintern Congress, argued that the Labour Party, by its restrictions on Communist membership, affiliation and cooperation, had transformed itself into a typical "social fascist" organisation.
In the discussion which followed J. T. Murphy characterized the Labour Party as "the third party of the bourgeoisie" , and as a party which had completely defeated Communist attempts to influence it.
R. Page Arnot, another delegate, held that the Communist Party had every prospect of becoming the new mass working-class party.
These were the attitudes which were to gain official acceptance after the change in British Communist leadership in December 1929.
The Comintern policy was applied in Britain on the theoretical grounds that the Labour Party had ceased to be a federation and that "the Labour Party was in the process of being transformed from a federal organisation to a party of the social democratic type" .
It was necessary to resist the Labour Party's discipline and to attack its structure and policy, rather than to attempt to become Part of it.
Under the slogan "Class against Class" the Party was to bring out more markedly its independent line and to fight against the bureaucratic discipline".
This was the "United Front from Below" ; the attempt to separate Labour Party members from their leaders and eventually to recruit them into the Communist Party.
In Britain there remained many common ties between Communists and Labour Party members and many Communists were still working within the trade unions.
The Party's most important trade unionist, Arthur Horner of the South Wales Miners' Federation, was repeatedly criticized for "trade union legalism" , and their most important supporter, A. J. Cook, national Miners' Federation Secretary, broke with them completely over their support for Red  Unions".
The Party's increasing isolation from its natural constituency in the broad labour movement was threatening its viability.
In early 1931 Party membership dropped to 2,500, the lowest level in its history.
The collapse of the Labour government had little effect on the Party's isolation.
It had claimed that "the Social Democratic leaders are the conscious enemies of the working class, the conscious agents of a foreign class, of a hostile class in the workers midst" .
Although the MacDonald defection did much to justify this claim it did not lessen the resentment created by the Communists' verbal and physical attacks on the rest of the Left.
The Eleventh Plenum of the Comintern, early in 1931, made it clear that social democracy was to be regarded as the main enemy.
The Comintern charged that "the Social Democratic Parties play a direct leading role" in preparing war against the USSR.
Because of this: the exposure of the Social Democrats, the exposure of the Second International, the liberation of the working masses from the influence of Social Democracy, the isolation and overcoming of Social Democracy, is the immediate task for the Communist Parties.
The Comintern policy had three levels of application in Britain.
On the grandiose plane of a general strike or revolution against a Labour government it was sheer nonsense, though much more dangerous in Germany, the country for which the new strategy had apparently been devised.
The Communists largely ignored the differences between the German and British situations.
There was no Fascist or Communist Party of any significance within British politics.
The entire labour movement was under the control of "social fascism" .
Communist influence in the Distressed Areas was growing slightly, but on the basis of "immediate economic demands" rather than "the open fight against the Labour Party" .
The industrial aspect of this new strategy, the creation of new, revolutionary "Red" unions, was a complete failure in Britain.
The United Mineworkers of Scotland had enrolled about 4,000 Fife miners, but otherwise there was nothing comparable with the Communist-led unions of Germany or France.
The second level of application was the forming of the "United Front from Below" .
Even here the Communists had little success, their activity remaining on the third level of faction fighting and street corner abuse of the rest of the labour movement.
But even during the most bitter quarrels of the "social fascist" period, the United Front was proclaimed and, to a limited extent, practised.
The "United Front from Below" was to be based primarily on "the immediate demands of the workers" and was to take the form of joint agitation at local level, rather than of organizational unity on a national scale.
The National Unemployed Workers Movement and the less successful Minority Movement were the main instruments in the campaign for "immediate demands" which was organized around the "National Charter" of 1931.
The Communist Party naturally supported the campaign which had been officially sponsored by its subsidiary, the Minority Movement.
Its supporting declaration called for the creation of "independent organs of struggle based on the factories" , and this was taken up at the Workers Charter Convention held in Bermondsey on 12 April 1931.
Proposals were carried for the creation of "broad committees" , "Leagues of Young Chartists" and similar groups to attract those "who will not go all the way with the Minority Movement" .
This was the "United Front from Below" in its purest form, an organized attempt to replace the official sections of the Labour movement by bodies under Communist domination.
The Labour Party promptly declared participation in such committees as "incompatible with membership of the Party" .
This proscription, together with the unrePresentative nature of the Minority Movement, prevented the Charter Campaign from arousing any strong feelings or action.
The campaign was fought on such issues as increased winter relief and unemployment benefit, though with implicit recognition of the ultimate necessity of revolution.
As with all subsequent "Unity" campaigns, the Communists stressed temporary grievances and short-term aims in the hope of attracting those to whom Communist ideology did not normally appeal.
It was still incumbent on the Party to avoid the impression that ILP co-operation in the campaign for "immediate demands" had redeemed the ILP from further attack.
A meeting between the Communists, the ILP and the NUWM on 23 September 1931, was criticized as abandoning the "United Front from Below" for top-level negotiations.
So strong was the fear that a "united front from above" would reflect credit on the ILP that Communists were warned that "the ILP must not be looked upon as a potential ally of the CP." 
Harry Pollitt defined the aim of the United Front in October 1932 as the recruitment of Communists from the Left of  the ILP.
 "We must make a determined effort to win the rank and file of the ILP." he wrote, "at the same time to avoid creating the impression that there are no fundamental differences between our Party and the ILP" .
The Communist leaders were desperately trying to establish contacts with the rest of the labour movement, despite their continued adherence to the "social fascist" line.
The only important advance made by the Party was the founding of the Daily Worker in January 1930, and that had reached a circulation of only 18,000 by the end of the following year.
Nearly 80 per cent of Party membership was unemployed, with serious effects on Party finance and organization.
Total membership fluctuated widely around 5,000 and it is clear that many members only stayed with the Party for a short time.
With such a small proportion of employed industrial workers in its ranks, the Party had great difficulty in carrying out its work in factory cells and trade-union groups.
To widen its support the Communist Party sent representatives to a meeting with the National Unemployed Workers Movement and the ILP.
It was attempting to reach agreement on a campaign for improving wages and hours, for combating unemployment and repealing the Trades Disputes Act.
Communists were interested in the ILP only because it was possible to secure recruits from what seemed to be a disintegrating party.
In electoral terms the ILP remained much stronger than the Communist Party, as the results of the general election in October 1931 underlined.
Communists improved only slightly on the vote of 1929, when they had fought under less favourable conditions but had been less fully committed to the "social fascist" position.
Twenty-six candidates polled 74,824 votes, all but five of them forfeiting their deposits.
Nearly half the vote was secured in the eight Scottish seats contested.
The ILP, in contrast, returned five MPs without official Labour Party endorsement, four of whom remained loyal after the final break with Labour.
While the Communists were engaged in manoeuvres on the fringe of labour politics, the Independent Labour Party was about to abandon its position within the Labour Party and to give up its effective role as an alternative Left party.
Despite their consistent and eventually justified opposition to MacDonald, ILP disaffiliation from the Labour Party was regarded as an extreme measure to be adopted only if the Labour National Executive refused to make  any concessions.
At its 1931 annual conference the ILP heavily defeated a proposal to disaffiliate, by 173 votes to 37.
Divisional Conferences held in January and February 1932, though recording greater support for disaffiliation, nevertheless gave a two to one vote in favour of staying inside the Labour Party.
In the Scottish Division, containing nearly one third of the membership, disaffiliation was defeated by 88 votes to 49.
It was supported only in London and the South-West.
In considering these results the NAC decided to allow resolutions on disaffiliation to be considered at the Easter Conference, but declined to make any recommendation on the issue by seven votes to five.
The Easter Conference, held in Blackpool, did little to solve the problem.
Dr Cullen of Poplar, who had been leading the disaffiliation campaign in London, moved to instruct the NAC: to take immediate steps to discontinue the affiliation of the ILP to the Labour Party.
Although defeated by 144 votes to 183 Cullen nevertheless gained more support than Dollan of Govan, whose resolution for a return of the ILP to its propagandist role within the Labour Party received only 93 votes.
Majority opinion in the ILP was best expressed in the resolution moved on behalf of the Rugby Branch, which argued for continued affiliation on the basis of a satisfactory revision of Parliamentary Standing Orders.
The NAC was instructed to continue negotiations with the Labour Party to this effect.
When it met after the Conference it set up a subcommittee to draft acceptable Standing Orders with which it could approach the Labour Party National Executive.
The Parliamentary Labour Party, despite its greatly reduced numbers, was not prepared to return to the previous Standing Orders which had allowed the ILP to put forward a distinct policy in Parliament while still remaining within the Labour Group.
The ILP leadership, feeling it had a mandate from the Easter Conference, made preparations for a Special Conference at which it would make: a recommendation for disaffiliation, and for the re-organisation of the ILP as an independent Socialist Party with a programme aiming at a decisive change from Capitalism to Socialism.
For over two years the ILP had been moving towards a position  where it could no longer work within the limitations of Parliamentary discipline and electoral necessity.
Two sections of the Party now openly advocated disaffiliation.
Some felt with Maxton that Socialists should be inside a socialist organization, not committed to the policy of a trade-union Party.
Others, influenced by Cullen's Revolutionary Policy Committee, had accepted the Communist attack on the Labour Party as the "third party of the bourgeoisie" .
But it was only after the persistent refusal of the Labour Party to concede complete autonomy to the ILP that the majority of members were forced to accept disaffiliation.
The Bradford Special Conference of 29 July 1932 ended affiliation by 241 votes to 142 and created an independent party with a disunited membership and with an organization which was in serious difficulties.
Resignations and the formation of dissident minorities began immediately after the Bradford decision.
ILP membership had already dropped by one third in the past four years, and three months after disaffiliation the NAC estimated a loss of 10 per cent of the remaining branches in protest.
Of the 653 branches only 288 had given definite support to disaffiliation, some by small majorities.
Patrick Dollan led a considerable reaffiliation movement in Scotland, which, on its expulsion, formed the nucleus of the Scottish Socialist Party.
In England an associated group was later to help form the Socialist League.
It is unlikely that the ILP retained more than half its membership one year after it had left the Labour Party.
The Independent Labour Party had drawn most of its strength from its connection with the larger Party.
The Bradford decisions were to prove so effective in isolating the Party that the prophecies of disaster made by the opponents of disaffiliation seemed about to be fulfilled.
Not only were connections with the Labour Party broken but the Bradford Conference, against the advice of the NAC, decided to discontinue paying the Trade Union political levy; to withdraw from membership of the Co-operative Party; and to forbid ILP Members from holding any position in the Labour movement which involved giving support to the policies of the Labour Party.
Consequently ILP members on local authorities or in Trade Union positions refused to remain in the Party.
Ten ILP Councillors remained on Glasgow City Council out of a previous total of over sixty.
The Party had decided to make a decisive break with the "reformist" Labour movement.
In the words of John Paton, "the clean break seemed to be making a clean sweep of the Party members" .
The ILP had opened negotiations with the Communist Party for joint agitation on "immediate demands" while still affiliated to the Labour Party.
Now that it had disaffiliated it recognized the necessity of strengthening this co-operation.
The Communist Party had continually attacked the ILP regarding the disaffiliation issue as a temporary manoeuvre "to hold back the British workers from the revolutionary policy of the Communist lnternational" .
Despite this constant criticism the ILP was working with the Communist controlled National Unemployed Workers Movement, and cooPerated in the Hunger Marches and Means Test agitation organized by them in November 1932.
The Communist Party had welcomed ILP disaffiliation as indicating the break-up of the Labour Party.
Yet it was anxious lest the ILP usurp Communism's already weakened hold on the Left.
There were those in the ILP like John Paton who saw this as the only possibility of success for the disaffiliated party.
The "Front from Below" was based on the totally unrealistic view that the Parliamentary collapse of 1931 would lead to the replacement of the Labour Party by some other form of Left party.
Palme Dutt prophesied that"the Labour movement, the old Labour movement is dying.
The workers movement, the independent workers movement is rising."
Whether or not the Communist leaders really believed this or any other of the sweeping statements made at the time is questionable.
Nevertheless there was some hope that the rifts in the Labour Party would produce some new combinations on the Left.
The Communists expected that if militants were drawn into united demonstrations their allegiance to the official Labour movement would be lessened.
 "The revolutionary differentiation of the militant workers will have to take place against the leadership of both the Labour Party and the Independent Labour Party, will have to take place from below." 
At this early stage the Communists persisted in repudiating national negotiation with the ILP leaders, despite the willingness of the latter to take part in such negotiations.
William Warbey of the ILP Revolutionary Policy Committee suggested early in 1932 that a joint party should be formed.
Despite later Communist acceptance of this policy it was rejected at this time by William Rust for the Party.
 "The united front is not a question of the relation of the ILP  and the CP," he wrote, "but the building up of the workers unity in the struggle against the capitalist offensive on the basis of demands that will unite the widest masses of workers." 
A similar repudiation was made by Palme Dutt later in the year.
He repeated the Comintern formula that "the united front can only be built up from below, by the workers themselves, not as a corrupt bargain of the reformist leaders and disorganisers of the struggle endeavouring to buy off the criticism of the revolutionaries, but as the solid class front of the workers" .
So the ideological epithets passed back and forth, largely ignored by the workers with whose future they dealt.
It was true that many of the unemployed willingly accePted Communist leadership of their demonstrations.
Yet they were totally unwilling to join the Party or even to vote for its national and local candidates.
The battle between the Communists and the ILP was almost totally confined to the Labour movement, a conflict of organizational-loyalties with little relation to the outside world.
The Comintern had not confined its attacks to the Right Social Democrats alone.
In its view Left groups like the ILP were even more dangerous enemies, as their intentions were disguised.
In Britain this attitude led to a bitter struggle between the Communists and the ILP, with each declaring itself to be the revolutionary leadership of the Left.
Sensing the dangers of such rivalry, the Communists intensified their attack on the ILP, going so far as to declare that disaffiliation was but a temporary manoeuvre.
Some ILP leaders undoubtedly believed in the possibility of maintaining an independent Left party distinct from the Labour Party or the Communists.
Fear of such a development had motivated Communist attacks on Left Socialism.
Pravda had commented late in 1931: In England, as elsewhere, the task of the "Lefts" consists in hindering the workers who are becoming revolutionised from abandoning the Labour Party and going over to the revolutionary fight, to Communism.
The Communist Party, reduced to a low level, had good reason to be concerned at the threat of a new Left party.
However it was clearly aware of the tensions inside the ILP and was ready to take advantage of them.
The Communists saw themselves as the only alternative to the Labour, Liberal and Conservative Parties.
Any new development of another Left party could only be an attempt  "to reach for the Leftward workers and draw them back to the basic Labour line" .
The belief that the Depression had resulted in a "leftward swing" in working class opinion was central to Communist strategy.
They saw a potential danger in the ILP releasing itself from responsibility for the failings of the late Labour Government.
For the ILP had six times the membership of the Communist Party, and although its contacts with the unemployed were not as strong, it had a much larger electoral following than the Communists in predominantly industrial areas.
The Communist Party made a number of charges against the ILP.
In the early period of uncertainty, when many prominent leaders of the ILP were clearly wary of forming an independent party, the Communists favoured the suggestion that disaffiliation was a temporary manoeuvre.
For many years the Party had attacked the ILP as providing an insincere alternative to Communism.
It was still convenient to hold that the Labour Party relied on a "left" Party "which will stand between the Communist Party and the Labour Party and hold back the British workers from following the revolutionary policy of the Communist International" .
With the break complete, and the ILP intent on remaining separate, it became increasingly implausible that its leaders were "manoeuvring" the Party in the interests of Labour.
The Communist Party began to speak of the ILP membership as having forced the leaders into disaffiliation.
Although this was the exact opposite of what they had been saying in the previous year, it was consistent in suggesting that there was a conflict between leaders and members.
If the ILP members were "to the Left" of their leaders, then it was logical that they should advance still further and join the Communist Party.
This kind of "unity" obviously involved the break-up of the ILP and the transfer of its radical membership to the Communist Party.
For the next three years the Communists worked towards this aim, though with little concrete success.
The ILP certainly broke up, but most of its members went back into the Labour Party.
Communist influence in the ILP began to increase rapidly, largely owing to the work of the Revolutionary Policy Committee which began as an independent minority working within the ILP but eventually merged into the Communist Party.
Its first conferences were held at Blackfriars and Blackpool early in 1932.
At this early stage the Committee's immediate aim was to secure ILP  disaffiliation from the Labour Party.
After this had been achieved the RPC turned its attention to formulating a revolutionary policy which would replace the gradualism inherited from the Labour Party.
At the Bradford Conference it attempted (unsuccessfully) to commit the ILP to the Organization of revolutionary militancy in the working class.
The RPC wanted to diminish the already weak adherence of the Party membership to the Parliamentary method.
The committee's policy was in many respects akin to that just being abandoned by the Communist Party, but with a greater syndicalist content.
The ILP Conference of 1933 made this official Party policy; this gave the NAC the problem of deciding what exactly the RPC had meant.
At this stage the RPC was still an impossibilist minority, well organized and favouring joint action with the Communist Party, but looked on with suspicion by the Communists themselves.
Revolutionary Policy Conferences were held by the Labour Monthly in 1933, partly no doubt to increase Communist influence in the ILP at the expense of the RPC.
J. R. Campbell directed revolutionary comrades in the ILP as follows; Fight for a revolutionary policy and work with the Communist Party to carry out that policy; work for coming over en masse into the ranks of the Communist Party.
Many ILP officials were antagonized more by the Committee's effective organization than by its Communist orientation.
The NAC decided as early as October 1932 to warn the Committee that it could not countenance an organization or an appeal for funds by any minority within the Party.
As official hostility grew, the RPC drew closer to the Communist Party.
In April 1934 it amalgamated with the Comintern Affiliation Committee, an ILP minority much more directly under Communist control.
Their interest became centred around sympathetic affiliation to the Comintern and the creation of a United Communist Party, the two main objects of Communist tactics at the time.
At the 1935 ILP Annual Conference unofficial groups were declared bad in principle though previous attempts to disband the RPC had been defeated.
Finally in November 1935 the Committee decided to withdraw its members from the ILP and to join the Communist Party.
Jack Gaster and Dr Cullen, the two leading members, took with them the Poplar, Wood Green and Harrow branches and  some 50 members of the Party.
The RPC had been successful in getting its policy adopted by the ILP Conference but had become too closely associated with the Communists to receive continued support from the ILP.
The Communists' blatant use of the RPC to influence and later to break up the ILP naturally worsened relations between the ILP leaders and the Communists.
Attempts by the CP to identify the ILP with the policies of MacDonald had been particularly annoying.
Whatever other motives were responsible for disaffiliation, there is no doubt that the ILP was strongly opposed to Labour "reformism" .
Even the Revolutionary Policy Committee, the section of the ILP most closely identified with the Communists, was dubious of the value of associating with the small and discredited Communist Party.
Jack Gaster, a leading member of the RPC, strongly criticized the "narrow sectarianism" of the Communists and was responsible, with Dr.Cullen, for the Memorandum on the Present Political and Economic Situation and the ILP which openly condemned the failure of Communist tactics in Britain.
There was little enthusiasm in the ILP for a United Front with the Communists, and little affection for the ILP in the Communist Party.
Despite this the two parties began almost immediately to undertake joint campaigns.
The reasons for this were practical rather than doctrinal.
Maxton, no less than Paton or Brockway, realised the dangers of complete isolation for the ILP.
If the disaffiliated Party were to prosper it would have to attract those that had previously turned to the Communist Party.
The Left Wing of the ILP took the same view, though eventually it became more sympathetic to the Communists.
It preferred to work within a party which still had a certain amount of prestige.
Yet both sections realised the futility of trying to be too independent.
The Communists were in control of the unemployed demonstrations, they had the reflected glory of the Bolshevik revolution.
It was essential to work with the Communists, if only to share some of these advantages.
What the ILP leaders failed to realise was that their party lacked the internal discipline of the Communist Party and would inevitably succumb to organized attempts by the Communists to disrupt the larger organization.
Pollit had declared a "war to the knife" with the ILP in a debate with Brockway in 1932.
For over a year leading Communists had urged ILP members to "come over en masse into the Communist  party" .
Even before disaffiliation the Communists had urged all ILP "militants" to "take the lead in calling upon all revolutionary elements to come out of the ILP in a body, hold a separate conference and decide whether and in what way they can link themselves up with the only revolutionary party in Britain today — the Communist Party" .
The Comintern Plenum of 1932 had reappraised the "Social Fascist" policy and lessened some of the hostility to Left Social Democratic members though the former antagonism against Left Social Democratic leaders was retained.
Gradually the ILP and the Communist Party drew together into the United Front.
The Communist Party, further modifying its policy, came to advocate the formation of a joint party with the ILP.
In its less dogmatic and more amateur way the ILP had also been giving serious consideration to the United Front.
Despite every discouragement, the National Administrative Council seemed determined to work with the Communists where possible, although this was a potentially suicidal policy.
If, as they themselves admitted, the Communists aimed at the supersession of the ILP, it was obviously dangerous and foolish to help them in their work.
The ILP leadership, particularly Maxton, seemed to believe that the Communists could be beaten with their own tactics.
Every critic of disaffiliation had emphasised the danger of getting out of touch with the Labour movement.
Fred Jowett, who nevertheless remained with the ILP, "believed that it was fundamental for the ILP to continue to keep in the main stream of working class life through its mass organisation in the Labour Party and the Trade Union Movement" .37 After the "clean break" of 1932 the ILP could only alleviate its isolation by working with the smaller, though more militant, groups on the Left.
The Party was particularly concerned with gaining influence among the unemployed and was working with the NUWM as early as 1931.
The NUWM, however, was under Communist control, and it was difficult to cooperate with it so long as the ILP was regarded as "Social Fascist" .
A serious breach occurred as the result of the Hunger March of 18 October and 1 November 1932.
A mass demonstration on the Means Test had petered out in confusion and each party blamed the other for its failure.
The Communists claimed that the ILP Member, John McGovern, had weakened the demonstration by trying to present its demands to Parliament himself, rather than allowing the leaders of the NUWM to do so.
The ILP, for its part, accused the Communists of misusing their influence in the NUWM.
For two months the New Leader was filled with the controversy.
Pat Devine, secretary of the NUWM, summed up the whole Communist objection to ILP concept of the United Front as meaning a formal alliance between groups.
He wrote: The big thing in developing the United Front is to agitate and bring the masses into activity around the particular issues and to get organisation (Committees), expressing and representing the actual character of the movement.
Thus, early in 1933, the Communists were still advocating the "United Front from Below" , the formation of action committees rather than the establishment of formal relations between Left leaders.
They still regarded these leaders as the main enemy.
The tortured relationship between the Communists and the ILP was almost all that the strategy of the "United Front from Below" had to show by the middle of 1933.
The rest of the Left was still divided into small groups which for various reasons did not wish to be involved in these narrow manoeuvres.
Several of these groups were offshoots from the ILP which had disagreed with its decision to leave the Labour Party.
Members of the Society for Socialist Inquiry and Propaganda had combined with the ILP Affiliation Committee (dissentients from the QQradlord decision) in founding the Socialist League.
An inaugural conference was held during the Leicester Conference of the Labour Party in October 1932 to establish a Socialist educational and propaganda organization affiliated to the Labour Party.
At a further conference held in London a fortnight later former leading members of the ILP, including H. N. Brailsford and E. F. Wise were prominent among the speakers.
Naturally the ILP remained hostile to the League, commenting that: The only groups which will participate in this effort are the insignificant number which have already put themselves outside the ILP.
The Socialist League defended itself against any suggestion that it was exceeding its limited aims.
In 1933 the Labour Party acknowledged these aims by accepting the affiliation of the Socialist League, giving its 2,000 members the same opportunities for  submitting policy resolutions as the largest Trade Unions.
Inevitably the League began to acquire the characteristics of a political party rejecting the "self-denying ordinance" which prevented the Fabians from submitting political resolutions to the Party.
J. T. Murphy, who had resigned from a leading position in the Communist Party in 1932, became the Secretary of the League on the death of E. F. Wise.
His interpretation of its aims as"working for the transformation of the Labour Party into the Party of the working class revolution' came to be accepted in a modified form by most members of the League.
The policy at which the League had arrived reflected the discontent with Parliamentary methods which dominated the ILP and the Communist Party though it was expressed in less revolutionary and more "managerial" terms.
The League's policy was "Fabianism for the 1930s" , a radical version of the idea of efficient administration based on accumulated knowledge.
Despite this the Labour Party found it distasteful.
Herbert Morrison wrote shortly before the 1933 Labour Party Conference: If the Socialist League point of view were approved by the Party it would drive us to defend ourselves for the greater part of our time against Tory allegations of Bolshevism and dictatorship.
The Socialist League submitted detailed amendments to the Party's policy at the Hastings Conference where they were supported by Sir Staford Cripps.
The alterations to the National Executive report, Socialism and the Condition of the People which he advocated were finally left to the Executive to consider, and were moved again at the Southport Conference of 1934.
The Reaction Against Hitler
Before 1933 a United Front of any kind had been largely fictitious.
The United Front was openly being used to gain converts to Communism from the ILP and the Labour Party and, if possible, to split these organizations.
The labour movement in Britain had not paid much attention to the revolutionary propaganda of the Communists.
 "Unity against the capitalist offensive" had remained an empty phrase, while the agitation for "immediate demands" was conducted almost solely among the unemployed.
The victory of the German Nazi Party in the 1933 elections changed all this.
Despite the recriminations surrounding the collapse of German socialism, the British Left became increasingly willing to work together against fascism; the willingness increased when the British Union of Fascists emerged in 1934.
The Left Socialist Bureau, which included the ILP, the Italian Socialist Party, Norwegian Labour Party and various small European groups, cabled the Second and Third lnternationals from its Paris conference of 4 February 1933: We strongly urge the immediate summoning of a conference between the Labour and Socialist International, the Communist International and the Independent revolutionary Socialist Parties.
The purpose of this conference would be to establish a plan of action to assist the workers who are now opposed by Fascism in its various forms and to break the power of the counter-revolution everywhere.
The Communist International was in a difficult position after Hitler's election victory.
It was taken by surprise by his success and appears to have accepted Thaelmann's slogan: "After Hitler.
Us!"
On 9 March, fully one month after the Paris telegram, the Comintern took up the slogan of "the United Front against Fascism" .
It did so with only grudging recognition of the need for national consultations with Social Democratic leaders.
The Labour and Socialist International had issued a declaration on 19 February calling for joint action between the German Social Democrats and Communists to defeat Hitler.
It concluded: "The Labour and Socialist International has always been ready to negotiate with the Communist International with a view to common action as soon as this body is also ready." 
The Comintern response was that there could be "no faith in the sincerity of the declaration of the LSI Bureau" .
The Comintern suggestion that Communists should approach the official national committees of their respective Social Democratic Parties was, however, a significant departure.
Should this approach receive no response they were to form joint anti-Fascist committees at a lower level "despite the leadership" .
The Comintern, completely disregarding their past policy, called upon "all Communist Parties to make yet another attempt to set up the united front of struggle with the social democratic workers through the medium of the social democratic parties" .
The Labour and Socialist International was not prepared to recommend the formation of United Fronts in individual countries but issued the following reply to the Comintern: We feel it to be our duty to call upon the Parties affiliated to the LSI to hold their hands if possible and not to deal with Communist offers of this kind in the individual countries until the Executive of the Labour and Socialist International has defined its attitude towards the new platform of the Comintern.
In Britain the ILP and the Communist Party were naturally the first to take up the call for united action.
Following on the resolution of the Paris Left Bureau, the National Administrative Council of the ILP adopted a statement on Germany at its meeting of 5 March.
It announced that: The National Council has decided immediately to approach with concrete proposals the British Labour Party, the Trades Union Congress, the Co-operative Party, the C.P.G.B. and all other working class bodies.
Thus the ILP advanced at the same time as the Comintern the  necessity of the "United Front against Fascism" .
Five days later the Communist Party of Great Britain sent a letter to the same organizations approached by the ILP.
Not surprisingly, the two parties were the only ones to accept each other 's invitations.
Each was conscious of its isolation, each felt the necessity of maintaining contact with the Labour movement.
Despite intense and continuing rivalry, the Communists and the ILP could not afford to remain apart.
The Labour Party had no incentive to accept the United Front proposals.
The National Joint Council of Labour unanimously rejected the United Front on 21 March.
Its reply took the form of a detailed statement, democracy versus Dictatorship, which stated the case against Communism and Fascism with equal vigour.
It took as its theme part of the statement made by the Labour and Socialist International with regard to national United Fronts: Past experience goes to show that such negotiations in individual countries may unfortunately only too easily be turned into manoeuvres by the Communists, with the result that they help to poison the situation and increase the mistrust in the Labour Movement instead of diminishing it.
The statement was circulated by the Labour Party and endorsed at the Hastings Conference in October where resolutions in favour of the United Front were defeated.
Herbert Morrison in opposing the resolutions, recalled the Communist attacks on the Labour Party in recent years.
At the Southport Conference in 1934 it was agreed: That united action with the Communist Party or organisations ancillary or subsidiary thereto without the sanction of the National Executive Committee is incompatible with membership of the Labour Party, and that the N.E.C. seeks full disciplinary powers to deal with any case or cases that may arise.
The Labour Party refused to consider the United Front proposals and for over two years the only form of "Unity" was that established with some difficulty between the ILP and the Communist Party.
The Left elements in she new Socialist League were not too enthusiastic about joining their former ILP colleagues in collaborating with the Communists.
The National Council of the League passed a resolution in March 1933 urging the Labour party and  TUC to arrange "a meeting with the representatives of the Co-op movement, the ILP and the CP for the purpose of proposing to them a basis for United Action" .
After the publication of Democracy versus Dictatorship the League decided to modify its policy in conformity with the Labour Party attitude.
The League's National Council submitted a drastically revised statement to its Derby Conference at Whitsun, calling on the TUC and the Labour Party "to formulate a policy which would rally the whole working class movement against Fascism and Capitalism" .
A resolution from the Hendon branch favouring joint action with the Communists and the ILP was defeated.
The idea of a United Front was slowly gaining favour on the Left, despite the intransigence of the Communists.
However, the Labour Party, in recovering from the defeat of 1931, seemed to be adopting a more radical policy.
The great majority of its members were more attracted to this than to the abuse from the Communists or to the dissensions of the ILP.
The readiness of the ILP to cooperate with the Communists did not lessen the tension between the two parties to any important extent.
Having failed in their attempt to attract individuals or sections from the ILP into their Party, the Communists were now advocating a "United Working Class Party" , a combination with the ILP which would inevitably come under Communist leadership.
In a Labour Monthly article, "The United Front and Revolutionary Unity" , Palme Dutt developed the theme that the United Front created on 17 March 1933 was merely a preliminary to the creation of a new Left party."
Communist influence in the ILP was growing and although the ILP leadership remained hostile to Communism, there seemed to be opportunities for greatly expanding the Communist Party at the expense of the older and larger party.
The National Administrative Council of the ILP decided on 14 April to continue and expand the United Front.
The Party Conference had accepted this recommendation, despite the opposition of two if its MPs, McGovern and Wallhead.
So strong had sympathy with the Communists grown among the active membership that the NAC was instructed, against its wishes, "to approach the Communist International with a view to ascertaining in what way the ILP may assist in the work of the International" .
The Comintern Secretariat cabled a reply on 30 April, welcoming the Conference decision, and expressing its readiness to begin negotiations with the NAC.
For the next few weeks it seemed as though a  genuine "United Front" would be established.
Brockway, Mann and Pollitt spoke from a joint platform at the May Day Rally in Hyde Park.
It was not long, however, before squabbles broke out between the temporary allies.
There were three attitudes to the United Front within the ILP.
Some like McGovern and Wallhead were opposed to collaboration with the Communists on principle; rather than accept the United Front, Wallhead resigned from the Party.
Allied with these two MPs were Paton, the General Secretary.
who later resigned, and Elijah Sandham and the Lancashire Division who seceded in 1934.
They all felt that the United Front was "frittering away valuable energy and finance in resultless activity" .
The official majority viewpoint on the other hand, was expressed by Brockway and Maxton, who were hostile to the Communist Party and constantly aware of the dangers of isolation.
They put little faith in the sincerity of the Communists but were prepared to make concessions in the interests of "Unity against Fascism" .
On the Left wing was the Revolutionary Policy Committee, which openly favoured the "United Communist Party" proposals of the Comintern.
The ILP was in its usual position of trying to go three ways at once and the Communists took advantage of the situation.
A new dispute was begun by the articles written by Fenner Brockway in the New Leader, in which he criticized the failure of the Comintern in Germany and supported the pretensions of the Paris Left Bureau to be a bridge between the Communist and Socialist Internationals.
The Communists saw this as a revival of the Vienna International of 1920, which had eventually merged with the Labour and Socialist International.
In a letter to the ILP Otto Kuusinen attacked Brockway's articles and outlined the growing split between what he termed the "left reformist" and "revolutionary elements" in the ILP.
The ILP leadership was trying to avoid close contact with the Comintern.
Kuusinen quoted to them the obligations imposed by the Whitsun Conference decision: We propose that the following questions be raised for discussion in all the organisations of the ILP. (l) What concrete mass actions on the basis of the united front of the C.P.G.B. and the ILP can and must be carried out in the near future with the aim of a successful struggle for  a 10% wage increase, against the Means Test, and other similar partial demands advanced by the C.P.G.B. and the ILP?(2) Is it desirable for the ILP to join the Communist International as a Party sympathising with Communism with the right to a consultative vote…?
Thus after six months of Nazi rule in Germany the"United Front had changed little in its essentials.
Kuusinen's report to the XIII Plenum of the ECCI in December 1933 still spoke of "the hypocritical and treacherous sophistries of social democracy" .
It was well over a year before Communist policy changed radically"though it had undergone substantial modification.
Throughout that year the feud between the ILP and the Communist Party continued, rather ludicrously disguised under the label of the "United Front" .
By early 1934 there was convincing evidence that European Fascism was expanding at the expense of Socialists and Communists alike.
The ILP wrote to the Labour party, the TUC and the Co-operative and Communist parties on 13 February 1934 calling for: an immediate consultation between representatives of all sections of the working class so that we may plan common action.
On the following day Maxton and Brockway met Arthur Hender who expressed his sympathy with their request but once again repeated that the Labour party would not join any United Front which included the Communist Party.
The Labour Party officially replied to the ILP on 9 March as follows: Your suggestion for "an immediate consultation between representatives of all sections of the working class" is one which, in the considered opinion of the National Executive, would not result in any agreed policy of "common action" , in view of the fundamental differences which exist, for examples between the Labour Party and its associate movements on the one hand and the Communist Party on the other.
The situation remained as before.
Indeed the "United Front" was further restricted by an NAC decision on 16 February "to limit co-operation with the Communist Party to specific objects as agreed upon by the representatives of the two parties from time to time" .
The Labour Party rebuff had impressed the ILP leaders with the difficulties of maintaining contact with the Labour movement while allied with the Communist Party.
Rumblings from Lancashire had prompted the NAC to survey the results of the United Front campaign.
John Paton reported at the end of 1933: The analysis of the reports shows that the policy of isolated cooperation with the Communist Party has completely failed to bring general support from the other organised bodies.
Wrangles with the Comintern continued, despite the growing realization by Communists that genuine Fascism had rendered the concept of "Social Fascism" out of date.
At the beginning of 1934 the ILP had written to the Comintern, criticizing the rigidity of Comintern control over constituents.
The ILP wanted international discussion to precede important decisions of the Comintern.
The most provocative demand was that the monopolistic position of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union should be replaced "by a real collective international leadership based upon the class relations in their countries" .
The Comintern expressed righteous indignation at such an attack, although eighteen months later it tacitly accepted all these points.
The Political Secretariat of the ECCl replied on 20 February, repeating its suggestions for a United Communist Party and accused the ILP leadership of attempting to escape the decisions of its 1933 Conference.
The ILP leaders felt that "the whole tone of the Comintern letter is deplorable in view of the need for working class unity" .
The refusal of the ILP leaders to follow up "sympathetic affiliation" to the Comintern was endorsed at the York Conference of Easter 1934 by a four-to-one majority.
Enthusiasm for an approach to the Comintern had largely evaporated as it became clear that the Communists were intent on superseding the ILP.
William Rust, for instance, had stated openly that sympathetic affiliation had been suggested "in order that it could facilitate the movement of the ILP workers towards Communism" .
Internal dissension in the ILP caused by Communist sympathizers came to a head in August 1934.
The Communist Party had written to Divisional Councils and branches of the ILP inviting them to send representatives to the forthcoming Seventh World Congress of the Communist International.
This was done without consulting or indeed informing the National Administrative Council.
The NAC  meeting of 7 November called on the Communist Party to give guarantees of non-interference in ILP affairs as a condition for continuing the United Front.
The leading members of the Comintern Affiliation Committee, who eventually went to Moscow in 1935, were suspended from membership of the ILP.
The negative aspects of the United Front were still dominant at the end of 1934 but several positive steps had been taken.
The "Great United Front National Congress of Action" was held in Bermondsey on 24 February 1934.
It was organized mainly by the National Unemployed Workers Movement, and was characterized by criticism of the official Labour movement.
Indeed so bitter were Communist attacks on the Labour Party and TUC as"saboteurs of the Congress and its accompanying march, that the ILP was forced to defend them.
By October the Communist attitude had softened in the light of the pact of Unity between the Socialists and Communists in France.
The Communist Party was preparing to take advantage of the strong reaction to Nazism which was sweeping the Left.
Local Communist Parties were authorized to approach their Labour Parties in an attempt to make electoral agreements, and in the November 1934 Municipal elections the bulk of Communist candidates were withdrawn in favour of the Labour Party.
The negotiations between representatives of the two Internationals had made top-level agreements acceptable tactics.
The Communists were realizing the possibility of forming alliances with the national leadership of other Left-Wing parties.
Piatnitsky wrote, early in November: The united front from below must remain the basic form of the Communist united front tactics.
However this must not mean that the application of the united front from above is thereby excluded from our activities.
It may possibly be seen that in some cases the application of the united front from below is the only possible tactic, but it can never be the case that the application of the united front from above is the only possible tactic.
While this may appear a grudging recognition of negotiation between Party leaders, it was as significant as the breakdown of the anti-Communism of the LSI.
The British Labour Party, after its stern admonitions at Southport, showed no signs of abandoning its decision that collaboration with Communists was out of the  question.
However there was some hope that proposals for "Unity" put forward by a self-effacing and cooperative Communist Party might be accepted by the Left of the Labour Party.
The ILP, despite the endless trouble which the United Front had caused, was still prepared to work with the Communists.
A meeting at the House of Commons between Maxton, Brockway, Campbell Stephen and McGovern of the ILP, and Pollitt, Gallacher, Kerrigan and Springhall of the Communist Party, laid down conditions for the continuance of the United Front.
The ILP was able to get assurances that the Communist Party would stop interfering in its affairs.
Co-operation with the Communist Party did not, however, seem to be helping the ILP.
In June 1934, despite the United Front, a Communist candidate opposed the ILP nominee at Merthyr, a seat formerly held by the ILP Member, Dick Wallhead.
Communist influence in the ILP Guild of Youth led to its virtual disruption at the end of 1934 and the Revolutionary Policy Committee was becoming a Communist instrument.
Unrest at these tendencies had caused the resignation of John Paton from the position of General Secretary in August 1933.
His repeated warnings of the effect of the United Front on the ILP had been ignored by the National Administrative Council and he eventually left the party altogether and returned to the Labour Party.
The ILP Guild of Youth, like its counterpart the Labour Party League of Youth, was in conflict with the senior party.
The National Committee of the Guild decided to apply for "sympathetic affiliation" to the Young Communist International and at the Norwich conference of May 1934, the Guild ratified this decision by 18 votes to 12.
Representatives of the NAC met the Guild Council on 21 October and made it quite clear that the NAC could not continue to recognize the Guild as the youth section of the Party if it retained sympathetic affiliation to the Young Communist International.
The National Council of the Guild decided by three votes to two to call a special conference to rescind the affiliation decision.
At Derby on 18 November, the Guild did so by 21 votes to 11 in order to prevent a split.
In an attempt to curb the Guild the ILP reduced its age limit to 21 at the 1935 annual conference, thus removing many of the advocates of YCI affiliation from the Guild's leadership.
The ILP's troubles were by no means confined to its youth  section.
It was also subject to Trotskyist penetration, to the loss of many Scottish members and to the defection of most of its followers in Lancashire.
Trotsky's final expulsion from the Soviet Union had left him free to encourage groups of supporters elsewhere, though his main concern remained the policies of the Soviet state and Party.
A "Left Opposition" was already in existence in several European Communist Parties and by 1932 the 12-man "Balham Group" had emerged from the British Communists.
The January reso1ution of the Communist Party Central Committee in 1932 criticized "Left and Right sectarianism" within the Party, warning particularly against the dangers of Trotskyism.
The "Balham Group" was expelled and formed itself into a Communist League.
After two years the Communist League decided to merge with the Independent Labour Party in accordance with the "entrist" tactic of those French and American Trotskyists who had joined their respective socialist parties.
On 23 March 1934, members of the Communist League informed the ILP that the International Communist League had disbanded its British section and advised its members to join the Independent Labour Party.
The statement by former members of the League outlined their aims with disarming frankness: The building of a new party would be painfully slow.
The Possibility of a speedier way of establishing an effective revolutionary party is provided by the ILP, which, despite its past mistakes, represents a potentially revolutionary force.
This appeal presaged two years of uncomfortable relations, which were to disturb the ILP without adding much to the strength of Trotskyism.
The Independent Labour Party in its rapid decline gave rise to several minorities besides those going to make up the Socialist League.
Immediately after disaffiliation from the Labour Party an important body of members in Scotland organized together to reverse the decision.
On 14 August 1932, the NAC agreed to the expulsion from the ILP of members of the Scottish ILP Affiliation Committee, among whom were Patrick Dollan, David Kirkwood MP and Tom Johnston.
The Committee formed a Scottish Socialist Party at the end of August which was accepted for affiliation to the Labour Party on a total of 1,000 members.
By November 1932 the new party claimed nearly 2,000 of the original 3,300 Scottish ILP  members.
The Scottish Socialist Party, like its English counterpart the Socialist League, aimed at fulfilling the original function of the ILP.
Patrick Dollan stated at Motherwell, soon after the party's foundation, that the aim of the SSP was to be the missionary society for socialism, in full cooperation with the trade union and cooperative movement.
The SSP's policy was close to that of the Socialist League although it had a strong pacifist section and remained hostile to Communism.
Its most important asset was the Glasgow weekly Forward which became the party's official paper in 1934.
Dissension over disaffiliation was soon followed by a revolt against co-operation between the ILP and the Communist Party.
In Lancashire, where the ILP had been well represented on local authorities and in the Trade Union movement, co-operation with the small and sectarian Communist Party was held to be damaging the ILP's local influence.
In July 1933, the Lancashire Divisional Council circularized its branches, proposing an end to the United Front.
The Lancashire Division publicized this viewpoint through its paper Northern Voice, and at the York Annual ILP Conference of 1934 an NAC Report, censuring the Division for its actions, was carried by 135 votes to 31.
J. T. Abbott, the Divisional Organiser, resigned from the Party and formed a Unity Committee which set up the Independent Socialist Party in May 1934.
Seven of the 32 ILP branches in Lancashire joined the new party which also attracted Middleton Murry, the critic, who had been unsuccessfully urging his own form of democratic Marxism on the ILP for the past two years.
By the end of 1934, then, the Independent Labour Party was falling apart in all directions.
The Socialist League and the Scottish Socialist Party had gone back to the Labour Party and many members of the Independent Socialist Party were to do so before long.
The ILP itself was rent with dissension between the openly proCommunist element around the Revolutionary Policy Committee, the parliamentary leadership and the Trotskyists.
The Communist Party still had less than 6,000 members at the end of 1934 but the balance within the Left was beginning to move towards it and away from the disintegrating ILP.
Within the Labour Party the Left was naturally wary about both the parties in the fractious "United Front" .
Some of the Left had just defected from the ILP and had no desire to join with it again.
Others had quit the  Communist Party in reaction against its "social fascist" line.
All remembered and periodically still experienced the vicious attacks on them which the Communists were only just beginning to abandon.
The Labour Party leadership did all it could to limit any appeal which the Left outside the Party might exercise over its members.
The National Executive increased its powers to discourage contact between local Labour parties and outside minorities and extended the list of "proscribed organizations" (begun in 1930 to name Communist fronts).
Hence the Left was not merely confined to two small and quarrelsome groups outside the Labour Party but the Party itself was quite satisfied to keep things that way.
However the Labour Party was not the decisive element in the situation and events in Europe were to change everything almost overnight.
The Spread of Fascism: 1934-37
During 1934 the emphasis in Left politics began to shift from domestic to international affairs.
Although unemployment remained and the problems of the Distressed Areas grew worse, the politically active were increasingly forced to consider the implications of European fascism.
The relatively puny Fascist and Communist movements in Britain gained attention because they were seen as projections of much more important European counterparts.
Extra-parliamentary agitation began to shift from the unemployed movement to opposition to fascism, despite the fact that the unemployed demonstrations continued to attract popular attention.
Regular Hunger Marches from the Distressed Areas to London, of which the most famous was the Jarrow March of 1936, helped to emphasize to the more prosperous areas that unemployment had not been abolished but had merely receded.
On most occasions when mass demonstrations took place there were clashes with the police and it was primarily for this reason that the Labour Party and the TUC tried to discourage such a form of protest.
The demonstrations had some effect, however, notably in 1935 when the new Unemployment Assistance Board scales were withdrawn.
The public was kept aware of the problem and intelligent opinion was roused by the conditions revealed.
Violence on the streets increasingly moved from the Distressed Areas to London, Manchester and other major cities in reaction to the rise of the British Union of Fascists.
Sir Oswald Mosley's movement was associated with street battles, violence and anti-Semitism on the model of the Nazi Party.
Metropolitan Police regulations restricted the holding of rival meetings in close proximity, while in Manchester the police had banned the wearing  of political uniforms.
Both measures were later incorporated in the Public Order Act.
In October 1936 the "battle of Cable Street" broke out to prevent an attempt by the Fascists to march through Stepney.
After this riot, which involved 100,000 people, political processions were banned in the Metropolitan Police area for six months.
In 1937 there was a further riot when the BUF tried to march through Bermondsey.
The Blackshirts deliberately concentrated on those areas where there were liable to be violent counter-demonstrations.
The Left, seeing the European situation repeated in Britain, made every attempt to prevent the BUF from marching, even though the BUF never showed any evidence of becoming an effective political force.
The Left claimed that the government and police were prejudiced in favour of Mosley, and were convinced that the National Government was favourable to fascism.
The BUF claimed the opposite.
Mosley undoubtedly had admirers in important social positions, including for a period Lord Rothermere, and had access to a wide range of the politically influential.
But the violent character of the BUF and its unashamed adoption of foreign symbols made it unattractive to many who might otherwise have agreed with some of its policies, and made it doubly obnoxious to the Left.
One reaction against fascism, and the threat of warfare which it was beginning to present, was a revival of the pacifist movement.
On 27 March 1934, a National Declaration Committee was set up to organize a ballot on the British attitude to the League of Nations.
Although the "Peace Ballot" was ostensibly an investigation, it was regarded by its opponents and by many of its supporters as an attempt to bring pressure to bear upon the government.
The ballot showed substantial support for the attitude of the Labour and Liberal Parties towards foreign policy.
Even more importantly it showed that millions of electors could be made to take a stand in favour of the League of Nations, towards which many Conservatives were cynical or even hostile.
Those who voted showed themselves not ready for rearmament but, at the same time, in favour of strengthening the League of Nations.
The General Election of 1935 was largely conducted in response to this attitude.
There was considerable disagreement about foreign policy both within the Conservative Party and among the Opposition.
Until  1935 the Labour Party was led in parliament by an avowed Christian pacifist, George Lansbury.
The National Labour Prime Minister, Ramsay MacDonald, had campaigned against conscription in the First World War.
But within the Labour Party Ernest Bevin, Walter Citrine and Hugh Dalton began to urge rearmament against Germany and support for League of Nations sanctions against Italy for its invasion of Abyssinia in 1935.
In the Conservative Party Churchill consistently called for effective rearmament.
Throughout the I930s the parliamentary situation was complicated by these divisions within the major parties and by the aftermath of the disintegration of the Liberals and the defection of MacDonald in 1931.
The parliaments of 1931 and 1935 contained an unprecedented number of groups and remnants, apart from the solid bloc of Conservatives who always constituted a majority.
These groups included National Labour, three Liberal Parties, the ILP, Independents, a Communist and, later, a "Progressive" .
Among these moved Lloyd George and Winston Churchill, unacceptable for office, yet suspect to the Opposition.
The only hope of forming an alternative government lay in the combination of these diverse elements with the Labour Party and with a body of defectors from the Conservatives.
By 1937, in the face of the rapid spread of fascism, many who were active in politics began to be attracted to the idea of such a combination.
Although the general elections of 1931 and 1935 resulted in a 1arge Conservative majority in the Commons, e1ectioneering was not totally meaningless.
The East Fulham by-election in October 1933 proved a significant pointer to the strength of pacifist sentiment.
The Labour candidate advocating a pacifist programme, reversed a large Conservative majority in a seat never before held by Labour.
In the following year the Labour Party gained control of the London County Council for the first time.
This emphasized the shift in Labour support out of the Distressed Areas.
But these successes were not repeated, and the general election of 1935 was a disappointment; the Labour Party returned only 154 MPs on a vote slightly below that of 1929.
The National government, now led by Stanley Baldwin, continued in office and was more Conservative than ever.
The National Labour group was diminishing; Ramsay MacDonald was heavily defeated by Emanuel Shinwell at Seaham in the general election.
The election was also notable for the return of the first Communist to be elected since Shapurji Saklatvala lost  Battersea North in 1929.
The Communist vote was growing stronger in Fife and the Rhondda, though in the rest of Britain its record at by-elections was no better than that of the Independent Labour Party or other fringe groups.
The Peace Ballot and the East Fulham by-election suggested a strong sentiment against war but few established politicians were prepared to argue that the rise of fascism made a future war probable.
The contradictions within the Labour Party were quite marked; many supported a boycott of German goods but were unprepared to consider any international action against fascism if this were to create a danger of war.
This contradictory attitude was clearly revealed in October 1935 when Fascist Italy invaded Abyssinia, an act of open aggression by one League of Nations member against another.
Such overt aggression turned the Labour Party away from pacifism and towards the acceptance of a degree of force to implement collective security.
The change in the Party's outlook was not completed without the loss of its leader.
George Lansbury. and the resignation from its National Executive Committee of Sir Stafford Cripps.
The Left was torn between the pacifists and the dominant group in the Labour Party which urged support for League sanctions.
The Communists and some within the Socialist League and the ILP asserted the need for defending small nations against fascism and aggression, by sanctions and force if necessary, while others condemned Abyssinia and Italy as equally reactionary and unworthy of support.
Cripps, in particular, became associated with the notion of "working-class sanctions" ; that is the use of union power to prevent arms delivery and the avoidance of reliance on either the National Government or on the League of Nations.
The "Peace Ballot" had shown considerable support for the use of economic and even military sanctions against an aggressor and this popular attitude was reflected in the policy adopted by the Trades Union Congress and the dominant block of union officials within the Labour Party.
On this issue Lansbury and the pacifist element in the Party were unable to compromise with the rest of the party.
Cripps' objection to sanctions was based on distrust of the National Government rather than on complete opposition to force in any form.
The National Executive of the Labour Party, on the other hand.
had supported League of Nations sanctions against Italy and Cripps resigned from it rather than accept this decision.
When the  Party conference began at Brighton in October 1935, opinion in the Party had hardened against Lansbury and Cripps.Lansbury's support for pacifism received only 102,000 votes and he resigned from the parliamentary leadership.
The vicious personal attack on him by Ernets Bevin and his humiliating defeat made it impossible for him to remain as leader.
He was replaced by Clement Attlee, the party's first public-school educated middle-class leader who was widely but wrongly regarded as a temporary appointment.
The debate about "physical" and "moral" methods of obstructing fascism was largely terminated by the outbreak of the Spanish civil war in the middle of 1936.
In February a Left coalition was elected to office in Spain; later in the year a similar coalition was elected in France.
Both elections were taken as further proof that if Socialists, Communists and Liberals worked together they could defeat fascism.
The Communist International at its Seventh (and final) Congress in 1935 had called for the formation of such an alliance and this object was being pursued by all national Communist Parties including the British.
The Spanish Frente Popular relied on Liberal and Socialist support in the Cortes and on toleration by the syndicalist unions and anarchist peasant movement in the country.
side.
The strength of these movements was greater than that of the Communists and made anti-clericalism and radical land reform essential ingredients in the politics of the Spanish Left.
The Socialist trade-union movement, the Union General de Trabajadores, had drawn closer to the syndicalist CNT after the suppression of the Asturias miners in 1934.
The combination behind the new government was certain to clash with long-established religious and military interests in Spain and with the landowning aristocracy.
In July a military rising broke out in Spanish Morocco, was supported by many of the garrisons in Spain, and came under the leadership of Generals Mola and Franco.
The major European powers, including initially the Soviet Union, formed a Non-Intervention Committee, designed to prevent foreign involvement in and the isolation of the civil war.
The policy of non-intervention was adopted by the Labour Party Annual Conference at Edinburgh in October 1936 after consultations with the Trades Union Congress and the French Socialist Party.
"The official resolution was so drafted as to assume that non-intervention could be made a reality,…
"
This was a false assumption as later speeches from the  representatives of the Spanish Socialist Party showed.
Clement Attlee and Arthur Greenwood immediately caught the train to London to interview the Prime Minister.
They advised him that the Spanish government had evidence of Italian and German intervention and urged him to supervise the non-intervention agreement more effectively.
On their return the Conference passed a stronger resolution.
The Labour Party remained in an ambiguous position.
Its members organized aid for the Republican government while its leaders felt unable to do so until the following year when it became clear that neither Germany nor Italy had the slightest intention of discouraging aid to Franco.
The proven fact of German and Italian intervention made the Spanish Republic a symbol of resistance to fascism.
The Labour Party, the Communists, most Liberals and a few Conservatives actively worked for the Republic, while many more Conservatives, many Catholics and the BUF supported Franco.
In answer to foreign arming of the Spanish Fascists the European Left, led by the Communists, organized voluntary aid and recruited an International Brigade.
The German and Italian support restored the strength of the rebels and was eventually decisive, while Soviet intervention led to a rapid expansion of the previously weak Spanish Communist Party.
Communist influence was strong in the police and army and they controlled the International Brigade.
By advocating the building of a national coalition the Communists were able to attract sections of the Socialist Party.
In 1937 the Socialist Unity Party of Catalonia was created by an amalgamation which was in keeping with the United Front tactic of the eventual creation of a single Left party.
By the following year the Communist and Socialist youth movements combined, an amalgamation which was often quoted by Young Communist League Leaders in Britain during their overtures to the Labour League of Youth.
The growing strength of Spanish Communism and its identification with the international movement to aid the Republic, underline the increasing influence which the Soviet Union was exercising over the European Left.
The Soviet Union had remained a Utopian ideal to the Left even during the vicissitudes of the late 1920s and the collectivization and famine during the First Five Year Plan.
 "Who shall say what the Soviet Union has been to us?" , wrote Andre Gide in 1936.
"More than a chosen land — an example, a  guide.
What we have dreams of, what we have hardly dared to hope, but towards which we were straining all our will and all our strength, was coming into being over there."
Gide, like many, returned from the Soviet Union disillusioned, and renounced Communism.
Many more were inspired, while the great majority of Soviet disciples never went there at all and saw it through the propaganda of the Friends of the Soviet Union or the Daily worker.
Sidney and Beatrice Webb surprised the labour movement in 1935 when they added to their earlier works an exhaustive and largely favourable account of the working of soviet society.
The goodname of the Soviet Union, marred by the Menshevik Trials of 1930 and the Metro-vickers Trial of 1933, had been regained by 1936.
The Soviet Union had entered the League of Nations in 1934, reached an agreement with France obviously directed against Germany and introduced the Stalin Constitution.
But no sooner had this been achieved than the arrests and trials of leading Bolsheviks began, destroying most of the goodwill created among Western sympathizers.
Communists and their supporters worked hard to justify the prosecutors' case and the penalties imposed.
Western liberals and the Left once again found their credulity stretched in defence of the one state which most of them saw as the only bulwark against Nazi Germany.
Within the labour movement.
the emphasis of political discussion moved away from domestic problems to the international scene, although states like the Soviet Union or Nazi Germany were often used as symbols for forces existing in British politics.
Many Conservatives supported Hitler or Franco without being fascists, for the same psychological reason as many on the Left cheered loudly whenever the Soviet government executed its enemies.
Both sides were translating foreign affairs into domestic battles and acting out the conflicts between classes and parties through the use of international substitutes.
However within the Labour Party there was still such confusion between the traditional pacifism of many local parties, the new-found aggressiveness of the Communists and the movement towards rearmament among union leaders, that the party had entered the general election of 1935 with all the outward signs of disunity.
The Brighton conference had forced Lansbury out.
For over a year the press had been presenting Cripps as a dangerous radical, if not a republican.
His resignation from the National Executive had drawn attention to the difference within  the Labour Party on foreign policy.
Labour lost the 1935 election because of its confusion over foreign policy, just as it had lost in 1931 because of its domestic failure.
The parliamentary party was once more an effective opposition under the continued leadership of Clement Attlee, but with no prospect of reaching power for at least another five years.
Rather than ending divisions in the Labour Party, the controversies of 1935 mark the beginning of a new period of prolonged disunity.
There had always been a radical element in the local Labour parties and this was now augmented by former members of the ILP who were returning to the Labour Party in large numbers.
Moreover, at the end of 1935 the Communist Party began its campaign for a United Front against Fascism.
Unti1 1939 the Labour Party was bedevilled by internal dissensions on this issue.
The central theme of the dispute was that the Labour Party had neither the following nor the enthusiasm to oppose the National Government in isolation.
The Left of the Party held that the government was little better than fascist and was encouraging Germany and Italy.
Consequently, they argued, the Labour Party should refuse to co-operate in any way with the government.
In contrast, the official leadership was moving towards agreement with the government on the question of rearmament, though continually critical of the foreign policy being pursued.
The trade unions, after the Congresses of 1935 and 1936, were committed to military sanctions against aggression and to that level of rearmament necessary to make sanctions effective.
For over three years the Labour Party's foreign policy was an attempt, only partially successful, to accommodate this view with the Party's traditional pacifism and distrust of Conservative governments.
Members of the Labour Party were paying more attention to the Communist Party than for many years, largely as a result of the unique impact of foreign affairs.
While Communism in Britain was not very important, it was significant in Europe where the Communist and Socialist Parties faced with active Fascism were working together.
Many Labour Party members drew the conclusion that only by building a United Front with the small British Communist Party could the Labour Party be strengthened.
At the Edinburgh Conference of the Labour Party in 1936 a request for affiliation from the Communist Party was refused.
This decision started rather than ended the controversy about united action.
Until 1939 internal dissension remained characteristic of the Labour Party, with agitations against Fascism and the National Government's foreign policy occupying much of the time and energy of the active Party member.
If the Labour Party were to build up an effective electoral machine, its leaders argued such controversial activities would have to be abandoned in the interests of widening popular support.
The gap between these different approaches, basic to all mass radical parties in an electoral situation, was not closed until the outbreak of war.
As it turned out this continuing disunity did not have the damaging electoral effects in 1940 that the Party's leaders feared.
There was no 1940 general election and by 1945 the voters remembered both that the Labour Party had shared responsibility for winning the war and that it had opposed the Conservative policies which led to the war.
The Labour Party was not deterred from developing a domestic program me despite the growing concentration on foreign affairs.
In the years after the defeat of 1935 the Party formulated many of the policies on which it was to be returned in 1945.
After the Edinburgh Conference a series of Party enquiries investigated the problems of the Distressed Areas, for although unemployment had declined there was still no solution for the decay of the older, heavy industrial areas from which most Labour MPs were elected.
In Labours Immediate Programme, produced early in 1937, the Party suggested state control of the location of industry coupled with a policy of equalizing local rates.
Labours Immediate Programme summarized the discussions of the previous five years in a form which appealed even to the Left of the Party and to the Communists.
Control of investment was seen as the key to central direction of the economy.
Co-ordination of transport, nationalization of coal, gas and electricity, in short the basic measures carried out between 1945 and 1950 were treated in the new programme as the "four vital measures of reconstruction" .
The concept of the public corporation as the controlling body for nationalized industry was finally accepted in the Immediate Programme.
The syndicalist idea of "workers control" was finding much less favour than in 1932, when Ernest Bevin had forced through the Party Conference "the claim of organised labour that it shall have its place in the control and direction of publicly owned industries" .
Finally, the Immediate Programme reasserted Labour's adherence to the principle of collective security through the League of  Nations.
By now Labour was fully committed "to maintain such armed forces as are necessary to defend our country and to fulfil our obligations as a member of the British Commonwealth and of the League of Nations" .
The Labour Party had traditionally concentrated on "gas and water" socialism, but it could not avoid the revision of its foreign policy which events made necessary.
After the death of Henderson in 1935 and the removal of Lansbury from the leadership, disarmament and pacifism were less universally accepted among the Party's members.
In 1936 the National Council of Labour, representing the Labour Party, the Trades Union Congress and the Co-operative Union, emphasized that collective security against aggression must rely on a degree of rearmament.
Despite the opposition of many of the Party's leaders, the parliamentary party agreed in the following year to abstain from any division against the Estimates for the Fighting Services.
Hugh Dalton, returned to parliament in 1935, had taken a leading part in reconciling the Party to rearmament and in this he was backed by Bevin, Citrine and the TUC.
Despite the recovery of the Labour Party after 1931, its electoral successes were unspectacular.
The Labour victory in the London County Council election of 1934, repeated three years later, was the most important single achievement of the decade, increasing the personal prestige of Herbert Morrison and emphasizing the shifting southwards of Labour influence.
The 1935 general election was a disappointment and it was a major part of Cripps's case for the Labour Left that the election due in 1940 would not lead to a Labour victory either.
In local government elections, to which much importance was attached, the Labour Party made little advance after the victories of 1934, actually losing seats in 1936.
Despite strong condemnation of the National Government by the Left, there is little evidence that the voters regarded the Labour Party as a suitable alternative.
However, the Party organization was increasing its effectiveness and recruiting members in areas which had previously been weakly organized.
The local Labour parties were growing significantly, leading to changes in the Party constitution and in the relative importance of the Left.
By 1936 the individual Party membership had risen to 430,000, constituting 20 per cent of Labour's nominal strength and the great bulk of its active supporters.
In the following year membership reached a  peak, before dropping away in 1938 and 1939.
The local Parties, growing in strength, began to ask for a greater voice in decisions than was allowed under the 1918 constitution.
After an agitation lasting several years the Constituency Parties won the right in 1937 to exclusive choice of their representatives on the National Executive Committee.
Real power remained in the hands of the union delegations but it now became possible for the local parties to ensure that their opinions were more effectively voiced.
Something like a collective opinion was growing in the individual section under the influence of the Left.
It was never true that the majority of local parties were under the control of the Left but the more active and vocal Constituencies were becoming so by 1939.
The balance of power within the Party Conference and on the National Executive moved in favour of the local parties after 1937.
The Labour Party was ceasing to be a loose federation of political and industrial groups.
It was becoming an alliance of the trade union movement with a unitary political party.
There was less scope in the individual section for the organized expression of minority views than in the political affiliates of the past.
Local Labour parties were subject to a centralized control which had never been exerted over the ILP or over individual unions.
As the number of local agents increased and the Party adopted a regional structure directly answerable to London, so the central authority became more elective.
There was no device comparable to the annual conferences of individual unions or affiliated socialist societies at which Constituency Labour opinion could be expressed.
Neither the new regional conferences nor the revived Labour League of Youth were allowed to debate national policy.
With the disaffiliation of the Socialist League in 1937 and of the University Labour Federation in 1940, the Party ended the possibility of a political affiliate being able to oppose official policy within the Labour Party.
Party members were further prohibited from joining or affiliating to the "proscribed organizations" (groups listed by the National Executive and almost always under Communist Party control).
Domestically the Labour Party was improving its organization and developing its programme after 1934, with its focus on the general election of 1940 which never took place.
The world, however, was not moving in the desired direction and the Left often annoyed Labour leaders by pointing this out in public.
The  Left became increasingly cosmopolitan in its outlook and concerns while the Labour Party and the union leaders were still firmly rooted in the conditions and outlook of the Distressed Areas.
Moreover, Labour politicians and full-time union officials were much more sensitive to the conservatism of a working-class electorate which was just weaned from Liberalism and, in many important areas, continued to return Conservative MPs.
The Left, even in the local Labour parties, tended to move in a world of the politically involved and to be far more responsive to what was happening in Europe than were most British voters.
By 1937 this was helping to bring into the orbit of Left politics an increasing number of younger, better educated middle-class activists, who found themselves confronting a leadership which still belonged to the 1920s intellectually and was socially based on the older industrial areas and occupations.
As Fascism became the central concern and unemployment a secondary issue, the social differentiation between the Left and the labour movement became more marked.
The Communist Party, which was largely working-class in its leadership and electoral following, was able to bridge this gap precisely because the Soviet Union was also centrally concerned with the rise of Nazi Germany.
This gave it an influence among the Middle classes which it had never previously enjoyed, while allowing it to maintain the tenuous but important industrial base which it had been creating in the 1920s.
It, too, was able to expand its following in London and among new working-class sections like the London busmen, while still able to benefit from its loyal followings in South Wales and Central Scotland.
It was further able to influence important sections of the expanding local Labour parties, which grew most rapidly away from the Distressed Areas.
The Recovery of the Communist Party
On the extreme Left the Communist Party began to emerge as the dominant group although throughout the decade the ILP had more electoral and parliamentary influence.
By November 1934 the conciliatory attitude of the Communist International had caused the Labour and Socialist International to modify its earlier warning against entering into United Front agreements with national Communist Parties.
The "Pact for Unity of Action" had already been signed between the Communist and Socialist Parties of France.
In Britain the Communist Party returned to its attempts to work with sections of the Labour Party.
Pollitt, speaking in October 1934, proposed an electoral agreement with the Labour Party and the ILP in the approaching municipal elections.
The ILP leadership continued to regard co-operation with the Communists as a preliminary to the extension of the United Front to the rest of the labour and trade-union movement.
At a meeting with Communist leaders on I1 December 1934, Fenner Brockway laid down three conditions for continued co-operation:(a) Neither Party was to interfere in the internal affairs of the other (b) The Communist Party should state clearly whether it would oppose Labour Party or ILP candidates at elections (c) There should be no attempt to unify the ILP and the Communist Party into a single organisation until the next Annual Conference had discussed the matter.
Despite its participation in the United Front, the ILP was fully aware of the danger of its complete submersion.
Both Parties had some 6,000 members in 1934, but the Communists were on the  increase, while the ILP was declining, in financial difficulties and riddled with unofficial groups, two of them directly encouraged by the Communist Party.
At the Derby ILP conference in 1935 Harry Pollitt, acting as fraternal delegate from the Communist Party, suggested "the holding of a joint congress for the formation of a United Communist Party" .
Maxton, in reply, foresaw the formation of a new working-class party, but would not agree that unification was opportune at the time.
Throughout 1935 joint activities between the two Parties virtually ceased.
Three years after disaffiliation and the beginning of the United Front the ILP had less than one third of the membership on which it had last affiliated to the Labour Party.
The General Election was to show where the strength of the ILP lay.
Fifteen candidates secured 139,517 votes, four-fifths of them in Scotland, and in the four successful contests the official Labour candidates forfeited their deposits.
Bridgeton, Gorbals, Camlachie and Shettleston in the East End and South Side of Glasgow returned a solid bloc of ILP Members and City Councillors.
The Party position in the area remained far stronger than that of the Labour Party.
which hardly existed.
Though small in numbers, the ILP had four vociferous Members of Parliament who were assured a hearing in the House and in the country.
However remote their political views remained from the rest of the electorate, the "Clyde group" remained as secure in their own area as they had ever been.
Internally, however, the ILP was in confusion.
The Revolutionary Policy Committee members in the London Division resigned to join the Communist Party in November 1935.
The NAC"was severely criticized for its policy towards the Abyssinian war.
It had given its support to League sanctions against Italy, putting this view forward to its international contacts in the"Left Bureau.
However the Party Inner Executive, consisting of Maxton, McGovern and Campbell Stephen, disagreed with what appeared to then, as support for Abyssinia and the League of Nations.
After the NAC had reluctantly accepted this view the Keighley Conference of 1936 censured it, declaring its support for sanctions.
The Parliamentary Group declared itself "unable conscientiously to carry out the Conference decision" .
Faced with the threat of losing its Parliamentary representatives the NAC had to agree to a plebiscite of the membership on the issue.
This vindicated the refusal of the Inner Executive to support either Italy, Abyssinia or  the League of Nations.
Such vacillation still further reduced the political influence of the Party.
By 1935 the Trotskyists had succeeded in organizing an effective group within the ILP.
They advocated a less sectarian approach to relations with the Labour Party, favouring work for a third Labour Government, rather than the virtually syndicalist policy being put forward by the ILP.
The National Administrative Council continued to support the loose federation of European "Left" Socialist Parties, described as "renegades from Communism, Brandlerites and counter-revolutionary Trotskyists" by the Communist Party.
The Trotskyist branches, on the other hand, wanted the formation of a Fourth International with the centralizing and directing power which the NAC refused to countenance in the Comintern, or encourage in the Left Socialist Bureau.
As a reaction against the Trotskyist agitation and the existence of groups favouring the Communist Party, the Conference ruled that unofficial groups were "bad in principle" "by the narrow margin of 63 votes to 60.
As a recognizable group the Trotskyists disbanded in April.
but continued to work within the Party until the end of November 1936.
C. L. R. James, their leader, then wrote to Brockway, the ILP Secretary, declaring the intention of all Trotskyists to withdraw from the Party to form a separate organization.
In a circular sent to branches on 5 December, Brockway estimated that only 30 members would be involved, mostly in the London Division, but possibly in Liverpool also.
While the ILP was in confusion, its "loyal" successor, the Socialist League, was beginning to reconsider its role.
The League had presented a full programme to the Labour Party Conference at Southport, intended to increase the socialist elements in the official Socialism and the Condition of the People.
This had been defeated and the League began to move from the elaboration of policy to agitation.
A special League conference was called on 25 November 1934, at which its National Council was given executive powers to take action on contemporary political issues.
The Socialist Leaguer declared: A disciplined organisation founded on a common policy and working as part of the Labour movement is what the League conceives itself to be.
We have passed out of the realm of programme making into the realm of action.
J.T. Murphy saw this as marking a definite departure from the  limited aims of the League.
 "It at once sharpened the process of transforming League branches from research groups into active political units" , he wrote in the official League journal.
Considerable discussion had gone into the Socialist League programme and the debates on Labour Party policy promoted by it at the Hastings and Southport Conferences were undoubtedly the best on domestic policy during the decade.
They lacked the bitterness and sterility of the debates on Party discipline, Communist affiliation and the United Front which took place at subsequent Party Conferences.
Labour Party leaders, however, did not appreciate the radicalism of the League, nor its increasing domination by Sir Stafford Cripps.
The Socialist League began to find itself in the same critical relationship with the Labour Party which had forced its predecessor, the ILP, to disaffiliate.
At its first annual conference in June 1933, the League had been asked to consider the issues raised by the United Front between the ILP and the Communist Party.
However the conference had felt it advisable to avoid this and the Labour Party and the TUC were asked instead to formulate a policy which would rally the whole working-class movement against Fascism and Capitalism.
The Socialist League still took the view that only through work in the Labour Party was there any possibility of building a united labour movement.
The United Front was not regarded as sufficiently important for the League to abandon its propaganda work in favour of joint agitation with the Communist Party and the ILP.
The National Council advised the Bristol conference of the League of 1935: We must not allow ourselves to be diverted into activities definitely condemned by the Labour Party which will jeopardize our affiliation to and influence in the Party.
The Socialist League was developing an independent policy in conflict with the official programme of the Labour Party.
At its 1935 conference it decided to oppose League of Nations sanctions against Italy, an approach close to that eventually adopted by the ILP and reflecting the influence of Cripps.
This led to the resignation from the League of J. T. Murphy and was clearly opposite to the policy of the Labour Party.
The League organized Anti-War Conferences and once again found itself drawn into political action on a policy differing from that of the Labour Party in being critical of the League of Nations.
Early hostility to the  United Front began to lessen after the departure of J. T. Murphy and Socialist Leaguers were soon involved in the controversies on Spain, the rise of Fascism and the need for "working class unity" .
They were encouraged by Sir Stafford Cripps who was both their president and the unchallenged leader of an emerging Labour Party Left of which the Socialist League was the core.
By the end of 1935, then, the situation on the Left had become increasingly favourable for the Communist Party.
The ILP was in decline and the Communist Party"was seriously attempting to make amends for its previous abuse of the rest of the labour movement.
Within the Labour Party the Socialist League was finding that its attempts to remould policy were resented and rejected and it began to look for allies outside the Party.
At the same time both the Constituency Labour Parties and the Labour League of Youth were enjoying a rapid increase in membership and many of their new recruits were more interested in what was happening in Europe than in the traditional problems of unemployment and labour conditions.
Newcomers to the Left could be forgiven for not being acquainted with the tactics of the Communists and with the tortuous and unedifying relationships within the United Front.
Much of the appeal of official Labour condemnation of the United Front in all its forms stemmed from recollections of these manoeuvrings for power.
The advocates of "Unity" argued, however, that a considerable change had come over the Communist Party and that it had given up its "social fascist" accusations.
The Communist International appeared to substantiate these claims at its Seventh World Congress held in Moscow in the middle of 1935.
As a result the change in atmosphere, in tactics and in the whole conception of "Unity" in the second half of the decade was spectacular.
Alterations in the structure and personnel of the Comintern themselves indicated the adoption of a new approach.
Manuilsky and Kuusinen were replaced in the public eye by Dimitrov, the "Reichstag hero" and new Comintern Chairman.
The "Leftists" , who had been in power since 1928, made open or implicit recantations of their policies.
On practically every issue the Comintern found itself in the role of an infallible body which had adopted a manifestly fallible policy.
In fact the Comintern, with its internecine struggles reflecting Russian politics, and its persistent failures, was increasingly ineffectual.
The continuing sessions of the Plenum, and the controlling powers of the Executive Committee were abandoned.
The independence of national Parties was enshrined as an organizational principle.
Communist Parties throughout the world continued to think and act alike, as the crisis on the outbreak of war was to show.
The real significance of the Seventh Congress was, however, that it tried desperately to create the impression of a new approach.
It was even prepared publicly to bury the Comintern if "Social Fascism" could be buried with it.
The United Front was broadened and its aims made defensive.
The tactics by which such aims were to be achieved were reformist and not revolutionary.
The Comintern still asserted its belief in "Soviet Power" , and the weakness of parliamentary democracy, but despite this the aim of the United Front was to be the formation of an elected coalition Government, which could not achieve "Soviet Power" , but which could educate and encourage the Left towards this distant goal by virtue of its existence.
The Comintern Congress was trying to reconcile its revolutionary past with the necessity of gaining support from constitutional parties.
The contradictions and misunderstandings which were later to centre around the objects of the Popular Front were, in the main, the product of this attempt to reconcile the defence of parliamentary democracy with the advocacy of eventual revolution.
The inconsistency between the broad appeal of the Popular Front and its continued use as a tactic for ultimate Communist control is the central theme in the discussions which occupied the next four years.
The Popular Front was, in any case, accepted almost unanimously by national Communist Parties as a relief from the increasing absurdity of the previous policies.
In Britain, as in other countries, the Communist Party had already adopted tactics similar to those officially blessed by the Seventh Congress.
Despite the continued indifference of the Labour Party the Communists had made many concessions aimed at attracting support from Labour members.
The Party had supported Labour candidates and was calling for the return of a Labour Government.
While Pollitt was not satisfied that the United Front was being used sufficiently to the advantage of the Party, he warned at the Thirteenth Congress in February 1935 that the Communists should not be too obviously in control of the campaign for Unity.
Similarly he anticipated Dimitrov in calling for a new approach to the middle classes.
 "We must also endeavour to recruit the doctor, teacher, student, architect," he said, "and thus  we will grow stronger and stronger and build a strong united front." 
The Communist Party had not yet abandoned its attempts to gain control of the ILP, despite the assurances made in the previous year.
For the first time in its history the 1935 Annual Conference of the ILP was attended by a fraternal delegate from the Communist Party, Harry Pollitt, who put forward the policy of "organizational unity" , that is of merging both Parties, now equal in membership, into a single unit.
In its discussion prior to the Seventh World Congress, the Communist Party was asked to consider the position of other Left groups in Britain and, in particular, the experiences with the ILP in the United Front.
The Party also considered the place of the Socialist League which "continues the traditional ILP role in the working-class movement under a pseudo-Marxist cloak" .
At its Bristol Conference in April the League had once again refused to become involved in the United Front.
It favoured the development of a more radical policy for the Labour Party, a policy which would provide "a real basis for unity" .
The Annual Report made it clear that the League considered its influence within the Labour Party as its most important contribution to Left unity.
The Communist Party could apparently hope for little from the Socialist League and for nothing from the Labour Party.
It was forced to maintain its alliance with the ILP, in spite of its growing contempt for that Party.
There was still a faint hope that the ILP would accept "organizational unity" , and become submerged in the more unified and efficient Communist Party.
Even if "organizational unity" with the ILP had been carried through, this would at best only have doubled the small membership of the Communist Party.
Assuming that all the ILP members acquiesced in the amalgamation, the new Party with less than 12,000 members would certainly have lost two of its three MPs.
Even Maxton could not have worked for long with the Communists whose infiltration he had done so much to resist.
With this in mind the Communists began to pay increasing attention to the Labour Party.
By the end of 1935 they were quite prepared to abandon their former ILP allies in the hope of gaining influence with the 400,000 individua1 members of the Labour Party.
Limited though the desire for Unity was in the Labour Party, both the Communists and the ILP were anxious to take advantage  of it.
Speaking at an ILP Summer School, Maxton proposed an electoral agreement: The ILP is prepared to consult with the Labour Party, the Co-operative Party and the Communist Party, regarding the General Election, with a view to avoiding conflicting candidatures in order to (a) defeat the National Government candidates and (b) secure the return of candidates nominated by the Parties taking part in the consultations.
Pollitt, at the Seventh World Congress of the Comintern, was prepared to go further than the ILP.
He urged that the Communist Party "should propose a meeting with the Labour Party to jointly formulate a united front programme around which the common fight could be organised" .
He went on to state that the Party would definitely affiliate to the Labour Party if accepted as a "revolutionary organisation" .
The Communists had decided to pursue a policy which could not be followed by the ILP.
Brockway had specifically rejected any proposal to reaffiliate to the Labour Party at the end of 1934: "The decisive objection to this" , he wrote, "is that a Socialist can now only function through the Labour Party by giving up his Socialism" .
The Communist decision to withdraw its candidates in all but two Parliamentary constituencies aggravated the situation still further.
Except in the three ILP seats the Communists would support Labour rather than ILP candidates.
ILP speakers attacked the Communist "betrayal" at length but were dismissed contemptuously by Pollitt.
Referring to the ILP and the Socialist League, he wrote in November: Fortunately for the British working class movement, such organisations, with no mass connections or mass influence, or record of mass struggles in any part of the country, are of little significance at the present time.
Although the Communists were to turn to "such organisations" in just over a year, they were, for the present, much more intent on wooing the Labour Party.
Towards the Popular Front
The National Conference of the Communist Party, which met in Sheffield in October 1935, passed a resolution which departed considerably from the slogan "For a Communist Group in Parliament" adopted at the Thirteenth Congress only eight months previously.
In the intervening period the decision of the Comintern Congress had become public.
The resolution adopted by the National Conference consequently proposed an electoral agreement with the Labour Party and a campaign for affiliation to it.
This was a preliminary to withdrawing Communist candidates from all but two of the contests in the General Election.
Even in West Fife and Rhondda East, the Central Committee declared that: "the Party is prepared to, in conjunction with the Trade Unions and Labour bodies in them, convene a selection conference, bring the various working class candidates before it and abide by their decisions" .
At the General Election in November, William Gallacher was successful in West Fife while Pollitt in the Rhondda secured 13,655 votes.
After his election Gallacher applied for the Labour Party whip which, as he was not a Party member and had defeated someone who was, could"not be granted.
Although the Communists had greatly modified their policy they failed to persuade the leadership of the Labour Party to make any concessions on the United Front or affiliation proposals.
The Communist Party wrote to the National Executive of the Labour Party on 25 November applying for affiliation; they based their claim on the federal nature of the labour movement and the help which Communists had given to Labour candidates.
The letter was far more conciliatory than that which had been rejected in 1921.
Whether or not the Communist Party leaders expected such a  letter to have anything more than a propaganda appeal they can hardly have been surprised by the Labour Party reply on 27 January 1936 which rejected the application and outlined the history of relations between the two parties, particularly during the social fascist"period.
In this reply and in the report British Labour and Communism submitted to the 1936 Annual Conference, the Labour Party stressed that acceptance of the application would only serve the Communist Party's ends.
These were "to utilise Party facilities on the platform, in public conference, and in the Party press, to displace their essential democratic and socialist character and substitute a Policy Programme based upon Communist Party principles" .
The National Executive also noted "the proclaimed fact that the present application for affiliation is but an evidence of the deviation in the tactics which have been pursued by the Communist International in recent years" .
The official labour movement remained hostile to the Communists, at the international and national levels.
The Executive Committee of the Comintern had cabled the Labour and Socialist International on 25 September 1935, asking for negotiations for the "defence of peace" .
The LSI Executive met in Brussels on 12 October and rejected the suggestions.
The LSI had no authority over its constituents but the growing domination of the British and Scandinavian parties was enough to secure this refusal which directly countered the United Fronts established by the Latin parties in the LSI.
There was ample evidence that neither the Comintern nor the local Communists had abandoned the aim of changing Labour's programme and capturing its machine.
Harry Pollitt reported to the Central Committee of the Party in January 1936 that: We fight to affiliate as an organised Party, campaigning for united action on the part of all workers organisations, for a change of policy that corresponds to the desires of the Labour Party members, and that also opens up the perspective of realising at a later stage one united working class political party.
At the lower levels of the movement, however, many were becoming attracted to the prospect of ending the feuds of recent years.
In January 1936 the University Labour Federation accepted the amalgamation of the Communist Federation of Student  Societies.
The British Youth Peace Assembly, a largely Communist gathering, was held in March 1936, and attracted some support from branches of the Labour League of Youth and from the University Labour Federation.
The Young Communist League had already agreed to merge with the Labour League of Youth, if possible.
Advance, the unofficial League of Youth paper which was growing rapidly in influence, was calling for a "drawing together of the working class youth Internationals" .
Left-wing, and particularly Communist, influence was increasing rapidly among organized youth and students; a symptom of the reaction against European fascism.
The annual conference of the Labour League of Youth meeting in Manchester on 12 April 1936, passed a resolution in favour of a "United Front of working class youth organisations" by 82 votes to 75, bringing the League into immediate conflict with the Labour Party.
This was followed in June by a letter from John Gollan, Secretary of the Young Communist League, to the League's National Advisory Committee asking for joint talks aimed at "uniting all working class youth organisations into the Labour League of Youth on the basis of the decisions of your recent conference" .
Communist influence on the youth and student organizations of the Labour Party grew markedly during 1936.
The Eighth National Conference of the Young Communist League, held at Bermondsey in February 1936, marked the first serious attempt to broaden the appeal of the YCL.
Visitors and observers from 26 other organizations were invited to attend.
The Labour League of Youth sent observers from thirteen branches and from the London Federation.
The rules of the Young Communist League were altered so as to widen its membership "not only to those who support its stated policy and aims, but also to those who, while not being actively hostile to its policy and aims, wish to study Socialism" .
The YCL internal bulletin, Communist Youth, was replaced by the weekly Challenge; the new paper had a popular appeal which gained it 20,000 regular subscribers within two years.
Within the Labour League of Youth the YCL was able to maintain contact with the membership and the National Advisory Committee, particularly through the influence of Ted Willis and the Advance group.
The attempt of the Communist Party to implement Comintern decisions naturally gave rise to the most widely publicized of the movements for some kind of co-operation on the Left.
Campaigns  to involve the Liberal Party in an electoral agreement with the Labour and Communist Parties were less significant, though they were to provide the ultimate form of the "People's Front" .
The idea of such an alliance was based on the Front Populaire in France, which included the Radical Party among its members.
It was quite unacceptable at the time to the British Communists.
A campaign for a People's Front would detract from their attempts to influence the Labour Party, and was felt to be inspired by Lloyd George, with whom the Communists had a long standing feud, dating back to the First World War.
An article by Lloyd George in the Co-operative newspaper Reynolds News, lending support to such an idea, was attacked by the Communists as a manoeuvre "to drag Fascism into England behind the popular sign of the" People's Front".
More moderate criticism held that it was essential to ensure Communist affiliation to the Labour Party before appealing to other diverse political elements.
Within two years the Communist Party was to be foremost in advocating cooperation with leading Liberals.
The difference was one of timing.
Pollitt believed that "there can be no real and effective People's Front unless there has been already united action within the Labour Movement itself." 
As with so many of the apparently unreal differences on the Left it was organizational rather than principled considerations which divided the Communist and non-Communist advocates of Unity.
The Communist Party felt that there was still much resentment against the Liberals in the Labour Party for the role they had played in 1931.
All supporters of "Unity" realized that their aims could not be attained without the participation of the Labour Party.
Several leaders of the Liberal Party "were known to favour a Popular Front to move the Government, but acquiesced in the view that they could do nothing about it unless the Labour Party changed its attitude" .
At the end of 1936 G. D. H. Cole, in his The Peoples Front, advocated the formation of "Radical Groups" , to work in local Liberal parties and to co-operate with the Labour and Communist Parties.
Here again the central place was given to the Labour Party.
Early in 1937 a group of prominent Liberals pressed such a policy on the Liberal Party Executive, their appeal for "Unity" being printed by the Party without comment.
The Communists held back from such attempts to draw the Liberal Party into a People's Front.
They still believed in influencing the  Labour Party.
This caution on the part of the Communists was due to their natural antipathy to the Liberal Party, their desire to concentrate on the campaign for affiliation to the Labour Party, and organizational conflicts with the People's Front Propaganda Committee.
Ideologically the Party was committed to creating a "working class united front" before going on to an alliance on the French or Spanish models.
Despite this it was to be less than two years before the Party adopted the idea of the "People's Front" in its entirety, including the help of Liberals and even of Conservatives who were opposed to the National Government.
The Independent Labour Party, in contrast, had deeply-rooted objections to the Popular Front idea.
The suggestion of Communist affiliation to the Labour Party was regarded as an unwarrantable departure from principle.
Nevertheless"working class unity remained a desired end despite all our disappointments in seeking it.
Among the general body of workers the urge for unity was wide and deep.
There seemed no hope of removing the National Government so long as division continued."
The ILP desire to exert influence on the rest of the Labour movement was tempered by hostility to the Communists and, above all, by an inability to compromise or to sacrifice any of the Party's independence.
With its declining membership the ILP tended to adopt a purist attitude to other Left groups.
If it was to continue in existence the ILP had to reach some agreement, to find some acceptable compromise between "Unity" and "independence" .
It turned to federalism for the solution; a solution in keeping with its history.
To distinguish its proposal from the variations of the "United Front" which were current in 1936, the ILP described its own suggested Left federation as the "Workers Front" .
On 7 August 1936 the NAC put its proposals to the Labour Party, the Communist Party and the Co-operative Party, but received no support.
The "Workers Front" hung fire; it was revived in 1938 when the "People's Front" began to solicit the aid of non-Socialist groups.
The election of Popular Front governments in France and Spain and the outbreak of the Spanish Civil War made 1936 the decisive year for the Left.
Any lessening of Fascist activity might well have led to complete confusion among the differing advocates of "Unity" .
As it was the campaign for Communist affiliation continued smoothly and support for "Unity" grew rapidly in the Labour League of Youth and in local Labour Parties.
The central position  which the Communists occupied in these campaigns was a result of their international connections, which made them appear as the principal opponents of Fascism.
In Britain, their insignificance was overcome by the long agitation for affiliation to the Labour Party.
This presented the Communists as a part of the federal Labour movement, and made it necessary for sections of the Labour Party to give serious consideration to Communist aims and activities.
Communist sympathizers like John Strachey saw Communist affiliation as "the indispensable foundation stone upon which a Peoples Front for Britain can alone be built" .
Even G. D. H. Cole, far more critical of the Communists than Strachey, could not see "any sharp line which marks off British Communists from other British Socialists" .
The Socialist League, which, it will be remembered, had deliberately kept out of the United Front, accepted the need for Communist affiliation at its Annual Conference on l June 1936.
Several Trade Unions agreed to support the Communist application, among them the Miners' Federation of Great Britain, whose votes made up the bulk of those recorded for Communist affiliation at the Edinburgh Conference of the Labour Party.
Even the Fabian Society Executive made a similar decision, though at a meeting held in the middle of the summer and therefore poorly attended.
In the Labour League of Youth leading members were actively negotiating for the formal amalgamation of the Young Communist League.
Clearly the Labour Party Executive was finding "unity" a serious problem.
The Edinburgh Conference was the last to be held under the complete trade-union domination which had been noticeable since 1932.
In later years the initiative passed to the political wing of the Party, although decisions were, of course, ultimately decided by the union vote.
The Edinburgh Conference decisions, particularly on "non-intervention" in Spain, were widely resented in the Labour movement.
The close identification of C. R. Attlee with the Spanish Republican Government, and Herbert Morrison's part in increasing Constituency representation on the National Executive, indicated dissatisfaction even among the moderate Parliamentary leaders.
For these reasons the inevitable defeat of the "United Front" and of Communist affiliation by a predominantly trade-union vote did little to deter the "Unity Campaign" which grew in direct defiance of the Edinburgh decisions.
The two main resolutions on the "United Front" and Communist affiliation did, in any case, receive half a  million votes each and were backed by such important bodies as the Miners' Federation and the Amalgamated Engineering Union.
This in itself was sufficient to encourage the Left to continue with its agitation.
Despite a speech by Will Lawther for the MFGB, praising the work of Communists in the unions, the majority of union officials were totally opposed to the Communist Party.
It was inevitable that affiliation would be rejected.
From the Communist viewpoint their campaign had been justified by the vote of 592,000 for affiliation and by the importance which it had given the Party in the eyes of militant Labour Party members.
The Labour Party conference defeated Communist affiliation at the request of the National Executive and with the approval of most union officials other than some in the Miners' Federation and the Amalgamated Engineering Union.
Rather than ending the discussion this decision merely began a period of three years during which the issue of "Unity" was rarely off the agendas of local Labour parties, trade unions and other sections of the labour movement.
The Labour leadership also had to face two revolts from among individual Party members which were tackled in organizational terms but which were largely motivated by ideological sympathy for the Left.
The Labour Party National Executive had submitted a memorandum on League of Youth organization to the League's annual conference in Manchester in Apri1 1936.
It was suggested that the League should concentrate on recreational and educational activities and that the age limit, which had been raised to 25 in 1926, should be progressively reduced to 11 by 1939.
This would have forced the resignation of many of the League's leading members who were closely associated with the Communists.
Not only did the Manchester conference reject the memorandum with only one dissenter but it went on to request: that Conferences of the Labour Party League of Youth be empowered to freely discuss and record decisions upon policy.
The National Executive submitted a report to the Edinburgh Conference in October including new rules for the League of Youth.
These repeated the proposals of the earlier memorandum and in addition recommended the disbanding of the National Advisory Committee, the suspension of the 1937 League conference and the replacement of the New Nation by a bulletin for League branches prepared by the National Organizer's office.
This  would have reduced the League of Youth to a simple ancillary of the Party, entitled to discuss organizational matters but not empowered to formulate any collective view on current issues.
The University Labour Federation failed to carry its motion to reject the report.
The concessions granted to the League since 1929 were finally withdrawn in 1937 when the League representative on the National Executive was dismissed.
A less obtrusive movement of opinion, which was to have an important effect on the balance of forces within the mass Labour Party, was the demand for organizational changes which would increase the voice of the Constituency Parties on the National Executive.
After the Hastings Conference of 1933 an Association of Constituency Labour Parties was projected by members who were dissatisfied with the preponderance of the trade unions.
The aim was to separate the individual membership section of the Party from the unions and to set it up in a relationship reminiscent of that with the ILP before 1932.
Instead of local Parties being affiliated separately the constituencies as a whole would be able to form a collective opinion in the same way as national trade unions.
The Labour Party warned against taking part in any such movement which obviously threatened to disturb the balance maintained at Party Conference by the union block vote.
In 1936 the National Executive Committee rejected a number of proposals to change the party Constitution, most of them inspired by the Constituency Party Association.25 After the Edinburgh Conference, in November 1936, a Constituency Party Association conference was held in London at which representatives of local Labour parties supported the demand that they should be free to elect the Constituency representatives on the National Executive without the unions being involved.
A provisional committee was formed with Stafford Cripps as chairman, to hold unofficial conferences confined to local Party delegates at which this demand would be pressed.
This was so successful in London and the South-East that by the middle of 1937 there existed something like a parallel system to the official machinery.
Through Cripps the campaign became linked with those favouring "Unity" of the Left.
Thus both in the League of Youth and in the expanding local parties, the Left was able to feed on resentment against organizational restrictions which were largely designed to prevent the expansion of the Left within the Labour Party.
The constituency  agitation had far-reaching consequences.
For the first time local Labour parties were given some sense of common identity, which had been lacking on the political wing since the disaffiliation of the ILP.
Although only a minority of parties were favourable to the Left, it was that minority which was most active at Party conferences and in political propaganda in the country.
In the South, where Labour was not so deeply influenced by trade-union traditions, the local parties were becoming an increasingly coherent pressure group with a common outlook and a tendency to look outside the Labour Party and towards the Communists for ideological guidance.
Appeasement and the War
There was a perceptible movement of opinion away from the National government in the two years before the outbreak of war.
but there was no landslide to the Labour Party.
The general election which should have come by 1940 seemed unlikely to lead to the return of a majority Labour government but it was postponed because of the declaration of war on 3 September 1939.
Throughout the war there operated a "political truce" in accordance with which each major party agreed not to contest seats formerly held by any of the others.
The few Communists, Fascist and Stop-the War candidates who ignored the truce were badly defeated until towards the end of the war when the newly formed Commonwealth began to win seats which might otherwise have gone to the Labour Party.
In some cases the Left opposed the "electoral truce" , causing difficulties within local Labour Parties.
While there seems to have been a major but largely unmeasured swing to Labour during the war, the pre-war electoral situation revealed no great reaction against the National government.
Nor was Baldwin troubled with the industrial unrest which culminated in the General Strike during his first administration.
The Depression and the decline of the Distressed Areas made a return to such unrest very unlikely.
Not unti1 1937 was there anything like the industrial unrest of the 1920s and this took place mainly outside the traditional centres of militancy.
The London Transport strike of 1937 was an unofficial protest by the Communist-led Busmen's Rank and File Movement against agreements reached between London Transport and the busmen's own union, the Transport and General Workers.
On the Nottinghamshire coalfield the strike at Harworth against the breakaway "Spencer Union" was also led by  Communists and ended with the imprisonment of one of their leaders, Mick Kane.
After 1932 it was not until 1937 that three million working days were again to be lost in industrial disputes, compared with 162 million days in 1926 and an average of 24 million days per year between 1918 and 1926.
Neither in the industrial nor the electoral sphere, then, was there any measurable and widespread opposition to the National government.
On the other hand there was a great surge of Left-wing sentiment in the political and intellectual life of the labour movement.
Only gradually was the distaste of the Left for the National government shared by any appreciable section of public opinion.
After the war the majority of the electorate reversed its previously favourable attitude to the National government and that process probably began soon after 1941.
Yet in the late 1930s there were few signs of it happening.
The growing influence of the Left among middle-class intellectuals did not correspond to increasing militancy in the working class nor to growing anti-Conservatism among the voters.
Left influence was sustained increasingly by events overseas, events over which most Labour supporters felt they had little control and which most of them probably saw as secondary to their still-lingering economic burdens.
The Left became increasingly middle-class and this reinforced the already strong opposition to it among trade union officials.
The Communist Party, although still working-class in its leadership, encouraged middle-class radicalism, almost abandoned any claims to be a revolutionary party and dedicated all its energies to supporting the foreign policy aims of the Soviet government.
It was thus able to draw on the large reservoir of latent discontent among Liberals and the intellectuals which had been only slightly touched by the problem of unemployment and which was completely cut off from the syndicalist traditions of working class militancy in the previous decade.
The Spanish Civil War and "appeasement" became symbols of British official weakness and treachery for the intellectuals, as in other Western democracies.
The most heavily publicized campaign was that of the Aid Spain Committee which organized the British Section of the International Brigade and the sending of "food ships" and medical supplies to the Republicans.
Although the work of this Committee was almost entirely organized by the Communist Party, it was supported by most of the labour movement.
While  intellectuals secured most publicity for their support of Spanish Republicanism, the International Brigade drew many of its members from areas which were traditionally Left, particularly Scotland and South Wales.
Spain united the Left because it represented a real struggle between Fascism and the Left, more vital than the battles against the British Union of Fascists in the streets of London.
Apart from the religious issues which sometimes confused Catholics, only one factor weakened British Left support for the Spanish government.
This was the growth of Communist influence at the expense of other parties in the Frente Popular.
In May 1937 street fighting had broken out in Barcelona and was used as an excuse for outlawing the "Trotskyist" POUM, not in fact Trotskyist but a breakaway from the Spanish Communist Party in close touch with the British ILP.6 By 1938 the Communist Party had so entrenched itself through the use of Soviet aid and advisers that it was able to force the resignation of Prime Minister Prieto and to improve its position in the Cabinet.
Despite the genuine idealism of those who fought and agitated for the Republicans, the role of the Communist Party aroused some doubts on the Left.
The Communists had been the leaders of the Aid to Spain campaign in Britain, raising as much support as the combined efforts of the Labour Party and the TUC.
Nevertheless, many on the Left could not fail to notice the consistent attempts of the Party to benefit from the Civil War.
Fred Copeman, leader of the British Section of the International Brigade, wrote: By allowing Party politics to gain the ascendancy over the popular front, the slogans changed from "All for Spain" to "All for the Party" .
Doubts about Communist motives in Spain would have been submerged under the general enthusiasm for the Republic, had not doubts about Soviet Communism been growing at the same time.
Bolshevik leaders, tried in Moscow throughout 1937 and 1938, claimed to have been under direct orders from Trotsky and in contact with the German and Japanese governments.
The Left watched those they had known as leaders of the 1917 revolution admit to being "fascist agents" , and to "habitual and base betrayal of military secrets to a certain hostile fascist power" .
The effect of the Moscow trials is difficult to gauge from the immediate reaction.
D. N. Pritt, at the time a member of the Labour Party National  Executive, gave a pro-Soviet report based on his observations at the 1936 trial.
The Friends of the Soviet Union, a Communist organization with some influence, repeated the official charges against the accused.
But the Moscow trials dampened a great deal of Left-wing enthusiasm for the Soviet Union.
The Moscow trials shattered the notion of a totally good Soviet Union confronting a totally bad Nazi Germany.
This had been a central theme of Left propaganda, appealing to a movement which had always tended to think dichotomously.
Support within the Labour Party for united action with the Communist Party slackened considerably after the results of the trials become known.
Events moved so rapidly in 1939 that the Left in Britain could do little but point to the complete breakdown of the National government's foreign policy.
On 23 August 1939 this feeling was fortified by an event quite unforeseen on the Left and, indeed, by many others.
The Soviet Union and Germany signed a nonaggression pact and Soviet propaganda against Fascism completely ceased.
Since the end of 1937 the British Left had supported the formation of a triple alliance between Britain, France and the Soviet Union, an object clearly desired by the Soviet government.
After the occupation of Czechoslovakia in March 1939, the British government finally accepted the necessity of gaining support from the Soviet Union.
But by then the Soviet Union no longer had any faith in the sincerity of a government which it believed had encouraged Fascism for many years.
Molotov concluded the parallel negotiations which he had been conducting with German representatives and thus secured two years grace while partitioning Poland with Nazi Germany.
In view of the internal difficulties of the USSR and the apparent indifference of the British government this course was not altogether surprising.
But it shocked the Left which had come to regard the Soviet Union as the only genuine opponent of Fascism.
Pritt blamed the National government which did "not desire either an end of Fascism or a genuine reciprocal pact with the USSR" .
On the outbreak of war one week later, the Communist Party hesitated and then reversed its support for the war into an appeal for a "people's peace" .
This convinced all but the Party members that the Communists had abandoned their previous opposition to Fascism and simply removed the core of the alliances built up during the Unity campaigns.
The Soviet invasion of Finland on 30 November  1939 completed the disillusionment and produced a strong reaction in the Labour Party against Communism and the Soviet Union.
International politics had come to be a formative influence on the thinking of the British labour movement.
Pacifist idealism received a permanent setback.
It was no longer possible to see the world as developing towards socialism and international harmony.
The belief in the inevitability of progress, which had dominated most Labour thinking, disappeared under the impact of Fascism.
The Left had always emphasised the influence of power politics and capitalism as forces leading to war and in the 1930s this attitude was revalidated.
The Left, like most people in Britain, had been brought up to regard Britain as a world power and had not adjusted to Britain's real weakness.
The Left identified the struggle against the National government at home with the world-wide struggle between Fascism and the Left: they saw the Soviet Union as the heart of the "progressive forces" and the Left at home as its loyal support.
This attitude was sustained until August 1939 by the converse attitudes of many on the Right of Conservatism, who clearly sympathized with Hitler and saw him as a bastion against Bolshevism both in Germany and in Spain.
In every respect Britain's foreign policy was a failure: it failed to do anything which would strengthen the declining influence of the League of Nations; it failed to prevent the alliance of Italy and Germany: it failed to stop German expansion, and in the last resort, it failed to prevent the agreement between Germany and the Soviet Union which neutralized the Eastern Front for nearly two years.
Most significantly, in terms of British politics.
the National government failed to convince informed opinion that it was genuinely concerned about the spread of Fascism.
The Labour Party in parliament, most Liberals and, of course, the Left were all opposed to the basic principles behind the government's policy.
if such could be said to exist.
The failure of the Opposition to provide a constructive alternative in no way exonerates the National Government.
Even the consistent opposition to any form of appeasement maintained by Ernest Bevin, Walter Citrine and Hugh Dalton, wavered at the time of the Spanish Civil War in the direction of "non-intervention" .
Everyone quite rightly feared the coming war.
The Left was often unrealistic to the point of silliness; it failed to appreciate that the USSR was a power with interests of its own which it would pursue, regardless of the feelings of Soviet  supporters in Britain.
But the Left did at least sense that Fascism presented an imminent threat to Britain and this is more than can be said for some of those holding the responsibility for Britain's foreign policy and ultimate defence.
Chamberlain's appeasement aroused the concerted attack of such varied elements as the Labour and Liberal Parties, the Left and Churchill's followers among Conservatives.
It was taken by the Left as final proof that the National government was, as Cripps had once argued, "National Fascist" .
The Left argued that "the mere fact of the Chamberlain Government being overthrown and replaced by a Labour or People's Government would be a defeat for Hitler and Mussolini" .
This attitude gave further urgency to Left campaigns against the government who were seen as worse than the old-style Conservatives.
By 1937 "appeasement" had become a term acceptable to supporters of the National government.
While recognising the ultimate necessity of making a stand against German threats to British interests, The Times called for "a supreme effort…to do what is possible for appeasement before that point is reached" .
The Left suspected that important people in high places were more active in support of Fascism than even the policy of appeasement"would suggest.
The existence of open support by some Conservative MPs for Franco, the association in the "Link" and the Anglo-German Fellowship of National supporters with the German Ambassador, Kibbentrop, and the activities of the "Cliveden set" made such suspicions plausible.
The Left believed, and there is little evidence to the contrary even after 30 years of "revisionist" history, that the National government was willing to make concessions out of all proportion to those necessary and that it was supported by influential people who were quite willing to see Hitler at war with the Soviet Union.
After Munich, however, even many Conservatives became disturbed at the failure to halt German expansion and some of the Left, encouraged by the Communists, found themselves seeking alliances with old enemies like Churchill or Lloyd George on the basis of common opposition to Chamberlain's foreign policy.
Distrust of the motives of the National government prevented the Labour Party and the Left from supporting measures such as rearmament and conscription which were the logical outcome of the failure of"appeasement.
Criticism of the illogicality of the Opposition must take into  account the complete collapse of faith in the government by the end of 1938.
Left agitation against "appeasement" and rearmament, however contradictory, expressed sentiments widespread in the country by 1939, sentiments which led to the repudiation of the government's foreign policy, either explicitly or implicitly, by leading members of all three major political parties.
When the war finally came in September 1939, the Left had almost burned itself out in frustration at Chamberlain's foreign policy and amazement at the Hitler-Stalin pact.
Czechoslovakia, a democratic state with a mass socialist and trade-union movement, had been handed to the Nazis by the National government, which now expected the labour movement to support a war for Poland, a society much less attractive to democrats let alone socialists.
It had been argued on the Left that wars were caused by the search for profits, by imperialism, by militarism.
On the other hand the pacifist position that war was a consequence of human nature was also still widely held, even though pacifism had been politically defeated within the labour movement on the Left.
The great bulk of Liberal and Marxist writing about war had presented it as an activity which no radical could support and which all must fight to prevent.
The Left tradition was reinforced by the belief that the war would not have broken out had the Chamberlain government done something to prevent it, a view held by many who had nothing to do with the Left.
Thus they blamed Chamberlain as well as Hitler for the war.
The dilemma of being forced to support a British government which was hated, against a German government which was hated even more, was not resolved by the formal declaration of war on 3 September 1939.
The Left tradition incorporated within it memories of war resistance between 1914 and 1918, in which many leaders of the Labour Party had joined.
In one important respect, however, the situation in 1939 was not the same as in 1914.
The Left had fought against fascism since 1933 and had organized support for the Spanish Republican armies since I 936.
Pacifism had been abandoned as a means for dealing with fascism and Lansbury was widely ridiculed for his "mission to the dictators" which some on the Left saw as little better than Chamberlain's visit to Munich.
The Left was psychologically equipped for the reality of war, which had not been the case in 1914.
Then it had held out against a wave of patriotism among a public which was totally unaware of the reality of modern warfare, never having been touched by it.
In 1939 nearly everyone had a direct or indirect memory of mass warfare and mindless patriotism was much less important than a conscious commitment to the idea that aggressive fascism could not be stopped by any method short of war.
The Left was ready for war but bound by its tradition to react against it.
This dilemma was compounded by the fact that the Soviet Union was not engaged in the war and was also occupying Poland, selling oil to the Nazis and deporting German Communists back to Hitler's concentration camps.
The British Communists and the large group of supporters they had built around them could not sidestep the problem.
Between September 1939 and June 1941 the Left almost ceased to exist as a unified force.
Its major field of operations, the Labour Party, was restricted by the wartime electoral truce and by the rapid decline in Labour Party individual membership caused by conscription, evacuation, bombing and the virtual suspension of normal electioneering.
Its cohesion was shattered by the rift between those who accepted the Communist line that the war was "imperialist" and should be ended and those who retained their previous belief that fascism could only be defeated by armed opposition.
There was little room for compromise between previous allies, especially as the Labour Party took advantage of the situation to discipline and expel all those who publicly sided with the Communists.
Within the Miners' Federation and the Amalgamated Engineering Union, which had been centres for anti-war activity in 1916, the Communist position still received some support.
Ernest Bevin's entry into the wartime coalition made it even less likely than before that the bulk of trade-union officials would tolerate the Communists let alone support them.
After June 1941, however, the Communist Party bui1t a powerful position within the unions on the basis of support for the war, industrial peace and the maximisation of output.
Between 1941 and 1945 it created a following for itself which has never been equalled since and certainly did not exist at any time prior to 1941.
The Communists were able to benefit from the war, both in the political Left and in the unions.
By doing so they tied their fortunes even more firmly to the popularity of the Soviet Union, placing a series of time-bombs under themselves which began exploding in 1947 and 1948.
A Communist-Led Left
Despite official Labour Party opposition, united Left campaigns continued in various forms until 1939.
Whatever the consequences for the other participants, there can be little doubt that the Communist Party benefited in strength and influence from these joint activities.
At the Party's Fourteenth Congress, held at Battersea on 29 May 1937, Pollitt reported that membership had increased to 12,500, nearly twice that at the previous Congress in 1935.
The average circulation of the Daily Worker had risen from 30,000 to 70,000 in the same period, while at weekends and on special occasions sales of over 100,000 had been achieved.
The "sectarian mistakes" of the past were being overcome.
The Party was even making some slight electoral progress.
Fifty-four members had been returned to local councils while in certain local authorities, notably the Rhondda Urban District, the Communist vote had approached that of the Labour Party.
While the electoral strength of Communism was still infinitesimal in contrast to that of the Labour Party, it was greater than for the past decade.
In the London County Council elections of 1937 the Party "went all out to secure a Labour victory" .
Communist offers of help were accepted by many local Labour Parties, though Herbert Morrison and the London Labour Party made considerable efforts to discourage them.
In the November election of 1937 the Communists declared that "certain seats are being contested independently, but nowhere where so doing would endanger Labour seats" .
In this election Phil Piratin secured election to Stepney borough council — the first Communist to be elected in the Metropolitan area since the "Labour-Communist" candidates of the early 1920s.
The new policy of the Party was reflected not only in its  increased strength but in its composition.
Despite electoral concentration in mining South Wales and Scotland, nearly one half of the Party membership came from the London area.
The preponderance of clerical workers, Party officials and students in the Congress delegation of 1937, though not necessarily representative of proportions within the Party, indicates the transformation from the days when over 60 per cent of the members and delegates had been unemployed.
Three thousand members were added in a year.
Even more indicative of the solid support which the Party hoped to achieve in the future was the weekly circulation of 20.000 copies of Challenge, paper of the Young Communist League.
The Party was continuing to appeal to those who, in the past, had been regarded as least sympathetic to the labour movement.
The Communist Party was able to maintain its progress throughout 1939, having passed through the longest period of continuous growth in its history.
Just as it was consolidating its gains, however, the Party was forced to make another somersault, which largely destroyed the advantages it had secured through the various Unity campaigns.
In contrast to the organizational success of the Communists, the fate of the Independent Labour Party had already been settled by 1935.
It had become a narrow, word-spinning sect.
In 1937 its Annual Conference gave support to the formation of a "Workers Front" , a coalition of socialist groups for specifically radical objectives.
Three months before, the ILP had signed the Unity Manifesto with the Communists and the Socialist League.
The resulting Unity Campaign had concentrated on anti-fascism rather than on a definite programme.
The ILP regarded this as a negative approach and by the middle of 1937 the Communist Party was complaining of the impossibility of continued cooperation between the two parties.
As it drew away from the Communists, the ILP leadership became more sympathetic to the Labour Party which was also criticizing the Popular Front for its inclusion of non-socialists.
At the 1938 ILP conference a resolution was carried by 55 votes to 49 "to approach the Labour Party for the purpose of securing the maximum common action against the National Government, united action on class issues and an electoral understanding" .
After discussions in the Divisions and the preparation of a Report by the NAC, the Easter Conference of 1939 decided by 69  votes to 40 to re-affiliate to the Labour Party, provided certain conditions were accepted.
Immediate re-affiliation without conditions was only defeated by 63 votes to 45.
The ILP Members of Parliament, with the exception of Maxton, led the movement for re-affiliation.
Although the Scottish Division defeated re-affiliation by 88 votes to 6 at its Conference in February 1938 the MPs continued to press for a return to the Labour Party.
In July, McGovern, supported by Campbell Stephen, had openly stated the necessity of such a return if the ILP were to continue as a significant organization.
George Buchanan joined the Parliamentary Labour Party in April 1939.
Maxton was faced with the prospect of being the only remaining ILP Member if he did not withdraw his continued opposition to re-affiliation.
The ILP Parliamentary Group had been out of sympathy with the party on two important issues, the Abyssinian War and the Munich agreement.
Maxton had surprised the Party by welcoming the agreement, though he made it plain that he did so out of relief that war had been averted.
 "Is it not clear that our MPs have flagrantly broken the declared policy of the Party?" asked a London Division statement calling for the disciplining of the Parliamentary representatives.
McGovern, too, was involved in a controversy over his attitude to the Spanish Republican Government.
The Party had adopted the principle of complete control over its Parliamentary spokesmen, but the stage had been reached where the MPs were prepared to re-enter the Labour Party rather than be instructed on their actions.
The original cause of disaffiliation, ILP control over its parliamentary group, was now proving to be disruptive to the Party.
Realizing the futility of isolation, many of the Party members were prepared to reverse their earlier decision to leave the Labour Party.
The ILP had shrunk to a small faction by 1940, its only significance being that it was well represented in the Commons.
The controversy over affiliation had grown out of all proportion, driving the party into an isolation which neither its leaders nor its members really desired.
Similarly, the United Front policy had been pursued despite its damaging effect on the Party.
There were only a few realists in the ILP who appreciated that it could not function independently of the Labour Party.
Only the Communist Party, with its rigid discipline, could survive alone.
By 1939 it had completely replaced the ILP as the dominant minority on the Left.
The spread of Communist ideas and influence among the middle classes and among the steadily expanding constituency Labour parties, was achieved much more rapidly than in the past.
The tide of ideas on the Left was flowing in the Communists' favour and they did not have to resort to the often artificial tactics of "penetration" used since the early 1920s.
Many on the Left positively sought out Communists and espoused Communist ideas without being enticed, misled or coerced.
The elaborate network of "sympathizing mass organizations" built up through the Comintern by Willi Muenzenberg was not only maintained but rapidly expanded.
Communists joined almost any organization which was prepared to have them and some secretly enrolled in local Labour parties from which they were ostensibly excluded.
The Communists used both direct and indirect methods to contact supporters in other sections of the labour movement, suiting their tactics to the situation.
The ultimate aim remained the winning of Party members and their public "coming over" to Communism.
During the Popular Front period it was comparatively simple to attract people to organizations with apparently acceptable aims, later persuading them to become Communists.
The Party was able to accommodate the scruples of those who worked with it, while at the same time securing new members with some political experience.
This was a primary function of the "sympathizing mass organizations" , which looked like liberal reforming societies, but were invariably managed and funded by the Communist Party.
The Communists were also able to take advantage of groups which had leaders only too willing to co-operate with the Party and to draw on its growing network of organizers and activists.
Such arrangements were mutually beneficial, although there was always a tendency for the Communist influence to increase at the expense of other less cohesive groups.
The clearest example of a mass organization which voluntarily worked with the Communists, while independently organised and funded, was the Left Book Club.
The Left Book Club was primarily an educational body with a political purpose.
An introductory leaflet claimed that: The aim of the Club is a simple one; it is to help in the terrible urgent struggle for World Peace and a better social and economic order and against Fascism, by giving (to all who are  determined to play their part in this struggle) such knowledge as will greatly increase their efficiency.
The Club was launched in May 1936.
Its books were selected by Professor Laski, John Strachey and Victor Gollancz, the publisher.
Local Clubs were formed to discuss the topics raised in the monthly selection.
Eventually these clubs broadened into miniature "Unity Committees" , bringing together Labour and Communist intellectuals and middle-class people who would not otherwise have exchanged views in such an organized manner.
In assessing the effect of the Left Book Club on the Left it is important to consider the amount of Communist influence in the Club and in its books.
The Economic League report on The Present Trend of Communism in Britain alleged that "the Communist Party has made full use of the Left Book Club, enabling it for the first time to make effective contact with some 50,000 members of the middle class" .
The Independent Labour Party, critics of Communism from another angle, shared this view.
In 1937 Fenner Brockway wrote that "from the outset the Left Book Club has been recognisable as an instrument of Communist Party policy" .
Of the books chosen by the selectors a high proportion were written by Communists.
But there were surprisingly few non-Communists capable of writing popular works within the broad limits of the Club's aims.
Only The Labour Party in Perspective by C. R. Attlee could be held to represent the official views of the Labour Party and Trade Union movement.
From August 1937 the Club operated a price-reduction agreement with Lawrence and Wishart, who had a virtual monopoly of Marxist-Leninist publications and of works by the leading members of the British Communist Party.
The Left Book Club was serving to publicize Communist ideology.
In fairness to its selectors one must stress the virtual absence of any important body of writing expressing an alternative Left viewpoint.
The Labour Party began its own Book Service at the end of 1939 in an attempt to provide the alternative, but its efforts were hindered by the war and could not attract a fraction of the readership achieved by the Left Book Club.
Despite its claim to be an educational body, the Club could not escape the charge that it was taking an organized part in politics.
Gollancz had indeed proclaimed such an aim at the Club's second Rally in January 1938.
We have to find a way to utilise our fifty thousand members as an educational and propaganda machine.
His aim was "the drafting through the Clubs, and particularly the groups, of formerly" unpolitical "people into active political work" .
By September 1938 the Club had established one thousand local groups which were actively supporting the United Peace Alliance campaign."
In the following month it distributed two million leaflets on the Munich crisis, following this up in December with ten million leaflets on the Spanish Civil War.
The Club had become of political significance, and as its support for the Peace Alliance was unacceptable to the Labour Party it was inevitable that there should be some conflict between the two.
Herbert Morrison attacked the Club in the December 1938 London News: There is ample evidence that the Left Book Club, through its groups, has become a political movement with substantial money behind it, and that one of its main activities is in the direction of manipulating and controlling local Labour Parties.
The expulsion of Cripps from the Labour Party in 1939 increased the probability that the Labour Executive would take action against the Club, which had publicized his "Unity Memorandum" , though not officially supporting it.
G. R.Shepherd, the Labour National Agent, wrote to local Labour Parties in March 1939, warning them against close liaison with the Club: Since groups of the Left Book Club are not entitled to affiliation with constituency parties, joint political activities with them should not be entered into, especially when these are in the direction of a so-called "Popular Front" with any other political party.
The Labour Party took no action against the Club, and with the coming of war the Communist sympathies of the Club's leaders rapidly disappeared.
Arthur Woodburn, Secretary of the Scottish Labour Party, articulated the view of many moderate elements in the Party when the Club suspended its activities in 1941: It is sad to think that, building its philosophy upon the shifting sands of Communist policy, it was foredoomed to disaster.
Had it been broad enough to have included the purpose of the great  organised movement its contribution could have been of historical value.
Nevertheless the Book Club was of great importance in spreading Left ideas.
Left News, the Club's monthly paper, was an important political journal in its own right.
After September 1938 the Club had control over a section of Tribune, the weekly paper supporting the Unity Campaign.
The Left Book Club was a unique development in Britain, providing a high standard of political literature at a price which ensured its circulation to a wide audience.
Nearly three million Left Books were published, providing much of the basic political reading during the war.
Undoubtedly this contributed to the Labour electoral victory in 1945 and to the increased participation of middle-class people in the work of the Labour Party.
Communist influence also grew rapidly among the small section of young people organized in political youth and student groups.
In 1938 Young Communist League membership stood at 4,500 compared with a total Party membership of 16,000, while at the Birmingham Congress of that year 226 of the 539 delegates were under the YCL age limit of 30.
The advance made by the Young Communist League was paralleled in the University Labour Federation.
The ULF had been founded in 1920 but remained a small organization affiliated to the Labour Party in 1934 on a membership of only three hundred.
In 1932 a number of independent student groups, dominated mainly by the Communist Party, had formed the Federation of Student Societies and this group was accepted into the ULF at its Cardiff conference in January 1936.
During that year membership doubled to 3,000, reaching 4,000 by 1939.
The University Labour Federation was particularly active in supporting the Spanish Republicans, sending several of its leading members into the International Brigade.
Socialist and Communist influence in the universities increased rapidly, one fifth of the undergraduates at Oxford and Cambridge being enrolled in the ULF in 1939.
The University Labour Federation was the only socialist society affiliated to the Labour Party which not merely allowed, but encouraged, Communists to become members.
On 1 May 1937, the National Executive of the Labour Party warned the Federation that it would be automatically disaffiliated within a month if it did not alter its constitution.
The ULF decided to follow  the "contracting in" system of the Trade Unions, allowing non-members of the Labour Party to remain in the Federation without being able to decide the ULF representation at the Party's Conferences.
As the National Executive had made its objection on constitutional and not political grounds, it accepted this decision though the support of the ULF for the United Front continued.
The Federation was, in any case, the undisputed representative of the Left at the Universities and the Labour Party would have been ill-advised to disaffiliate it while its opinions were so popular and widely accepted.
Youth organizations were making rapid progress, and it was not long before the National Executive decided to re-organize the Labour League of Youth.
The majority of branches were still in existence, though without any co-ordinating machinery.
The disbanded National Advisory Committee reformed unofficially in December 1936 as a National Activity Committee, controlling its own journal Advance and organizing the League as far as was possible without official Party sanction.
It seemed likely that many isolated sections of the League of Youth would merge into the Young Communist League if the national organization were not restored.
An unofficial conference of League branches was held in Islington on 8 May 1937 under the Chairmanship of Ted Willis, editor of Advance.
This called for the withdrawal of the National Executive memorandum abolishing the League's national organization.
The Labour Party Conference in October agreed that a meeting of League branches should be held "to discuss the future of the League" and, early in the following year, most of the national machinery was restored and a Youth Officer appointed.
At the official League Conference which met in London in March 1938, policy discussion was allowed on certain topics relating to the problems of young people.
In May the National Executive decided to give official recognition to Advance which, since its foundation in December 1935, had risen from a local circulation of a few hundred to a sale of 15,000 reaching the entire membership of the League.
The National Executive had recognized, temporarily, most of the organizational demands put forward in the paper since its foundation.
The London Conference of the League had been attended by Sir Stafford Cripps representing the National Executive of the Labour Party.
His influence as leader of the "Unity Campaign" increased  rapidly in the League.
When the National Executive expelled Cripps for his part in the "United Peace Alliance" , it attacked him for his influence in the League.
In February 1939 all national and regional committees were disbanded and the League Annual Conference was cancelled after the National Advisory Committee had declared its support for Cripps and his Petition campaign.
In July, Willis and some of his NAC colleagues left the League to join the Young Communist League.
The outbreak of war put an end to the possibility of reviving the League of Youth, though a sub-committee of the NEC was created to do so.
The ILP Guild of Youth also collapsed at the beginning of the war, the NAC feeling that "members of the Guild should function through the Party" .
The University Labour Federation came into open conflict with the Labour Party at the beginning of 1940 when it was proscribed by the National Executive.
By 1937 the Communists were almost completely dominating the rest of the Left, both organizationally and intellectually.
Within the Labour Party and the unions the Communists had still made little progress, and their electoral impact remained negligible.
Pacifism was in retreat and the moralistic socialist alternative once favoured by the ILP was largely assimilated into Communist ideology.
There was an "alternative Left" surfing mainly among the ruins of the ILP and in the Labour League of Youth which was generally described as "Trotskyist" by its opponents in the mainstream of the Left.
For such a tiny group, he true Trotskyists had considerable influence.
content with the policy of the Communist Party and its tactics in the United Front had grown in the ILP to an extent which caused many of its remaining members to adopt the theoretical arguments of Trotskyism while resenting its organized activities.
The Communists reacted by attacking "the half-Trotskyite ILP, a party that loves to talk of revolution and to shriek out" Left "phrases on every possible occasion" .
Even discounting the Communist attacks, however, the, attitude of the ILP was now similar to the Trotskyist viewpoint an many issues, particularly on the domestic and foreign policy of the Soviet Government.
Despite their small numbers, the Trotskyists managed to create two organizations in 1937 to work within the Labour Party as they had done within the ILP.
The Militant Labour League continued within the Labour Party until its proscription in March 1940 for opposing the war.
Through its publication, the Militant, it opposed  United Front tactics on the one hand and the policy of the official Labour Party leadership on the other.
The Militant Youth League, which was attached to the MLL, followed the same policy within the Labour League of Youth.
The group was never strong, but it often provided the only opposition to the pro-Communist Advance group in the League.
Thus at the unofficial Islington conference of May 1937, the twelve Trotskyist delegates were repeatedly the only opponents of the platform's policy.
 "The Youth Militant supporters must be seen in their true light of splitters and disrupters and cleared out of the youth movement," urged John Gollan, secretary of the Young Communist League, after the conference.
Nevertheless the Trotskyist viewpoint was again presented at the March 1938 Conference League of Youth.
The Trotskyist movement reflected the traditions of the pre-Revolutionary Russian Socialist groups, from which it seemed to draw much of its inspiration and terminology.
Groups were continually dividing over minor points of doctrine.
The most important point at issue was the tactic of infiltration which had led to several splits in the American Socialist Workers' Party, the dominant group in Trotsky's Fourth International.
Early in 1938 several Trotskyist groups came together in an attempt to form a unified British section of the Fourth International.
So deep was the division on the "entrist tactic" that the unified body reached the compromise of working within the Labour Party for a period and then withdrawing for a time and continuing independent activity.
After six months the group broke up, despite letters from Trotsky and a visit from J.P.
Cannon, secretary of the American organization.
The militant Labour League remained within the Labour Party, while the Revolutionary Socialist Party, the Workers' International League and the Revolutionary Socialist League remained independent.
New splits came in 1939 when the signing of the Soviet-German Pact and the outbreak of war created a major division in the American Socialist Workers' Party.
During the first year of the war most of the Trotskyist groups in Britain collapsed and the Fourth International recognized the Workers' International League as its official section.
The proscription of the Militant Labour League by the Labour Party in 1940 put an end to the "entrist tactic" (or "French turn" ) for a time.
Trotskyists drew closer to the ILP again in opposition to the war, making full propaganda use of the Communists' rapid change  in policy in September 1939 and June 1941.
The policies of the ILP had lost it much support but in its opposition to the war and to conscription it regained some of its influence on the Left.
In January 1939, a No Conscription League was formed to oppose the National Registration Bill.
By the beginning of 1940 the league had secured the affiliation of nearly seven hundred groups, mainly Co-operative and trade union, with an aggregate membership of 250,000.
Its leading officials were Will Ballantine of the National Union of Railwaymen, and Fenner Brockway, both ILP members, and it maintained a close liaison with the Party.
The League and the ILP worked jointly to establish the Central Board of Conscientious Objectors, and combined with representatives of the Peace Pledge Union in sponsoring Anti-War candidatures.
The Trotskyists and pacifist groups which continued to oppose the war only had the power to attract Left support between late 1939 and 1941.
The Communists were at variance with all their previous allies and there was room for an alternative viewpoint.
But there was to be no repeat of the growing anti-war movement of 1916.
The Communists became the most active supporters of the war and were able to revive their previous connections on the Left as well as to capitalize on the rapidly increasing resentment against the pre-war Conservative Party.
Almost the only significance of Trotskyism in the 1930s was that a tenuous tradition was established which was not to materialize as a significant political influence until the 1960s.
By the end of 1941 it looked as though the Communists and their supporters had established the monopoly over the Left for which they had been striving since their foundation.
They had done so by being in the right place at the right time, for the first and last time in their history.
From Unity Campaign to Peoples Convention
The Edinburgh Labour Party Conference decision did not deter the supporters of "Unity" , though it ended the campaign for Communist affiliation for the next three years.
Despite a Labour Party circular of 12 January 1937, warning against joint activities with the Communists, the Socialist League decided four years later to take part in a Unity Campaign with the Communist Party and the ILP.
Stafford Cripps, who had occupied the leading position in the League for the past four years, was particularly enthusiastic about the proposed campaign.
However the League conference at which the decision was made was seriously divided.
Opposition to the proposed Campaign received 38 votes to the 56 for the successful motion.
Opponents were concerned with the future of the League, rather than with the ideological implications of working with the Communists.
A Trotskyist group, led by Reg Groves, was particularly afraid of "sacrificing the Socialist League's position in the Labour Party" , thus repeating the objections to working in the United Front which had been made by leaders of the League in past years.
To a large extent the Unity Campaign was passing out of the control of the Socialist League into that of the Left Book Club and the weekly Tribune, founded by Cripps in January 1937.
The formal agreement of the League was, however, necessary as it gave the campaign a much closer connection with the Labour Party than if it had appeared as a personal crusade by Cripps.
Without the organization and membership of the three parties to the Unity Agreement, the Campaign could not hope to make any more impression than previous actions of the same sort.
Maxton saw the Agreement as "the answer of the three most politically conscious and informed workers Parties in the country to a very widespread  demand for unity that has been felt by every working class spokesman who has faced audiences during the last two years" .
By formalizing agreement between "the three organisations representing the most advanced Socialist workers" it was intended to make clear that the Campaign was a continuation of the United Front on a sounder basis.
It was not, as its critics asserted, meant to presage an alliance between the Left and the Liberals.
The Uinity Campaign was officially launched at the Free Trade Hall in Manchester on 24 January 1937, when Cripps, Maxton and Pollitt spoke on the points raised in the Unity Manifesto, issued six days before.
Although the Unity Manifesto had been signed by Pollitt, butt, Gallacher, Tom Mann and Arthur Horner on behalf of the Communists it was essential to stress that there was no intention of setting up a rival to the Labour Party.
At the Albert Hall rally of the Left Book Club on 7 February Pollitt assured the audience of seven thousand that the Campaign was "not directed against the Labour Party" , but that its whole aim was to "strengthen, revivify and revitalise the Labour Party" .
The Manifesto had called for "Unity of all sections of the working class movement" for "the return of a Labour government" , and "Unity within the framework of the Labour Party and the Trade Unions" .
Its signatories were all closely associated with the Communists, the Socialist League and the ILP and, despite the growing interest of some Liberals, the theme of "working class unity" was deliberately dominant.
As Professor Laski wrote: The signatories to the manifesto ask that the leadership of the campaign be undertaken by the Labour Party.
They seek to fight within its ranks.
They believe that with this unity a Labour Government becomes directly into view as the next stage on the road to working class power.
The Unity Campaign could hardly avoid the accusation that it was creating a new organization to invite Labour Party members to work together with Communists, which every Labour Conference decision had forbidden over the previous ten years.
Unity Campaign Committees were established after the official launching of the Campaign at Manchester.
They were based in the main on constituency Labour parties although Communists and, for a short time, members of the ILP worked within them.
A National Unity Campaign Committee was responsible for co-ordinating local  efforts and organized the speaking tours of Cripps, Maxton, Pollitt, Bevan and other prominent supporters of united agitation against the National Government and its foreign policy.
The Labour Party took immediate action.
Its circular of 12 January drawing attention to the decisions against united action taken at Southport, had been ignored.
On 27 January, three days after the official launching, the National Executive Committee disaffiliated the Socialist League, making it "ineligible for affiliation" two months later.
The Socialist League was a small organization with only three thousand members.
Moreover it was confined to members of the Labour Party, its first rule stating that "all members are expected to become individual members of their constituency Labour Parties" .
The voting at the special January conference of the League had shown considerable disagreement with adherence to the Unity Manifesto.
If the Unity Campaign was to have any effect its links with the Labour Party had constantly to be underlined.
The Party had now disaffiliated the Socialist League, announcing on 24 March that its members would be automatically expelled on 1 June.
Officially the Labour Party remained hostile to the Campaign.
suggesting that it was a Communist-inspired attempt to reach agreement with the Liberals.
It further characterized the Campaign as being the personal machine of a few wealthy men, particularly of Strauss, Strachey, Cripps and Gollancz.
The Independent Labour Party was also suspicious of what it termed "the" Popular Front "political line of the Left Book Club" .
The ILP had gained two important concessions during the drafting of the Unity Manifesto.
A laudatory reference to the foreign policy of the Soviet Union had been excluded and the Manifesto expressed opposition to the National Government's proposals for rearmament.
Nevertheless the ILP representatives on the Unity Campaign Committee were constantly in friction with the Communist Party over the tendency to encourage non-Socialists to join the Campaign.
Fenner Brockway's conception of the "Workers Front" , limited to "working class parties" , was adopted at the ILP Conference at Easter 1937, and the ILP began to draw away from the other participants in the Unity Campaign.
The Communists meanwhile continued to deny that the Campaign Committee was moving towards an understanding with the Liberals.
Although Liberals like Sir Richard Acland were becoming identified with the Campaign, the Communists remained hostile to Lloyd George and his Five Point Group.
The Unity Campaign made considerable progress when compared with the old United Front.
By the beginning of March 13,000 signed "Pledge Cards" , supporting the Unity Manifesto, had been received by the Campaign Committee.
Mass meetings were the central feature of the Campaign, and the Committee was able to draw on the services of Cripps, Maxton, Pollitt, Bevan or Strauss, and virtually every prominent figure on the Left of the Labour movement.
The six platforms at the 1937 United May Day Rally in Hyde Park contained, altogether, eleven members of the Labour Party, ten members of the Communist Party, three from the ILP, and a foreign Socialist.
Significantly for the future, there were also five religious speakers, including among them the Dean of Canterbury, Hewlett Johnson.
Large amounts of money were collected for the Campaign, while the Communist Party was able to supply many full-time workers for the Committee's various activities.
The greatest obstacle to the progress of the Unity Campaign was the opposition of the Labour Party.
The placing of the Socialist League on the "proscribed list" meant the elimination of one of the three sponsoring bodies.
Members of the League and supporters of the Unity Manifesto had repeatedly called for "Unity within the framework of the Labour Party" .
The League had little alternative but to disband and thus allow its members to continue their campaign within the Labour Party as individuals.
At its Whitsun Conference, therefore, the Socialist League unanimously passed the decision to dissolve itself.
Immediately after the disbanding, the Labour Executive turned its attention to the Unity Campaign Committee.
Executive circulars on 9 and 22 April had drawn attention to Conference and Executive decisions against Party members co-operating with or speaking from the same platform as members of the Communist Party.
A further circular was sent on 26 May"calling upon all members to refrain from any further joint activities with the Communist Party and the ILP.
In view of the threat of expulsions contained in these circulars, Labour supporters of Unity had to reconsider their position.
George Strauss had already been threatened with expulsion for welcoming support from the Communists during the London County Council elections in March.
Speaking at Hull on 6 June Stafford Cripps outlined the new tactics which were to be followed by the Unity Campaign Committee.
From that date a National Labour Unity Committee  was to organize the campaign within the Labour Party, while the Communists and the ILP would carry on separate agitations on their own.
Brockway, Dutt, Gallacher, Jowett, Maxton and Pollitt for the Communists and the ILP appealed for support for the new committee.
The leadership of the organization within the Labour Party remained with Cripps, Strauss and Mellor, all of them still fully committed to the Unity Manifesto.
The Unity Campaign was officially transformed into the Labour Unity Campaign with committees limiting their members to Labour Party subscribers.
As the campaign became more unpopular with the National Executive its organization became less clearly defined and its control by Cripps and his friends more informal.
The Labour Unity Campaign Committee statement issued for "Unity Sunday" on 18 July 1937 called on "all supporters of unity to put the utmost energy into the work of rousing the Labour Party membership to the need for immediate struggle for the demands listed in the programme and to lead the revival campaign by their example of practical work" .
In effect the Unity Campaign was already seriously weakened.
Of the three signatories to the Unity Manifesto one had disbanded, the ILP was not too enthusiastic and, as usual, only the Communists remained.
The Labour Party National Executive took care to refute the argument put forward by Cripps at Hull that there was no objection to a Unity Campaign within the Labour Party provided it did not involve other groups.
An Executive circular of 28 July pointed out that anything in the nature of a campaign for Unity could not be accepted.
A crisis within the Labour Party was precipitated in early September when the National Executive refused to endorse William Mellor, editor of Tribune and secretary of the Labour Unity campaign committee, as Parliamentary candidate for Stockport.
Cripps, Laski and Strauss, who had been booked for a speaking tour in "Labour's Crusade Week" , refused to continue their tour until Mellor had been endorsed.
The National Executive consequently arranged for other speakers to take their place.
The Bournemouth Conference of the Labour Party was faced with a serious problem.
The Constituency Parties Association, of which Cripps was Chairman, had gained the active support of nearly half the constituency Labour Parties for its proposed revisions of the Party Constitution.
On this issue the National Executive reversed its previous attitude, allowing separate voting for  Constituency representatives on the Executive.
This concession led to Cripps and Laski joining D. N. Pritt as "Unity" supporters on the Labour NEC.
The Party's policy on Spain had also been radically altered amid the great enthusiasm which was felt over the resistance of the Republican Government.
The Unity Campaign had been identified with both these changes in Party policy, and, moreover, had greatly enlivened the Party's activity during the year.
The National Executive issued a statement on the Campaign, pointing out that"its object is to bring the Communist Party and the ILP within the Labour Party.
Members of the Labour Party who are taking part in this Campaign are acting in clear defiance of repeated and emphatic decisions of the Annual Conference of the Party".
Cripps, speaking on behalf of the East Bristol Labour Party, moved the reference back of this section of the Executive Report but won only 331,000 votes against the 2, l16,000 votes for the National Executive's condemnation of the Unity Campaign.
The Campaign had not been successful in influencing the Trade Unions, possibly because it had been officially characterized as an individual agitation by a few wealthy members.
Moreover the Party had adopted a progressive policy and had made concessions to the Constituency Parties.
The Bournemouth decision made it clear that the Unity Campaign's success had been more apparent than real.
The leaders of the Campaign.
and Cripps in particular, felt that"the Unity campaign has played its part.
All the energy and drive which gave to that campaign so electric a character in the first weeks of this year must find outlets for the same fundamental objectives in new, and yet familiar channels.
We of the Left must work to make our Party the spearhead of struggle against Fascism, against War and against the National Government".
This was to be done through the Constituency Parties, "the chief instrument of Socialist propaganda in this country in future" .
On 16 October 1937, the National Labour Unity Committee circularized all its branch committees, winding up the organization.
They had concluded that "a campaign for organisational unity is not, in the light of the Conference decisions, within the ambit of Party loyalty" .
The aim of the Unity Campaign was propaganda within the Labour movement.
Its appeal to radical Liberals and to the middle class offered the possibility of forming an electoral alliance between the main Opposition parties in the General Election which was  due to be held by 1940.
The Peoples Front was "not based primarily on parliamentary or electoral combinations" .
Yet its supporters could not fail to realize the possibility of attracting a section of the Liberal Party, which was still represented in the official Party.
Most Liberals were opposed to the Labour Party let alone to the Communists, but there was an important radical wing of the Party which was attracted by the Peoples Front idea.
The original object of the Peoples Front Propaganda Committee had been to attract "the co-operation of the scientist and artist, the writer, dramatist and philosopher" , that is the groups least interested in the industrial aims of Socialism.
The Left Book Club had appealed to such people.
There was thus a concrete possibility of creating a Peoples Front in Britain which would take advantage of the opposition to the National Government to be found outside the labour movement.
The Communist Party had originally been opposed to such a proposal.
But the spread of Communist ideas in the middle class had caused the Party to modify its approach.
At the Albert Hall Rally of the Left Book Club in February 1937, "Mr Harry Pollitt said there was a new awakening among the middle classes and they had to rope these people in rather than keep them out." 
The Party was gratified that "these seekers after peace, democracy and socialism are being brought together" .
The Central Committee was already considering the wider implications of the Unity Campaign.
Its primary aim was to "bring to the working class the fundamental idea of their own strength and power" .
Eventually it was hoped to attract"great masses of people now outside the movement who are seriously concerned at the present state of the world…
They would ally themselves with the united Labour forces and afford the possibilities of developing a mighty Peoples Front which will bring down the National Government."
Four or five years before, the Communist Party would have advocated revolution "to bring down the National Government" .
Now it was accepting the democratic method to the extent of reaching agreement with the Liberals or even Conservatives.
The Party had become extremely conciliatory, still trying to attract those who were quite opposed to its philosophy.
They had been instrumental in ending co-operation with Labour Party members when this had  been demanded by the Labour National Executive.
When Cripps had abandoned the Unity Campaign to support the Labour Party's Immediate Programme his action had been fully endorsed by the Communist Party.
They were still interested in affiliating to the Labour Party, though under the Labour Party rules this could not be recognised until 1940.
 "The Communist Party wants unity in the interests of the Labour movement as a whole" , wrote Harry Pollitt.
 "Quite concretely the Communist Party wants to discuss with representatives of the Labour party the difficulties which they consider stand in the way of the realization of this unity and of the Communist Party becoming affiliated to the Labour Party" .
For the moment the issue of affiliation was subordinated to that of forming an electoral alliance against the National Government.
 "Unity" was redefined by Pollitt at the Second Left Book Club rally on 16 January 1938.
The Daily Worker described the audience as "middle class" .
It was to this section that Pollitt appealed:
We believe first of all the shock troops of the Labour Movement, the Radicals within the Liberal Party, the forces who want peace and not to become doormats for Hitler and Chamberlain to walk upon, and the members of the Left Book Club — have all to engage in organised effort to bring about Unity.
The interests of the overwhelming majority of professional people, small business men, shopkeepers and farmers are bound up with the social progress of the Labour and Democratic Movements.
This new form of Unity was to be concerned with foreign policy issues, virtually to the exclusion of the domestic policies contained in the original Unity Manifesto.
It was to include those who were not within the Labour movement.
In essentials it embodied the proposals put forward by the Peoples Front Propaganda Committee and by G.D.H. Cole in previous years.
In a manifesto published in the Co-operative paper Reynolds News on 20 March 1938, this projected coalition was referred to as the "United Peace Alliance" .
Its aim was the creation of a triple alliance between Britain, France and the Soviet Union to restrain Nazi Germany.
It was implied, rightly as it happened, that such a policy was unlikely to be acceptable to the National Government and that a broad alliance must be formed in Britain to replace the Chamberlain administration.
An important body of support was secured to the alliance by the decision taken at the Annual Conference of the Co-operative  Party by 2,343,000 votes to 1,547,000 to endorse the Reynolds news manifesto.
In addition to that newspaper the idea of an electoral alliance against the government was being canvassed by the News Chronicle and the Manchester Guardian.
The Labour Party showed some signs of softening in its attitude to the supporters of the new form of Unity.
The National Executive Committee reported in favour of reforming the Labour League of Youth, disbanded at Edinburgh for its support of the United Front.
The University Labour Federation had been allowed to carry on active propaganda for Unity after being threatened with disaffiliation.
The leaders of the Party, particularly C. R. Attlee, were actively campaigning for "Arms for Spain" , a complete reversal of the attitude adopted at Edinburgh.
An officially sponsored Labour Party Spain Committee ran an agitation against the NonIntervention Pact which culminated in a Rally in the Albert Hall at the end of 1937.
On 31 March 1938, the Committee issued a Manifesto supporting the right of the Republican Government to purchase arms.
The Spanish Civil War was producing a stronger antagonism to Fascism and the National Government than had previously existed in the Opposition.
The apparent trend to the Left in the Labour Party was in keeping with the political atmosphere of the times, but it was not strong enough to force the abandoning of official opposition to any form of the Unity Campaign.
The National Executive of the Party circularized its answer to the requests received to join an alliance with the Co-operative, Liberal and Communist Parties, on 12 April 1938.
Fear of the Communist "Trojan horse" was still present in the minds of the Executive, though it was now coupled with a desire to assert the Party's independence from allies on the Right as much as on the Left.
From attacking the Communists as undemocratic, the Executive moved to attacking the Liberals as non-socialist.
In doing so it probably aroused some sympathy among the Party membership, though it could not prevent a movement which was receiving support from national figures.
The adherents to the Peace Alliance had to undergo a serious reorientation in their political attitudes.
Cripps, for instance, admitted that he "was bitterly opposed to any such alignment a year ago" .
He still saw the Alliance "as a temporary co-operation to save democracy and peace" in which "the Labour Party should take the lead" .
The aim of the United Peace Alliance was deliberately  broad, ignoring most of the social and economic demands which were the central feature of all previous "Unity" campaigns.
The Labour Party was still expected to take the leading part, an agitation being started for an emergency Labour Conference to discuss the Alliance.
Dissident Conservatives, for instance Churchill or Eden, were not welcomed as prospective allies, because of their expressed hostility to the Soviet Government and their lack of sympathy with the Spanish Republicans.
On the other hand, the Duchess of Atholl, a Conservative who had been active in support of the Republicans, took a leading part in the Alliance.
A General Election was expected during the next two years, but already there were signs that the Peace Alliance was preparing to test its strength among the electorate.
Though the history and sentiments of the Labour Party were totally against "Lib-Lab" candidates, it was not long before the idea of formal electoral alliances was being canvassed.
R. T. Paget, Labour candidate for Northampton, wrote to Tribune, suggesting that the Liberal candidate in the Aylesbury by-election should be given Labour support against the National candidate.
In reply the Secretary of the Bucks.
Federation of Trades Councils and Labour Parties warned: "We shall not achieve a Socialist Commonwealth by compromise of this sort.
The Labour candidate, Reg Groves, went ahead with his campaign, increasing his poll considerably but still not replacing the Liberal as runner-up to the successful National candidate.
Peace Alliance supporters, and the Communists in particular were annoyed that the opportunity for a joint candidature had been lost.
A Communist leaflet had painted the terrifying picture of Groves as "a Trotskyist agent" carrying out "disruptive policy in Mid-Bucks" .
The Labour Party, on the contrary, welcomed the result, feeling that it had been vindicated by the considerable impression made on a difficult seat.
Unrest at "class collaboration" was an important element in antagonizing many Labour Party members against the latest development in the campaign for Unity.
It was to this sentiment that the National Executive appealed in its statement Labour and the Popular Front, published in May 1938.
The Executive did not believe: that the proposed combination would afford a better rallying cry, or be more effective electorally against the "National" Government than the Labour Party itself.
Such a view underestimates the growing strength of Labour in the country as indicated by recent by-elections.
It fails to take account of the diminishing force of the Liberal Party.
As for the Communist Party, the Executive repeated its belief in the complete inadvisability of associating it with the Labour Party in the public eye.
 "The presence of the Communists would bring some few thousand votes to the alliance; but it might well drive millions into Mr Chamberlain's camp." 
By associating with the Liberals and the Communists the Labour Party would only split its ranks and disillusion its supporters.
Were the Alliance to be successful, the NEC held that it would produce a weak government like that in France.
The electoral agreement which Peace Alliance supporters proposed "would have less electoral appeal than a united and independent Labour Party" .
The only circumstances under which it would be possible to remove the National Government were those which actually arose in May 1940: "A new situation might arise of course, if any considerable number of Members of Parliament now supporting the Government.
were to rebel against the Prime Minister's authority".
The Labour Party rejected the United Peace Alliance, though with more reasoned argument than had been used in dismissing the United Front on previous occasions.
Unlike the preceding Unity Campaign the agitation for a United Peace Alliance had no formal organization and only a tenuous connection with the organized Labour movement.
Its leading figures remained the same however, though the ILP was replaced by the radical Liberals as the third partner.
The intensity of factional dispute had vanished but the Alliance suffered from the weakening of its links with local Labour Parties.
Left Book Club groups were capable of immense effort on occasion, but they could not reach as wide an audience as the Local Parties and were unsuited to the work of winning over Labour opinion by consistent effort.
Many in the Labour movement were prepared to admit that without a strong combination forcing the National Government out of office "we may not get a chance for a very long time of putting into effect our ultimate aims" .
On the other hand it was difficult for others to see "where the Alliance would benefit the  Labour Party…the working class as a whole" .
The refusal of the Co-operative Congress to support the campaign indicated diminishing sympathy with the Peace Alliance.
The Congress was more representative of the movement as a whole than the Co-operative Party which, despite its vast nominal membership, was in reality much smaller in individual membership than the Labour Party.
The Left Book Club continued throughout 1938 as the unifying force behind the United Peace Alliance.
Its rallies on Spain, addressed by Cripps, Gollancz:, Kingsley Martin and D. N. Pritt, culminated in a national gathering at the Queens Hall, London, on 17 October.
Its mass circulation of leaflets on Munich and Spain surpassed anything undertaken by a political party between elections, while its one thousand local groups worked closely with Constituency Labour Parties.
The Club controlled a section of Tribune, Gollancz eventually replacing Mellor on its editorial board.
Officially the Left Book Club did not favour any specific proposals for a Liberal-Labour alliance, but in effect its influence was directed towards this end.
In this activity it was enthusiastically supported by the Communists, who had dropped all their previous objections to the "class enemy" .
In October 1938, a second attempt was made to secure a united opposition to a National candidate, this time with more success than at Aylesbury.
The Constituency Labour Party at Oxford allowed A. D. Lindsay to contest the seat as a "Progressive" , withdrawing its own candidate, apparently under pressure from University Labour opinion.
Lindsay was actually a member of the Labour Party, but was not its official candidate.
He reduced the Government majority by half, providing an incentive to further "Progressive" candidatures.
At Bridgwater, in the following month, Vernon Bartlett, a Liberal supporter of the "Peace Alliance" , was elected as a "Progressive" in what had been a National seat.
The Labour Party was weak in this rural constituency and had no prospective candidate and hardly any organization.
The Left Book Club once again took a leading part, organizing canvassers from surrounding areas, including Cripps' Labour stronghold in East Bristol.
Gollancz held that "had there been no Left Book Club there would have been no Bridgwater" .
Although Bartlett's vote was predominantly Liberal the result restored some of the waning popularity of the Peace Alliance.
Immediately after the by-election Richard Acland took the responsibility of acting as "secretary for  Progressive candidates" .
It seemed as though the next General Election would see agreements between Labour and the Liberals in several constituencies.
Once again, however, the Peace Alliance was out of touch with a strong sentiment within the Labour Party.
Acland was a Liberal MP, and in the three attempts to secure a "Progressive" candidature the official Labour Party machinery had been bypassed.
In normal circumstances 1939 might have been election year.
Any electoral agreement with radical Liberals would have produced an embarrassing position for the Labour party.
Stafford Cripps continued to stress that such an alliance was made inevitable as much by the policy of the Labour Party as by the growing danger from Nazi Germany.
The Party had modified its opposition to the Government's rearmament programme and the Left felt that this had inhibited the campaign against Chamberlain.
 "No one in the Labour Party" , wrote Cripps, "wants to encourage the forming of any sort of combined Opposition if it can be avoided — that is to say, if the Labour Party can show itself strong enough to give the lead to the anti-National Government forces and to be a real and effective Opposition to that Government" .
He had become alarmed by the attempts of a group in the Conservative Party to form a New Progressive Group with 100,000 supporters.
The group was led ostensibly by Duncan Sandys and the Progressive MP, Vernon Bartlett, but Winston Churchill was widely believed to be behind the movement.
The Communists had gone so far towards accepting any ally that the Daily Worker expressed hopes that "this may prove to be a new, broad democratic movement, based primarily on the youth of the country" .
However, the tone of the Group meeting in January 1939, although critical of the National Government, was clearly out of sympathy with the pro-Soviet sentiments of "Unity" supporters.
Two days later the Communists saw the new grouping as an "essentially disruptive organisation which can only hinder the development of unity between existing political parties and organisations against the Chamberlain Government" .
Cripps had already taken this view of the New Progressive Group.
The new group did not in fact achieve its target of 100,000 pledged supporters and had faded away by March.
Yet its appeal to youth had greatly concerned Cripps, whose influence with the Labour League of Youth had become considerable.
He once again submitted his proposals to the Labour National Executive favouring a United Peace Alliance and electoral agreement.
His memorandum, delivered on 9 January 1939, repeated previous arguments and drew attention to the weakness of the Labour League of Youth and the difficulty of gaining a majority at the next General Election.
The Executive met four days later and rejected the memorandum by 17 votes to three.
Cripps had tried to answer the criticism that he was abandoning Socialism by making special reference to the need for the Party to retain its principles should it join any alliance.
Despite this the Executive attitude was unchanged, its composition being exactly the same as when Cripps' earlier proposals had been discussed in 1938.
Cripps and his followers were once again in conflict with the National Executive on the familiar topic of the most effective way of opposing the National Government.
In contrast to previous campaigns, in which he had kept within the limits imposed by the Executive, Cripps decided to take his proposals direct to the Party membership in defiance of official decisions.
On 18 January he circularized all sections of the Labour Party and the Press, and launched into a revived campaign for the Peace Alliance.
At its meeting on 25 January the National Executive agreed to a statement surveying Cripps' "past campaigns waged over a long period" , "his wide departure from the Party's Programme, Principles and Policy" , and his "organised effort fundamentally to change the Party's direction and leadership" .
In conclusion the Executive requested Stafford Cripps: to reaffirm his allegiance to the Labour Party within the meaning of the Constitution, Programme, Principles and Policy of the Party, and to withdraw his Memorandum by circular to the persons and organisations to whom it was addressed.
Failing compliance with these requests Sir Stafford Cripps should be informed that he no longer fulfils the conditions of membership of the Labour Party, and that in consequence he will be excluded there from.
Cripps had no alternative but to refuse the conditions laid down by the Executive.
To accept them would have meant a complete recantation of all his actions over the past five years.
On 28 January he was expelled from the Party, to be followed later by several prominent supporters of his campaign.
The Labour Party leadership was concerned with the prospect of fighting the General Election with an unwelcome and embarrassing group of "progressives" unofficially allied with its candidates.
Cripps had implied in his memorandum that the Party had little chance of gaining a Parliamentary majority without Liberal allies.
He had repeated once more that the central position in the Peace Alliance belonged to the Labour Party "for not only is it the largest opposition party, but it represents the essential core for any progressive alliance — the working class" .
The element of continuity with previous Unity campaigns was thus preserved and the Cripps Memorandum received support from basically the same groups and individuals who had supported him on previous occasions.
But it no longer seemed possible to capture the imagination of a wide section of the Labour movement.
Electoral alliances were not favoured in the Party, and the radicalism of local Labour Parties was of a different character from Liberal radicalism.
The Petition Committee, set up in February to gain support for the memorandum, appealed to the Labour, Liberal and Cooperative Parties, for the "parties of progress to work together" .
Its programme was brief and it was circulated in the form of points from a petition to the three "progressive" Parties.
The Petition called for the defence of democracy, a "Plan for Plenty" , the signing of a Peace Alliance with France and the Soviet Union, the control of vital industries, protection against air attack, and a plan to "Build for Peace and Justice" .
This collection of demands gave the widest scope for an agitation against the government on several issues thought to appeal to radical Liberals and Left Labour alike.
Although the Communists actively supported the campaign it was based on markedly less radical demands than the Unity Manifesto of 1937.
However it was thought by its sponsors to represent a programme which had some possibility of acceptance by the bodies to which the petition would be presented.
The Labour Party showed no signs of accepting the points made by the Petition Committee.
John Marchbanks of the NUR, representing an active Right Wing minority in the Party leadership, saw the campaign as an attempt at "engineering the break up of the Labour Party, and paving the way to the creation of a new party, in which Liberals and progressives of all political shades will be enrolled" .
The majority of the National Executive did not go as  far as Marchbanks but warned several of the leading participants in the Petition campaign that disciplinary action would be taken against them (as against Cripps) if they continued in their support for it.
As a result of this warning Will Lawther of the Miners Federation, and C. Poole, Member for Lichfield, withdrew their backing at the beginning of March.
Sir Charles Trevelyan refused to withdraw or to curb his activities in any way and was consequently expelled from the Party.
Seven Labour MPs, Aneurin Bevan, S.O.
Davies, J. Parker, C. Poole, M. Phillips Price, George Strauss and B. Kiley had sent a letter to the Executive protesting against Cripps' expulsion and were supported by a number of Parliamentary candidates.
The National Executive wrote to the four signatories and supporters who were most closely identified with the Petition campaign, Bevan, Strauss, Cdr Young, and W. Bruce, asking them to discontinue their support for the campaign or face expulsion from the Party.
The four wrote to enquire how they could best put forward their views inside the Labour Party.
In his reply the National Agent, G. R. Shepherd, Summarized five forms of action which "amount to unpardonable disloyalty against a democratic movement" .
The basic objection to any continuation of the campaign was its organized nature, based on the "creation of machinery with staffs and offices throughout the country" .40 It was made clear that no campaign of any sort was to be allowed and, on their refusal to accept this decision, the four members were expelled.
The Labour Party had now lost two of its most distinguished "intellectuals" , two of its most active Members of Parliament and two prospective candidates, in an effort to suppress the idea of an electoral alliance before the General Election.
Prior to the Party's Annual Conference the National Executive once again disbanded the Labour League of Youth, which had given official support to Cripps' memorandum.
The National Advisory Committee of the League had taken part in the "Youth Pilgrimage" of 18 February, a predominantly Communist demonstration in favour of the Cripps petition.
Even after the Committee had been disbanded, the officially sponsored League Conference had called for its reformation and supported participation in the National Youth Campaign, an offshoot of the Communist-controlled British Youth Peace Assembly.
The National Executive had taken rigorous action, reimposing all restrictions imposed in 1936.
The Party Conference at Southport at Whitsun was thus  presented with the most drastic series of measures taken against the Left since the Edinburgh Conference.
Cripps had asked for permission to appeal against his expulsion.
The National Executive at first refused this, but eventually left the decision to the Conference delegates.
By l, 227,000 votes to l, 083,000 he was allowed to speak, but by general agreement failed to make the most of this opportunity.
Cripps dealt with the constitutional rights of Party members, rather than with the items contained in his memorandum.
The final result of the debate, in which Cripps was attacked largely on personal grounds, was the confirmation of his expulsion by 2,100,000 votes to 402,000.
The Peace Alliance campaign was virtually dead, lingering on in the remnants of the Labour League of Youth, and in the Communist Party.
In the last stages of the drift to war, the United Peace Alliance seemed rather futile.
In no circumstances was the bulk of the Labour Party prepared to be allied with groups which were clearly not as influential as they had been in the past.
Most of the members clung to the view that"the Labour Movement is more than an anti-Fascist Party…
It stands for a positive policy — Socialism at home and internationally".
Although the Labour Left may have considered this official conversion to Socialism somewhat belated, it was attracted to the Peace Alliance only in so far as it represented a continuation of previous Unity campaigns.
In its last stages the Alliance was essentially a revival of Liberal radicalism emphasizing foreign policy.
The Peace Alliance had, as a result, attracted support from a variety of national figures, but had not been so successful in the organized Labour movement.
At a Petition meeting in February 1939, the Alliance platform had included Cripps, Strauss, Acland, Paul Robeson and, finally.
Lloyd George.
Yet less than half a million votes were cast to keep Cripps inside the Labour Party, far fewer than were cast three years earlier to accept the affiliation of the Communist Party.
The various campaigns for "Unity" after 1936 were increasingly devoted to agitation on foreign policy in the hope that war could be averted.
On the outbreak of war the original components of the Peace Alliance and the Unity Campaign scattered in different directions.
The ILP and the extreme Left advocated "war resistance" , becoming more sectarian than ever.
The most important Labour supporters of "Unity" gave modified support to the war  effort, though they were highly critical of its conduct by Chamberlain and of the political truce which prevented the running of candidates in previously Conservative seats.
When the coalition National Government was formed in May 1940, much of this criticism subsided, except for that maintained by Aneurin Began and by Tribune .
The Liberal radicals and "Progressives" were eventually brought together by Sir Richard Acland into the Commonwealth Party in 1942, where they provided the only effective electoral opposition to the wartime government.
For their part, the Communists completely reversed their line, earning the permanent hostility of many of their former allies.
Just as war began the Communist Party had published a short pamphlet How to Win the War , which outlined the Party's continued opposition to fascism and its intention of participating in the war effort.
This was the obvious sequel to its policy for the past four years.
After communication with the Comintern, however, a majority of the Party leadership decided to reconsider its attitude to the war, which was declared an "imperialist struggle" to be opposed by the Party.
Pollitt and J.R.
Campbell were removed from their Party positions on 11 October.
On the following day a statement was made in the Daily Worker embodying the Comintern declaration and correcting the previous statement of policy.
On 23 November, Pollitt and Campbell withdrew their support from the initial statement and were readmitted to their positions.
For the next eighteen months the Party ran a campaign for a "People's Government and a People's Peace" , setting up a People's Convention to popularize this slogan in the labour movement.
Bitter criticism of Communist policy was continually expressed in previously favourable journals like Tribune .
The principal non-Communist supporters of the Unity Campaign joined in writing a book,The Betrayal of the Left , in which they repudiated the Communist attitude to the war.
John Strachey, who though not officially in the Communist Party had worked assiduously for it since 1932, was a significant contributor to this volume.
The Communist Party, after its reversal of policy in October 1939, tried to keep the idea of "Unity" alive through the People's Convention.
A People's Vigilance Committee was created in 1940 to fight against the "imperialist war" and for some of the social measures originally incorporated in the Unity Manifesto.
It was a successor to the pre-war campaigns but the central core of  anti-fascism had been removed.
Formed on the initiative of D.N.
Pritt, MP, who had just been expelled from the Labour Party, its main support came from the Communists.
Its appeal was to "the workshops and the mines…the Trade Union branches and the Co-operative organisations, all groupings and associations of the wider mass of the people" .
The Committee's activities culminated in the summoning of a People's Convention on 12 January 1941.
The Communist Party, though it gave full facilities to the People's Vigilance Committee in the Daily Worker and Labour Monthly , continued to deny that the Convention was entirely inspired by the Party.
Neither the Labour Party, the Left contributors to Tribune nor the pacifist elements centred around the ILP were prepared to believe these protestations.
The Labour Party officially viewed the Convention as "an attempt to build up a new Political Party" , and indeed it is not improbable that the Communists, fearing illegality, were preparing a new organization on United Front lines into which they could merge if necessary.
The German invasion of the Soviet Union, however, made the Convention redundant.