

PRINCIPLES OF CLASSIFICATION
All animal organisms are related to one another, closely or remotely, and the study of the complex systems of inter-relationship is called systematics.It is essentially a study of the evolutionary process.
When organisms are examined it is seen that they form natural groups with features, usually morphological, in common.
A group of this sort is called a taxon, and the study of this aspect of biology is called taxonomy.
The taxa in which organisms may be placed are recognised by international agreement, and the chief ones are: Kingdom, Phylum, Class, Order, Family, Genus and Species.
The intervals between these are large, and some organisms cannot be allocated to them precisely, so that intermediate taxa, prefixed appropriately, have been formed; examples of these are the Suborder and the Superfamily.
As an instance, the taxonomic status of one of the common abomasal parasites of ruminants may be expressed as shown in the next column.
The names of taxa must be adhered to according to the international rules, but it is permissible to anglicise the endings, so that members of the superfamily Trichostrongyloidea in the example above may also be termed trichostrongyloids.
The names of the genus and species are expressed in Latin form, the generic name having a capital letter, and  they must be in grammatical agreement.
It is customary to print foreign words in italics, so that the name of an organism is usually underlined or italicised.
Accents are not permitted, so that, if an organism is named after a person, amendment may be necessary; the name of Muller, for example , has been altered in the genus Muellerius.
The higher taxa containing helminths of veterinary importance are: Nemathelminthes (Roundworms) Platyhelminthes (Flatworms)
Major
Acanthocephala (Thornyheaded Worms)
Minor
Phylum NEMATHELMINTHES
Though the phylum Nemathelminthes has six classes only one of these, the nematoda, contains worms of parasitic significance.
The nematodes are commonly called roundworms, from their appearance in cross-section.
Class NEMATODA
A system of classification of nematodes of veterinary importance is given in Table 1.
It must be emphasised that this is not an exact expression of the general system of parasitic nematodes, but is a simplified presentation intended for use in the study of veterinary parasitology.
It is based on the ten superfamilies in which nematodes of veterinary importance occur, and which are conveniently divided into bursate and non-bursate groups as shown in Table 1.
Most nematodes have a cylindrical form, tapering at either end, and the body is covered by a colourless, somewhat translucent, layer, the cuticle.
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
The cuticle is secreted by the underlying hypodermis, which projects into the body cavity forming two lateral cords, which carry the excretory canals, and a dorsal and ventral cord carrying the nerves (Fig.1).
The muscle cells, arranged longitudinally, lie between the hypodermis and the body cavity.
The latter contains fluid at a high pressure which maintains the turgidity and shape of the body.
Locomotion is effected by undulating waves of muscle contraction and relaxation which alternate on the dorsal and ventral aspects of the worm.
Most of the internal organs are filamentous and suspended in the fluid-filled body cavity (Fig.2).
The digestive system is tubular.
The mouth of many nematodes is a simple opening which may be surrounded by two or three lips, and leads directly into the oesophagus.
In others, such as the strongyloids, it is large, and opens into a buccal capsule, which may contain teeth; such parasites, when feeding, draw a plug of mucosa into the buccal capsule (Fig.3), where it is broken down by the action of enzymes which are secreted into the capsule from adjacent glands.
Some of these worms may also secrete anticoagulant, and small vessels, ruptured in the digestion of the mucosal plug, may continue to bleed for some minutes after the worm has moved to a fresh site.
Those with very small buccal capsules, like the trichostrongyloids, or simple oral openings, like the ascaridoids, generally feed on mucosal fluid and cell debris, while others, such as the oxyuroids, appear to scavenge on the contents of the lower gut.
Worms living in the bloodstream or tissue spaces, such as the filarioids, feed exclusively on fluids.
The oesophagus is usually muscular and pumps food into the intestine.
It is of variable form (Fig.4), and is a useful preliminary identification character for groups of worms.
It may be filariform simple and slightly thickened posteriorly, as in the bursate nematodes; bulb-shaped, with a large posterior swelling, as in the ascaridoids; or double bulb-shaped, as in the oxyuroids.
In some groups this wholly muscular form does not occur: the filarioids and spiruroids have a muscular-glandular oesophagus which is muscular anteriorly, the posterior part being glandular; the trichuroid oesophagus has a capillary form, passing through a single column of cells, the whole being known as stichosome.
A rhabditiform oesophagus, with slight anterior and posterior swellings, is present in the preparasitic larvae of many nematodes, and in adult free-living nematodes.
The intestine is a tube whose lumen is enclosed by a single layer of cells or by a syncytium.
Their luminal surfaces possess microvilli which increase the absorptive capacity of the cells.
In female worms the intestine terminates in an anus while in males there is a cloaca which functions as an anus, and into which opens the vas deferens and through which the copulatory spicules may be extruded.
The so-called "excretory system" is very primitive, consisting of a canal within each lateral cord joining at the excretory pore in the oesophageal region.
The reproductive systems consist of filamentous tubes.
The female organs comprise ovary, oviduct and uterus, which may be paired, ending in a common short vagina which opens at the vulva.
At the junction of uterus and vagina in some species there is a short muscular organ, the ovejector, which assists in egg-laying.
A vulval flap may also be present (Fig.5).
The male organs consist of a single continuous testis and a vas deferens terminating in an ejaculatory duct into the cloaca.
Accessory male organs are sometimes important in identification, especially of the trichostrongyloids, the two most important being the spicules and gubernaculum (Fig. 6).
The spicules are chitinous organs, usually paired, which are inserted in the female genital opening, during copulation.
The gubernaculum, also chitinous, is a small structure which acts as a guide for the spicules.
With the two sexes in close apposition the amoeboid sperm are transferred from the cloaca of the male into the uterus of the female.
The cuticle may be modified to form various structures, the more important (Fig. 7) of which are:
Leaf crowns consisting of rows of papillae occurring as fringes round the rim of the buccal capsule (external leaf crowns) or just inside the rim (internal leaf crowns).
They are especially prominent in certain nematodes of horses.
Their function is not known, but it is suggested that they may be used to pin a patch of mucosa in position during feeding, or that they may prevent the entry of foreign matter into the buccal capsule when the worm has detached from the mucosa.
Cervical papillae occur anteriorly in the oesophageal region, and caudal papillae posteriorly at the tail.
They are spine-like or finger-like processes, and are usually diametrically placed.
Their function may be sensory or supportive.
Cervical and caudal alae are flattened wing-like expansions of the cuticle in the oesophageal and tail regions.
Cephalic and cervical vesicles are inflations of the cuticle around the mouth opening and in the oesophageal region.
The copulatory bursa, which embraces the female during copulation, is important in the identification of certain male nematodes and is derived from much expanded caudal alae which are supported by elongated caudal papillae called bursal rays.
It consists of two lateral lobes and a single small dorsal lobe.
Plaques and cordons are plate-like and cord-like ornamentations present on the cuticle of many nematodes of the superfamily Spiruroidea.
In the Nematoda, the sexes are separate and the males are generally smaller than the females which lay eggs or larvae.
During development, a nematode moults at invervals shedding its cuticle.
In the complete life cycle there are four moults, the successive larval stages being designated, L1, L2, L3, L4 and finally L5, which is the immature adult.
BASIC LIFE CYCLE
One feature of the basic nematode life cycle is that immediate transfer of infection from one final host to another rarely occurs.
Some development usually takes place either in the faecal pat or in a different species of animal, the intermediate host, before infection can take place.
In the common form of direct life cycle, the free-living larvae undergo two moults after hatching and infection is by ingestion of the free L3.
There are some important exceptions however, infection sometimes being by larval penetration of the skin or by ingestion of the egg containing a larva.
In indirect life cycles, the first two moults usually take place in an intermediate host and infection of the final host is either by ingestion of the intermediate host or by inoculation of the L3 when the intermediate host, such as a blood sucking insect, feeds.
After infection, two further moults take place to produce the L5 or immature adult parasite.
Following copulation a further life cycle is initiated.
In the case of gastrointestinal parasites, development may take place entirely in the gut lumen or with only limited movement into the mucosa.
However, in many species, the larvae travel considerable distances through the body before settling in their final (predilection) site and this is the migratory form of life cycle.
One of the most common routes is the hepatic-tracheal.
This takes developing stages from the gut via the portal system to the liver then via the hepatic vein and posterior vena cava to the heart and from there via the pulmonary artery to the lungs.
Larvae then travel via the bronchi, trachea and oesophagus to the gut.
It should be emphasised that the above is a basic description of nematode life cycles and that there are many variations.
Nematode eggs differ greatly in size and shape, and the shell is of variable thickness usually consisting of three layers.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE PARASITE
EGG
The inner membrane, which is thin, has lipid characteristics and is impermeable.
A middle layer which is tough and chitinous gives rigidity and, when thick, imparts a yellowish colour to the egg.
In many species this layer is interrupted at one or both ends with an operculum (lid) or plug.
The third outer layer consists of protein which is very thick and sticky in the ascaridoids and is important in the epidemiology of this superfamily.
In contrast, in some species the egg shell is very thin and may be merely present as a sheath around the larva.
The survival potential of the egg outside the body varies, but appears to be connected with the thickness of the shell, which protects the larva from desiccation.
Thus parasites whose infective form is the larvated egg usually have very thick-shelled eggs which can survive for years on the ground.
Depending on the species, eggs may hatch outside the body or after ingestion.
HATCHING
Outside the body, hatching is controlled partly by factors such as temperature and moisture and partly by the larva itself.
In the process of hatching, the inner impermeable shell membrane is broken down by enzymes secreted by the larva and by its own movement.
The larva is then able to take up water from the environment and enlarges to rupture the remaining layers and escape.
When the larvated egg is the infective form, the host initiates hatching after ingestion by providing stimuli for the larva which then completes the process.
It is important for each nematode species that hatching should occur in appropriate regions of the gut and hence the  stimuli will differ, although it appears that dissolved carbon dioxide is a constant essential.
Three of the important superfamilies, the trichostrongyloids, the strongyloids and the rhabditoids, have a completely free-living preparasitic phase.
The first two larval stages usually feed on bacteria, but the L3, sealed off from the environment by the retained cuticle of the L2, cannot feed and must survive on the stored nutrients acquired in the early stages.
Growth of the larva is interrupted during moulting by periods of lethargus in which it neither feeds nor moves.
LARVAL DEVELOPMENT AND SURVIVAL
The cuticle of the L2 is retained as a sheath around the L3; this is important in larval survival with a protective role analogous to that of the egg shell in egg-infective groups.
The two most important components of the external environment are temperature and humidity.
The optimal temperature for the development of the maximum number of larvae in the shortest feasible time is generally in the range 18-260C.
At higher temperatures, development is faster and the larvae are hyperactive, thus depleting their lipid reserves.
The mortality rate then rises, so that few will survive to L3.
As the temperature falls the process slows, and below 10oC the development from egg to L3 usually cannot take place.
Below 5oC movement and metabolism of L3 is minimal, which in many species favours survival.
The optimal humidity is 100%, although some development can occur down to 80% relative humidity.
It should be noted that even in dry weather where the ambient humidity is low, the microclimate in faeces or at the soil surface may be sufficiently humid to permit continuing larval development.
In the trichostrongyloids and strongyloids, the embryonated egg and the ensheathed L3 are best equipped to survive in adverse conditions such as freezing or desiccation; in contrast, the L1 and L2 are particularly vulnerable.
Although desiccation is generally considered to be the most lethal influence in larval survival, there is increasing evidence that by entering a state of anhydrobiosis, certain larvae can survive severe desiccation.
On the ground most larvae are active; although they require a film of water for movement and are stimulated by light and temperature, it is now thought that larval movement is mostly random and encounter with grass blades accidental.
As noted previously, infection may be by ingestion of the free-living L3, and this occurs in the majority of trichostrongyloid and strongyloid nematodes.
In these, the L3 sheds the retained sheath of the L2 within the alimentary tract of the host, the stimulus for exsheathment being provided by the host in a manner similar to the hatching stimulus required by egg-infective nematodes.
In response to this stimulus the larva releases its own exsheathing fluid, containing an enzyme leucine aminopeptidase, which dissolves the sheath from within, either at a narrow collar anteriorly so that a cap detaches, or by splitting the sheath longitudinally.
The larva can then wriggle free of the sheath.
INFECTION
As in the preparasitic stage, growth of the larva during parasitic development is interrupted by two moults, each of these occurring during a short period of lethargus.
The time taken for development from infection until mature adult parasites are producing eggs or larvae is known as the prepatent period and this is of known duration for each nematode species.
The main food reserve of preparasitic nematode larvae, whether inside the egg shell or free-living, is lipid which may be seen as droplets in the lumen of the intestine; the infectivity of these stages is often related to the amount present, in that larvae which have depleted their reserves are not as infective as those which still retain quantities of lipid.
METABOLISM
Apart from these reserves the free-living first and second stage larvae of most nematodes feed on bacteria.
However, once they reach the infective third stage, they are sealed in the retained cuticle of the second stage, cannot feed and are completely dependent on their stored reserves.
In contrast, the adult parasite stores its energy as glycogen, mainly in the lateral cords and muscles, and this may constitute 20% of the dry weight of the worm.
Free-living and developing stages of nematodes usually have an aerobic metabolism whereas adult nematodes can metabolise carbohydrate by both glycolysis (anaerobic) and oxidative decarboxylation (aerobic).
However, in the latter, pathways may operate which are not present in the host and it is at this level that some antiparasitic drugs operate.
The oxidation of carbohydrates requires the presence of an electron transport system which in most nematodes can operate aerobically down to oxygen tensions of 5.0 mm Hg or less.
Since the oxygen tension at the mucosal surface of the intestine is around 20 mm Hg, nematodes in close proximity to the mucosa normally have sufficient oxygen for aerobic metabolism.
Otherwise, if the nematode is temporarily or permanently some distance from the mucosal surface, energy metabolism is probably largely anaerobic.
As well as the conventional cytochrome and flavo-protein electron transport system, many nematodes have "haemoglobin" in their body fluids which gives them a red pigmentation.
This nematode haemoglobin is chemically similar to myoglobin and has the highest  affinity for oxygen of any known animal haemoglobin.
The main function of nematode haemoglobin is thought to be to transport oxygen, acquired by diffusion through the cuticle or gut, into the tissues; blood-sucking worms presumably ingest a considerable amount of oxygenated nutrients in their diet.
The end products of the metabolism of carbohydrates, fats or proteins are excreted through the anus or cloaca, or by diffusion through the body wall.
Ammonia, the terminal product of protein metabolism, must be excreted rapidly and diluted to non-toxic levels in the surrounding fluids.
During periods of anaerobic carbohydrate metabolism, the worms may also excrete pyruvic acid rather than retaining it for future oxidation when aerobic metabolism is possible.
The "excretory system" terminating in the excretory pore is almost certainly not concerned with excretion, but rather with osmoregulation and salt balance.
Two phenomena which affect the norma parasitic life cycle of nematodes and which are of considerable biological and epidemiological importance are arrested larval development and the periparturient rise in faecal egg counts.
(Synonyms: inhibited larval development, hypobiosis).
This phenomenon may be defined as the temporary cessation in development of a nematode at a precise point in its parasitic development.
It is usually a facultative characteristic and affects only a proportion of the worm population.
Some strains of nematodes have a high propensity for arrested development while in others this is low.
ARRESTED LARVAL DEVELOPMENT
Conclusive evidence for the occurrence of arrested larval development can only be obtained by examination of the worm population in the host.
It is usually recognised by the presence of large numbers of larvae at the same stage of development in animals withheld from infection for a period longer than that required to reach that particular larval stage.
The nature of the stimulus for arrested development and for the subsequent maturation of the larvae is still a matter of debate.
Although there are apparently different circumstances which initiate arrested larval development, most commonly the stimulus is an environmental one received by the free-living infective stages prior to ingestion by the host.
It may be seen as a ruse by the parasite to avoid adverse climatic conditions for its progeny by remaining sexually immature in the host until more favourable conditions return.
The name commonly applied to this seasonal arrestment is hypobiosis.
Thus the accumulation of arrested larvae often coincides with the onset of cold autumn/winter conditions in the northern hemisphere, or very dry conditions in the subtropics or tropics.
In contrast, the maturation of these larvae coincides with the return of environmental conditions suitable to their free-living development, although it is not clear what triggers the signal to mature and how it is transmitted.
The degree of adaptation to these seasonal stimuli and therefore the proportion of larvae which do become arrested seems to be a heritable trait and is affected by various factors including grazing systems and the degree of adversity in the environment.
For example, in Canada where the winters are severe, most Trichostrongyloid larvae ingested in late autumn or winter become arrested, whereas in southern Britain with moderate winters, about 50-60% are arrested.
In the humid tropics where free-living larval development is possible all the year round, relatively few become arrested.
However, arrested development may also occur as a result of both acquired and age immunity in the host and although the proportions of larvae arrested are not usually so high as in hypobiosis they can play an important part in the epidemiology of nematode infections.
Maturation of these arrested larvae seems to be linked with the breeding cycle of the host and occurs at or around parturition.
The epidemiological importance of arrested larval development from whatever cause is that, first, it ensures the survival of the nematode during periods of adversity; secondly, the subsequent maturation of arrested larvae increases the contamination of the environment and can sometimes result in clinical disease.
(Synonyms: Post-parturient rise, Spring rise).
This refers to an increase in the numbers of nematode eggs in the faeces of animals around parturition.
The phenomenon is most marked in ewes, sows and goats.
PERIPARTURIENT RISE (PPR) IN FAECAL EGG COUNTS
The etiology of this phenomenon has been principally studied in sheep and seems to result from a temporary relaxation in immunity associated with changes in the circulating levels of the lactogenic hormone, prolactin.
It appears that a decrease in parasite-specific immune responses occurs following elevation of serum prolactin levels.
These are rapidly restored when prolactin levels drop at the end of lactation or more abruptly if lambs are weaned early and the suckling stimulus removed.
The source of the periparturient rise (PPR) is three-fold:(i) Maturation of larvae arrested due to host immunity.
(ii) An increased establishment of infections acquired from the pastures and a reduced turnover of existing adult infections.
(iii) An increased fecundity of existing adult worm populations.
Contemporaneously, but not associated with the relaxation of host immunity, the PPR may be augmented by the maturation of hypobiotic larvae.
The importance of the PPR is that it occurs at a time when the numbers of new susceptible hosts are increasing and so ensures the survival and propagation of the worm species.
Depending on the magnitude of infection, it may also cause a loss of production in lactating animals and by contamination of the environment lead to clinical disease in susceptible young stock.
Superfamily TRICHOSTRONGYLOIDEA
The trichostrongyloids are small, often hair-like, worms in the bursate group which, with the exception of the lungworm Dictyocaulus, parasitise the alimentary tract of animals and birds.
Structurally they have few cuticle appendages and the buccal capsule is vestigial.
The males have a well developed bursa and two spicules, the configuration of which is used for species differentiation.
The life cycle is direct and usually non-migratory and the ensheathed L3 is the infective stage.
The trichostrongyloids, including Dictyocaulus, are responsible for considerable mortality and widespread morbidity, especially in ruminants.
The most important alimentary genera are Ostertagia, Haemonchus, Trichostrongylus, Cooperia, Nematodirus, Hyostrongylus, Marshallagia and Mecistocirrus.
This genus is the major cause of parasitic gastritis in ruminants in temperate areas of the world.
Hosts: Ruminants Site: Abomasum Species: Ostertagia ostertagi cattle O. circumcincta sheep and goats O. trifurcata sheep and goats Minor species are O. (syn.
Skrjabinagia) lyrata and kolchida, in cattle and O. leptospicularis in cattle, sheep and goats.
Ostertagia
Distribution: Worldwide; Ostertagia is especially important in temperate climates and in subtropical regions with winter rainfall.
The adults are slender reddish-brown worms up to 1.0 cm long, occurring on the surface of the abomasal mucosa and are only visible on close inspection.
The larval stages occur in the gastric glands and can only be seen microscopically following processing of the gastric mucosa.
IDENTIFICATION
Species differentiation is based on the structure of the spicules which usually have three distal branches (Fig. 8).
Since O. ostertagi is the most prevalent of the species in cattle it is considered in detail.
BOVINE OSTERTAGIASIS
O. ostertagi is perhaps the most common cause of parasitic gastritis in cattle.
The disease, often simply known as ostertagiasis, is characterised by weight loss and diarrhoea and typically affects young cattle during their first grazing season, although herd outbreaks and sporadic individual cases have also been reported in adult cattle.
cattle.
Ostertagia ostertagi
O. ostertagi has a direct life cycle.
The eggs (Fig. 9), which are typical of the Trichostrongyloidea, are passed in the faeces and under optimal conditions develop within the faecal pat to the infective third stage within two weeks.
When moist conditions prevail, the L3 migrate from the faeces on to the herbage.
After ingestion, the L3 exsheaths in the rumen and further development takes place in the lumen of an abomasal gland.
Two parasitic moults occur before the L5 emerges from the gland around 18 days after infection to become sexually mature on the mucosal surface.
LIFE CYCLE
The entire parasitic life cycle usually takes three weeks, but under certain circumstances many of the ingested L3 become arrested in development at the early fourth larval stage (EL4) for periods of up to six months.
The presence of O. ostertagi in the abomasum in sufficient numbers gives rise to extensive pathological and biochemical changes and severe clinical signs.
These changes are maximal when the parasites are emerging from the gastric glands (P1.I).
This is usually about 18 days after infection, but it may be delayed for several months when arrested larval development occurs.
PATHOGENESIS
The developing parasites cause a reduction in the functional gastric gland mass responsible for the production of the highly acidic proteolytic gastric juice; in particular, the parietal cells, which produce hydrochloric acid, are replaced by rapidly dividing, undifferentiated non-acid secreting cells.
Initially, these cellular changes occur in the parasitised gland (Fig. 10), but as it becomes distended by the growing worm which increases from 1.3-8.0 mm in length, these changes spread to the surrounding non-parasitised glands, the end result being a thickened hyperplastic gastric mucosa (P1.I).
Macroscopically, the lesion is a raised nodule with a visible central orifice (Fig. 11); in heavy infections these nodules coalesce to produce an effect reminiscent of morocco leather.
The abomasal folds are often very oedematous and hyperaemic and sometimes necrosis and sloughing of the mucosal surface occurs (P1.I); the regional lymph nodes are enlarged and reactive.
In heavily infections of 40,000 or more adult worms the principal effects of these changes are, first, a reduction in the acidity of the abomasal fluid, the pH increasing from 2.0 up to 7.0.
This results in a failure to activate pepsinogen to pepsi and so denature proteins.
There is also a loss of bacteriostatic effect in the abomasum.
Secondly, there is an enhanced permeability of the abomasal epithelium to macromolecules such as pepsinogen and plasma proteins.
One explanation is that the cell junctions between the rapidly dividing and undifferentiated cells which come to line the parasitised mucosa appear to be incompletely formed, and as a result, macromolecules may pass into and out of the epithelial sheet.
The results of these changes are a leakage of pepsinogen into the circulation leading to elevated plasma pepsinogen levels and the loss of plasma proteins into the gut lumen eventually leading to hypoalbuminaemia.
Another more recent theory is that, in response to the presence of the adult parasites, the zymogen cells secrete increased amounts of pepsin directly into the circulation.
Clinically the consequences are reflected as inappetence, weight loss and diarrhoea, the precise cause of the diarrhoea being unknown.
In lighter infections the main effects are sub-optimal weight gains.
Although reduced feed consumption and diarrhoea affect liveweight gain they do not wholly account for the loss in production.
Current evidence suggests that this is primarily because of substantial leakage of endogenous protein into the gastrointestinal tract.
Despite some re-absorption nitrogen and energy metabolism due to the increased demands for the synthesis of vital proteins, such as albumin and the immunoglobulins, which occur at the expense of muscle protein and fat deposition.
These disturbances are of course influenced by the level of nutrition, being exacerbated by a low protein intake and alleviated by a high protein diet.
Bovine ostertagiasis is known to occur in two clinical forms.
In temperate climates with cold winters the seasonal occurence of these is as follows:
CLINICAL SIGNS
The Type I disease is usually seen in calves grazed intensively during their first grazing season, as the result of larvae ingested 3-4 weeks previously; in the northern hemisphere this normally occurs from mid-July onwards.
The Type II disease occurs in yearlings, usually in late winter or spring following their first grazing season and results from the maturation of larvae ingested during the previous autumn and subsequently arrested in their development at the early fourth larval stage.
The main clinical sign in both Type I and Type II disease is a profuse watery diarrhoea and in Type I, where calves are at grass, this is usually persistent and has a characteristic bright green colour.
In contrast, in the majority of animals with Type II, the diarrhoea is often intermittent and anorexia and thirst are usually present.
The coats of affected animals in both syndromes are dull and the hind quarters heavily soiled with faeces.
In Type II ostertagiasis, hypoalbuminaemia is more marked and there is a moderate anaemia of unknown etiology.
As a result of the hypoalbuminaemia, submandibular oedema is often present.
In both forms of the disease, the loss of body weight is considerable during the clinical phase and may reach 20% in 7-10 days.
Carcass quality may also be affected since there is a reduction in total body solids relative to total body water.
In Type I disease, the morbidity is usually high, often exceeding 75%, but mortality is rare provided treatment is instituted within 2-3 days.
In Type II the prevalence of clinical disease is comparatively low and often only a proportion of animals in the group are affected; mortality in such animals is very high unless early treatment with an anthelmintic effective against both arrested and developing larval stages is instituted.
The epidemiology of ostertagiasis in temperate countries of the northern hemisphere can be conveniently considered under the headings of dairy herds and beef herds; important differences in subtropical climates are summarised later.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
From epidemiological studies the following important facts have emerged (Fig. 12):
Dairy herds
(i) A considerable number of L3 can survive the winter on pasture and in soil.
Sometimes the numbers are sufficient to precipitate Type I disease in calves 3-4 weeks after they are turned out to graze in the spring.
However, this is unusual and the role of the surviving L3 is rather to infect calves at a level which produces patent subclinical infection and ensures contamination of the pasture for the rest of the grazing season.
(ii) A high mortality of overwintered L3 on the pasture occurs in spring and only negligible numbers can usually be detected by June.
This mortality combined with the dilution effect of the rapidly growing herbage renders most pastures, not grazed in the spring, safe for grazing after mid-summer.
However, despite the mortality of L3 on the pasture it now seems that many survive in the soil for at least another year and on occasion appear to migrate on to the herbage.
Whether this is a common occurence and whether the larvae migrate or are transported by terrestrial populations of earthworms or beetles is not definitely known, but the occurrence of this apparent reservoir of larvae in soil may be important in relation to certain systems of control based on grazing management.
(iii) The eggs deposited in the spring develop slowly to L3; this rate of development becomes more rapid towards mid-summer as temperatures increase, and as a result, the majority of eggs deposited during April, May and June all reach the infective stage from mid-July onwards.
If sufficient numbers of these L3 are ingested, the Type I disease occurs any time from July until October.
Development from egg to L3 slows during the autumn and it is doubtful if many of the eggs deposited after September ever develop to L3.
(iv) As autumn progresses and temperatures fall an increasing proportion (up to 80%) of the L3 ingested do not mature but become inhibited at the early fourth larval stage (EL4).
In late autumn, calves can therefore harbour many thousands of these EL4 but few developing forms or adults.
These infections are generally asymptomatic until maturation of the EL4 takes place during winter and early spring and if large numbers of these develop synchronously, Type II disease materialises.
Where maturation is not synchronous, clinical signs may not occur but the adult worm burdens which develop can play a significant epidemiological role by contributing to pasture contamination in the spring.
Two factors, one management and one climatic, appear to increase the prevalence of Type II ostertagiasis.
First, the practice of grazing calves from May until late July on permanent pasture, then moving these to hay or silage aftermath before returning them to the original grazing in late autumn.
In this system the accumulation of L3 on the original pasture will occur from mid-July, ie. after the calves have moved to aftermath.
These L3 are still present on the pastures when the calves return in the late autumn and, when ingested, the majority will become arrested.
Secondly, in dry summers the L3 are retained within the crusted faecal pat and cannot migrate on to the pasture until sufficient rainfall occurs to moisten the pat.
If rainfall is delayed until late autumn many larvae liberated on to pasture will become arrested following ingestion and so increase the chance of Type II disease.
Indeed, epidemics of Type II ostertagiasis are typically preceded by dry summers.
Although primarily a disease of young dairy cattle, ostertagiasis can nevertheless affect groups of older cattle in the herd, particularly if these have had little previous exposure to the parasite, since there is no significant age immunity to infection.
Acquired immunity in ostertagiasis is slow to develop and calves do not achieve a significant level of immunity until the end of their first grazing season.
If they are then housed for the winter the immunity acquired by the end of the grazing season has waned by the following spring and yearlings turned out at that time are partially susceptible to reinfection and so contaminate the pasture with small numbers of eggs.
However, immunity is rapidly re-established and any clinical signs which occur are usually of a transient nature.
During the second and third year of grazing, a strong acquired immunity develops and adult stock in endemic areas are highly immune to reinfection and of little significance in the epidemiology.
An exception to this rule occurs around the periparturient period when immunity wanes, particularly in heifers, and there are reports of clinical disease following calving.
The reason is unknown but may be due to the development of larvae which were arrested in their development as a result of host immunity.
Although the basic epidemiology in beef herds is similar to diary herds, the influence of immune adult animals grazing alongside susceptible calves has to be considered.
Thus, in beef herds where calving takes place in the spring, ostertagiasis is uncommon since egg production by immune adults is low, and the spring mortality of the overwintered L3 occurs prior to the suckling calves ingesting significant quantities of grass.
Consequently only low numbers of L3 become available on the pasture later in the year.
Beef herds
However, where calving takes place in the autumn or winter, ostertagiasis can be a problem in calves during the following grazing season once they are weaned, the epidemiology then being similar to dairy calves.
Whether Type I or Type II disease subsequently occurs depends on the grazing management of the calves following weaning.
In countries in the southern hemisphere with temperate climates, such as New Zealand, the seasonal pattern is similar to that reported for Europe with Type I disease occurring in the summer and burdens of arrested larvae accumulating in the autumn.
In those countries with subtropical climates and winter rainfall such as parts of southern Australia, South West Africa and some regions of Argentina, Chile and Brazil, the increase in L3 population occurs during the winter and outbreaks of Type I disease are seen towards the end of the winter period.
Arrested larvae accumulate during the spring and where Type II disease has been reported it has occurred in late summer or early autumn.
A basically similar pattern of infection is seen in some southern parts of the U.S.A. with non-seasonal rainfall, such as Louisiana and Texas.
There, larvae accumulate  on pasture during winter and arrested development occurs in late winter and early spring with outbreaks of Type II disease occurring in late summer or early autumn.
The environmental factors which produce arrested larvae in subtropical zones are not yet known.
Although burdens of adult Ostertagia spp. in dairy cows are usually low there is some evidence that a single anthelmintic treatment of such cows at, or soon after, calving can improve milk yields.
However, the economic benefit gained from such treatment varies considerably from farm to farm and also apparently from country to country and there are as yet insufficient grounds for advocating routine treatment of herds at calving.
THE EFFECT OF OSTERTAGIA INFECTION ON LACTATION YIELDS OF GRAZING COWS
It has also been suggested that during lactation a reduction in milk yield might result from oedema and increased permeability of the abomasal mucosa, possibly due to hypersensitivity reaction associated with the continued ingestion and destruction of large numbers of L3.
In young animals this is based on:(i) The clinical signs of inappetence, weight loss and diarrhoea.
(ii) The season.
For example, in Europe Type I occurs from July until September and Type II from March to May.
(iii) The grazing history.
In Type I disease, the calves have usually been set-stocked in one area for several moths; in contrast, Type II disease often has a typical history of calves being grazed on a field from spring to mid-summer, then moved and brought back to the original field in the autumn.
DIAGNOSIS
Affected farms usually also have a history of ostertagiasis i previous years.
(iv) Faecal egg counts.
In Type I disease these are usually more than 1,000 eggs per gram (epg) and are a useful aid to diagnosis; in Type II the count is highly variable, may even be negative and is of limited value.
(v) Plasma pepsinogen levels.
I clinically affected animals up to two years old these are usually in excess of 3.0 i.u. tyrosine (normal levels are 1.0 i.u. in non-parasitised calves).
The test is less reliable in older cattle where high values are not necessarily correlated with large adult worm burdens but, instead, may reflect plasma leakage from a hypersensitive mucosa under heavy larval challenge.
(vi) Post-mortem examination.
If this is available, the appearance of the abomasal mucosa is characteristic.
There is a putrid smell from the abomasal contents due to the accumulation of bacteria and the high pH.
The adult worms, reddish in colour and 1.0 cm in length, can be seen on close inspection of the mucosal surface.
Adult worm burdens are typically in excess of 40,000, although lower numbers are often found in animals which has been diarrhoeic for several days prior to necropsy.
In older animals the clinical signs and history are similar but laboratory diagnosis is more difficult since faecal egg counts and plasma pepsinogen levels are less reliable.
A useful technique to employ in such situations is to carry out a pasture larval count on the field on which the animals had been grazing.
Where the level of infection is more than 1,000 larvae per kg of dried herbage, the daily larval intake of grazing cows is in excess of 10,000 larvae.
This level is probably sufficient to cause clinical disease in susceptible adult animals or to upset the normal functioning of the gastric mucosa in immune cows.
Type I disease responds well to treatment at the standard dosage rates with any of the modern benzimidazoles (albendazole, fenbendazole or oxfendazole), the pro-benzimidazoles (febantel and thiophanate), levamisole, or ivermectin.
All of these drugs are effective against developing larvae and adult ages.
Following treatment, calves should be moved to pasture which has not been grazed by cattle in the same year.
TREATMENT
For the successful treatment of Type II disease it is necessary to use drugs which are effective against arrested larvae as well as developing larvae and adult stages.
Only the modern benzimidazoles listed above or ivermectin are effective in the treatment of Type II disease when used at standard dosage levels, although the pro-benzimidazoles are also effective at higher dose rates.
Sometimes with the orally administered benzimidazoles the drug by-passes the rumen and enters the abomasum directly and this appears to lower efficacy because of its more rapid absorption and excretion.
The field where the outbreak has originated may be grazed by sheep or rested until the following June.
Traditionally, ostertagiasis has been prevented by routinely treating young cattle with anthelmintics over the period when pasture larval levels are increasing.
For example, in Europe this involved one or two treatments usually in July and September and on many farms this prevented disease and produced acceptable growth rates.
However, it has the disadvantage that since the calves are under continuous larval challenge their performance may be impaired.
With this system, effective anthelmintic treatment at housing is also necessary  using a drug effective against hypobiotic larvae in order to prevent Type II disease.
CONTROL
Today, it is accepted that the prevention of ostertagiasis by limiting exposure to infection is a more efficient method of control.
This may be done by grazing calves on new grass leys, although it is doubtful if this should be recommended for replacement dairy heifers, as it would result in a pool of susceptible adult animals.
A better policy is to permit young cattle sufficient exposure to larval infection to stimulate immunity but not sufficient to cause a loss in production.
The provision of this "safe pasture" may be achieved in two ways:
First, by using anthelmintics to limit pasture contamination with eggs during periods when the climate is optimal for development of the free-living larval stages, ie. spring and summer in temperate climates, or autumn and winter in the sub-tropics.
Alternatively, by resting pasture or grazing it with another host, such as sheep, which are not susceptible to O. ostertagi, until most of the existing L3 on the pasture have died out.
Sometimes a combination of these methods is employed.
The timing of events in the systems described below is applicable to the calender of the northern hemisphere.
Since the crucial period of pasture contamination with O. ostertagi eggs is the period up to mid-July, one of the efficient modern anthelmintics may be given on two or three occasions between turn-out in the spring and July to minimise the numbers of eggs deposited on the pasture.
For calves going to pasture in early May two treatments, three and six weeks later, after first treatment, are used, whereas calves turned out in April require three treatments at intervals of three weeks.
Where parenteral ivermectin is used the interval after first treatment may be extended to five weeks due to its residual activity.
Prophylactic anthelmintic medication
Alternatively, a rumen bolus has been recently developed which releases the anthelmintic morantel over a 90 day period.
When this sustained-release bolus is administered to calves just prior to turn-out, it prevents the development of infections acquired from overwintered larvae and so prevents the deposition of eggs during the spring.
In extensive trials throughout Europe this method of control has given good results and may well be the forerunner of other similar devices.
Anthelmintic prophylaxis has the advantage that animals can be grazed throughout the year on the same pasture and is particularly advantageous for the small heavily stocked farm where grazing is limited.
This system, usually referred to as "dose and move" , is based on the knowledge that the annual increase of L3 occurs after mid-July.
Therefore if calves grazed from early spring are given an anthelmintic treatment in early July and moved immediately to a second pasture such as silage or hay aftermath, the level of infection which develops on the second pasture will be low.
Anthelmintic treatment and move to safe pasture in mid-July
The one reservation with this technique is that in certain years the numbers of L3 which overwinter are sufficient to cause heavy infections in the spring and clinical ostertagiasis can occur in calves in April and May.
However, one the "dose and move" system has operated for a few years this problem is unlikely to arise.
In some European countries such as the Netherlands, the same effect has been obtained by delaying the turn-out of calves until mid-summer.
This method has given good control of ostertagiasis, but many farmers are unwilling to continue housing and feeding calves when there is ample grazing available.
This system ideally utilises a three-year rotation of cattle, sheep and crops.
Since the effective life-span of most O. ostertagi L3 is under one year and cross-infection between cattle and sheep in temperate areas is largely limited to O. leptospicularis, Trichostrongylus axei, and occasionally C. oncophora good control of bovine ostertagiasis should, in theory, be achieved.
It is particularly applicable to farms with a high proportion of land suitable for cropping or grassland conservation and less so for marginal or upland areas.
However, in the latter, reasonable control has been reported using an annual rotation of beef cattle and sheep.
Alternate grazing of cattle and sheep
The drawback of alternate grazing systems is that they impose a rigorous and inflexible regimen on the use of land which the farmer may find impractical.
Furthermore, in warmer climates where Haemonchus spp. are prevalent, this system can prove dangerous since this very pathogenic genus establishes in both sheep and cattle.
This system involves a continuous rotation of paddocks in which the susceptible younger calves graze ahead of the immune adults and remain long enough in each paddock to remove only the leafy upper herbage before being moved on to the next paddock.
The incoming immune adults then graze the lower more fibrous echelons of the herbage which contain the majority of the L3.
Since the faeces produced by the immune adults contains few if any O. ostertagi eggs the pasture contamination is greatly reduced.
The success of this method depends on having sufficient fenced paddocks available to prevent over-grazing and the adults must have a good acquired immunity.
Rotational grazing of adult and young stock
While this system has many attractions, its main  disadvantage is that it is costly in terms of fencing and again requires careful supervision.
Its main attractions are the optimal utilisation of permanent grassland and the control of internal parasitism without resort to therapy.
In sheep O. circumcincta and O. trifurcata are responsible for outbreaks of clinical ostertagiasis, particularly in lambs.
In Europe a clinical syndrome analogous to Type I bovine ostertagiasis occurs from August to October; thereafter arrested development of many ingested larvae occurs and a Type II syndrome has been occasionally reported in late winter and early spring, especially in young adults.
OVINE OSTERTAGIASIS
In subtropical areas with winter rainfall ostertagiasis occurs primarily in late winter.
Both free-living and parasitic phases of the life cycle are similar to those of the bovine species.
LIFE CYCLE
In clinical infections, this is similar to the situation in cattle and the same lesions are present at necropsy.
In subclinical infections, it has been shown under both experimental an natural conditions that O. circumcincta causes a marked depression in appetite and this, together with losses of plasma protein into the gastro-intestinal tract, results in interference with the post-absorptive metabolism of protein and to a lesser extent the utilisation of metabolisable energy.
In lambs with moderate infections of Ostertagia spp., carcass evaluation shows poor protein, fat and calcium deposition.
PATHOGENESIS
The most frequent clinical sign is a marked loss of weight.
Diarrhoea is intermittent and although stained hindquarters are common, the fluid faeces which characterise bovine ostertagiasis are less frequently seen.
CLINICAL SIGNS
In Europe the herbage numbers of Ostertagia spp.
L3 increase markedly from mid-summer onwards and this is when disease appears.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
These larvae are derived mainly from eggs passed in the faeces of ewes during the periparturient period, from about two weeks prior to lambing until six weeks post-lambing (Fig. 13).
Eggs passed by lambs, from worm burdens which have accrued from the ingestion of overwintered larvae, also contribute to the pasture contamination.
It is important to realise that it is these eggs deposited in the first half of the grazing season from April to June, which give rise to the potentially dangerous populations of L3 from July to October.
If ingested prior to October, the majority of these larvae mature in three weeks; thereafter, many become arrested in development for several months and may precipitate Type II disease when they mature.
Immunity is acquired slowly and requires exposure over two grazing seasons before a significant resistance to infection develops.
Subsequently, adult ewes harbour only very low populations of Ostertagia spp. except during the annual periparturient (PPR).
The epidemiology in subtropical areas is basically similar to that in temperate zones, except that the seasonable timing of events is different.
In many of these areas lambing is geared to an increase in the growth of pasture which occurs with the onset of rain in late autumn or winter.
This coincides with conditions which are favourable to the development of the free-living stages of Ostertagia spp. and so infective larvae accumulate during the winter to cause clinical problems or production loss in the second half of the winter; arrested larval development occurs at the end of the winter or early spring.
The sources of pasture contamination are again the ewes during the PPR and the lambs following ingestion of larvae which have survived the summer.
The relative importance of these sources in any country varies according to the conditions during the adverse period of larval survival.
Where the summer is very dry and hot, the longevity of L3 is reduced except in areas with shade and these can act as reservoirs of infection until the following winter.
Although L3 can persist in  sheep faeces during adverse weather conditions the protection is probably less than that afforded by the more abundant bovine faecal pat.
This is based on clinical signs, seasonality of infection and faecal egg counts, and if possible, post-mortem examination, when the characteristic lesions can be seen in the abomasum.
Plasma pepsinogen levels are above the normal of 1.0 i.u. tyrosine and usually exceed 2.0 i.u. in sheep with heavy infections.
DIAGNOSIS
Ovine ostertagiasis responds well to treatment with any of the benzimidazoles or pro-benzimidazoles, levamisole, which in sheep is effective against arrested larvae, or ivermectin.
Treated lambs should preferably be moved to safe pasture and if this is not possible, treatment may have to be repeated at monthly intervals until the pasture larval levels decrease in early winter.
TREATMENT
See the "Treatment and control of parasitic gastroenteritis (PGE) in sheep" , p. 32.
CONTROL
Increasing numbers of goats are being kept worldwide and generally these run on permanent grazing.
It has been shown that goats are very susceptible to the Ostertagia spp. which predominate in sheep, O. circumcincta and O. trifurcata, and also to O. leptospicularis which establishes equally well in sheep and cattle.
There is also some evidence that O. ostertagi can establish in goats.
CAPRINE OSTERTAGIASIS
As in sheep there is a marked PPR in female goats; these eggs are the main source of pasture contamination and, eventually, the L3 which may then infect grazing kids.
The pathogenesis, diagnosis, treatment and control measures are as for the other ruminants, but care must be taken in choosing the anthelmintic since many of those recommended for sheep and cattle are not registered for use in goats.
Where goat milk or milk products are used for human consumption, milk-withholding periods for different drugs should be observed.
Thiabendazole has anti-fungal properties and should not be used when milk is processed for cheese.
Found in the abomasum of small ruminants in the tropics and subtropics including southern Europe, U.S.A., South America, India and Russia.
It is similar to Ostertagia spp. and can be differentiated by its greater length (up to 2.0 cm).
The eggs are much larger and resemble those of Nematodirus battus.
Marshallagia marshalli
The life cycle is similar to Ostertagia and there is penetration of the gastric glands with resultant nodule formation.
Each nodule contains three or four developing parasites and measures 2.0-4.0 mm in diameter.
The pathogenicity of M. marshalli is not known.
This blood-sucking abomasal nematode may be responsible for extensive losses in sheep and cattle, especially in tropical areas.
Haemonchus
Hosts: Cattle, sheep and goats Site: Abomasum Species: Haemonchus contortus H. placei H. similis Until recently the sheep species was called H. contortus and the cattle species H. placei.
However there is now increasing evidence that these are the single species H. contortus with only strain adaptations for cattle and sheep Distribution: Worldwide.
Most important in tropical and subtropical areas
Gross: The adults are easily identified because of their specific location in the abomasum and their large size (2.0-3.0 cm).
In fresh specimens, the white ovaries winding spirally around the blood-filled intestine produce a "barber's pole" appearance.
IDENTIFICATION
Microscopic: The male has an asymmetrical dorsal lobe and barbed spicules; the female usually has a vulval flap.
In both sexes there are cervical papillae and a tiny lancet inside the buccal capsule (Fig. 14).
This is direct and the preparasitic phase is typically trichostrongyloid.
The females are prolific egg layers.
The eggs hatch to L1 on the pasture and may develop to L3 in as short a period as five days but development may be delayed for weeks or months under cool conditions.
After ingestion, and exsheathment in the rumen, the larvae moult twice in close apposition to the gastric glands.
Just before the final moult they develop the piercing lancet which enables them to obtain blood from the mucosal vessels.
As adults they move freely on the    surface of the mucosa.
The prepatent period is 2-3 weeks in sheep and four weeks in cattle.
LIFE CYCLE
Essentially the pathogenesis of haemonchosis is that of an acute haemorrhagic anaemia due to the blood-sucking habits of the worms.
Each worm removes about 0.05 ml of blood per day by ingestion and seepage from the lesions so that a sheep with 5000 H. contortus may lose about 250 ml daily.
OVINE HAEMONCHOSIS
PATHOGENESIS
In acute haemonchosis anaemia becomes apparent about two weeks after infection and is characterised by a progressive and dramatic fall in the packed red cell volume.
During the subsequent weeks the haematocrit usually stabilises at a low level, but only at the expense of a two- to three-fold compensatory expansion of erythropoiesis.
However due to the continual loss of iron and protein into the gastrointestinal tract and increasing inappetence, the marrow eventually becomes exhausted and the haematorcrit falls still further before death occurs.
When ewes are affected, the consequent agalactia may result in the death of the suckling lambs.
At necropsy, between 2,000 and 20,000 worms may be present on the abomasal mucosa which shows numerous small haemorrhagic lesions (P1.I).
The abomasal contents are fluid and dark brown due to the presence of altered blood.
The carcass is pale ad oedematous and the red marrow has expanded from the epiphyses into the medullary cavity (P1.I).
Less commonly, in heavier infections of up to 30,000 worms, apparently healthy sheep may die suddenly from severe haemorrhagic gastritis.
This is termed hyperacute haemonchosis.
Perhaps as important as acute haemonchosis in tropical areas is the lesser known syndrome of chronic haemonchosis.
This develops during a prolonged dry season when reinfection is negligible, but the pasture becomes deficient in nutrients.
Over such a period the continual loss of blood from small persisting burdens of several hundred worms are sufficient to produce clinical signs associated primarily with loss of weight, weakness and inappetence rather than marked anaemia.
In hyperacute cases sheep die suddenly from haemorrhagic gastritis.
CLINICAL SIGNS
Acute haemonchosis is characterised by anaemia, variable degrees of oedema, of which the submandibular form and ascites are most easily recognised (P1.I), lethargy, dark coloured faeces and falling wood.
Diarrhoea is not generally a feature.
Chronic haemonchosis is associated with progressive weight loss and weakness, neither severe anaemia nor gross oedema being present.
The epidemiology of H. contortus is best considered separately depending on whether it occurs in tropical and subtropical or in temperate areas.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Because larval development of H. contortus occurs optimally at relatively high temperatures, haemonchosis is primarily a disease of sheep in warm climates.
However, since high humidity, at least in the micro-climate of the faeces and the herbage, is also essential for larval development and survival, the frequency and severity of outbreaks of disease is largely dependent on the rainfall in any particular area.
Tropical and subtropical areas
Given these climatic conditions, the sudden occurrence of acute clinical haemonchosis appears to depend on two further factors.
First, the high faecal worm egg output of between 2,000 and 20,000 epg, even in moderate infections, means that massive pasture populations of L3 may appear very quickly.
Second, in contrast to many other helminth infections, there is little evidence that sheep in endemic areas develop an effective acquired immunity to Haemonchus, so that there is continuous contamination of the pasture.
In certain areas of the tropics and subtropics such as Australia, Brazil, the Middle East and Nigeria, the survival of the parasite is also associated with the ability of H. contortus larvae to undergo hypobiosis.
Although the trigger for this phenomenon is unknown, hypobiosis occurs at the start of a prolonged dry season and permits the parasite to survive in the host as arrested L4 instead of maturing and producing eggs which would inevitably fail to develop on the arid pasture.
Resumption of development occurs just before the onset of seasonal rains.
In other tropical areas such as East Africa, no significant degree of hypobiosis has been observed and this may be due to more frequent rainfall in these areas making such an evolutionary development unnecessary.
The survival of H. contortus infection on tropical pastures is variable depending on the climate and degree of shade, but the infective larvae are relatively resistant to desiccation and some may survive for 1-3 months on pasture or in faeces.
In the British Isles, the Netherlands and presumably in other parts of northern Europe and in Canada, which are among the least favourable areas for the survival of H. contortus, the epidemiology is different from that of tropical zones.
From the information available, infections seem to develop in two ways.
Perhaps most common is the single annual cycle.
Infective larvae which have developed from eggs deposited by ewes in the spring are ingested by ewes and lambs in early summer.
The majority of these become arrested in the abomasum as EL4 and do not complete development until the following spring.
During the period of maturation of these hypobiotic larvae, clinical signs of acute haemonchosis may occur and in the ewes this often coincides with lambing.
Temperate areas
In some years however clinical haemonchosis is seen in grazing lambs in late summer.
The underlying epidemiology is unknown, but is perhaps associated with pasture contamination by that proportion of ingested larvae which did not undergo hypobiosis in early summer.
The history and clinical signs are often sufficient for the diagnosis of the acute syndrome especially if supported by faecal worm egg counts.
DIAGNOSIS
Necropsy, paying attention to both the abomasum and the marrow changes in the long bones, is also useful.
Changes are usually evident in both, although in sheep which have just undergone "self cure" (see below) or are in a terminal stage of the disease, the bulk of the worm burden may have been lost from the abomasum.
In hyperacute haemonchosis, only the abomasum may show changes since death may have occurred so rapidly that marrow changes are minimal.
The diagnosis of chronic haemonchosis is more difficult because of the concurrent presence of poor nutrition and confirmation may have to depend on the gradual disappearance of the syndrome after anthelmintic treatment.
When an acute outbreak has occurred the sheep should be treated with one of the benzimidazoles, levamisole or ivermectin and immediately moved to pasture not recently grazed by sheep.
When the original pasture is grazed again, prophylactic measures should be undertaken, as enough larvae may have survived to institute a fresh cycle of infection.
Chronic haemonchosis is dealt with in a similar fashion.
If possible the new pasture should have a good nutritional value; alternatively some supplementary feeding may be given.
TREATMENT
In the tropics and subtropics this varies depending on the duration and number of periods in the year when rainfall and temperature permit high pasture levels of H. contortus larvae to develop.
At such times it may be necessary to use an anthelmintic at intervals of 2-4 weeks depending on the degree of challenge.
Sheep should also be treated at least once at the start of the dry season and preferably also before the start of prolonged rain to remove persisting hypobiotic larvae whose development could pose a future threat.
For this purpose, one of the modern benzimidazoles or ivermectin as recommended.
CONTROL
In some wool producing areas where Haemonchus is endemic, disophenol, which has a residual prophylactic effect of up to 6 weeks, may be used.
Because of its long withdrawal period it is of limited use in meat producing animals.
Apart from anthelmintic prophylaxis some studies, especially in Kenya, have indicated the potential value of some indigenous breeds of sheep which seem to be naturally highly resistant to H. contortus infection.
Presumably such breeds could be of value in developing areas of the world where veterinary surveillance is poor.
In temperate areas, the measures outlined for the control of parasitic gastroenteritis in sheep are usually sufficient to pre-empt outbreaks of haemonchosis.
Goats are highly susceptible to Haemonchus contortus particularly when they are precluded from browsing and derive all their food intake from pasture.
CAPRINE HAEMONCHOSIS
The disease caused by H. placei or H. similis, the latter possessing a characteristic vulval flap (Fig. 15), is similar in most respects to haemonchosis in sheep and is important in the tropics and subtropics during seasonal rains when severe outbreaks may occur.
However the disease has also been recorded at the end of a long dry season due to the maturation of hypobiotic larvae.
BOVINE HAEMONCHOSIS
Unlike haemonchosis in sheep, grazing cattle over two years old are relatively immune although this may be broken down by drought conditions which lead to poor nutrition and heavy challenge from congregation of animals around watering points.
Treatment and control are similar to that described for H. contortus in sheep.
In areas of endemic haemonchosis it has often been observed that after the advent of a period of heavy rain the faecal worm egg counts of sheep infected with H. contortus drop sharply to near zero levels due to the expulsion of the major part of the adult worm burden.
This event is commonly termed the self-cure phenomenon, and has been reproduced experimentally by superimposing an infection of H. contortus larvae on an existing   adult infection in the abomasum.
The expulsion of the adult worm population is considered to be the consequence of an immediate-type hypersensitivity reaction to antigens derived from the developing larvae.
It is thought that a similar mechanism operates in the naturally occurring self-cure when large numbers of larvae mature to the infective stage on pasture after rain.
THE SELF-CURE PHENOMENON
Although this phenomenon has an immunological mechanism it is not necessarily associated with protection against reinfection since the larval challenge often develops to maturity.
Another explanation of the self-cure phenomenon as it occurs in the field is based on the observation that it may happen in lambs and adults contemporaneously and on pasture with insignificant numbers of infective larvae.
This suggests that the phenomenon may also be caused, in some non-specific way, by the ingestion of fresh growing grass.
Whatever the cause, self-cure is probably of mutual benefit to both host and parasite.
The former gains a temporary respite from persistent blood loss while the ageing parasite population is eventually replaced by a vigorous young generation.
This blood-sucking abomasal parasite, which to the naked eye is indistinguishable from H. contortus, is common in buffalo and cattle in certain areas of Asia.
Microscopically it is most readily distinguished from the latter by having long narrow spicules.
The prepatent period is also longer, being 60-80 days.
Mecistocirrus digitatus
The pathogenesis is similar to that of H. contortus in sheep and it is of similar economic importance.
Trichostrongylus is rarely a primary pathogen in temperate areas, but is usually a component of parasitic gastroenteritis in ruminants.
By contrast, in the subtropics it is one of the most important causes of parasitic gastroenteritis.
One species, T. axei, is also responsible for gastritis in horses while T. tenuis has been implicated in outbreaks of severe enteritis in game birds.
Trichostrongylus
Hosts: Ruminants, horses, pigs, rabbits and fowl Site: Small intestine except T. axei and T. tenuis Species: Trichostrongylus axei abomasum of ruminants and stomach of horses and pigs T. colubriformis ruminants T. vitrinus}sheep and goats T. capricola}T. retortaeformis rabbits T. tenuis small intestine and caeca of game birds There are a number of other species of ruminants with more local distribution and importance such as T. rugatus, T. falculatus, T. probolurus and T. longispicularis Distribution: Worldwide Gross: The adults are small and hair-like, usually less than 7.0 mm long and difficult to see with the naked eye.
Microscopic: The worms have no obvious buccal capsule.
A most useful generic character is the distinct excretory notch in the oesophageal region (Fig. 16).
The spicules are thick and unbranched and in the case of T. axei are also unequal in length; in the female the tail is bluntly tapered (Fig. 16) and there is no vulval flap.
In T. axei the eggs are arranged pole to pole longitudinally.
There is no vulval flap.
This is direct and the preparasitic phase is typically trichostrongyloid, except that exsheathment of the L3 of intestinal species occurs in the abomasum.
Under optimal conditions, development from the egg to infective stage occurs in 1-2 weeks.
IDENTIFICATION
LIFE CYCLE
The parasitic phase is non-migratory and the prepatent period in ruminants is 2-3 weeks.
In the horse, T. axei has a prepatent period of 25 days while in game birds infected with T. tenuis it is only 10 days.
Following ingestion, the L3 of the intestinal species penetrate between the epithelial glands of the mucosa with formation of tunnels beneath the epithelium, but above the lamina propria (P1.II).
When the sub-epithelial tunnels containing the developing worms rupture to liberate the young worms about 10-12 days after infection, there is considerable haemorrhage and oedema and plasma proteins are lost into the lumen of the gut.
Grossly, there is an enteritis, particularly in the duodenum; the villi become distorted and flattened reducing the area available for absorption and nutrients and fluids.
However many such areas appear normal.
Where parasites are congregated within a small area, erosion of the mucosal surface is apparent (P1.II).
In heavy infections diarrhoea occurs, and this, together with the loss of plasma protein into the lumen of the intestine, leads to weight loss.
A reduced deposition of protein, calcium and phosphorus has also been recorded.
PATHOGENESIS
In the case of T. axei the changes induced in the gastric mucosa are similar to those of Ostertagia with an alteration in pH and an increased permeability of the mucosa.
One difference is that the worms penetrate between the glands rather than into the glands as in Ostertagia.
Coalescence of the subsequent nodular lesions often results in plaques or ring-like lesions (P1.II).
The principal clinical signs in heavy infections are rapid weight loss and diarrhoea.
At lower levels of infection, inappetence and poor growth rates, sometimes accompanied by soft faeces, are the common signs.
It is often difficult to distinguish the effects of low infections from malnutrition.
CLINICAL SIGNS
The embryonated eggs and infective L3 of Trichostrongylus have a high capacity for survival under adverse conditions whether these are extreme cold or desiccation.
In temperate areas such as in Britain the L3 survive the winter well, sometimes in sufficient numbers to precipitate clinical problems in the spring.
More commonly, larval numbers increase on pasture in summer and autumn giving rise to clinical problems during these seasons.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
In the southern hemisphere larvae accumulate in late winter and outbreaks are usually seen in spring.
In Australia, following a period of drought the advent of rain has been shown to rehydrate large numbers of apparently desiccated L3 (anhydrobiosis) which then become active and rapidly available to grazing animals.
Under similar circumstances in southern Brazil in 1958, 20% of a total sheep population of 12 million died from intestinal trichostrongylosis.
Until recently hypobiosis was not considered to be a feature of this genus.
However, there is now ample evidence in temperate areas that hypobiosis plays an important part in the epidemiology, the seasonal occurrence being similar to that of Ostertagia spp.
In contrast to other trichostrongyles hypobiosis occurs at the L3 stage although their role in outbreaks of disease has not been established.
Immunity to Trichostrongylus as in Ostertagia is slowly acquired and in sheep and probably goats it wanes during the periparturient period.
This is based on clinical signs, seasonal occurrence of  disease and, if possible, lesions at post-mortem examination.
Faecal egg counts are a useful aid to diagnosis, although faecal cultures are necessary for generic identification of larvae.
DIAGNOSIS
Depending on the host this is as described for bovine ostertagiasis, parasitic gastroenteritis in sheep and strongylosis in the horse.
TREATMENT AND CONTROL
In game birds, heavy infections produce an acute and fatal haemorrhagic typhlitis.
Lighter infections result in a chronic syndrome characterised by anaemia and emaciation.
On game farms, therapy with levamisole in the drinking water has proved useful, but it is more important that pens should be moved regularly to prevent the accumulation of larvae.
If possible the runs should not be placed in the same areas in successive years.
T. TENUIS INFECTION
In temperate areas, members of the genus Cooperia usually play a secondary role in the pathogenesis of parasitic gastroenteritis of ruminants although they may be the most numerous trichostrongyle present.
However, in some tropical and subtropical areas, some species are responsible for severe enteritis in calves.
Cooperia
Hosts: Ruminants Site: Small intestine Species: Cooperia oncophora}C. punctata}cattle C. pectinata}C surnabada (syn.
C. mcmasteri) cattle and sheep C. curticei sheep and goats Distribution: Worldwide Gross: In size Cooperia are similar to Ostertagia.
The most notable features are the "watch spring-like" posture of C. curticei and the very large bursa in all species.
Microscopic: The main generic features (Fig. 17) are the small cephalic vesicle and the transverse cuticular striations in the oesophageal region.
The spicules usually have a distinct wing-like expansion in the middle region and often bear ridges; there is no gubernaculum.
The females usually have a small vulval flap and a long tapering tail.
IDENTIFICATION
This is direct and typical of the superfamily.
The bionomic requirements of the free-living stages vary according to species.
Thus, for example, those of C. oncophora and C. curtiei which are primarily found in temperate ares are similar to those of Ostertagia; C. punctata and C. pectinata which are more common in warmer areas have similar requirements to Haemonchus.
In the parasitic phase the two common temperate zone species develop on the surface of the intestinal mucosa whereas with the others some penetration of the epithelium takes place.
The prepatent period varies from 15-18 days.
LIFE CYCLE
C. oncophora and C. curticei are generally considered to be mild pathogens in calves and lambs respectively although in some studies they have been associated with inappetence and poor weight gains.
A strong immunity to reinfection develops after one year.
PATHOGENESIS
C. punctata, C. pectinata and probably C. surnabada are more pathogenic since they penetrate the epithelial surface of the small intestine trichostrongylosis which leads to villous atrophy and a reduction in the area available for absorption.
In heavy infections diarrhoea has been reported
These are loss of appetite, poor weight gains and with C. punctata and C. pectinata, diarrhoea, severe weight loss and submandibular oedema.
CLINICAL SIGNS
In temperate areas this is identical to that of Ostertagia.
Hypobiosis at the EL4 is a regular feature during late autumn and winter in the northern hemisphere, and spring and summer in the southern hemisphere.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
In the subtropics the epidemiology is similar to that of Haemonchus though Cooperia does not have the same high biotic potential and the L3 survive rather better under arid conditions.
Hypobiosis is a feature during prolonged dry seasons.
A closely related parasite Paracooperia nodulosa is responsible for a severe nodular enteritis in buffaloes in Asia, Africa and South America.
The principles are similar to those applied in bovine ostertagiasis and PGE in sheep.
DIAGNOSIS, TREATMENT AND CONTROL
This parasite is responsible for a chronic gastritis in pigs, particularly gilts and sows.
Hyostrongylus
Host: Pig Site: Stomach Species: Hyostrongylus rubidus Distribution: Worldwide Gross: Slender reddish worms 5-8 mm in length.
IDENTIFICATION
Microscopic: A small cephalic vesicle is present and the spicules resemble Ostertagia, but have only two distal branches.
Typical of the superfamily.
The free-living and parasitic stages are similar to those of Ostertagia.
The prepatent period is three weeks.
LIFE CYCLE
Similar to ostertagiasis, with penetration of the gastric glands by the L3 and replacement of the parietal cells by rapidly dividing undifferentiated cells which proliferate to give rise to nodules on the mucosal surface.
The pH becomes elevated in heavy infections.
Sometimes there is ulceration and haemorrhage of the nodular lesions, but more commonly light infections occur and these are associated with decreased appetite and poor feed conversion rates.
PATHOGENESIS
These are inappetence, anaemia and loss of condition.
CLINICAL SIGNS
Because of the preparasitic larval requirements infection is confined to pigs with access to pasture or those kept in straw yards.
It is therefore more common in breeding stock, particularly gilts.
The epidemiology, at least in temperate zones, is similar to that of Ostertagia in ruminants with seasonal hypobiosis a feature.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
This is based on a history of access to permanent pig pastures and the clinical signs.
Confirmatory diagnosis  is by examination of faeces for eggs; for differentiation from other nematodes, larval identification following faecal culture may be necessary.
DIAGNOSIS
When Hyostrongylus infection is diagnosed, particularly in breeding stock, it is important to use a drug such as a modern benzimidazole or ivermectin which will remove hypobiotic larvae.
TREATMENT
The same principles apply as for the control of parasitic gastroenteritis in ruminants.
For example, in temperate areas there should be an annual rotation of pasture with other livestock or crops.
The timing of the move to other pastures may be dependent on other farming activities, but if it can be delayed until October or later and accompanied by an anthelmintic treatment then eggs from any worms which survive the treatment are unlikely to develop due to the unfavourable winter temperatures.
A second treatment, again using a modern benzimidazole or ivermectin, is recommended 3-4 weeks later to remove any residual infection.
CONTROL
Nematodirus is of special importance as a parasite of lambs in temperate regions.
Nematodirus
Hosts: Ruminants Site: Small intestine Species: Nematodirus battus sheep, occasionally calves N. filicollis sheep and goats N. spathiger sheep and goats, occasionally cattle N. helvetianus cattle N. abnormalis and N. oiratianus have also been recorded from sheep and goats in southern Europe, Asia, America and Australia Distribution: Worldwide, more commonly in temperate zones.
N. battus is most important in the British Isles, but also occurs in Norway and the Netherlands Gross: The adults are slender worms about 2.0 cm long.
The intertwining of the thin, twisted worms produces an appearance similar to that of cotton wool.
Microscopic: A small but distinct cephalic vesicle is      present (Fig. 18).
The spicules are long and slender with fused tips.
In all except N. battus the male has two sets of parallel rays in each of the main bursal lobes; the female has a truncate tail with a small spine, and the egg is large, ovoid and colourless (Fig. 18) and twice the size of the typical trichostrongyle egg.
IDENTIFICATION
N. battus is characterised by having only one set of parallel rays in each bursal lobe while the female worm has a long pointed tail and the large egg is brownish with parallel sides.
(Fig. 18).
The preparasitic phase is almost unique in the trichostrongyloids in that development to the L3 takes place within the egg shell.
This development is generally very slow and in temperate climates takes at least two months.
Once the L3 is present there is often a lag period before hatching occurs, the duration varying according to the species.
LIFE CYCLE
In the case of N. battus, the most important species in Britain.
hatching of most eggs requires a prolonged period of chill followed by a mean day/night temperature of more than 100C, conditions which occur in late spring.
Hence most of the eggs from one season's grazing must remain unhatched on the ground during the winter and only one generation is possible each year for the bulk of this species.
However, some N. battus eggs deposited in the spring are capable of hatching in the autumn of the same year resulting in significant numbers of L3 on the pasture at this time.
Nematodirus battus
The parasitic phase is non-migratory and the prepatent period is 15 days.
The other species do not have the same critical hatching requirements as N. battus and so the L3 appear on the pasture within 2-3 months of the eggs being excreted in the faeces.
More than one annual generation is therefore possible.
Other Nematodirus species
Nematodiriasis, due to N. battus infection, is an example of a parasitic disease where the principal pathogenic effect is attributable to the larval stages.
Following ingestion of large numbers of L3 there is disruption of the intestinal mucosa, particularly in the ileum, although the majority of developing stages are found on the mucosal surface.
Development through L4 to L5 is complete by 10-12 days from infection and this coincides with severe damage to the villi and erosion of the mucosa leading to villous atrophy (Fig. 19).
The ability of the intestine to exchange fluids and nutrients is grossly reduced, and with the onset of diarrhoea the lamb rapidly becomes dehydrated.
At necropsy the carcass has a dehydrated appearance and there is an enteritis in the ileum.
PATHOGENESIS
While the pathogenesis of infections with the other Nematodirus spp. is probably similar there is some controversy on the extent of their pathogenic effect.
For example, though No. helvetianus has been incriminated in outbreaks of bovine parasitic gastroenteritis, experimental attempts to reproduce the disease have been unsuccessful.
In severe infections, diarrhoea is the most prominent clinical sign.
As dehydration proceeds the affected animals become thirsty and in infected flocks the ewes continue to graze, apparently unaffected by the larval challenge, while their inappetent and diarrhoeic lambs congregate round drinking places.
CLINICAL SIGNS
This is best considered separately for N. battus and other Nematodirus spp.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The three most important features of the epidemiology of N. battus infections are:
(i) The capacity of the free-living stages, particularly the egg containing the L3, to survive on pasture, some for up to two years.
(ii) The critical hatching requirements of most eggs which ensure the appearance of a large number of L3 on the pasture simultaneously, usually in May and June.
Though the flush of larvae on the pasture may be an annual event, the appearance of clinical nematodiriasis is not; thus if the flush of L3 is early the suckling lambs may not be consuming sufficient grass to acquire large numbers of L3, and if it is late the lambs may be old enough to resist the larval challenge.
There is some evidence that there is an age resistance to N. battus which commences when lambs are about three months old.
However, lambs of 6-7 months can have considerable  N. battus burdens and it is therefore doubtful if this age immunity is absolute.
(iii) The negligible role played by the ewe in the annual cycling of N. battus which can thus be considered as a lamb-to-lamb disease.
Adult sheep often have a few N. battus eggs in their faeces, but these are insufficient to precipitate a larval flush although enough to ensure the persistence of infection on the pastures.
The epidemiology is illustrated in Fig. 20.
Since the other Nematodirus species do not have such critical hatching requirements, a sudden flush of L3 does not occur and although N. filicollis, N. spathiger and N. helvetianus have all been associated with outbreaks of nematodiriasis in sheep and cattle, it is more common to find them in conjunction with the other trichostrongyles.
Though L4 of Nematodirus spp. apparently arrested in their development have been recorded at necropsy, there is no obvious seasonal pattern to their occurrence and it seems more likely that they have accumulated as a consequence of host resistance rather than hypobiosis.
Because the clinical signs appear during the prepatent period faecal egg counts are of little value in diagnosis which is best made on grazing history, clinical signs, and is possible, a post-mortem examination.
DIAGNOSIS
Several drugs are highly effective against Nematodirus infections especially levamisole, ivermectin or one of the modern benzimidazoles, fenbendazole, oxfendazole or albendazole.
The response to treatment is usually rapid and if diarrhoea persists coccidiosis should be considered as a complicating factor.
TREATMENT
With the exception of N. battus, which requires special consideration, disease due to monospecific Nematodirus infections is rarely seen.
Instead, they are usually part of the worm burden of trichostrongyloid species which are responsible for the syndrome of parasitic gastroenteritis in sheep and as such may be controlled by the measures outlined below.
CONTROL
Since N. battus infection of lambs has a unique epidemiology, its control is best considered separately.
Due to the annual hatching of N. battus eggs in spring, the disease can be controlled by avoiding the grazing of successive lamb crops on the same pasture.
Where such alternative grazing is not available each year, control can be achieved by anthelmintic prophylaxis, the timing of treatments being based on the knowledge that the peak time for the appearance of N. battus L3 is May to  early June.
Ideally, dosing should be at three week intervals over May and June and it is unwise to await the appearance of clinical signs of diarrhoea before administering the drugs.
The Ministry of Agriculture in Britain has developed a forecasting system based primarily on soil temperature in the early spring which can predict the likely severity of nematodiriasis.
In years when the forecast predicts severe disease, three treatments are recommended during May and June; in other years two treatments in May should suffice.
Several drugs are recommended, including levamisole, or any of the modern benzimidazoles or ivermectin.
The recommendations outlined below are applicable to temperate areas of the northern hemisphere, but the principles can be adapted to local conditions elsewhere.
THE TREATMENT AND CONTROL OF PARASITIC GASTROENTERITIS (PGE) IN SHEEP
Because of the short period between birth and marketing, the treatment of PGE in lambs is an inferior policy compared with the preventive measures discussed below.
However, when necessary, treatment with any of the benzimidazoles, levamisole or ivermectin will remove adult worms and developing stages.
Following treatment, lambs should be moved to pasture not grazed by sheep that year, otherwise they will immediately become reinfected.
TREATMENT
The occasional outbreaks of Type II ostertagiasis in young adult sheep in the spring may be treated with the same anthelmintics.
Unlike O. ostertagi in calves the arrested stages of the common sheep nematodes are susceptible to thiabendazole and levamisole.
Although the control of PGE in sheep is based on the same principles as that described for O. ostertagi in cattle, its practice is somewhat different for the following reasons:
CONTROL
(i) The PPR (periparturient rise in faecal egg counts) is very marked in ewes and is the most important cause of pasture contamination with nematode eggs in the spring.
(ii) PG in sheep is generally associated with a variety of nematode genera with differing epidemiological characteristics.
(iii) Most sheep graze throughout their lives so that pasture contamination with nematode eggs and the intake of infective larvae is almost continuous and modified only by climatic restrictions.
In selecting the best method of prophylaxis much depends on whether the farm consists primarily of permanent pasture or has pastures which are rotated with crops so that new leys or hay and silage aftermaths are available each year.
On such farms control may be obtained either by anthelmintic prophylaxis or by alternate grazing on an annual basis with cattle and sheep.
The former is the only feasible method where the farm stock is primarily sheep while the latter can be used where cattle and sheep are both present in reasonable proportions.
FARMS CONSISTING OF MAINLY PERMANENT PASTURE
The most important source of infection for the lamb crop is undoubtedly the increase in nematode eggs in ewe faeces during the PPR and prophylaxis will only be efficient if this is kept to a minimum.
Effective anthelmintic therapy of ewes during the fourth month of pregnancy should eliminate most of the worm burdens present at this time including arrested larval stages and in the case of ewes on extensive grazing, where nutritional status is frequently low, this treatment often results in improved general body condition.
However, during late pregnancy and early lactation, such treated ewes will soon become reinfected from the ingestion of overwintered larvae on the pasture.
It is therefore recommended that for optimal prophylaxis, a further treatment be given at 4-6 weeks post-lambing.
Prophylaxis by anthelmintics Adult sheep
Young adults and rams should also be treated at these times.
An alternative to the gathering of ewes for these treatments is to provide anthelmintic incorporated in a feed or energy block during the periparturient period.
The results obtained with the latter system appear to be best when the ewes are contained in small paddocks or fields as the uptake of drug is less consistent under extensive grazing systems.
Rumen boluses designed for the slow release of anthelmintics over a prolonged period are under development for sheep and seem an ideal way of minimising worm egg output.
Apart from specific treatment for N. battus infection, lambs should be treated at weaning, and if possible moved to safe pasture ie. those not grazed by sheep since the previous year.
Where such grazing is not available, prophylactic treatments should be repeated until autumn or marketing.
The number of treatments will vary depending on the stocking rate, one treatment in September sufficing for lambs under extensive grazing and two between weaning and marketing for those under more intensive conditions.
Lambs
For prophylactic treatments levamisole, the benzimidazoles, pro-benzimidazoles and ivermectin may be used.
For low level administration in feed blocks thiophanate or fenbendazole have proved useful.
The prophylactic programmes outlined above are relatively costly in terms of drugs and labour but are currently the only methods available on farms where the enterprise is heavily dependent on one animal species.
On farms where sheep and cattle are both present in significant numbers, good control is theoretically possible by alternating the grazing of fields on an annual basis with each host, due to the relative insusceptibility of cattle to sheep nematodes and vice versa.
Prophylaxis by alternate grazing of sheep and cattle
In practice, control is best achieved by exchanging, in the spring, pastures grazed by sheep and beef cattle over the previous year, preferably combined with anthelmintic treatment at the time of exchange.
In these mostly intensive farms, rotation of crops and grass is often a feature, and therefore new leys and hay and silage aftermaths are available as safe pastures each year and can be reserved for susceptible stock.
In such a situation, control should be based on a combination of grazing management and anthelmintic prophylaxis.
FARMS WITH ALTERNATIVE GRAZING
Good control is possible with only one annual anthelmintic treatment of ewes when they leave the lambing field.
This will terminate the PPR in faecal egg counts prior to moving the ewes and lambs to a safe pasture.
At weaning, the lambs should be moved to another safe pasture and an anthelmintic treatment of the lambs at this time is good policy.
Prophylaxis by grazing management and anthelmintics
A second system, not costly in labour or drugs, has been devised for farms where arable crops, sheep and cattle are major components and involves a three year rotation of cattle, sheep and crops.
With this system the aftermath grazing available after cropping may be used for weaned calves and weaned lambs.
It has been suggested that anthelmintic prophylaxis can be disposed of completely under this system but clinical PGE has sometimes occurred when treatment has been omitted.
It is worth remembering that even the highly efficient drugs currently available will not remove all the worms present; that some cattle nematodes can infect sheep and vice versa; and that a few infective larvae on the pasture can survive for beyond two years.
It is therefore advisable to give at least one annual spring treatment to all stock prior to moving to new pastures.
Many schemes were devised to control the acquisition of L3 based solely on grazing management.
One recommendation was to rotate sheep through paddocks, but since it involved the return of the sheep to their previously grazed paddocks in the same season, this was of little value.
Two other methods, which did not involve a return to the original pasture, were strip grazing, in which sheep were confined to a narrow strip across the field by fences which were moved every few days, and creep grazing, in which a single fence confined the ewes, but since it possessed a "creep" or hole, allowed the lambs to graze forward.
The systems may have been highly effective in preventing PG, but were costly in fencing and labour and are little used nowadays.
Prophylaxis by grazing management
This genus living in the bronchi of cattle, sheep, horses and donkeys is the major cause of parasitic bronchitis in these hosts.
Dictyocaulus
Hosts: Ruminants, horses and donkeys Site: Trachea and bronchi, particularly of the diaphragmatic lobes Species: Dictyocaulus viviparus cattle and deer D. filaria sheep and goats D. arnfieldi donkeys and horses Distribution: Worldwide, but especially important in temperate climates.
The adults are slender thread-like worms up to 8.0 cm in length.
Their location in the trachea and bronchi and their size are diagnostic.
IDENTIFICATION
Since D. viviparus is the most pathogenic of the three species it is presented in detail.
For the other two species, only those features which are different to D. viviparus are discussed.
Dictyocaulus viviparus is the cause of parasitic bronchitis in cattle, also known as husk, hoose, verminous pneumonia or dictyocauliasis.
The disease is characterised by bronchitis and pneumonia and typically affects  young cattle during their first grazing season on permanent or semi-permanent pastures.
The disease is prevalent in temperate areas with high rainfall.
Dictyocaulus viviparus
The female worms are ovo-viviparous, producing eggs containing fully developed larvae which hatch almost immediately.
The L1 migrate up the trachea, are swallowed and pass out in the faeces.
The larvae are unique in that hey are present in fresh faeces, are characteristically sluggish, and their intestinal cells are filled with dark brown food granules (Fig. 21).
In consequence the preparasitic stages do not require to feed.
Under optimal conditions the L3 stage is reached within five days, but usually takes longer in the field.
The L3 leave the faecal pat to reach the herbage either by their own motility or through the agency of the fungus Pilobolus.
LIFE CYCLE
After ingestion, the L3 penetrate the intestinal mucosa and pass to the mesenteric lymph nodes where they moult.
Thence the L4 travel via the lymph and blood to the lungs, and break out of the capillaries into the alveoli about one week after infection.
The final moult occurs in the bronchioles a few days later and the young adults then move up the bronchi and mature.
The prepatent period is around 3-4 weeks.
This may be divided into four phases:
PATHOGENESIS
During this period the larvae are making their way to the lungs and pulmonary lesions are not yet apparent.
(i) Penetration phase.
Days 1-7.
This phase starts with the appearance of larvae within the alveoli where they cause alveolitis.
This is followed by bronchiolitis and finally bronchitis as the larvae become immature adults and move up the bronchi.
Cellular infiltrates of neutrophils, eosinophils and macrophages temporarily plug the lumina of the bronchioles and cause collapse of other groups of alveoli.
This lesion (Fig. 22) is largely responsible for the first clinical signs.
Towards the end of this phase bronchitis develops, characterised by mucus containing immature lungworms in the airways, which may only be seen with the aid of a low-power microscope, and by cellular infiltration of the epithelium.
(ii) Prepatent phase.
Days 8-25
Heavily infected animals, whose lungs contain several thousand developing worms, may die from day 15 onwards due to respiratory failure following the development ment of severe interstitial emphysema an pulmonary oedema.
This is associated with two main lesions.
(iii) Patent phase.
Days 26-60.
First, a parasitic bronchitis characterised by the presence of hundreds of even thousands of adult worms in the frothy white mucus in the lumina of the bronchi (P1.II).
The bronchial epithelium is hyperplastic and heavily infiltrated by inflammatory cells, particularly eosinophils.
Secondly, the presence of dark-red collapsed areas around infected bronchi.
This is a parasitic pneumonia (P1.II) caused by the aspiration of eggs and L1 into the alveoli.
These"foreign bodies' quickly provoke dense infiltrates of polymorphs, macrophages and multi-nucleated giant cells around them (Fig. 23).
Depending on the extent of the infection there may be varying degrees of interstitial emphysema and oedema.
In untreated calves, this is normally the recovery phase after the adult lungworms have been expelled.
Although the clinical signs are abating the bronchi are still inflamed and residual lesions such as bronchial and peribronchial fibrosis may persist for several weeks or months.
Eventually the broncho-pulmonary system becomes completely normal and coughing ceases.
However, in about 25% of animals which have been heavily infected, there is a flare-up of clinical signs during this phase which is frequently fatal.
This is caused by one of two entities.
(iv) Postpatent phase.
Days 61-90
Most commonly, there is a proliferative lesion so that much of the lung is pink and rubbery and does not collapse when the chest is opened.
This, often described as "epithelialisation" , is due to the proliferation of Type 2 pneumocytes on the alveoli giving the appearance of a gland-like organ (Fig. 24).
Gaseous exchange at the alveolar surface is gravely hindered and the lesion is often accompanied by interstitial emphysema and pulmonary oedema.
The etiology is unknown, but is thought to be due to the dissolution and aspiration of dead or dying worm material into the alveoli.
The clinical syndrome is often termed postpatent parasitic bronchitis.
The other cause, usually in animals convalescing indoors, is a superimposed bacterial infection of the imperfectly healed lungs leading to acute interstitial pneumonia.
Within any affected group, differing degrees of clinical severity are usually apparent; typically a few animals are mildly affected, most are moderately affected and a few are severely affected.
CLINICAL SIGNS
Mildly affected animals cough intermittently, particularly when exercised.
Moderately affected animals have frequent bouts of coughing at rest, tachypnoea (>60 respirations per minute) and hyperpnoea.
Frequently, squeaks and crackles over the posterior lung lobes are heard on auscultation.
Severely affected animals show severe tachypnoea (>80 respirations per minute) and dyspnoea and frequently adopt the classic "air-hunger" position of mouth-breathing with the head and neck outstretched.
There is usually a deep harsh cough, squeaks and crackles over the posterior lung lobes, salivation, anorexia and sometimes mild pyrexia.
Often the smallest calves are most severely affected.
Calves may show clinical signs during the prepatent period and occasionally a massive infection can cause severe dyspnoea of sudden onset often followed by death in 24-48 hours.
Most animals gradually recover although complete return to normality may take weeks or months.
However, a proportion of convalescing calves suddenly develop severe respiratory signs, unassociated with pyrexia, which usually terminates fatally 1-4 days later.
This syndrome of postpatent parasitic bronchitis has been described above.
Generally only calves during their first grazing season are clinically affected, since on farms where the disease is endemic older animals have a strong acquired immunity.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
In endemic areas in the northern hemisphere infection may persist from year to year in two ways:
L3 may survive on pasture from autumn until late spring in sufficient numbers to initiate infection or occasionally to cause disease.
A similar effect may result when infected slurry or manure is spread on pastures in the spring.
(i) Overwintered larvae
Small numbers of adult worms can survive in the bronchi of infected animals, particularly yearlings, until the next grazing season.
Until recently it was assumed that they all persisted as adults, but is has now been shown that the chilling of infective larvae before administration to calves will produce arrested L5; hypobiosis at this stage has also been observed in naturally infected calves in Switzerland, Austria and Canada, although the extent to which this occurs naturally after ingestion of larvae in late autumn and its significance in the transmission of the infection has not yet been fully established.
(ii) Carrier animals
The dispersal of larvae from the faecal pat during the grazing season appears to be effected by a fungus rather than by simple migration.
This fungus, Pilobolus, is commonly found growing on the surface of bovine faecal pats about one week after these have been deposited.
The larvae of D. viviparus, crawling on the surface of the pats, migrate in large numbers up the stalks of the fungi on to, and even inside, the sporangium or seed-capsule (P1.II).
When the sporangium is discharged it is projected a distance of up to three metres in still air to land on the surrounding herbage.
It is possible that this very effective method of dissemination of larvae may be further enhanced given a moderate wind.
Perhaps also the rare outbreaks of parasitic bronchitis in houses calves are associated with the dispersal of L3 by Pilobolus growing in the dung of adjacent infected cattle.
Parasitic bronchitis is predominantly a problem in areas such as northern Europe which have a mild climate, a high rainfall and abundant permanent grass.
Outbreaks of disease occur from June until November, but are most common from July until September.
It is not clear why the disease is usually not apparent until calves, turned out to graze in the spring, have been at grass for 2-5 months.
One explanation is that the initial infection, acquired from the ingestion of overwintered larvae in May, involves so few worms that neither clinical signs nor immunity is produced; however, sufficient numbers of larvae are seeded on to the pasture so that by July the numbers of L3 on pasture are sufficient to produce clinical disease.
Young calves, added to such a grazing herd in July, may develop clinical disease within 2-3 weeks.
An alternative explanation is that L3 overwinter in the soil rather than on the grass and only migrate on to pasture at some point between June and October as a result of some factor, as yet unknown, perhaps involving ing earthworms or coprophagic beetles.
At present there is only circumstantial evidence to support this theory.
Although dairy or dairy-cross calves are most commonly affected it should be recognised that autumn-born born single-suckled beef calves are just as susceptible when turned out to grass in early summer.
Spring-born suckled beef calves grazed with their dams until housed or sold do not usually develop clinical signs, although coughing due to a mild infection is common.
However, the typical disease may occur in weaned calves grazed until late autumn.
This epidemiological picture, typical of temperate countries, may be modified in some areas by factors such as climate or husbandry.
In tropical countries, where disease due to D. viviparus may occur intermittently, the epidemiology is presumably quite different and probably depends more on pasture contamination by carrier animals such as may occur during flooding when cattle congregate on damp, high areas, rather than on the prolonged survival of infected larvae.
Usually the clinical signs, the time of the year and a history of grazing on permanent or semi-permanent pastures are sufficient to enable a diagnosis to be made.
DIAGNOSIS
Larvae are found (50-1,000/g) only in the faeces of patent cases so that faecal samples should be obtained from a umber of affected individuals.
To avoid contamination with soil nematodes, samples should be obtained from the rectum.
The anthelmintics available for the treatment of bovine parasitic bronchitis are the modern benzimidazoles, levamisole or ivermectin.
TREATMENT
These drugs have been shown to be effective against all stages of lungworms with a consequent amelioration of clinical signs.
In the past diethylcarbamazine was widely used, but it has been largely superseded by the drugs mentioned above.
For maximum efficiency all of these drugs should be used as early as possible in the treatment of the disease since clinical signs associated with pulmonary pathology are not rapidly resolved by mere removal of adult lungworms.
Where the disease is severe and well established in a number of calves, the stock owner should be warned that anthelmintic treatment, while being the only course available, may exacerbate the clinical signs in one or more animals with a possible fatal termination.
The reasons underlying this are still under study, but are probably similar to those which produce postpatent parasitic bronchitis.
Whatever treatment is selected, it is advisable to divide affected calves into two groups as the prognosis will vary according to the severity of the disease.
Those calves which are only coughing and/or tachypnoeic are usually in the prepatent stage of the disease or have a small adult worm burden and treatment of these animals should result in rapid recovery.
Calves in this category may not have developed a strong immunity and after treatment should not be returned to the field which was the source of infection; if this is impossible, parenteral ivermectin is the drug of choice since its residual effect prevents reinfection for a further three weeks.
Any calces which are dyspnoeic, anorexic and possibly pyrexic should be kept indoors for treatment and further observation.
The prognosis must be guarded and the owner informed that a proportion of these animals may not recover while others may remain permanently stunted.
As well as being treated with an anthelmintic, severely affected animals may require antibiotics if pyrexic and may be i need of hydration if they are not drinking.
In the case of valuable animals, treatment with oxygen may be merited.
The only reliable method of preventing parasitic bronchitis is to immunise all young calves with lungworm vaccine.
This live vaccine, consisting of larvae attenuated by irradiation, is currently only available in Europe and is given orally to calves aged eight weeks or more.
Two doses of vaccine are given at an interval of four weeks and, in order to allow a high level of immunity to develop, vaccinated calves should be protected from challenge until two weeks after their second dose.
CONTROL
Although vaccination is effective in preventing clinical disease, it does not completely prevent the establishment of small numbers of lungworms.
Consequently, pastures may remain contaminated, albeit at a very low level.
For this reason it is important that all of the calves on any farm should be vaccinated whether they go to pasture in the spring or later in the year.
Also once a vaccination programme has been undertaken it must be continued annually for each calf crop.
Although the limited pasture larval contamination will serve to boost the immunity of vaccinated calves it can lead to clinical disease in susceptible animals.
The vaccination programme for dairy calves should, if possible, be completed before they go to grass in the spring or early summer.
However, these or suckled calves can be vaccinated successfully at grass provided the vaccine is given in spring or early summer, that is, prior to encountering a significant larval challenge.
Attempts have been made to control parasitic bronchitis by grazing systems designed to ensure that young susceptible cattle are not exposed to large numbers of infective larvae.
This approach is rarely successful, particularly if the farm is heavily stocked.
The introduction of calves to infected pasture followed by anthelmintic treatment after an arbitrary period has also been suggested as a means of "immunisation" .
However this can be hazardous since the initial larval challenge may not be sufficient to stimulate immunity and disease may subsequently occur.
It is also worth noting that, because of the unpredictable epidemiology, the technique commonly used in ostertagiasis of "dose and move" in midsummer does not prevent parasitic bronchitis.
Parasitic bronchitis is only seen in adult cattle under two circumstances.
First as a herd phenomenon, or in a particular age group within a herd, if they have failed to acquire immunity through natural challenge in earlier years.
Such animals may develop the disease if exposed to heavy larval challenge as might occur on pasture recently vacated by calves suffering from clinical husk.
Secondly, disease is occasionally seen in an individual adult penned in a heavily contaminated calf paddock because it requires daily attention for some other reason.
PARASITIC BRONCHITIS IN ADULT CATTLE
The disease is most commonly encountered in the patent phase although the other forms have been recognised.
In addition to coughing and tachypnoea, a reduction in milk yield in cows is a common presenting sign.
Treatment is similar to that discussed for calves but in selecting a drug one should consider the withdrawal period of milk for human consumption.
If possible, an annual programme of calf vaccination should be started.
Normally the natural challenge of adult cattle, yearlings or calves which have acquired immunity to D. viviparus, whether by natural exposure or by vaccination, is not associated with clinical signs.
THE REINFECTION SYNDROME IN PARASITIC BRONCHITIS
Occasionally, however, clinical signs do occur to produce the "reinfection syndrome" which is usually mild, but occasionally severe.
It arises when an immune animal is suddenly exposed to a massive larval challenge, usually from a heavily contaminated field.
Significant numbers of larvae reach the lungs and migrate to the bronchioles where they are killed by the animal's immune response.
The resulting proliferation of lympho-reticular cells around each dead larva causes bronchiolar obstruction and ultimately the formation of a macroscopically visible greyish-green, lymphoid nodule about 5.0 mm in diameter (Fig. 25).
In addition, dense infiltration of the lung by eosinophils occurs, and where these accumulate in the small bronchi in large numbers, they may be seen as greenish plugs at necropsy.
Usually the syndrome is associated with frequent coughing and slight tachypnoea over a period of a few days; less frequently there is marked tachypnoea, hyperpnoea and in dairy cows a reduction in milk yield.
Deaths rarely occur.
In the absence of a good history it may be impossible to differentiate this syndrome from the early stages of a severe primary infection.
The only course of action in these instances is treatment with one of the anthelmintics described above and a change of pasture.
This obiquitous parasite of donkeys is rarely associated with signs of clinical disease.
In horses, its prevalence is difficult to establish since infections rarely become patent although it is frequently incriminated as a cause of chronic coughing.
Dictyocaulus arnfieldi
The detailed life cycle is not fully known, but is considered to be similar to that of the bovine lungworm, D. viviparus, except in the following respects.
LIFE CYCLE
The adult worms are most often found in the small bronchi and their eggs, containing the first stage larvae, hatch soon after being passed in the faeces (Fig. 26).
The prepatent period is between 2-4 months.
Patent infections are common donkeys of all ages, but in horses generally only occur in foals and yearlings.
In older horses the adult lungworms rarely attain sexual maturity.
The characteristic lesion is similar in both horses and donkeys and is somewhat different from bovine parasitic bronchitis.
PATHOGENESIS
In the caudal lung lobes particularly, there are raised circumscribed areas of over-inflated pulmonary tissue 3.0-5.0 cm in diameter (Fig. 27).
On section, at the centre of each lesion is a small bronchus containing lungworms and mucopurulent exudate.
Microscopically, the epithelium is hyperplastic with an increase in the size and number of mucus-secreting cells while the lamina propria is heavily infiltrated and often surrounded by inflammatory cells, predominately lymphocytes.
Despite the prevalence of patent D. arnfieldi infection in   donkeys, overt clinical signs are rarely seen; however, on close examination slight hyperpnoea and harsh lung sounds may be detected.
This absence of significant clinical abnormality may be partly a reflection of the fact that donkeys are rarely required to perform sustained exercise.
CLINICAL SIGNS
Infection is much less prevalent in horses.
However, patent infections may develop in foals and these are not usually associated with clinical signs.
In older horses infections rarely become patent but are often associated with persistent coughing and an increased respiratory rate.
Donkeys acquire infection as foals and yearlings and tend to remain infected, presumably through re-exposure, all their lives.
Horses are thought to acquire infection mainly from pastures contaminated by donkeys during the summer months.
Most commonly this occurs when donkeys are grazed as companion animals with horses.
Pilobolus fungi may play a role in the dissemination of D. arnfieldi larvae from faeces, as in D. viviparus.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
In donkeys, patent infections are common and L1 are readily recovered from fresh faeces.
In horses, although a history of donkey contact and clinical signs may be suggestive of D. arnfieldi infection, it is often not possible to confirm a diagnosis by demonstrating larvae in the faeces.
When attempted, a modified Baerman technique is employed using 50 g of faeces from the rectum.
Recently the detection of eosinophils in tracheal mucus has been described as an ancillary aid to diagnosis.
DIAGNOSIS
In practice, a presumptive diagnosis of lungworm infection in horses is often only possible in retrospect, when resolution of the clinical signs occurs after treatment.
Successful treatment in both horses and donkeys has been reported using various regimens of diethylcarbamazine, levamisole, febendazole or mebendazole.
High efficacy has been reported in trials with oral ivermectin at normal dose rates.
TREATMENT
Ideally, horses and donkeys should not be grazed together, but if they are, it is advisable to treat the donkeys, preferably in the spring, with a suitable anthelmintic.
A similar regimen should be practised in donkey studs and visiting animals should be isolated in separate paddocks.
CONTROL
This species, the most important lungworm of sheep and goats, is commonly associated with a chronic syndrome of coughing and unthriftiness which usually affects lambs and kids.
Dictyocaulus filaria
Similar to that of D. viviparus except that the prepatent period is five weeks.
LIFE CYCLE
Similar to that of D. viviparus infection.
However, since the number of lungworms in individual animals is generally low, the widespread lesions associated with the bovine infection are not common.
PATHOGENESIS
Nevertheless, in severe cases, pulmonary oedema and emphysema may occur and the lung surface may be studded with purulent areas of secondary infection.
The most common signs are coughing and unthriftiness which, in endemic areas, is usually confined to young animals.
In more severe cases dyspnoea and tenacious nasal discharge are also present.
CLINICAL SIGNS
These signs may be accompanied by diarrhoea or anaemia due to concurrent gastrointestinal trichostrongy trichostrongylosis or fascioliasis.
Although this parasite is prevalent throughout the world, it is only responsible for sporadic outbreaks of  disease in temperate countries such as Britain and North America.
However, it occurs more frequently as a clinical problem in some warmer areas such as Mediterranean countries, the Middle East and India.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
In temperate areas the epidemiology is somewhat similar to that of D. viviparus in that both the survival of overwintered larvae on pasture and the role of the ewe as a carrier are significant factors in the persistence of infection on pasture from year to year in endemic areas.
In ewes it seems likely that the parasites are present largely as hypobiotic larvae in the lungs during each winter and mature in the spring.
Development to the L3 only occurs during the period from spring to autumn.
In lambs, patent infections first occur in early summer, but the heaviest infections are usually seen in autumn.
In ewes the prevalence of infection is lower and their larval output smaller.
As with the other trichostrongyloids it seems likely that only two cycles of the parasite occur during each grazing season.
In warmer climates, where conditions are often unsuitable for larval survival, the carrier animal is probably a more important source of pasture contamination and outbreaks of disease in lambs and kids are most likely to occur after a period of prolonged rain around the time of weaning.
Goats appear to be more susceptible to infection than sheep and are thought to play a prominent role in the dissemination of infection where both are grazed together.
This is based on history and clinical signs, but should be confirmed by faecal examinations from a large sample of the flock.
The L1 resembles that of D. viviparus, but has a characteristic cuticular knob at the anterior extremity (Fig. 28).
It is differentiated from other ovine lungworms by its larger size and straight tail.
DIAGNOSIS
Where sporadic outbreaks occur, the affected animals, or preferably the whole flock, should be gathered, treated with a suitable anthelmintic and then, if possible, moved to fresh pasture.
It is probable that the prophylactic regimens of control currently recommended for the control of gastrointestinal nematodes in sheep will, in normal years, be effective to a large extent in suppressing D. filaria infection.
TREATMENT AND CONTROL
Where it is necessary to apply specific control measures, it is suggested that the flock should be annually ally treated with a suitable anthelmintic in late pregnancy.
The ewes and lambs should then be grazed on pasture which, in temperate areas at least, should not have been used by sheep during the previous year.
Three trichostrongyloid genera of minor importance are Amidostomum, Ollulanus and Ornithostrongylus.
This parasite found in the upper alimentary tract, particularly the gizzard, may cause heavy mortality in goslings, ducklings and other young aquatic fowls.
Amidostomum anseris
The adult worms, bright red in colour and up to 2.5 cm in length, are easily recognised at necropsy where they predominate in the horny lining of the gizzard.
Microscopically they are characterised by a shallow buccal capsule with three teeth.
Eggs passed in the faeces are already embryonated and, like Nematodirus, develop to the L3 in the egg.
Treatment with one of the benzimidazoles or levamisole is effective and the condition may be prevented by ensuring that birds do not run on the same ground each year.
This very small trichostrongyle (0.7-1.0 mm long) occurs in the stomach of cats, pigs, wild felids, foxes and occasionally domestic dogs.
It is identified microscopically by the spiral coil of the head and the fact that the viviparous female has a tail with three or four short points.
Ollulanus tricuspis
The whole life cycle may be completed endogenously and transmission, at least in the cat, is thought to be via  ingestion of vomit containing the L3.
The worms live under a layer of mucus in the stomach wall.
Little is known of its pathogenicity although a chronic gastritis has been reported in the pig.
Treatment with benzimidazoles is effective.
This trichostrongyle, found in the small intestine and crop of pigeons, causes an enteritis and anaemia which, in heavy infections, may result in severe mortality in domestic pigeons.
Ornithostrongylus quadriradiatus
The adult worms which measure up to 2.5 cm are bloodsuckers, have a reddish colour and can be seen by the naked eye.
Superfamily STRONGYLOIDEA
There are several important parasites of domestic mammals and birds in this superfamily of bursate nematodes.
Most are characterised by a large buccal capsule which often contains teeth or cutting plates and in some there are prominent leaf crowns surrounding the mouth opening.
The adults occur on mucosal surfaces of the gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts and feeding is generally by the ingestion of plugs of mucosa.
With the exception of three genera, Syngamus and Mammomonogamus, which are parasitic in the trachea and major bronchi, and Stephanurus found in the perirenal area, all other genera of veterinary importance in this superfamily are found in the intestine and can be conveniently divided into two groups, the strongyles and hookworms.
The strongyles are parasitic in the large intestine and the important genera are Strongylus, Triodontophorus, Trichonema, Chabertia and Oesophagostomum.
Hookworms are parasites of the small intestine and the three genera of veterinary importance are Ancylostoma, Uncinaria, and Bunostomum.
Members of this genus live in the large intestine of horses and donkeys and, with Triodontophorus, are commonly known as the large strongyles.
STRONGYLES OF HORSES
Strongylus
Hosts: Horses and donkeys Site: Caecum and colon Species: Strongylus vulgaris S. edentatus S. equinus Distribution: Worldwide Gross: Robust dark-red worms which are easily seen against the intestinal mucosa.
The well developed buccal capsule of the adult parasite is prominent as is the bursa of the male.
IDENTIFICATION
Microscopic: Species differentiation is based on size and the presence and shape of the teeth in the base of the buccal capsule (Fig. 29).
S. vulgaris 1.5-2.5 cm two ear-shaped rounded teeth S. edentatus 2.5-4.5 cm No teeth S. equinus 2.5-5.0 cm Three conical teeth.
One is situated dorsally and is larger than the others and bifid.
The adult parasites live in the caecum and colon.
Eggs which resemble those of the trichostrongyles (Fig. 30) are passed in the faeces and development from egg to the L3 under summer conditions in temperate climates requires uires approximately two weeks.
Infection is by ingestion of the L3.
Subsequently, parasitic larval development of the three species differs and will be dealt with separately.
LIFE CYCLE
The L3 penetrate the intestinal mucosa and moult to L4 in the submucosa.
These then enter small arteries and migrate on the endothelium to their predilection site in the cranial mesenteric artery and its main branches.
After a period of development of several months the larvae moult to L5 and return to the intestinal wall via the arterial lumina.
Nodules are formed around the larvae mainly in the wall of the caecum and colon when, due to their size, they can travel no further within the arteries and subsequent rupture of these nodules releases the young adult parasites into the lumen of the intestine.
S. vulgaris
The prepatent period is 6-7 months.
After penetration of the intestinal mucosa L3 travel via the portal system, and reach the liver parenchyma within a few days.
About two weeks later the moult to L4 takes place, further migration then occurs in the liver and, by 6-8 weeks post-infection, larvae can be found subperitoneally around the hepatorenal ligament.
The larvae then travel under the peritoneum to many sites with a predilection for the flanks and hepatic ligaments (Fig. 31).
The final moult occurs after four months and each L5 then migrates, still subperitoneally, to the wall of the large intestine where a large purulent nodule is   formed, which subsequently ruptures with release of the young adult parasite into the lumen.
S. edentatus
The prepatent period is 10-12 months.
Of the three Strongylus species, least is known of the larval migration of S. equinus.
It appears that the L3 lose their sheaths while penetrating the wall of the caecum and central colon and within one week provoke the formation of nodules in the muscular and subserosal layers of the intestine.
The moult to L4 occurs within these nodules and the larvae then travel across the peritoneal cavity to the liver where they migrate within the parenchyma for six weeks or more.
After this time L4 and L5 have been found in and around the pancreas before their appearance in the large intestinal lumen.
S. equinus
The prepatent period is 8-9 months.
Despite the invasive behaviour of the parasitic larval stages, little specific pathogenic effect can be attributed to them; the exception is S. vulgaris, 90% of horses in Britain having lesions in the arterial system of the intestine caused by this species.
Lesions are most common in the cranial mesenteric artery and its main branches, and consist of thrombus formation provoked by larval damage to the endothelium together with a marked inflammation and thickening of the arterial wall (P1.III).
True aneurysms with dilatation and thinning of the arterial wall, although uncommon, may be found especially in animals which have experienced repeated infection.
PATHOGENESIS
Larvae
Much of the information concerning S. vulgaris has been derived from experimental infection of foals.
A few weeks after infection with several hundred L3 a clinical syndrome of fever, inappetence and dullness occurs sometimes accompanied by colic.
At necropsy, these signs are associated with arteritis and thrombosis of intestinal blood vessels with subsequent infarction and necrosis of areas of bowel.
However, a syndrome of this severity is not commonly reported in foals under natural conditions, probably because larval intake is continuous during grazing; it has been show experimentally that foals may tolerate large numbers of larvae administered in small doses over a long period.
In S. edentatus infection there are gross changes in the liver associated with early larval migration, but these rarely result in clinical signs.
Similarly, the haemorrhages and fluid-filled nodules which accompany later larval development in subperitoneal tissues, rarely result in clinical signs.
There has been little work on the pathogenesis of migrating larvae of S. equinus.
The pathogenesis of infection with adult Strongylus spp. is associated with damage to the large intestinal mucosa due to the feeding habits of the worms (P1.III) and, to some extent, to the disruption caused by emergence of young adults into the intestine following completion of their parasitic larval development.
Adults
These worms have large buccal capsules and feed by ingestion of plugs of mucosa as they move over the surface of the intestine.
Although the worms appear to feed entirely on mucosal material the incidental damage to blood vessels can cause considerable haemorrhage.
Ulcers which result from these bites eventually heal leaving small circular scars.
The effects of infection with the adult worms have not been quantified, but the gross damage and subsequent loss of blood and tissue fluids is certainly partly responsible for the unthriftiness and anaemia associated with intestinal helminthiasis in the horse.
Since members of this genus form only one component of the total parasitic burdens of the large intestine, the other aspects of infection will be dealt with after a description of the life cycles and pathogenesis of the other genera.
Members of this common genus of non-migratory large strongyles frequently occur in large numbers in the colon and contribute to the deleterious effects of mixed strongyle infection.
Triodontophorus
Hosts: Horses and donkeys Site: colon and caecum  Species: Triodontophorus serratus T. tenuicollis T. brevicauda T. minor Distribution: Worldwide Gross: Robust, reddish worms 1.0-2.5 cm in length readily visible on the colonic mucosa.
In one species, T. tenuicollis, groups of adult worms are characteristically found feeding in groups.
IDENTIFICATION
Microscopic: Species differentiation is based on buccal capsule characteristics, especially the number and shape of the teeth present in all species.
Little information is available on the developmental cycle of this genus, but it is thought to be similar to that of the genus Trichonema.
LIFE CYCLE
Like the other horse strongyles, the pathogenic effect of these worms is damage to the large intestinal mucosa from the feeding habits of the adult parasites; in particular, T. tenuicollis, whose adults feed in groups and cause the formation of large deep ulcers which may be several centimetres across (P1.III).
PATHOGENESIS
This genus embraces over 40 species, popularly known as trichonemes, cyathostomes or small strongyles.
These parasites are found in the large intestine of horses and their effects on the host range from poor performance to clinical signs of severe enteritis.
Trichonema
Hosts: Horses and donkeys Site: Caecum and colon Species: For many years there has been a great deal of confusion in the classification of this group of parasites and in a recent revision it has been proposed that the genus Trichonema be discarded and replaced by four genera, namely Cyathostomum, Cylicocyclus, Cylicodontophorus and Cylicostephanus, these being collectively referred to as cyathostomes.
Since the majority of species involved are similar both morphologically and in behaviour they will be referred to in this text as trichonemes or small strongyles
Fifteen species of these are commonly present in large numbers
Distribution: Worldwide Gross: Small to medium sized ({1.5 cm in length) bursate nematodes ranging in colour from white to dark red, the majority being visible on close inspection of the large intestinal mucosa or contents.
IDENTIFICATION
Microscopic: The well developed buccal capsule is cylindrical and species differentiation is based on characteristics of the buccal capsule, and the internal and external leaf crowns.
Hatching of eggs and development to L3 is complete within two weeks during the summer in temperate areas, after which the larvae migrate from the faeces on to the surrounding herbage.
After ingestion, the L3 exsheath and invade the wall of the large intestine where they develop to L4 (P1.III) before emerging into the gut lumen and moulting to become young adult worms.
LIFE CYCLE
The prepatent periods of members of this genus are generally between 2-3 months although this may be extended, due to hypobiosis in some species.
Parasitic larval development of most species takes place entirely in the mucosa of the caecum and colon, but a few penetrate the muscularis ad develop in the submucosa.
The entry of larval trichonemes into the lumina of the tubular glands generally provokes an inflammatory response together with marked goblet cell hypertrophy.
Emergence of the bright red L4 into the gut lumen appears to be associated with a massive infiltration of the gut mucosa with eosinophils.
Many thousand L4 may be present, but their pathogenic significance has been little studied.
There are, however, reports of heavy natural infections of adult worms and larvae associated with catarrhal and haemorrhagic enteritis, with thickening and oedema of the mucosa, especially in animals of six months to three years of age.
PATHOGENESIS
Mature parasites are frequently present in large numbers in the lumen of the large intestine and during feeding those species with small buccal capsules take in only glandular epithelium while large species may damage deeper layers of the mucosa.
Although the erosions caused by individual parasites may be slight, when large numbers are present a desquamative enteritis may result.
Grazing horses usually carry a mixed burden of large and small strongyles and the major clinical signs associated with heavy infections in animals up to 2-3 years of age are unthriftiness, anaemia and sometimes diarrhoea.
Marked clinical signs are less common in older animals, although general performance may be impaired.
THE CLINICAL SIGNS, EPIDEMIOLOGY, DIAGNOSIS, TREATMENT AND CONTROL OF EQUINE STRONGYLOSIS
CLINICAL SIGNS
In temperate countries an acute syndrome of severe diarrhoea and death in young ponies in the spring has been reported which is associated with the simultaneous mass emergence of trichoneme L4 from the intestinal mucosa and submucosa.
This may have etiological and epidemiological similarities to Type II ostertagiasis in young cattle.
The significance of migrating larvae of S. vulgaris in natural cases of colic is difficult to assess, but it is generally recognised that where strongyle infections of horses are efficiently controlled the incidence of colic is markedly decreased.
Strongylosis is most frequently a problem in young horses reared on permanent horse pastures, although cases of severe disease may occur in adult animals kept in suburban paddocks and subjected to overcrowding and poor management.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Although the preparasitic larval requirements of the horse strongyles are similar to those of the trichostrongyles of ruminants, adult horses, unlike cattle, may carry substantial worm burdens and therefore have a considerable influence on the epidemiology of infection.
Thus there are two sources of infection during the grazing season in temperate areas.
First there are infective larvae which developed during the previous grazing season and have survived on pasture over winter.
The second and probably more important source of infective larvae are the eggs passed in the current grazing season by horses, including nursing mares, sharing the same grazing area.
Pasture larval levels increase markedly during the summer months when conditions are optimal for rapid development of eggs to L3 (Fig. 32).
At present there is little evidence for a periparturient rise in faecal egg output in breeding mares due to a relaxation of immunity since the egg rise in the spring occurs in both breeding and non-breeding animals and is often unrelated to parturition.
There is increasing evidence that many trichoneme L3  ingested during the autumn show a degree of hypobiosis and remain in the large intestinal mucosa until the following spring.
Mass emergence of these larvae results in the severe clinical signs described previously.
This is based on the grazing history and clinical signs of loss of condition and anaemia.
Although the finding of typical, oval, thin-shelled strongyle eggs on faecal examination may be a useful aid to diagnosis, it is important to remember that substantial worm burdens may be associated with faecal egg counts of only a few hundred epg, due either to low fecundity of adult worms or to the presence of many immature parasites.
On some occasions when heavy trichoneme infections in the spring cause severe diarrhoea, thousands of bright red trichoneme L4, apparently unable to establish, may be present in the faeces.
DIAGNOSIS
Treatment for clinical strongylosis should not be necessary if prophylactic measures are adequate.
TREATMENT
There are a number of broad spectrum anthelmintics including the benzimidazoles, pyrantel, dichlorvos and ivermectin, which are effective in removing lumen-dwelling adult and larval strongyles and these are usually marketed as in-feed or oral preparations.
Two of these compounds, dichlorvos and ivermectin, have the additional advantage of activity against larvae of horse bot flies (Gasterophilus spp.) which develop in the stomach.
Some modern benzimidazoles and ivermectin are also efficient against both developing trichoneme larvae in the gut wall and some migrating stages of the large strongyles.
Since horses of any age can become infected and excrete eggs, all grazing animals over two months of age should be treated every 4-6 weeks with an effective broad spectrum anthelmintic.
This regimen will also control infections with other intestinal parasites such as Parascaris equorum and Oxyuris equi.
CONTROL
Any new animals joining a treated group should receive an anthelmintic and be isolated for 48-72 hours before being introduced.
If possible, a paddock rotation system should be adopted so that nursing mares and their foals do not graze the same area in successive years.
If horses are housed in the winter, treatment at that time with an anthelmintic effective against larval trichonemes will reduce the risk of disease due to their mass emergence in the spring.
There is evidence that some species of trichonemes may become resistant to benzimidazole compounds and to avoid this it is suggested that these should be alternated with chemically unrelated anthelmintics on an annual or a six-monthly basis.
Faecal samples from groups of horses should be examined at regular intervals to monitor drug efficiency.
Chabertia ovina is present, usually in low numbers, in the majority of sheep and goats.
It contributes to the syndrome of parasitic gastroenteritis and only occasionally occurs in sufficient numbers to cause clinical disease on its own.
STRONGYLES OF OTHER ANIMALS
Chabertia
Hosts: Sheep, goats and occasionally cattle Site: Colon Species: Chabertia ovina Distribution: Worldwide Gross: The adults are 1.5-2.0 cm in length and are the largest nematodes found the colon of ruminants.
They are white with a markedly truncated and enlarged anterior end due to the presence of the very large buccal capsule.
IDENTIFICATION
Microscopic: The huge buccal capsule, which is bell shaped, has a double row of small papillae around the rim.
There are no teeth (Fig. 33).
This is direct and the preparasitic phase is similar to that of the trichostrongyles of ruminants.
LIFE CYCLE
In the parasitic phase the L3 enter the mucosa of the small intestine and occasionally that of the caecum and colon; after a week they moult, the L4 emerge on to the mucosal surface and migrate to congregate in the caecum where development to the L5 is completed about 25 days after infection.
The young adults then travel to the colon.
The prepatent period is 42 days.
The major pathogenic effect is caused by the L5 and by mature adults which feed by ingesting large plugs of mucosa resulting in local haemorrhage ad loss of protein through the damaged mucosa.
PATHOGENESIS
A burden of 250-300 worms is considered pathogenic and in severe outbreaks the effects become evident during the late prepatent period.
The wall of the colon becomes oedematous, congested and thickened with small haemorrhages at the sites of worm attachment (fig. 34).
In severe infections, diarrhoea, which may contain blood and in which worms may be found, is the most common clinical sign.
The sheep become anaemic and hypoalbuminaemic and can suffer severe weight loss.
CLINICAL SIGNS
In temperate areas, L3 are capable of surviving the winter.
The parasite may also overwinter in the host as hypobiotic L4 in the wall of the intestine emerging in the late winter and early spring.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Although outbreaks of chabertiasis have been recorded in goats and sheep in Europe, the disease is more important in the winter rainfall areas of Australasia and South Africa.
Since much of the pathogenic effect occurs within the prepatent period, the faecal egg count may be very low.
However, during the diarrhoeic phase, the worms may be expelled and they are easily recognised.
At necropsy, diagnosis is generally based on the lesions since the worm burden may be negligible following the expulsion of worms in the faeces.
DIAGNOSIS
Since the epidemiology of C. ovina is the same as that of the trichostrongyles the control and treatment is similar.
TREATMENT AND CONTROL
Oesophagostomum species are responsible for an enteritis in ruminants and pigs.
The more pathogenic species in ruminants occur in the subtropics and tropics and are associated with nodule formation in the intestine.
Oesophagostomum
Hosts: Ruminants, pigs Site: Caecum and colon Species: Oesophagostomum columbianum sheep and goat Oe. venulosum sheep and goat Oe. radiatum cattle and buffalo Oe. dentatum pig Oe. quadrispinulatum pig Other species found in the pig are Oe. longicaudatum, Oe. granatensis and Oe. brevicaudum and in sheep and goats Oe. asperum.
Distribution: Worldwide; more important in tropical and subtropical areas Gross: Stout white worm 1.0-2.0 cm long.
Readily differentiated by its tapered head from Chabertia.
Microscope: The buccal capsule is small.
In many species it is surrounded by leaf crowns.
The external crown, if present, is compressed and so there is only a narrow opening into the buccal capsule.
Around the   capsule there is a small cephalic vesicle behind which is a cervical vesicle (Fig. 35).
This terminates in a cervical groove which is followed in some species by broad cervical alae.
The position of cervical papillae and the leaf crown arrangements are used to identify species.
IDENTIFICATION
The preparasitic phase is typically strongyloid and infection is by ingestion of L3 although there is limited evidence that skin penetration is possible, at least in pigs.
The L3 enter the mucosa of any part of the small or large intestine and in some species (Oe. columbianum, Oe. radiatum, Oe. quadrispinulatum) become enclosed in obvious nodules in which the moult to L4 takes place (P1.III).
These L4 then emerge on to the mucosal surface, migrate to the colon, develop to the adult stage.
The prepatent period is about 45 days.
LIFE CYCLE
On reinfection with most species the larvae may remain arrested at L4 in nodules for up to one year; however with Oe. venulosum nodules are absent while in Oe. dentatum they are barely visible.
All species are capable of causing a severe enteritis including Oe. venulosum, which does not provoke nodule formation.
PATHOGENESIS
In the intestine Oe. columbianum L4 migrate deep into the mucosa, provoking an inflammatory response with the formation of nodules which are visible to the naked eye.
On reinfection, this response is more marked, the nodules reaching 2.0 cm in diameter and containing greenish eosinophilic pus and an L4.
When the L4 emerge there may be ulceration of the mucosa.
Diarrhoea occurs coincident with emergence about a week after primary infection and up to one year after reinfection.
In heavy infections, there may be ulcerative colitis and the disease runs a chronic debilitating course with effects on the production of wool and mutton.
The nodules in the gut wall also render the intestines useless for processing as sausage skins and surgical suture material.
In Oe. radiatum infections in cattle, the pathogenic effect is also attributed to the nodules (up to 5.0 mm in diameter) in the intestine and it appears that as few as 500 larvae are sufficient to produce clinical signs.
Necropsy reveals a severely inflamed mucosa studded with yellowish-green purulent nodules.
In the later stages of the disease, anaemia and hypoalbuminaemia develop due to the combined effects of protein loss and leakage of blood through the damaged mucosa.
Oesophagostomum infections in the pig are less often associated with clinical disease, but are responsible for poor productivity.
In acute infections of ruminants, severe dark green diarrhoea is the main clinical sign and there is usually a rapid loss of weight and sometimes submandibular oedema.
In chronic infections, which occur primarily in sheep, inappetence and emaciation with intermittent diarrhoea and anaemia are the main signs of oesophagostomiasis.
CLINICAL SIGNS
Pregnant sows show inappetence, become very thin, and following farrowing, milk production is reduced with effects on litter performance.
In temperate areas, there is evidence that Oe. venulosum undergoes hypobiosis at the L4 stage in sheep during autumn and winter, and that this is the principal manner in which this species survives until the next spring.
It is not yet known if hypobiosis occurs in Oe. radiatum.
Both species are also capable of overwintering on pasture as L3.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
In the pig species, Oe. dentatum and Oe. quadrispinulatum, survival of both free-living L3 on the pasture and hypobiotic L4 in the host occur during autumn and winter; the hypobiotic larvae complete their development in the spring often coincident with farrowing.
There is also some evidence that larvae develop in faeces on the skin of pigs and it seems likely that, in housed animals, transmission is by contact between sows and their litters, infection occurring either orally or percutaneously.
Pen to pen transmission may also occur via dipteran flies which can carry L3 on their legs.
In tropical and subtropical areas, Oe. columbianum and Oe. radiatum, in sheep and cattle respectively, are especially important.
In Oe. columbianum infections, the prolonged survival of the L4 within the nodules in the gut wall and the lack of an effective immunity made control difficult until the advent of effective anthelmintics.
In contrast, cattle develop a good immunity to Oe. radiatum, partly due to age and partly to previous exposure so that it is primarily a problem in weaned calves.
This is based on clinical signs and post-mortem examination.
Since the acute disease occurs within the prepatent period, eggs of Oesophagostomum spp. are not usually present in the faeces.
In the chronic disease eggs are present and L3 can be identified following faecal culture.
DIAGNOSIS
The treatment and control of ruminant infections with Oesophagostomum spp. is similar to that of the trichostrongyles while infection in pigs can be controlled by the methods described for Hyostrongylus.
TREATMENT AND CONTROL
This is the "kidney worm" of sine which is of economic importance in its endemic areas.
Stephanurus
Host: Pig Site: Kidneys and perirenal tissues Species: Stephanurus dentatus Distribution: Mainly warm to tropical regions of all continents.
It does not occur in western Europe A large stout worm up to 4.5 cm long, with a prominent buccal capsule and transparent cuticle through which the internal organs may be seen (P1.III).
The colour is usually pinkish.
The size and site are diagnostic.
IDENTIFICATION
Preparasitic development from egg to L3 is typically strongyloid, though earthworms may intervene as transport hosts.
There are three modes of infection: by ingestion of the free L3, ingestion of earthworms carrying the L3, and percutaneously.
After entering the body, there is an immediate moult, and the L4 travel to the liver in the bloodstream, either from the intestine by the portal stream, or from the skin by the lungs and systemic circulation.
In the liver the final moult takes place, and the young adults wander in the parenchyma for three months or more before piercing the capsule and migrating in the peritoneal cavity to the perirenal region.
There they are enclosed in a cyst by host reaction, and complete their development.
The cyst communicates with the ureter either directly or, if it is more distant, by a fine connecting canal, allowing the worm eggs to be excreted in the urine.
LIFE CYCLE
Though the favoured site is in the perirenal fat, some worms occur in the kidney itself, in the calyces and pelvis.
Prenatal infection has been reported.
Erratic migration is common in Stephanurus infection, and larvae have been found in most organs and in muscle.
In these sites they are trapped by encapsulation and never reach the perirenal area.
The prepatent period ranges from 6-19 months and the worms have a longevity of about two years.
The main pathogenic effect is due to the larvae which, by the late L4 stage, have heavily sclerotised buccal capsules capable of tearing tissue and they cause much damage to the liver and occasionally other organs in their wanderings.
In heavy infections there may be severe cirrhosis and ascites and, in rare cases, liver failure and death.
In most infections, however, the effects are seen only after slaughter as patchy cirrhosis, and the main importance of the worm is economic, from liver condemnation.
PATHOGENESIS
Usually the adult worms, soon after arrival at the perirenal site, are encapsulated in cysts, which may contain greenish pus.
In rare cases the ureters may be thickened and stenosed, with consequent hydronephrosis.
Stephanurus may occasionally cause severe liver damage in calves grazing on contaminated ground.
In most infections the only sign is failure to gain weight or, in more severe cases, weight loss.
Where there is more extensive liver damage there may be ascites, but it is only when there is massive invasion, comparable to acute fascioliasis in sheep, that death occurs.
CLINICAL SIGNS
Though the adult worms are never numerous, they are very fecund, and an infected pig may pass a million eggs per day.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The L3 is susceptible to desiccation, so that stephanuriasis is mainly associated with damp ground.
Since it infects readily by skin penetration, the pigs' habit of lying around the feeding area when kept outside presents a risk, as does damp, unhygienic accommodation for housed animals.
Such conditions, coupled with pre-natal infection and the longevity of the worm, ensure continuity of infection through many generations of pigs.
The clinical signs are likely to be few, and since most of the damage occurs during the prepatent phase, eggs may not be found in the urine.
However, in endemic areas, where pigs are failing to thrive and where local abattoirs record appreciable numbers of cirrhotic livers, a presumptive diagnosis can be made.
DIAGNOSIS
Levamisole, the modern benzimidazoles and ivermectin are effective.
TREATMENT
One approach to control is based on the susceptibility of the L3 to desiccation and on the fact that a major route  of infection is percutaneous.
It follows that the provision of impervious surfaces around the feeding areas for outdoor-reared pigs, and simple hygiene, ensuring clean dry flooring, in pig houses will help to limit infection.
This approach may be supplemented by segregating young pigs from those of more than nine months of age which will be excreting eggs.
CONTROL
The "gilt only" scheme, which was advocated by workers in the United States, consists essentially of using only gilts for breeding.
The gilts are reared on land which is dry and exposed to the sun.
A single litter is taken from them, and as soon as the piglets can be weaned the gilts are marketed.
The scheme takes advantage of the extremely long prepatent period which allows a single breeding cycle by the gilts to be completed before egg-laying begins and so progressively eliminates infection.
The boars used in the scheme are housed on concrete.
Regimes incorporating anthelmintic control recommend treatment of sows and gilts 1-2 weeks before putting to the boar, and again 1-2 weeks before farrowing.
It should be remembered in designing a control system that the earthworm transport hosts present a continuous reservoir of infection.
Only one member of this genus, Syngamus trachea, is of veterinary significance and parasitises the upper respiratory tract of non-aquatic birds; it is commonly known as the "gapeworm" and may be responsible for respiratory distress and death.
Syngamus
Hosts: Domestic fowl and game birds such as pheasants and partridges Site: Trachea Species: Syngamus trachea Distribution: Worldwide Gross: The reddish, large female (up to 2.0 cm) and small male (up to 0.5 cm) worms, are permanently in copular forming a Y shape: they are the only parasites found in the trachea of domestic birds (P1.IV).
Microscopic: The worms have large shallow buccal capsules which have up to 10 teeth at their base.
IDENTIFICATION
The ellipsoidal egg of S. trachea has an operculum at both ends (Fig. 36).
Eggs escape under the bursa of the male and are carried up the trachea in the excess mucus produced in response to infection: they are then swallowed and passed in the faeces.
Unlike other strongyloids the L3 develops within the egg.
LIFE CYCLE
Infection may occur by one of three ways, firstly by ingestion of the L3 in the egg, secondly by ingestion of the hatched L3 or thirdly by ingestion of a transport host containing the L3.
The most common transport host is the common earthworm, but a variety of other invertebrates including slugs, snails and beetles, may act as transport hosts.
After penetrating the intestine of the final host the L3 travel to the lungs, probably in the blood since they are found in the alveoli 4-6 hours after experimental infection.
The two parasitic moults take place in the lungs within five days by which time the parasites are 1.0-2.0 mm long.
Copulation occurs around day seven in the trachea or bronchi after which the female grows rapidly.
The prepatent period is 18-20 days.
The effects of S. trachea are most severe in young birds especially game chicks and turkey poults.
In these, migration through the lungs in heavy infections may result  in pneumonia and death.
In less severe infections the adult worms cause a haemorrhagic tracheitis with excess mucus production which leads to partial occlusion of the airways and difficulty in breathing.
PATHOGENESIS
Pneumonia during the prepatent phase may cause signs of dyspnoea and depression, whereas the presence of adult worms and excess mucus in the trachea lead to signs of asphyxia or suffocation with the bird gasping for air; often there is a great deal of head shaking and coughing as it tries to rid itself of the obstruction.
The clinical picture of"gapes' may thus range from gasping, dyspnoea and death to, in less severely affected animals, weakness, anaemia and emaciation.
CLINICAL SIGNS
Gapeworm infection primarily affects young birds, but turkeys of all ages are susceptible, the adults often acting as carriers.
Eggs may survive for up to nine months in soil and L3 for years within the earthworm or other transport hosts.
Disease is seen most frequently in breeding and rearing establishments where outdoor pens, such as are used for breeding pheasants, are in use.
Infection may be initiated by eggs, passed by wild birds such as rooks and blackbirds; these may also infect earthworms.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
This is based on clinical signs and the finding of eggs in the faeces.
Disease is probably best confirmed by post-mortem examination of selected cases when worms will be found attached to the tracheal mucosa.
DIAGNOSIS
In-feed thiabendazole and fenbendazole are effective, administered usually over periods of 3-14 days.
Nitroxynil and levamisole are also very efficacious when given in the water.
TREATMENT
Young birds should not be reared with adults, especially turkeys, and to prevent infection becoming established runs or yards should be kept dry and contact with wild birds prevented.
CONTROL
Drug prophylaxis may be practised over the period when outbreaks are normally expected.
This genus, closely related to Syngamus, is parasitic in the respiratory passages of mammals.
Two species, M. larygeus and M. nasicola, are parasites of cattle, buffalo and goats in the Far East, Africa and Central and South America.
Another species, M. ierei, in the nasal cavities of cats has been reported from the Caribbean.
Little is known of the life cycle or effects of members of this genus, but they are not considered serious pathogens.
Mammomonogamus
The family Ancylostomidae, whose members are commonly called hookworms because of the characteristic hook posture of their anterior ends, are responsible for widespread morbidity and mortality in animals primarily due to their blood-sucking activities in the intestine.
HOOKWORMS OF DOGS AND CATS
Hosts: Dog, cat and fox Site: Small intestine Species: Ancylostoma caninum dog and fox A. tubaeforme cat A. braziliense dog and cat Distribution: Worldwide in the tropics and warm temperate areas.
In other countries it is sometimes seen in dogs imported from endemic regions Gross: They are readily recognised on the basis of size (1.0-2.0 cm), being much smaller than the common ascarid nematodes which are also found in the small intestine, and by their characteristic "hook" posture.
Microscopic: The buccal capsule is large with marginal teeth (Fig. 37), there being three pairs in A. caninum and A. tubaeforme and two pairs in A. braziliense.
Ancylostoma
IDENTIFICATION
Since the most important species is A. caninum this is discussed in detail.
The life cycle is direct and given optimal conditions the eggs may hatch and develop to L3 in as little as five days.
Ancylostoma caninum
LIFE CYCLE
Infection is by skin penetration or by ingestion, both methods being equally successful.
In percutaneous infection, larvae migrate via the blood stream to the lungs   where they moult to L4 in the bronchi and trachea, and are then swallowed and pass to the small intestine where the final moult occurs.
If infection is by ingestion the larvae may either penetrate the buccal mucosa an undergo the pulmonary migration described above or pass direct to the intestine and develop to patency.
Whichever route is taken the prepatent period is 14-21 days.
The worms are prolific egg layers and an infected dog may pass millions of eggs daily for several weeks.
An important feature of A. caninum infection is that, in susceptible bitches, a proportion of the L3 which reach the lungs migrate to the skeletal muscles where they remain dormant until the bitch is pregnant.
They are then reactivated and, still as L3, are passed in the milk of the bitch for a period of about three weeks after whelping.
This transmammary infection is often responsible for severe anaemia in litters of young pups in their second or third week of life.
Infection of the bitch on a single occasion has been shown to produce transmammary infections in at least three consecutive litters.
It also appears that dormant L3 in the muscles of both bitches and dogs can recommence migration months or years later to mature in the host's intestine.
Stress, severe illness or repeated large doses of corticosteriods can all precipitate these apparently new infections in dogs, which may perhaps now be resident in a hookworm-free environment.
A final point is that, experimentally, L3 of some strains of A. caninum exposed to chilling before oral administration have been shown to remain in arrested development in the intestinal mucosa for weeks or months.
The significance of this observation is still unknown, but it is thought that such larvae may resume development if the adult hookworm population is removed by an anthelmintic or at times of stress such as lactation.
This is essentially that of an acute or chronic haemorrhagic anaemia.
The disease is most commonly seen in dogs under one year old and young pups, infected by the transmammary route, are particularly susceptible due to their low iron reserves.
Blood loss started about the eighth day of infection when the immature adult has developed the toothed buccal capsule which enables it to grasp plugs of mucosa containing arterioles.
Every worm removed about 0.1 ml of blood daily and in heavy infections of several hundred worms, pups quickly become profoundly anaemic.
PATHOGENESIS
In lighter infections, common in older dogs, the anaemia is not so severe, as the marrow response is able to compensate for a variable period.
Ultimately, however, the dog may become iron deficient and develop a microcytic hypochromic anaemia.
In previously sensitised dogs, skin reactions such as moist eczema and ulceration at the sites of percutaneous infection occur especially affecting the inter-digital skin.
In acute infections, there is anaemia and lassitude and occasionally respiratory embarrassment.
In suckled pups the anaemia is often severe and is accompanied by diarrhoea which may contain blood and mucus.
Respiratory signs may be due to larval damage in the lungs or to the anoxic effects of anaemia.
CLINICAL SIGNS
In more chronic infections, the animal is usually underweight, the coat is poor, and there is loss of appetite and perhaps pica.
Inconsistently there are signs of respiratory embarrassment, skin lesions and lameness.
In endemic areas the disease is most common in dogs under one year old.
In older animals, the gradual development of age resistance makes clinical disease less likely, particularly in dogs reared in endemic areas whose age resistance is reinforced by acquired immunity.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The epidemiology is primarily associated with the two main sources of infection, transmammary in suckled pups and percutaneous or oral from the environment.
An important aspect of transmammary infection is that disease may occur in suckled pups reared in a clean environment and nursed by a bitch which may have  been recently treated with an anthelmintic and has a negative faecal egg count.
Contamination of the environment is most likely when dogs are exercised on grass or earth runs which retain moisture and also protect larvae from sunlight.
On such surfaces larvae may survive for some weeks.
In contrast, dry impervious surfaces, particularly if exposed to sunlight, are lethal to larvae within a day or so.
Housing is also important and failure to remove soiled bedding, especially if the kennels are damp or have porous or cracked floors, can lead to a massive build-up of infection.
This depends on the clinical signs and history supplemented by haematological and faecal examination.
High faecal worm egg counts are valuable confirmation of diagnosis, but it should be noted that suckled pups may show severe clinical signs before eggs are detected in the faeces.
Also, a few hookworm eggs in the faeces, although confirmatory evidence of infection, do not necessarily indicate that an ailing dog is suffering from hookworm disease.
DIAGNOSIS
Affected dogs should be treated with an anthelmintic, such as thenium, mebendazole, fenbendazole, dichlorvos and nitroscanate, all of which will kill both adult and developing intestinal stages.
If the disease is severe, it is advisable to give parenteral iron and to ensure that the dog has a protein-rich-diet.
Young pups may require a blood transfusion.
TREATMENT
A system of regular anthelmintic therapy and hygiene should be adopted.
Weaned pups and adult dogs should be treated every three months.
CONTROL
Pregnant bitches should be dosed at least once during pregnancy and the nursing litters dosed at least twice, at 1-2 weeks of age and again 2 weeks later with a drug specifically recommended for use in pups.
This will also control ascariasis.
A nw but expensive regimen which has been shown to reduce the perinatal transfer of both Ancylostoma and Toxocara larvae is the oral administration of large doses of fenbendazole daily for three weeks before to three weeks after whelping.
Kennel floors should be free of crevices and dry and the bedding should be disposed of daily.
Runs should preferably be of tarmac or concrete and kept as clean and dry as possible; faeces should be removed with a shovel before hosing.
If an outbreak has occurred, earth runs may be treated with sodium borate which is lethal to hookworm larvae, but this also kills grass.
A second possibility which is often used in fox farms is the provision of wire-mesh flooring in the runs.
The life cycle and treatment of this hookworm of cats are similar to that of A. caninum in the dog but there is no evidence of transmammary infection.
A. tubaeforme
This hookworm occurs in both dogs and cats.
Its life cycle is similar to that of A. caninum although evidence of transmammary infection is lacking.
While it may cause a degree of hypoalbuminaemia through an intestinal leak of plasma, it is not a blood-sucker and consequently is of little pathogenic significance in dogs, causing only mild digestive upsets and occasional diarrhoea.
Treatment is similar to that of A. caninum.
A. braziliense
The main importance of A. braziliense is that it is regarded as the primary cause of cutaneous larva migrans in man.
This lesion, characterised by tortuous erythematous inflammatory tracts within the dermis and by severe pruritus, is caused by infective larvae of A. braziliense, and less frequently Uncinaria, penetrating the skin and wandering in the dermis.
These larvae do not develop, but the skin lesions usually persist for weeks.
Similar lesions, although only transient and pinpoint, may be caused by A. caninum larvae.
Hosts: Dog, cat and fox Site: Small intestine Species: Uncinaria stenocephala Distribution: Temperate and sub-arctic areas; the "northern hook-worm" A small worm, up to 1.0 cm long, it possesses two cutting plates on the border of the buccal capsule (Fig. 38) and at the base a small pair of teeth.
Uncinaria
IDENTIFICATION
Similar to A. caninum except that oral infection, without pulmonary migration, is the usual route.
Although the infective larvae can penetrate the skin, the infection   rarely matures and there is no evidence as yet of transmammary infection.
The prepatent period is about 15 days.
LIFE CYCLE
The infection is not uncommon in groups of sporting and working dogs.
The worm is not a voracious blood-sucker like A. caninum, but hypoalbuminaemia and low-grade anaemia, accompanied by diarrhoea, anorexia and lethargy, have been recorded in heavily infected pups.
Probably the most common lesion in dogs made hypersensitive by previous exposure is pedal dermatitis, affecting particularly the inter-digital skin.
PATHOGENESIS AD CLINICAL SIGNS
In England, in a paddock used continuously throughout the year by greyhounds, the seasonal pattern of infective larvae on the pasture followed closely that described for gastrointestinal trichostrongyloids in ruminants with a sharp rise in July and a peak in September; this suggests that development to the L3 is heavily dependent on temperature.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
In areas where A. caninum is absent, the clinical signs of the patent infection together with the demonstration of strongyle eggs in the faeces is indicative of uncinariasis.
Where Ancylostoma is also endemic, differential diagnosis may require larval culture although the treatment is similar.
DIAGNOSIS
Regular anthelmintic treatment and good hygiene as outlined for Ancylostoma will control Uncinaria infection.
The pedal dermatitis responds poorly to symptomatic treatment, but regresses gradually in the absence of reinfection.
TREATMENT AND CONTROL
Hosts: Ruminants Site: Small intestine Species: Bunostomum trigonocephalum sheep and goats B. phlebotomum cattle Distribution: Worldwide Gross: Bunostomum is one of the larger nematodes of the small intestine of ruminants, being 1.0-3.0 cm long and characteristically hooked at the anterior end.
Microscopic: The large buccal capsule bears on the margin a pair of cutting plates and internally a large dorsal cone.
(Fig. 39)
HOOKWORMS OF RUMINANTS
Bunostomum
IDENTIFICATION
Infection with the L3 may be percutaneous or oral, only the former being followed by pulmonary migration.
The prepatent period ranges from 1-2 months.
LIFE CYCLE
The adult worms are blood-suckers and infections of 100-500 worms will produce anaemia, hypoalbuminaemia, loss of weight and occasionally diarrhoea.
In calves, skin penetration of the larvae may be accompanied by foot-stamping and signs of itching.
In temperate countries, high worm burdens are uncommon and in Britain, for example, only one outbreak has been recorded, occurring in young cattle housed in a damp yard; in sheep it is unusual to find more than 50 adult worms.
In contrast, pathogenic infections are more common in the tropics and in some areas, such as Nigeria, the highest worm burdens are found at the end of the dry season apparently due to the maturation of hypobiotic larvae.
PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL SIGNS
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The clinical signs of anaemia and perhaps diarrhoea in calves or young sheep are not in themselves pathognomonic of bunostomiasis.
However, in temperate areas, the epidemiological background may be useful in eliminating the possibility of Fasciola hepatica infection.
In the tropics, haemonchosis must be considered, possibly originating from hypobiotic larvae.
DIAGNOSIS
Faecal worm egg counts are useful in that these are lower than in Haemonchus infection while the eggs are more bluntly rounded, with relatively thick sticky shells to which debris is often adherent.
For accurate differentiation, larval cultures should be prepared.
The prophylactic anthelmintic regimens practised for Ostertagia or Haemonchus are usually sufficient to control this parasite.
Otherwise treatment of outbreaks should be accompanied by measures to improve hygiene, particularly with regard to the disposal of manure, and by the provision of dry bedding for housed or yarded animals.
TREATMENT AND CONTROL
Gaigeria pachyscelis, which closely resembles Bunostomum in most respects, is found in sheep and goats in South America, Africa and Asia.
It is a voracious blood-sucker and even 100200 worms are sufficient to produce death in sheep within a few weeks of infection.
Gaigeria
Agriostomum vryburgi is a common hookworm of the large intestine of cattle and buffaloes in Asia and South America.
Agriostomum
Its life cycle is probably direct and its pathogenicity, although unknown, presumably depends on its haematophagic habits.
[Hookworms in man: Two hookworms, Ancylostoma duodenale and Necator americanus, occur in man in the tropics.
Their pathogenesis is similar to that of A. caninum, but transmammary infection does not occur.]
Superfamily METASTRONGYLOIDEA
Most worms in this superfamily inhabit the lungs or the blood vessels adjacent to the lungs.
The typical life cycle is indirect, and the intermediate host is usually a mollusc.
They may be conveniently divided into three groups according to host; those occurring in pigs, in sheep and goats, and in the domestic carnivores.
Only one genus occurs in pigs, Metastrongylus, and it is exceptional in having earthworms, rather than molluscs, as intermediate hosts.
METASTRONGYLES OF PIGS
Host: Pig Intermediate hosts: Earthworms Site: Small bronchi an bronchioles, especially those of the posterior lobes of the lungs Species: Metastrongylus apri (syn. elongatus) M. salmi M. pudendotectus Distribution: Worldwide Slender white worms, up to 6.0 cm in length; the host, site and long slender form are sufficient for generic identification.
Metastrongylus
IDENTIFICATION
The eggs have rough, thick shells, and are larvated when laid.
In cold temperatures the eggs are very resistant and can survive for over a year in soil.
Normally, however, they hatch almost immediately, the intermediate host ingesting the L1.
In the earthworm, development to L3 takes about ten days at optimal temperatures of 22-260C.
The longevity of the L3 in the earthworm is similar to that of the intermediate host itself, and may be up to seven years.
LIFE CYCLE
The pig is infected by ingestion of earthworms and the L3, released by digestion, travel to the mesenteric lymph nodes, moult and the L4 then reach the lungs by the lymphatic-vascular route, the final moult occurring after arrival in the air passages.
The prepatent period is about 4 weeks.
During the prepatent period areas of pulmonary consolidation, bronchial muscular hypertrophy, and peribronchial lymphoid hyperplasia develop (Fig. 40), often accompanied by areas of overinflation.
PATHOGENESIS
When the worms are mature, and eggs are aspirated into the smaller air passages and parenchyma, consolidation increases and emphysema is more marked.
Hypersecretion of bronchiolar mucus also occurs during this stage.
About six weeks after infection, chronic bronchitis and emphysema are established and small greyish  nodules may be found in the posterior part of the diaphragmatic lobes; these may aggregate to form larger areas and are slow to resolve.
Purulent staphylococcal infection in the lungs has been noted in many cases of metastrongylosis.
Most infections are light and asymptomatic.
However in heavy infections coughing is marked, and is accompanied by dyspnoea and nasal discharge.
Secondary bacterial infection may complicate the signs.
CLINICAL SIGNS
Metastrongylosis shows a characteristic age distribution, bution, being most prevalent in pigs 4-6 months old.
The parasite is common in most countries although outbreaks of disease do not often occur, probably due to the fact that most systems of pig husbandry do not allow ready access to earthworms by pigs.
Though it is often suggested that Metastrongylus may transmit some of the porcine viruses, and may enhance the effect of viruses already present in the lungs, the role of the worm is not conclusively proven.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
For faecal examination saturated magnesium sulphate should be used as the flotation solution because of the heavy density of the eggs.
The small rough-shelled larvated eggs are characteristic, but it should be recollected that Metastrongylus is often present in normal pigs, and pulmonary signs may be referable to virus infection rather than lungworms.
The disease is most often encountered in pigs on pasture, though an occasional outbreak has occurred in yarded pigs.
DIAGNOSIS
Many anthelmintics including the modern benzimidazoles, levamisole and ivermectin are highly effective.
TREATMENT
When pig husbandry is based on pasture, control is extremely difficult because of the ubiquity and longevity of the earthworm intermediate host.
On farms where severe outbreaks have occurred pigs should be houses, dosed, and the infected pasture cultivated or grazed with other stock.
CONTROL
These worms all inhabit the lungs, but none is a major pathogen and, though common, they are of little economic importance compared with the other helminth parasites of sheep and goats.
Although there are several different genera they are sufficiently similar in behaviour to be considered together.
METASTRONGYLES OF SHEEP AND GOATS
Hosts: Sheep and goats Intermediate hosts: Molluscs: Muellerious in snails and slugs; Protostrongylus in snails Genera and sites: Muellerius capillaris found in alveoli Protostrongylus many species, found in small bronchioles Minor related genera are Cystocaulus, Spiculocaulus and Neostrongylus Distribution: Worldwide except for arctic and subarctic regions These are brown hair-like worms 1.0-3.0 cm long which are difficult to discern with the naked eye as they are embedded in lung tissue.
IDENTIFICATION
The worms are ovo-viviparous the L1 being passed in the faeces; these penetrate the foot of the molluscan intermediate host, and develop to L3 in a minimum period of 2-3 weeks.
The sheep is infected by ingesting the mollusc and the L3, freed by digestion, travel to the lungs by the lymphatic-vascular route, the parasitic moults occurring in the mesenteric lymph nodes and lungs.
LIFE CYCLE
The prepatent period of Muellerius is 6-10 weeks and that of Protostrongylus is 5-6 weeks.
The period of patency is very long, exceeding two years in all the genera examined.
Muellerius is associated with small, spherical, nodular lesions, which occur most commonly near, or on, the lung surface, and on palpation have the feel and size of lead shot (Fig. 41).
Nodules containing single worms are almost imperceptible, and the visible ones enclose several of the tiny worms as well as eggs and larvae.
PATHOGENESIS
In Protostrongylus infection there is a somewhat larger area of lung involvement, the occlusion of a small bronchus by worms resulting in its lesser branches which occur toward the lung surface being filled with eggs, larvae, and cellular debris; the whole lesion has a roughly conical form, with the base on the surface of the lung.
Pneumonic signs have rarely been observed, and infections are almost always inapparent, being identified only as necropsy.
CLINICAL SIGNS
Muellerius is by far the commonest genus, and in many temperate areas such as Britain, the eastern states of the U.S.A. and the winter rainfall regions of Australia, almost all sheep carry the infection; the extensive distribution and high prevalence are partly attributable to its wide range of intermediate hosts.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Prostostrongylus, whose intermediate host range is restricted to certain species of snail, has a lower prevalence, though its geographic range is just as wide.
Additional factors which play a part in ensuring the endemicity of these worms are, first, the ability of the L1 to survive for months in the faecal pellet, and secondly, the persistence of L3 in the intermediate host for the lifetime of the mollusc.
Also important in this respect are the long periods of patency and the apparent inability of the final host to develop acquired immunity, so that adult sheep have the heaviest infections and the highest prevalence.
The presence of infection is usually noted only during routine faecal examination.
The L1 are first differentiated from those of Dictyocaulus filaria by the absence of an anterior protoplasmic knob, and then on the individual characters of the larval tail (Fig. 42).
DIAGNOSIS
The modern benzimidazoles, levamisole and ivermectin have been shown to be effective.
TREATMENT
Because of the ubiquity of the molluscan intermediate hosts, and the fact that the L3 can survive as long as the molluscs, specific control is difficult, but fortunately rarely necessary.
CONTROL
Elaphostrongylus cervi is a metastrongyloid which occurs in farmed deer, including reindeer, in Europe, Asia and New Zealand.
It is found in the intermuscular connective tissue of the thorax and back, the eggs being carried in the bloodstream to the lungs, where they hatch and are coughed up and swallowed.
However, sometimes the worms invade the CNS to cause a meningoencephalitis with paralysis and occasional death.
In the muscles the parasites are harmless, but their presence may necessitate trimming of the carcass.
A related species, Parelaphostrongylus tenuis, whose natural host is the white-tailed deer in N. America occasionally invade the CNS of sheep causing paralysis.
Like most members of the superfamily, these worms live in, or adjacent to, the lungs.
The few genera of veterinary interest are considered in order of importance.
METASTRONGYLES OF DOGS AND CATS
This genus was, until recently, part of the larger genus Filaroides, but has now been separated on morphological grounds from the other members.
Though distinction has been made on morphology it is also useful from the veterinary standpoint, for it separates the single harmful species, Oslerus osleri, living in the upper air passages, from the relatively harmless species which are retained in the genus Filaroides, and which live in the lung parenchyma.
Oslerus (syn.
Filaroides)
Hosts: Domestic and wild dogs Site: The worms are embedded in fibrous nodules in the trachea at the region of bifurcation, and in the adjacent bronchi.
Species: Oslerus osleri Distribution: Worldwide Small, pale, slender worms, up to 1.5 cm long; the site and lesions are diagnostic.
IDENTIFICATION
Oslerus, and its closely related genus, Filaroides, are exceptional in the superfamily in having direct life cycles.
The females are ovo-viviparous, and most eggs hatch in the trachea.
Many larvae are coughed up and swallowed, and passed in the faeces and infection may occur by ingestion of these; more commonly, transmission occurs when an infected bitch licks the pup and  transfers the newly hatched L1 which are present in her sputum.
LIFE CYCLE
After ingestion, the first moult occurs in the small intestine and the L2 travel to the lungs by the lymphatic-vascular route.
Development through to L5 takes place in the alveoli and bronchi, and the adults migrate to the trachea.
The prepatent period varies from 10-18 weeks.
The nodules in which the worms live first appear at about two months from infection.
They are pinkish grey, and the small worms may be seen partly protruding from their surfaces.
These nodules are fibrous in character and are very firmly applied to the mucosa; they may be up to 2.0 cm in diameter.
Though the majority occur near the tracheal bifurcation a few may be found several centimetres from this area (Fig. 43).
PATHOGENESIS
Many infections are clinically inapparent, and the characteristic nodules are only discovered incidentally at necropsy.
CLINICAL SIGNS
The majority signs of Oslerus infection are respiratory distress and a rasping cough, especially after exercise.
The most severe cases have usually been seen in dogs of 6-12 months old, and obviously the infection is of greater importance in working dogs.
In household pets whose exercise is limited the presence of the tracheal nodules is well tolerated, and animals can survive for long periods with little distress.
Though Oslerus has been recorded from many countries there is little data on its local prevalence.
In the south of England one survey has given a figure of 6% for all types of dog.
In further surveys in that area, greyhounds have shown a prevalence rate of 18%, but there is no evidence of breed susceptibility.
In general the focus of infection appears to be the nursing bitch.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Swabs of pharyngeal mucus give variable results and repeated sampling may be necessary.
However, in paroxysmal coughing, large amounts of bronchial mucus are often expelled, containing large numbers of larvae.
Less rewarding techniques are those based on faecal examination, either by flotation or by the Baerman method.
DIAGNOSIS
Although requiring general anaesthesia, bronchoscopy is the most reliable method, as it will indicate not only the presence, size and location of many of the nodules, but will also allow the collection of tracheal mucus for confirmatory examination for eggs and larvae; the latter are invariably coiled, sluggish and have an S-shaped tail (Fig. 44).
Large nodules may be detected by lateral thoracic radiography.
Evidence for successful treatment is conflicting.
There are reports of amelioration of clinical signs, apparently due to a reduction in the size of the nodules, after prolonged treatment with some benzimidazoles, such as fenbendazole and oxfendazole at increased dosage rates.
However, consistent evidence of therapeutic success is lacking, although total suppression of larval output has been demonstrated during the period of drug administration.
TREATMENT
This is difficult unless infected bitches can be identified and treated before whelping and during lactation, but even in this event, until drugs are available which will give total clearance, the only certain measure is the removal of pups from infected dams at birth, and hand-rearing or fostering on uninfected bitches.
CONTROL
Host: Domestic dog and wild carnivores Site: Lung parenchyma Species: Filaroides milksi F. hirthi Distribution: North America, Europe and Japan The worms are very small, slender, hair-like and greyish, and are not only difficult to see with the naked eye in the lung parenchyma, but are unlikely to be recovered intact from the tissue.
A squeeze preparation from a cut surface of the lung will show worm fragments, eggs and larvae, and this, with the host and site, is sufficient for generic diagnosis.
Filaroides
IDENTIFICATION
The worms are ovo-viviparous and the hatched L1 are passed in faeces or expelled in sputum.
Though infection may be acquired by ingestion of faecal larvae, the important route, as in Oslerus infection, is thought to be by transfer of L1 in the bitch's saliva when the pup is licked.
The prepatent period of F. hirthi is five weeks; that of F. milksi is unknown.
LIFE CYCLE
The chief lesions are the small, soft, greyish miliary nodules which are associated with the presence of worms and which are distributed subpleurally and throughout the lung parenchyma; in heavy infections, sometimes observed in experimental dogs subjected to immunosuppressive drugs, the nodules may coalesce into greyish masses.
PATHOGENESIS
Infection is almost invariably asymptomatic, and is discovered only at post mortem examination.
However, in the rare heavy infection, hyperpnoea may occur.
CLINICAL SIGNS
Little is known of the epidemiology.
F. hirthi was first observed in a breeding colony of experimental beagles, and it would be fair to suggest, in view of its mode of transmission, that a high prevalence could be expected in dogs from breeding kennels.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Only F. hirthi has been diagnosed in the live animal and this was in experimental dogs.
The L1, present in the faeces and sputum, is coiled, and the tail has a notch, followed by a constriction, and has a terminal lance-like point.
DIAGNOSIS
Albendazole has been reported to be effective.
TREATMENT
Unlikely to be required.
CONTROL
One species, Aelurostrongylus abstrusus, is common in the lungs of the domestic cat.
Aelurostrongylus
Hosts: Cats  Intermediate hosts: Many molluscs Site: Lung parenchyma and small bronchioles Species: Aelurostrongylus abstrusus Distribution: Worldwide Aggregations of worms, eggs and larvae are present throughout the lung tissue.
The worms, about 1.0 cm long, are very slender and delicate, and are difficult to recover intact for examination; a squeeze preparation from a cut surface of the lung will show the worm material including the characteristic L1.
IDENTIFICATION
The worms are ovo-viviparous, and the L1 are passed in the faeces.
These penetrate the foot of the molluscan intermediate host and develop to the infective L3, and during this phase the mollusc may be eaten by paratenic hosts such as birds and rodents.
The cat is infected by ingestion of these hosts and the L3, released in the alimentary tract, travel to the lungs by the lymphatic or blood stream.
LIFE CYCLE
The prepatent period is between 4-6 weeks, and the duration of patency is about four months, though some worms may survive i the lungs for several years despite the absence of larvae in the faeces.
The worm generally has a low pathogenicity, and the majority of infections are discovered only incidentally at post mortem examination.
In most cases the lungs show only multiple small foci with greyish centres containing the worms and tissue debris, but in the rare severe infections larger nodules are present, up to 1.0 cm in diameter with caseous centres, projecting from the lung surface; these nodules may coalesce to form areas of consolidation.
Microscopically the alveoli are seen to be blocked with worms, eggs, larvae, and cellular aggregations which may progress to granuloma formation (Fig. 45).
A characteristic change is muscular hypertrophy and hyperplasia, which affects not only the bronchioles and alveolar ducts, but also the media of the pulmonary arteries.
PATHOGENESIS
With the exception of the muscular changes, which appear to be irreversible, resolution is rapid, and the lungs appear almost completely normal within six months of experimental infection, though a few worms may still be present.
The clinical effects are slight, and in the resting cat are limited to a chronic mild cough; following exercise or handling, there may be coughing and sneezing with slight dyspnoea and production of mucoid sputum.
In heavy experimental infections the most severe signs have appeared at 6-12 weeks after infection when egg-laying is maximal.
CLINICAL SIGNS
Aelurostrongylus infection is widespread partly because it is almost indiscriminate in its ability to develop in slugs and snails, and partly because of its wide range of paratenic hosts.
So far all surveys have shown prevalences greater than 5%.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Repeated faecal examination by smear, flotation, or Baerman technique may be necessary to find the characteristic teristic L1, which bears a subterminal spine on its S-shaped tail.
Examination of pharyngeal swabs may be a useful additional procedure.
Radiography has revealed the increased vascular and focal parenchymal densities which would be expected from the changes described above.
DIAGNOSIS
Fenbendazole has proved effective.
TREATMENT
In household pets, and especially in those of a nomadic disposition, access to the intermediate and paratenic hosts is difficult to prevent.
CONTROL
The single species of veterinary importance is not found in lung tissue, but in the heart and associated pulmonary vessels.
Anglostrongylus
Host: Dog Intermediate hosts: Land snails and slugs Site: Right ventricle and pulmonary artery Species: Angiostrongylus vasorum Distribution: Worldwide except in the Americas Slender worms, up to 2.5 cm long.
In the female the white ovaries are coiled round the red intestine as in Haemonchus spp.
IDENTIFICATION
The genus is ovo-viviparous.
The adult worms in the larger pulmonary vessels lay eggs which are carried to the capillaries, where they hatch.
The L1 break into the alveoli, migrate to the trachea and thence to the alimentary tract to be passed in the faeces.
Further development takes place after entry into the intermediate host, the infective stag being reached in 17 days.
LIFE CYCLE
After the mollusc has been ingested by the dog the infective L3, freed by digestion, travel to the lymph nodes adjacent to the alimentary tract, where both parasitic moults take place, and then to the vascular predilection site"L5 have also been found in the liver.
The prepatent period is seven weeks, and the worms can live in the dog for more than two years.
Canine angiostrongylosis is usually a chronic condition, extending over months or even years.
PATHOGENESIS
Much of the pathogenic effect is attributable to the presence of the adult worms in the larger vessels and eggs and larvae in the pulmonary arterioles and capillaries.
Blockage of these results in circulatory impediment which may lead eventually to congestive cardiac failure.
In the larger vessels, there is endarteritis and periarteritis which progresses to fibrosis, and at necropsy the vessels have a pipe-stem feel on palpation.
The vascular change may extend to the right ventricle, with endocarditis involving the tricuspid valve.
The cut surface of the lung is mottled and reddish-purple.
One reported systemic effect which is unusual in helminth infections is interference with the blood-clotting mechanism, so that subcutaneous haematomata may be present.
In recently established infections the resting dog usually shows no clinical signs, but if a substantial number of worms is present the active animal will show tachypnoea, with a heavy productive cough, the sputum sometimes showing blood.
CLINICAL SIGNS
In longer established severe infections signs are present even in the resting dog.
There may be recurrent syncope.
As a consequence of reduced blood-clotting capacity, slowly developing painless swellings may appear in dependent areas such as the lower abdomen and intermandibular space, and on the limbs where bruising has occurred.
The rare acute infection shows dyspnoea and violent cough, with white-yellow, occasionally bloody, sputum.
Though worldwide in general distribution, A. vasorum is only prevalent in certain localities, and these are invariably rural.
In Europe, endemic foci have been recognised in France, Spain, Eire and England.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The L1, which may be present in faeces and sputum, has a small cephalic button, and a wavy tail with a subterminal notch, and its presence in association with respiratory and circulatory signs is accepted as confirmatory.
DIAGNOSIS
Mebendazole is effective if given daily for five days.
TREATMENT
Control is impractical in most cases, due to the ubiquity of the molluscan intermediate hosts.
CONTROL
[Angiostrongylus cantonensis, which is normally parasitic in the pulmonary artery of rats in the Far East, may cause disease in humans if the infected molluscs or crustacean paratenic hosts are ingested.
The L3 travel to the brain, where they cause an eosinophilic meningoencephalitis, which may prove fatal.]
This genus contains several species parasitic in  carnivores and insectivores, but only one is of veterinary interest.
Crenosoma
Hosts: Dogs and farmed foxes Intermediate hosts: Mainly land snails Site: Trachea, bronchi and bronchioles Species: Crenosoma vulpis Distribution: Worldwide Slender white worms, up to 1.5 cm long.
The host and site are sufficient for generic diagnosis.
Microscopic confirmation is based on the presence of annular folds of the cuticle which bear small backwardly-directed spines on their margins.
IDENTIFICATION
C. vulpis is ovo-viviparous and L1 are passed in the faeces.
After ingestion of the molluscan intermediate host by the final host the L3 are released by digestion, and travel to the lungs where both parasitic moults take place.
The prepatent period is 19 days.
LIFE CYCLE
The spiny cuticular folds abrade the mucosa of the air passages with resulting bronchopneumonia and occlusion of the smaller bronchi and bronchioles.
PATHOGENESIS
The symptoms are those of a chronic respiratory infection, with coughing, sneezing, and nasal discharge associated with tachypnoea.
Foxes may become emaciated, with fur of poor quality.
CLINICAL SIGNS
In the infrequent acute infections there may be high mortality.
C. vulpis is commoner in the fox than in the dog, and can be a problem in farmed foxes.
The infection has a seasonality corresponding to fluctuations in population of its snail vectors so that, though cubs may begin to acquire L3 in early summer, the highest incidence of clinical crenosomiasis is seen in autumn.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
Examination of faeces by smear, flotation, or Baerman technique will reveal the L1 with a straight tail which differentiates it in fresh canine faeces from those of Oslerus, Filaroides and Angiostrongylus.
The L1 resembles somewhat that of Strongyloides spp.
DIAGNOSIS
Diethycarbamazine has been reported to be effective.
TREATMENT
The snail vectors may be eliminated by spraying fox runs with molluscicide and painting woodwork with creosote up to 20 cm from the ground.
Faeces should be disposed of in a manner which will avoid access by molluscs.
CONTROL
Several other metastrongyloid genera occur in the domestic carnivores, but they are limited in distribution.
They include Metathelazia, found in domestic cats in Russia, and in wild cats in the U.S.A., Anafilaroides in the domestic cat in U.S.A., Sri Lanka, and Israel, and Gurltia in cats in South America.
Metathelazia and Anafilaroides inhabit the lung parenchyma, whilst Gurltia is found in the veins of the upper hind limb and is an occasional cause of paralysis.
OTHER METASTRONGYLOIDS
Superfamily RHABDITOIDEA
This is a primitive group of nematodes which are mostly free-living, or parasitic in lower vertebrates and invertebrates.
Although a few normally free-living genera such as Micronema and Rhabditis occasionally cause problems in animals, the only important genus from the veterinary point of view is Strongyloides.
Members of this genus are common parasites of the small intestine in very young animals and, although generally of little pathogenic significance, under certain circumstances may give rise to a severe enteritis.
Strongyloides
Hosts: Most animals Site: Small intestine.
Also caecum in poultry  Species: Strongyloides westeri Horses and donkeys S. papillosus Ruminants S. stercoralis Dogs and cats; man S. avium Poultry Distribution: Worldwide Gross: Slender, hair-like worms generally less than 1.0 cm long.
Microscopic: Only females are parasitic.
The long oesophagus may occupy up to one-third of the body length and the uterus is intertwined with the intestine giving the appearance of twisted thread.
Unlike other intestinal parasites of similar size the tail has a blunt point (Fig. 46).
IDENTIFICATION
Strongyloides eggs are oval, thin-shelled and small, being half the size of typical strongyle eggs (Fig. 47).
In herbivores it is the larvated egg which is passed out in the faeces but in other animals it is the hatched L1.
Strongyloides is unique among the nematodes of veterinary importance being capable of both parasitic and free-living reproductive cycles.
The parasitic phase is composed entirely of female worms in the small intestine and these produce larvated eggs by parthenogenesis, ie. development from an unfertilised egg.
After hatching, larvae may develop through four larval stages into free-living adult male and female worms and this can be followed by a succession of free-living generations.
However under certain conditions, possibly related to temperature and moisture, the L3 can become parasitic infecting the host by skin penetration or ingestion and migrating via the venous system, the lungs and trachea to develop into adult female worms in the small intestine.
LIFE CYCLE
Foals, lambs and piglets may acquire infection immediately after birth from the mobilisation of arrested larvae in the tissues of the ventral abdominal wall of the dam which are subsequently excreted in the milk.
In addition, prenatal infection has been demonstrated experimentally in pigs and cattle.
The prepatent period is from 8-14 days.
Skin penetration by infective larvae may cause an erythematous reaction which in sheep can allow the  entry of Bacteroides nodosus, the causative organism of foot-rot.
Passage of larvae through the lungs has been shown experimentally to result in multiple small haemorrhages visible over most of the lung surfaces.
PATHOGENESIS
Mature parasites are found in the duodenum and proximal jejunum and if present in large numbers may cause inflammation with oedema and erosion of the epithelium.
This results in a catarrhal enteritis with impairment of digestion and absorption.
The common clinical signs usually seen only in very young animals, are diarrhoea, anorexia, dullness, loss of weight or reduced growth rate.
CLINICAL SIGNS
Strongyloides infective larvae are not ensheathed and are susceptible to extreme climatic conditions.
However, warmth and moisture favour development and allow the accumulation of large numbers of infective stages.
For this reason it can be a major problem in houses calves up to six months of age in some Mediterranean countries.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
A second major source of infection for the very young animal is the reservoir of larvae in the tissues of their dams and this may lead to clinical strongyloidiasis in foals and piglets in the first weeks of life.
Successive progeny from the same dam often shown heavy infections.
The clinical signs in very young animals, usually within the first few weeks of life, together with the finding of large numbers of the characteristic eggs or larvae in the faeces are suggestive of strongyloidiasis.
It should be emphasised however that high faecal egg counts may be found in apparently healthy animals.
DIAGNOSIS
Specific control measures for Strongyloides infection are rarely called for.
The benzimidazoles and ivermectin may be used for the treatment of clinical cases and a single dose of ivermectin 4-16 days prior to farrowing has been shown to suppress larval excretion in the milk of sows.
TREATMENT AND CONTROL
Several members of this free-living genus of nematodes may become casual parasites, invading the skin and causing an intense pruritus.
Cases have been most frequently reported in dogs houses in kennels with damp hay or straw bedding and the lesions, usually confined to areas of the body in contact with the ground, show hair loss, erythema, and pustule formation if infected with bacteria.
The very small worms 1.0-2.8 mm in length with a rhabditiform oesophagus may be recovered from skin scrapings.
Treatment is symptomatic and the condition can be prevented by housing animals on clean, dry bedding.
Rhabditis
In East African cattle, otitis externa associated with Rhabditis infection has been reported.
Occasional cases of infection of horses with the saprophytic, free-living nematode Micronema deletrix have been described from various parts of the world.
In affected animals the very small worms, less than 0.5 mm in length, have been found in nasal and maxillary granulomata and in the brain and kidney.
Severe nervous signs and death appear to accompany infection of the central nervous system.
Micronema
[Strongyloidiasis in man: S. stercoralis occurs in man in warm climates.
It produces diarrhoea, especially in young children, and in immunologically compromised adults may multiply within the host with fatal consequences.
The dog may act as a natural host for this species.]
Superfamily ASCARIDOIDEA
The ascaridoids are among the largest nematodes and occur in most domestic animals, both larval and adult stages being of veterinary importance.
While the adults in the intestine may cause unthriftiness in young animals, and occasional obstruction, an important feature of the group is the pathological consequences of the migratory behaviour of the larval stages.
With a few exceptions the genera have the following characters in common:
They are large, white opaque worms which inhabit the small intestine.
There is no buccal capsule, the mouth consisting simply of a small opening surrounded by three lips.
The common mode of infection is by ingestion of the thick-shelled egg containing the L2.
However, the cycle may involve transport and paratenic hosts.
Ascaris Host: Pig Site: Small intestine Species: Ascaris suum Distribution: Worldwide   A. suum is by far the largest nematode of the pig; the females are up to 40.0 cm long, and could only be confused with Macrocanthorhyncus where this occurs.
IDENTIFICATION
The egg is ovoid and yellowish, with a thick shell, the outer layer of which is irregularly mamillated (Fig. 48).
The life cycle is direct.
Though the single preparasitic moult occurs at about three weeks after the egg is passed, a period of maturation is necessary, and it is not infective until a minimum of four weeks after being passed, even in the optimal temperature range of 22-26oC.
LIFE CYCLE
The egg is very resistant to temperature extremes, and is viable for more than four years.
After infection, the egg hatches in the small intestine and the L2 travels to the liver, where the first parasitic moult takes place.
The L3 then passes in the bloodstream to the lungs and thence to the small intestine via the trachea.
In the intestine the final two parasitic moults occur.
If the eggs are ingested by a earthworm or dung beetle they will hatch, and the L2 travel to the tissues of these paratenic hosts, where they can remain, fully infective for pigs, for a long period.
The prepatent period is between 6-8 weeks, and each female worm is capable of producing more than 200,000 eggs per day
The migrating larval stages in large numbers may cause a transient pneumonia, but it is now recognised that many cases of so-called "Ascaris pneumonia" may be attributable to other infections, or to piglet anaemia.
PATHOGENESIS
In the liver, the migrating L2 and L3 can cause "milk spot" which appears as cloudy whitish spots of up to 1.0 cm in diameter, and represents the fibrous repair of inflammatory reactions to the passage of larvae in the livers of previously sensitised pigs (P1.IV).
The adult worms in the intestine cause little apparent damage to the mucosa, but occasionally, if large numbers are present, there may be obstruction, and rarely a worm may migrate into the bile duct, causing obstructive jaundice and carcass condemnation.
Experimental infections have shown that in young pigs the important effect of alimentary ascariasis is economic, with poor feed conversion and slower weight gains, leading to an extension of the fattening period by 6-8 weeks.
The main effect of the adult worms is to cause production loss in terms of diminished weight gain.
Otherwise, clinical signs are absent except in the occasional case of intestinal or biliary obstruction.
In piglets under four months old, larval activity during he pulmonary phase of migration may cause a clinically evident pneumonia which is usually transient an rapidly resolving.
CLINICAL SIGNS
A partial age immunity operates in pigs from about four months of age onwards, and this, coupled with the fact that the worms themselves have a limited life-span of several months, would suggest that the main source of infection is the highly resistant egg on the ground, a common characteristic of the ascaridoids.
Hence "milk spot" , which is economically very important, since it is a cause of much liver condemnation, presents a continuous problem in some pig establishments.
This condition has been widely noted to have a distinct, seasonality of occurrence, appearing in greatest incidence in temperate areas during the warm summer months, and almost disappearing when the temperatures of autumn, winter and spring are too low to allow development of eggs to the infective stage.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
A. suum may occasionally infect cattle, causing an acute, atypical, interstitial pneumonia, which may prove fatal.
In most cases reported the cattle have had access to housing previously occupied by pigs, sometimes several years before, or to land fertilised with pig manure.
In lambs, A. suum may also be a cause of clinical pneumonia as well as "milk spot" lesions, resulting in condemnation of livers.
In most cases lambs have been grazed on land fertilised with pig manure or slurry, such pasture remaining infective for lambs, even after ploughing and cropping.
Young adults of A. suum are occasionally found in the small intestine of sheep.
There are a few recorded cases of patent A. suum infection in man.
Diagnosis is based on clinical signs, and in infections with the adult worm, on the presence of faeces of the yellow-brown, ovoid eggs, with thick mamillated shells.
Being dense, the egg float more readily in saturated solutions of zinc sulphate or magnesium sulphate than in the saturated sodium chloride solution which is used in most faecal examination techniques.
DIAGNOSIS
The intestinal stages are susceptible to most of the anthelmintics in current use in pigs, and the majority of these, such as the benzimidazoles, dichlorvos, or tetramisole are given in the feed.
In cases of suspected Ascaris pneumonia injectable levamisole and ivermectin may be more convenient.
TREATMENT
In the past, elaborate control systems have been designed for ascariasis in pigs, but with the appearance of highly effective anthelmintics these labour-intensive systems are falling into disuse.
CONTROL
The chief problem in control is the great survival capacity of the eggs, but in housed pigs, strict hygiene in feeding and bedding, with frequent hosing of walls and floors, will limit the risk of infection.
In pigs on free range the problem is greater, and where there is serious ascariasis it may be necessary to discontinue the use of paddocks for several years, since the eggs can survive cultivation.
It is good practise to treat in-pig sows at entry to the farrowing pen, and on farms where ascariasis is prevalent young pigs should receive anthelmintic treatment at 5-6 weeks of age, and again 4 weeks later.
[Ascariasis in man: The type species, Ascaris lumbricoides, occurs in man, and at one time it was not differentiated from A. suum, so that the pig was thought to present a zoonotic risk for man.
With morphological distinction now possible.
A lumbricoides is accepted as specific for man, and is irrelevant to veterinary medicine.]
Though the members of this genus are in many respects typical ascaridoids, their biology is sufficiently varied for it to be necessary to consider each species separately.
Toxocara
Apart from its veterinary importance, this species is responsible for the most widely recognised form of visceral larva migrans in man.
Toxocara canis
Host: Dog Site: Small intestine Distribution: Worldwide Toxocara canis is a large white worm up to 10.0 cm in length, and in the dog can be confused only with Toxascaris leonina.
Differentiation of these two species is difficult, as the only useful character, visible with a hand lens, is the presence of a small finger-like process on the tail of the male T. canis.
IDENTIFICATION
The egg is dark brown and subglobular, with a thick, pitted shell (Fig. 49).
This species has the most complex life cycle in the super-family, with four possible modes of infection:
LIFE CYCLE
The basic form is typically ascaridoid, the egg containing the L2 being infective, at optimal temperatures, four weeks after being passed.
After ingestion, and hatching in the small intestine, the L2 travel by the bloodstream via the liver to the lungs, where the second moult occurs, the L3 returning via the trachea to the intestine where the final two moults take place.
This form of infection occurs regularly only in dogs of up to three months old.
In dogs over three months of age, the hepatic-tracheal migration occurs less frequently, and at six months it has almost ceased.
Instead, the L2 travel to a wide range of tissues including the liver, lungs, brain, heart and skeletal muscle, and the walls of the alimentary tract.
In the pregnant bitch, prenatal infection occurs, larvae becoming mobilised at about three weeks prior to parturition and migrating to the lungs of the foetus where they moult to L3 just before birth.
In the newborn pup the cycle is completed when the larvae travel to the intestine via the trachea, and the final moults occur.
A bitch, once infected, will usually harbour sufficient larvae to infect all her subsequent litters, even if she never again encounters the infection.
A few of these mobilised larvae, instead of going to the uterus, complete the normal migration in the bitch, and the resulting adult worms produce a transient but marked increase in faecal Toxocara egg output in the weeks following parturition.
The suckling pup may also be infected by ingestion of L3 in the milk during the first three weeks of lactation.
There is no migration in the pup following infection by this route.
Paratenic hosts such as rodents or birds may ingest the infective eggs, and the L2 travel to their tissues where they remain until eaten by a dog when subsequent development is apparently confined to the gastrointestinal tract.
A final complication is recent evidence that bitches may be reinfected during late pregnancy or lactation, leading directly to transmammary infection of the suckling pups, and, once patency is established in the bitch, to contamination of the environment with eggs.
The known minimum prepatent periods are:
Direct infection following ingestion of eggs or larvae in a paratenic host: 4-5 weeks Prenatal infection: 3 weeks.
In moderate infections, the larval migratory phase is accomplished without any apparent damage to the tissues, and the adult worms provoke little reaction in the intestine.
PATHOGENESIS
In heavy infections the pulmonary phase of larval migration is associated with pneumonia, which is sometimes accompanied by pulmonary oedema; the adult worms cause a mucoid enteritis, there may be partial or complete occlusion of the gut (P1.IV) and, in rare cases, perforation with peritonitis or in some instances blockage of the bile duct.
In mild to moderate infections, there are no clinical signs during the pulmonary phase of larval migration.
The adults in the intestine may cause pot-belly, with failure to thrive, and occasional diarrhoea.
Entire worms are sometimes vomited or passed in the faeces.
CLINICAL SIGNS
The signs in heavy infections during larval migration result from pulmonary damage and include coughing, increased respiratory rate, and a frothy nasal discharge.
Most fatalities from T. canis infection occur during the pulmonary phase, and pups which have been heavily infected transplacentally may die within a few days of birth.
Nervous convulsions have been attributed by some clinicians to toxocariasis, but there is still some disagreement on whether the parasite can be implicated as a cause of these signs.
Surveys of T. canis prevalence in dogs have been carried out in most countries and have shown a wide range of infection rates, from 5% to over 80%.
The highest prevalences have been recorded in dogs of less than six months of age, with the fewest worms in adult animals.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The widespread distribution and high intensity of infection with T. canis depend essentially on three factors:
First, the females are extremely fecund, one worm being able to contribute about 700 eggs to each gram of faeces per day, and egg counts of 15,000 epg are not uncommon in pups.
Second, the eggs are highly resistant to climatic extremes, and can survive for years on the ground.
Third, there is a constant reservoir of infection in the somatic tissues of the bitch, and larvae in these sites are insusceptible to most anthelmintics.
Only a tentative diagnosis is possible during the pulmonary phase of heavy infections when the larvae are migrating, and is based on the simultaneous appearance of pneumonic signs in a litter, often within two weeks of birth.
DIAGNOSIS
The eggs in faeces, subglobular and brown with thick pitted shells, are species-diagnostic.
The egg production of the worms is so high that there is no need to use flotation methods, and they are readily found in simple faecal smears to which a drop of water has been added.
The adult worms are easily removed by anthelmintic treatment.
The most popular drug used has been piperazine although this is being superseded by the benzimidazoles, fenbendazole and mebendazole and by nitroscanate.
TREATMENT AND CONTROL
A simple and frequently recommended regime for control of toxocariasis in young dogs is as follows:
All pups should be dosed at 2 weeks of age, and again 2 weeks later, to eliminate prenatally-acquired infection.
It is also recommended that the bitch should also be treated at the same time as the pups.
A further dose should be given to the pups at two months old, to eliminate any infection acquired from the milk of the dam or from any increase in faecal egg output by the dam in the weeks following whelping.
Newly purchased pups should be dosed twice at an interval of 14 days.
Since there are likely to be a few worms present, even in adult dogs, in spite of the diversion of the majority of larvae to the somatic tissues, it is recommended that adult dogs should be treated every six months throughout their lives.
It has recently been shown that daily administration of high doses of fenbendazole to the bitch from three weeks pre-partum to three weeks post-partum has largely eliminated transmammary and prenatal infection of the pups, although residual infection in the brain may persist.
This regimen may be useful in breeding kennels.
Though this term was originally applied to invasion of the visceral tissues of an animal by parasites whose natural hosts were other animals, it has now, in common usage, come to represent this type of invasion in humans alone and, in particular, by the larvae of Toxocara canis.
Its complementary term is cutaneous larva migrans, for infections by "foreign" larvae which are limited to the skin.
VISCERAL LARVA MIGRANS
The condition occurs most commonly in children who have had close contact with household pets, or who have frequented areas such as public parks where there is contamination of the ground by dog faeces.
Surveys of such areas in many countries have almost invariably shown the presence of viable eggs of T. canis in around 10% of soil samples.
Despite this high risk of exposure to infection, the reported incidence of clinical cases is small.
For example, in 1979 a French survey of the world literature reported that only 430 cases of ocular, and 350 cases of visceral, larva migrans had been recorded.
However, it has been suggested that 50-60 clinical cases occur in Britain each year, sine many are not recorded.
In many cases larval invasion is limited to the liver, and may give rise to hepatomegaly and eosinophilia, but on some occasions a larva escapes into the general circulation and arrives in another organ, the most frequently noted being the eye.
Here, a granuloma forms around the larva on the retina, often resembling a retinoblastoma, and there have been cases of precipitate removal of the eye in children following misdiagnosis.
Only in rare cases does the granuloma involve the optic disc, with total loss of vision, and most reports are of partial impairment of vision, with endophthalmitis or granulomatous retinitis.
Such cases are currently treated using laser therapy.
In a few cases of epilepsy, T. canis infection has been identified serologically, but the significance of the association has yet to be established.
Control of visceral larva migrans is based on the anthelmintic regimen described above, on the safe disposal of dog faeces in houses and gardens, and on the limitation of access by dogs to areas where children play, such as public parks.
Host: Cat Site: Small intestine Distribution: Worldwide Typically of the superfamily, Toxocara cati is a large white worm, often occurring as a mixed infection with the other ascaridoid of carnivores, Toxascaris leonina.
Differentiation (Fig. 50) is readily made between the two on gross examination or with a hand lens, when the cervical alae of T. cati are seen to have an arrow-head form, with the posterior margins almost at a right angle to the body, whereas those of Toxascaris taper gradually into the body.
The male, like that of T. canis, has a small finger-like process at the tip of the tail.
Toxocara cati
IDENTIFICATION
The egg, subglobular, with a thick, pitted shell and almost colourless, is characteristic in cat faeces.
Like T. canis, the life cycle of T. cati is migratory when infection occurs by ingestion of the L2 in the egg and non-migratory after transmammary infection with L3 or after ingestion of a paratenic host.
However, unlike T. canis prenatal infection does not occur.
LIFE CYCLE
The prepatent period from egg infection is about eight weeks.
Because the majority of infections are acquired either in the milk of the dam or by ingestion of paratenic hosts, there is no migratory phase and any changes are usually confined to the intestine, showing as pot-belly, diarrhoea, poor coat and failure to thrive.
PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL SIGNS
The epidemiology of T. cati depends largely on a reservoir of larvae in the tissues of the dam which are mobilised late in pregnancy and excreted in the milk throughout lactation.
The paratenic host is also of considerable significance because of the strong hunting instinct of cats.
Exposure to the latter route of infection does not occur until kittens begin to hunt for themselves or to share the prey of their dams.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The subglobular eggs, with thick, pitted shells, are easily recognised in faeces.
DIAGNOSIS
This is similar to that described for T. canis in dogs.
TREATMENT
Since infection is first acquired during suckling, complete control would be based on removal of kittens from the dam and artificial rearing.
In most cases, adequate control is achieved by early and repeated administration of anthelmintics to kittens along the lines recommended for T. canis in pups.
CONTROL
T. cati has been reported as a rare cause of visceral larva migrans in man.
Hosts: Cattle and buffalo Site: Small intestine Distribution: Mainly in tropical and warm regions T. vitulorum is the largest intestinal parasite of cattle, the females being up to 30.0 cm long.
It is a thick worm, pinkish when fresh, and the cuticle is rather transparent so that the internal organs can be seen.
Toxocara vitulorum (syn.
Neoascaris vitulorum)
IDENTIFICATION
The egg is subglobular, with a thick pitted shell, and is almost colourless.
The life cycle of this species resembles that of T. cati, in that the most important source of infection is the milk of the dam in which larvae are present for up to 30 days after parturition.
There is no tissue migration in the calf following infection and the prepatent period is 3-4 weeks.
LIFE CYCLE
The ingestion of larvated eggs by calves over 6 months old seldom results in patency, the larvae migrating to the tissues where they are stored; in female animals, resumption of development in late pregnancy allows further transmammary transmission.
The main effects of this infection appear to be caused by the adult worms in the intestines of calves up to six months old.
Heavy infections are associated with poor thriving and intermittent diarrhoea, and in buffalo calves particularly, fatalities may occur.
PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL SIGNS
The most important feature is the reservoir of larvae in the tissues of the cow, with subsequent milk-borne transmission ensuring that calves are exposed to infection from the first day of life.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The subglobular eggs, with thick, pitted shells, are characteristic in bovine faeces.
DIAGNOSIS
The adult worms are susceptible to a wide range of  anthelmintics including piperazine, levamisole and the benzimidazoles.
All these drugs are also effective against developing stages in the intestine.
TREATMENT
The prevalence of infection can be dramatically reduced by treatment of calves at three and six weeks of age preventing developing worms reaching patency.
CONTROL
This genus occurs in domestic carnivores, and though common, is of less significance than Toxocara because its parasitic phase is non-migratory.
Toxascaris
Hosts: Dog and cat Site: Small intestine Species: Toxascaris leonina Distribution: Worldwide Toxascaris is almost indistinguishable grossly from Toxocara canis, the only point of difference being the presence of a finger-like process at the tip of the male tail of the latter.
In the cat, differentiation from T. cati is based on the shape of the cervical alae, which are lanceolate in Toxascaris but arrow-head shaped in T. cati (Fig. 50).
IDENTIFICATION
The egg is slightly ovoid, with a smooth thick shell, and is characteristic in dog and cat faeces (Dig.
51).
Infection is by ingestion of the L2 in the egg or as larvae in the tissues of mice and subsequent development takes place entirely in the wall and lumen of the intestine, there being no migratory phase.
The prepatent period is around 11 weeks.
LIFE CYCLE
Since ascarid infections in the domestic carnivores invarably include Toxocara, the measures recommended for control of the latter will also have an effect on Toxascaris.
TREATMENT AND CONTROL
Since the two main reservoirs of infection are larvae in the prey or eggs on the ground, control has to be based on treatment of worm infection in the host animals, and on adequate hygiene to limit the possibility of acquisition of infection by ingestion of eggs.
Infection with Parascaris equorum is common throughout the world and is a major cause of unthriftiness in young foals.
Parascaris
Hosts: Horses and donkeys Site: Small intestine Species: Parascaris equorum Distribution: Worldwide   Gross: This very large whitish nematode, up to 40 cms in length, cannot be confused with any other intestinal parasite of equines (Fig. 52).
Microscopic: The adult parasites have a simple mouth opening surrounded by three large lips and in the male the tail has small caudal alae.
IDENTIFICATION
The egg of P. equorum is almost spherical, brownish and thick-shelled with an outer pitted coat.
The life cycle is direct.
Eggs produced by the adult female worms are passed in the faeces and can reach the infective stage containing the L2 (Fig. 53) in as little as 10-14 days, although development may be delayed at low temperatures.
After ingestion and hatching the larvae penetrate the intestinal wall and within 48 hours have reached the liver.
By two weeks they have arrived in the lungs where they migrate up the bronchi and trachea, are swallowed, and return to the small intestine.
The site of occurrence and timing of the parasitic larval moults of P. equorum are not precisely known, but it would appear that the moult from L2 to L3 occurs between the intestinal mucosa and the liver and the two subsequent moults in the small intestine.
LIFE CYCLE
The minimum prepatent period of P. equorum is 10 weeks.
There is no evidence of prenatal infection.
Gross changes are provoked in the liver and lungs by migrating P. equorum larvae.
In the liver, larvae cause focal haemorrhages and eosinophilic tracts which resolve leaving whitish areas of fibrosis.
Larval migration in the lungs also leads to haemorrhage and infiltration by eosinophils which are later replaced by accumulations of lymphocytes, while sub-pleural greyish-green lymphocytic nodules develop around dead or dying larvae; these nodules are more numerous following reinfection.
PATHOGENESIS
Although the presence of worms in the small intestine is not associated with any specific lesions, occasionally, heavy infections have been reported as a cause of impaction and perforation leading peritonitis.
However, under experimental conditions, unthriftiness is a major sign and despite maintaining a good appetite infected foals lose weight and may become emaciated.
Competition between a large mass of parasites and the host for nutrients may be the underlying cause of this weight loss.
During the migratory phase of experimental infections, up to four weeks following infection, the major signs are frequent coughing accompanied in some cases by a greyish nasal discharge although the foals remain bright and alert.
Light intestinal infections are well tolerated, but moderate to heavy infections will cause unthriftiness in young animals with poor growth rates, dull coats and lassitude.
CLINICAL SIGNS
A wide variety of other clinical signs including fever, nervous disturbances and colic have been attributed to field cases of parascariasis, but these have not been observed in experimental studies.
There are two important factors.
First, the high fecundity of the adult female parasite, some infected foals passing millions of eggs in the faeces each day.
Secondly, the extreme resistance of the egg in the environment ensures its persistence for several years.
The sticky nature of the outer shell may also facilitate passive spread of eggs.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
In the northern hemisphere, summer temperatures are such that many eggs become infective at a time when a population of susceptible foals is present.
The infections acquired by these result in further contamination of pasture with eggs which may survive during several subsequent grazing seasons.
Although mature horses may harbour a few adult worms, heavy burdens are usually confined to yearlings and to foals, which become infected from the first month or so of life, and infection is maintained largely by seasonal transmission between these groups of young animals.
This depends on clinical signs and the presence of spherical thick-shelled eggs on faecal examination.
If disease  due to prepatent infection is suspected, faecal examination having proved negative, diagnosis may be confirmed by administration of an anthelmintic when large numbers of immature worms may be observed in the faeces.
DIAGNOSIS
Anthelmintic prophylaxis for the horse strongyles will effectively control P. equorum infection.
Since transmission is largely on a foal-to-foal basis it is good policy to avoid using the same paddocks for nursing mares and their foals in successive years.
CONTROL
This is a non-migratory ascaridoid, and its appearance and biology are typical of the Superfamily.
Ascaridia
Hosts: Domestic and wild birds Site: Small intestine Species: Asaridia galli Two other species are A. dissimilis in turkeys and A. columbae in pigeons Distribution: Worldwide The worms are stout and densely white, the females measuring up to 12.0 cm in length.
Ascaridia is by far the largest nematode of poultry.
IDENTIFICATION
The egg is distinctly oval, with a smooth shell (Fig. 54), and cannot easily be distinguished from that of the other common poultry ascaridoid.
Heterakis.
The egg becomes infective at optimal temperatures in a minimum of three weeks and the parasitic phase is non-migratory.
The egg is sometimes ingested by earthworms, which may act as transport hosts.
LIFE CYCLE
The prepatent period ranges from 5-6 weeks in chicks to eight weeks or more in adult birds.
The worms live for about one year.
Ascaridia is not a highly pathogenic worm, and any effects are seen in young birds, adults appearing relatively unaffected.
The main effect is seen during the prepatent phase, when the larvae are in the mucosa.
There they cause an enteritis which is usually catarrhal, but in very heavy infections the adult worms are tolerated without clinical signs, but when considerable numbers are present the large size of these worms may cause intestinal occlusion and death.
PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL SIGNS
Adult birds are symptomless carriers, and the reservoir of infection is on the ground, either as free eggs or in earthworm transport hosts.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
In infections with adult worms, the eggs will be found in faeces, but since it is difficult to distinguish these from Heterakis eggs, confirmation must be made by post-mortemm examination of a casualty when the large white worms will be found.
In the prepatent period, larvae will be found in the intestinal contents and in scrapings of the mucosa.
DIAGNOSIS
When birds are reared on a free-range system, and ascariasis is a problem, the young birds should, if possible, be segregated and reared on ground previously unused by poultry.
TREATMENT AND CONTROL
Since the nematode may also be a problem in deep litter houses, feeding and watering systems which will limit the contamination of food and water by faeces should be used.
In either case treatment with piperazine salts or levamisole is best administered in the drinking water, uptake being facilitated by withdrawal of water overnight before its substitution with medicated water in the morning.
This genus is exceptional in its small size and in its location in the large intestine, in contrast to Ascaridia which is large and inhabits the small intestine (Fig. 55).
Heterakis
Hosts: Domestic and wild birds Site: Caeca Species: Heterakis gallinarum Another species, H. isolonche, occurs in game birds, notably pheasants Distribution: Worldwide Whitish worms up to 1.5 cm long, with elongated pointed tails.
Gross examination readily indicates the genus, but for specific identification microscopic examination is necessary to demonstrate the spicules, which are unequal in length in H. gallinarum, but of equal length in H. isolonche.
Microscopically, also, generic identity may be confirmed by the presence of a large precloacal sucker in the male, and prominent caudal alae supported by large caudal papillae.
IDENTIFICATION
The egg is ovoid and smooth-shelled, and is difficult to distinguish from that of Ascaridia.
The egg is infective on the ground in about two weeks at optimal temperatures.
Earthworms may be transport hosts, the eggs simply passing through the gut, or paratenic hosts in which the egg hatches and the L2 travels to the tissues to await ingestion by the fowl.
In H. gallinarum all three parasitic moults appear to occur in the caecal lumen, but in H. isolonche infection the hatched larvae enter the caecal mucosa, and develop to maturity in nodules.
Each nodule has an opening into the gut through which the eggs reach the lumen.
LIFE CYCLE
The prepatent period of the genus is about four weeks.
H. gallinarum is the commonest nematode parasite of poultry, and is usually regarded as being non-pathogenic.
Its chief pathogenic importance is as a vector of the protozoan, Histomonas meleagridis, the causal agent of "blackhead" in turkeys.
The organism can be transmitted from fowl to fowl in the egg of Heterakis and in earthworms containing hatched larvae of the worm.
PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL SIGNS
H. isolonche of game birds is in itself pathogenic, causing a severe inflammation of the caeca with nodules projecting from both peritoneal and mucosal surfaces.
These cause diarrhoea with progressive emaciation and there may be high mortality in heavily infected flocks.
H. gallinarum is widespread in most poultry flocks and is of little pathogenic significance in itself, but is of great  importance in the epidemiology of Histomonas.
In contrast H. isolonche in game birds occurs as a clinical entity.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
H. gallinarum infection is usually only diagnosed accidentally, by the finding of eggs in faeces or the presence of worms at necropsy.
DIAGNOSIS
H. isolonche infection is diagnosed at necropsy by the finding of caecal nodules containing adult worms, and if necessary, confirmed microscopically by examination of the spicules.
Like Ascaridia, heterakis is susceptible to piperazine and levamisole.
TREATMENT
Control of H. gallinarum is only necessary when histomoniasis is a problem in turkeys.
It is largely based on hygiene, and in backyard flocks two main points are: the segregation of turkeys from other domestic poultry, and the removal and disposal of litter from poultry houses.
Where the problem is serious and continuous, it may be advisable to administer either piperazine or levamisole intermittently in the feed or water in addition to continuous Histomonas chemoprophylaxis.
CONTROL
Where H. isolonche infection is endemic in pheasantries, the runs should be abandoned and pheasant chicks reared on fresh ground.
The Anisakidae are ascaridoids whose adults are parasitic in a wide rage of animals, including marine mammals and birds.
The larvae occur in many fish which have ingested either the eggs or crustacean paratenic hosts carrying larvae.
If the fish are eaten by humans, the larvae will migrate from the alimentary tract into other tissues, causing a form of visceral larva migrans which can be fatal.
One out-break in the Netherlands involed the consumption of raw herring which harboured the larvae in their muscles, but the most widespread endemic cycle is usually recognised as being between seals and cod, and for this reason there is pressure in some fishing communities for the reduction of seal populations in order to diminish the economic loss resulting from rejection of fish at inspection.
Asisakid infection