

CHAPTER ONE
‘Good grief!
Who on earth is that gorgeous-looking man?’
Ronni turned round from gazing at the figure on the jetty as her brother, manning the outboard motor behind her, responded with a snort of disapproval.
‘That gorgeous-looking man is your new employer,’ he told her.
‘And I'd advise you to reserve judgement on him till you get to know him a little better!’
‘That's Guido Falcone?’
Ronni blinked at Jeff in amazement.
‘You mean that's the monster you've just been telling me all about?’
Her short blonde hair whipping round her face in the breeze, Ronni turned back to fix her eyes on the jetty, which was drawing ever closer as Jeff's motor boat approached it, and focused with growing interest on the imposing tall, dark figure who stood there in the bright Sardinian sunshine.
In his early thirties, he was very tall — and growing even taller the closer they got to him!— with a shock of curly black hair that framed a deeply tanned face whose fierce, uncompromising features appeared chiselled from stone.
And his lean, strong body with its broad shoulders, tapering waist, narrow hips and long muscular legs exuded a virile, potent energy that seemed to crackle almost audibly.
He was standing quite still now, arms folded across his chest, the dark eyes beneath the dark brows fixed on the approaching motor boat, but Ronni found herself reflecting that that hard muscular body, dressed now in white trousers and a faded blue T-shirt, would only be seen at its best in motion.
He would move, she guessed, with the supple grace of a panther.
Unexpected excitement flickered inside her at the thought.
Her brother Jeff was guiding them alongside the jetty now.
Ronni turned to glance at him, smiling her surprise.
‘Well, if that's Guido Falcone, he's definitely not what I was expecting.’
From Jeff's description, she'd been expecting horns and cloven hoofs!
Jeff didn't have a chance to answer.
At that moment the figure on the jetty above them spoke.
‘You're late.’
The accusation was directed at Jeff.
But such was the power of those two softly spoken words that Ronni found her head jerking up to look at the speaker, barely aware of her brother's muttered response as he hoisted her cases up on to the jetty.
And as she met the dark gaze of Guido Falcone, her breath caught as though a fist had connected with her solar plexus.
In that instant she knew that standing before her was the most exciting man she had ever met.
As she tore her gaze away, Jeff helped her to disembark.
‘See you later, sis,’ he told her as she stood there, slightly stunned.
Then he was turning the boat around and speeding away.
‘Maledetto!’
There was another soft verbal explosion behind her, as Ronni paused to watch the boat disappear.
Composing herself, she turned.
‘I'm sorry I'm late,’ she said.
‘My flight was delayed.’
Guido's gaze was fixed seawards, watching the disappearing boat, and he did not turn round immediately to look at her.
Grateful to be spared the unsettling power of that dark gaze, Ronni took the opportunity to study him for a moment.
He was quite astonishingly good-looking, she decided, though there was nothing tame or soft about the beauty he possessed.
The features that had appeared fierce and uncompromising from afar, here, from a mere metre away, were even more so.
The line of his jaw, the curve of his proud nose, the sweep of his high, intelligent forehead proclaimed a strength of mind and character that was almost tangible.
There was a wildness about him, too, seen in the thick black hair, just a touch on the long side, that curled over his ears.
And those eyes that seemed to dance and scowl at the same time from beneath their fringe of long dark lashes gave him a restless, unpredictable air.
One would never know which way he was going to jump next.
‘What did you say?’
Suddenly, he had turned to look at her — simultaneously surprising her and proving her theory.
And in that instant, as his eyes fixed her, another thunderbolt shot through her.
‘I said I'm sorry I'm late.’
To her chagrin, Ronni blushed, as a wave of sudden confusion rushed through her.
‘My flight was delayed.
We got in late.’
‘You got in over two hours ago.’
Black eyes sparked down at her.
‘Even allowing for the journey from the airport, you ought to have been here long before now.
Unless, of course, you encountered some other delay?’
‘Not really.’
Ronni smiled an apologetic smile, wishing her heart would stop thumping so hard.
‘But we did stop off on the way for a cup of coffee.’
‘A cup of coffee?’
The jet-black eyebrows soared.
Every line of his face spelt disapproval.
Ronni made a face.
‘Yes.
I'm sorry.
I didn't realise I was keeping you waiting.
You see, I was thirsty after the journey.’
‘You couldn't have waited half an hour — that's all the journey from Olbia takes — and saved me the inconvenience of having to hang around for almost an hour?’
‘I really am sorry.’
Ronni felt a flicker of guilt.
His complaint, she couldn't help feeling, was perfectly justified.
Though the stop for coffee hadn't been her idea.
Her thirst could easily have waited.
It was Jeff who'd insisted that they stop off for a drink.
‘It'll give me a chance to fill you in on the situation,’ he'd told her.
She'd had no idea that her new employer was waiting!
But no doubt Jeff had, she decided, suddenly feeling torn between her sense of guilt for what now seemed like unnecessary rudeness and her automatic instinct to defend her brother.
She killed two birds with one stone and offered apologetically, ‘I really was terribly thirsty.’
‘In that case, what can I say?’
Guido smiled suddenly, once more taking Ronni by surprise — and at the same time displaying his perfect white teeth.
‘We could hardly have our new tutor dying of thirst,’ he added.
With that, he reached down to grab up her suitcases.
Then he was turning on his heel.
‘The car's over here.’
Ronni followed behind him, her eyes on his back, watching the way his muscles rippled beneath the T-shirt.
She'd been right, this man was made for motion.
When he moved he had the supple, easy grace of a big cat.
Immediately, she dropped her gaze away, feeling torn once again.
Her feelings of admiration — even her inclination to see his side of things — were surely totally out of place?
After what Jeff had told her about Guido Falcone, the only feelings she ought to have for him were disapproval and dislike.
It was most unsettling to discover that that was not the case.
They had reached a flame-red Alfa Romeo convertible, parked in the leafy shade of a fig tree.
The top was already down and Guido dumped her cases in the back seat, then pulled the passenger door open for her.
He flicked her a glance.
‘Get in,’ he said.
Ronni got in, feeling a welcome dart of annoyance at the way he had issued that curt command.
Maybe Jeff was right that the man was insufferable and she had simply been bowled over by his formidable good looks and by that quality of heady excitement he exuded.
More fool me, she decided, slipping him a narrow glance, as he climbed into the driver's seat beside her.
‘Is this your first trip to Sardinia?’
Guido had switched on the engine, and now, with a soft purr, the car headed out on to the road.
‘As a matter of fact, it is.
Though, of course, I've been to Italy before.’
‘Of course?’
His tone was mocking.
‘Why of course?’
‘It was just a figure of speech.’
Ronni scowled across at him, feeling another, even more satisfying, dart of annoyance.
‘I was simply saying that I'm not a total stranger to your country.’
‘Ah, but you are, if you've never been to Sardinia before.’
Guido smiled, momentarily disarming her again.
‘This island and mainland Italy have very little in common.
Different landscape, different people, different culture, different everything.’
At least he was right about the landscape.
Ronni detached her gaze from his in an effort to hold on to at least some of her displeasure and paused to glance curiously about her as the car sped along a dusty highway through a bright summer vista of parched scrubby fields.
There was none of the green lushness of mainland Italy here.
She could even sense it in the air.
This island was wild and different.
The ragged mountains off in the distance were dark and mysterious, the equally ragged coastline full of secrets.
She felt a flash of the excitement she had felt initially when this three weeks in Sardinia had been so unexpectedly sprung on her.
For the past week she'd literally been counting the days.
‘You know, you're very like your brother.’
Suddenly Guido spoke.
Ronni felt him flash a glance across at her.
‘Same blonde hair, same blue eyes.
I would have picked you out anywhere as being his sister.
Were it not for certain agreeable female attributes, you could very nearly pass yourself off as his double.’
He let his gaze drift over those agreeable female attributes — the swell of her breasts beneath the simple cotton blouse, the curve of her hips currently sheathed in blue jeans.
Then, lazily, he returned his gaze to her face again.
‘You're virtually as alike as two peas in a pod.’
‘I know.’
Ronni smiled and hoped the flush in her cheeks could pass for a simple flush of pleasure.
For she was pleased, just as she always was when people pointed out how much she looked like her adored older brother.
Older by only nine months — they were virtually twins!
But the current flush in her cheeks had rather more to do with the boldly appraising way that Guido had just looked at her.
That look had caused her blood to tingle!
She turned away and added, addressing the landscape, ‘People have always said we look alike.’
‘You certainly do.’
His tone was light as he turned his attention back to the road again.
And he seemed to be concentrating on his driving as a minute or two ticked by in silence.
But then he elaborated in a tone that had a sudden edge to it, ‘Let's just hope that's where the similarities end.’
‘I beg your pardon?’
Ronni swivelled round to look at him, her stomach tightening at the sudden dark note in his voice.
A frown touched her brow.
‘I'm sorry, I don't know what you mean.’
‘I mean I hope all resemblance is purely physical.
I hope you're not like your brother in other respects.’
‘What other respects?’
‘All other respects.’
Guido flicked her a look.
‘Particularly temperament.’
Ronni was taken aback.
‘I don't know what you mean.
What could you possibly think is wrong with my brother's temperament?’
‘Everything.’
Ronni's eyes widened.
‘Give me an example,’ she challenged.
Guido smiled a small smile devoid of humour.
‘I could give you a dozen different examples,’ he told her, ‘but here's a couple, just for starters…
He's bolshie, he's unreliable and he's totally irresponsible.’
Ronni had never been able to hear a bad word against Jeff without leaping instantly to his defence.
She did so now.
‘I've never heard such nonsense!
I can assure you my brother is none of these things!’
‘Oh, yes, he is.
I can assure you he's all of them.’
‘You're just saying that because you don't like him!’
Suddenly, she was remembering what Jeff had told her.
‘You're just saying it because you've got it in for him!’
Guido smiled a grim smile.
‘If I've got it in for him, it's because he's irresponsible, unreliable and bolshie.’
Then, before she could protest again, he turned to her and added, his eyes like steel traps in the dark lines of his face, ‘And what at the moment is causing me some concern is one very simple but crucial question — are you bolshie, unreliable and irresponsible, too?’
‘No, I'm not — no more than Jeff is!’
Ronni glared at Guido.
‘And, if you thought I might be, why did you hire me in the first place?’
At that moment, as she faced to him, waiting for an answer, Guido swung the steering-wheel round to negotiate a corner, barely bothering to decelerate at all as he did so — so that Ronni suddenly found herself lurching towards the dashboard.
She glowered at him disapprovingly.
Now who was being bolshie?
He flicked her a cool glance.
‘If I'd known in time, I wouldn't have.
Hired you, I mean,’ he added in a steely tone, as she sat back into her seat again, thankful for seatbelts.
‘But, unfortunately, this undesirable side to your brother's character only came to light after I'd hired you.
You were virtually on your way over.’
‘I see.’
Ronni nodded.
Things were falling into place.
What Guido had just told her coincided with Jeff's story.
It was only in the last week or so that the two of them had fallen out.
But it had been a serious falling out.
Bitter and acrimonious.
She felt a sudden flash of doubt, remembering the things Jeff had told her, and thought again what had occurred to her over that fateful cup of coffee.
This assignment that, initially, had seemed simple and straightforward was turning out to be no such thing.
Perhaps she should just forget it and fly straight back to London.
But how could she do that when she needed the money?
Ronni looked at Guido now from beneath her lashes, taking in the strong, mahogany-dark profile and remembering the story that Jeff had told her.
‘Why do you disapprove of my brother's relationship with your cousin?’ she asked him.
‘Is it because she's from a rich family and my brother's only a mechanic?’
Guido did not answer her.
Instead, he did another trick with the steering-wheel, making her lurch forward again as they turned off the road, between a pair of high wrought-iron gates, and headed up a tree-lined gravel driveway towards a fabulous, sprawling, red-roofed villa.
Ronni's jaw dropped open.
Was this where Guido Falcone lived?
She had never seen anything so magnificent in her life!
They came to a halt outside the front door flanked by huge stone urns overflowing with red geraniums.
‘This is it.’
Guido climbed out and snatched her cases from the back seat.
‘Let's go in and meet my cousin, your pupil.’
The next moment Ronni was being led inside, into a huge tiled entrance hall with a round central table weighed down by an enormous vase of fresh flowers.
Guido dropped her cases and strode across the tiled floor.
‘Silvia!’ he yelled.
‘Silvia ,dove sei ?’
For a moment there was only the echo of his voice, then there was a sudden shuffling sound as, through one of the open doorways, appeared the black-clad figure of a grey-haired woman.
Ronni regarded her curiously.
This was obviously not Silvia, Guido's cousin with whom Jeff had so unwisely fallen in love!
She watched as the woman muttered something in Italian and Guido responded with a couple of sharp questions.
And she found herself smiling at the stark contrast between the two figures — the small passive figure of the elderly servant and the dynamic, vivid figure of the dark-haired man.
But then anyone would look passive — even a little lifeless — she decided, when placed in the shadow of a man like Guido.
And, though she did not want to, again she felt a shiver of excitement.
In spite of herself, as she watched him, she felt dangerously drawn.
As the woman shuffled off again, Guido spat an oath.
Then he rounded on Ronni, as though she were to blame.
‘Silvia's not here.
I've been told she's gone into the village.
If she's gone to see that brother of yours, I swear I'll break her neck!’
He looked as though he might.
Sparks flew from his eyes that were suddenly as black and threatening as thunder.
‘I can meet her when she gets back.’
Ronni smiled a light smile, seeking to pour oil on troubled waters.
‘Please don't worry on my account.
It doesn't matter.’
‘It does matter.
I told her to be here!
She had no business going off!’
‘Maybe she got tired of waiting.
After all, I was late.’
‘She ought to have waited, just as I did.’
Guido paused and the dark eyes seemed to pounce on her suddenly.
‘Why are you defending her?
Do you know something I don't?
Do you know, for example, that she's gone off to meet your brother?’
Ronni shook her head.
‘I don't know anything.
And I wasn't trying to defend her.’
She blushed suddenly.
The only thing she'd been trying to do was calm Guido down and defuse the situation.
Though why she'd been trying to do that, heaven only knew.
She'd have done better to snap back at him the way he'd snapped at her!
Guido too obviously found her motives suspect.
The dark eyes flayed her.
‘Come with me,’ he commanded.
‘You and I should have a little chat.’
He swung on his heel then and strode across the hall, his steps a sharp tattoo against the polished tiles.
Ronni followed in his wake, wondering what was coming next.
Though there was one thing she was even more certain of than ever — this was no simple, straightforward assignment she'd taken on.
Anything but.
It was a veritable hornets' nest!
And again she wondered: would she be mad to stay?
‘Take a seat.
Would you like a drink?’
Suddenly they were in a huge, enchanting sitting-room, with the sun pouring in through the open French windows that gave a magnificent view out over the bay.
Only a stretch of exotic gardens separated the villa from the beach.
Guido was inviting her with a wave of his hand to take a seat on one of the sofas — there were four, all in soft pastel colours and piled with cushions.
As Ronni chose one by the nearest window, he repeated his question.
‘I know you've recently had a cup of coffee…but can I offer you a drink?’
His eyes held hers with a kind of taunting amusement.
Then he surprised her.
‘I can imagine what the real purpose of that coffee break was…
No doubt to brief you in your role as romantic go-between.’
Ronni looked back at him blankly.
‘I don't know what you're talking about.
I understood my role here was supposed to be as a tutor, not as a romantic go-between, whatever that is.’
As he turned to face her, Ronni was suddenly wishing she hadn't sat down quite so hurriedly.
Standing over her the way he was, he seemed far too imposing, far too dominant, far too overwhelming.
She straightened, stretching her neck as far as it would go, meeting his eyes, if not levelly, at least unwaveringly, as he answered, ‘A romantic go-between is someone who helps set up romantic meetings.
Someone who relays messages and passes on little notes.
In short,signorina , a saboteur.’
‘Sabotaging what precisely?’
‘Sabotaging my expressed will.
And I will not have a saboteur in this house.’
He held her gaze for a moment in an optical half-nelson.
As he turned away, it took Ronni a moment to catch her breath and get her eyes back into focus.
She watched him as he crossed to a table where an assortment of bottles and glasses were laid out.
‘You're paranoid,’ she said.
‘I'm not a saboteur.’
He was pouring something.
He flicked a glance across his shoulder.
‘So, I'm paranoid, am I?’
The notion seemed to amuse him.
‘Well, I suppose that's possible…but what I think is more possible…’
He turned and headed towards her, carrying two glasses.
‘What I think is more possible is that I'm right.’
That figured.
It was hard to imagine him ever thinking he might be wrong.
All the same, Ronni insisted, ‘I've come here solely as your cousin's tutor.’
Guido was standing over her now in that dominating way he had, making her sit up even straighter and stretch her neck even more.
He said, ‘Since you failed to tell me what you wanted to drink, I've poured you a Cynar.
I trust you like it.’
Ronni sniffed the dark brown brew.
‘I've no idea,’ she answered.
‘And I was about to say I'd like a glass of mineral water.’
‘Then you should have spoken up sooner.
It's too late now.’
With a look of satisfaction, he sat down on the sofa opposite her.
‘She who hesitates, I'm afraid, just has to drink what she's given.’
‘Or not, as the case may be.’
With a toss of her blonde head, Ronni laid her glass down pointedly on the coffee-table that stood between them.
And again she found herself thinking that maybe Jeff had been right and Guido was simply an insufferable bully, the type of man it would be all too easy to fall out with.
Guido took a mouthful of his Cynar and seemed to savour it for a moment.
He smiled across at her, seeming to guess what she was thinking and clearly not the least put out.
On the contrary, Ronni sensed he relished this clash between them.
Then he laid down his glass.
‘So, what was I saying…?
Ah, yes…’
He smiled again.
‘I was accusing you of being a saboteur…’
‘And I was telling you that such a suggestion was utter nonsense.’
As their eyes met and held across the coffee-table, Ronni felt a sudden sharp frisson go through her.
There was something almost physically pleasurable about the sudden tension between them.
Pleasurable and almost frighteningly exciting.
She pushed the feeling from her, for suddenly it did scare her a little.
Then she told him calmly, shifting her gaze slightly, ‘I can assure you I'm here for one reason and for one reason only…in order to help your cousin with her English.’
‘Ah, yes, that's the pretext.
I'm well aware of that.
But I have a feeling you actually plan on doing very little tutoring.’
‘You mean you think I'm out to cheat you?
To take my fee for nothing?
You think I intend to spend all my time passing love notes back and forward?’
Ronni exhaled an impatient breath.
‘That's not only ludicrous, it's also insulting!’
Her little outburst brought a smile to Guido's lips.
He regarded her suddenly flushed, angry face.
‘To listen to you, anyone would think you really took your job here seriously.’
‘I do take it seriously.
Of course I take it seriously.
I'm an English teacher.
That's my profession!
It would be a little discreditable of me if I didn't take it seriously!’
‘Discreditable.
Yes, it would be.’
He reached for his glass again.
‘So, you really are a proper professional teacher?
At least that's something in your favour.’
‘And what is that supposed to mean?’
Ronni glared at him.
‘Didn't you know I was a proper professional teacher?
Surely my brother told you that before you hired me?’
‘Oh, yes, he told me all right…’
‘But you didn't believe him?’
‘No, I believed him.
Otherwise, as you say, I would never have hired you.
But I believed him before I found out about him and Silvia.
After I found out, I wasn't so certain.’
‘But Jeff would never have recommended me if I weren't a proper teacher!
And I wouldn't have come.
Neither of us is that irresponsible!’
Guido took a deliberately unhurried mouthful of Cynar.
All the while his eyes never left Ronni's face.
Then he swallowed and leaned back against the cushions of the sofa, stretching his long, white-clad legs out in front of him.
He's as relaxed as a cat, Ronni thought to herself, looking at him.
But, like a cat, every muscle in that perfectly honed body of his is permanently coiled in perfect readiness to spring.
She watched him in reluctant fascination as he put to her, ‘When it comes to being irresponsible, your brother, I'm afraid, has already proved himself to be in the top league.’
He paused and sat forward ever so slightly in his seat.
‘He tricked me into employing him to look after my boats simply in order to gain access to my cousin.
And then he likewise tricked me into employing you as her tutor in order that he could continue to divert her from her studies.’
He smiled a grim smile.
‘But he will not succeed.’
‘I find this all rather insulting, as I've already told you.’
Ronni sat slightly forward in her own seat to face him.
‘The reason I'm here is because my brother phoned me and told me your cousin was in urgent need of a tutor.
The one you'd booked for the summer had apparently dropped out.’
‘Dropped out, indeed.’
Guido did not sound pleased.
‘And just a week before she was due to start.’
Ronni nodded.
That was precisely the story Jeff had told her.
‘Jeff told me he'd had a word with you about me and told you I had lots of experience teaching English to foreign students and that you wanted me to come and do the job.’
She paused and fixed Guido with an irritated look.
‘My brother said nothing to me about acting as a romantic go-between.
All he seemed concerned about was finding a new tutor for Silvia.’
Guido treated her to a long look between narrowed dark eyes.
‘And did he also by any chance happen to tell you that he and Silvia were romantically involved?’
‘You mean before I came here?’
‘Yes, before you came here.’
Ronni shook her head.
‘No, he didn't,’ she had to confess.
‘He didn't mention anything about that before I arrived.’
‘I see.’
Guido seemed to think about that for a moment.
‘So, he waited till you were here before telling you the whole story.’
He smiled a tight, dark, unamused smile.
‘Now I know what passed between you over that cup of coffee.’
He was spot-on about that.
Ronni couldn't deny it.
During that half-hour coffee break Jeff had told her all about Silvia and about how Guido was trying to break up the romance.
‘But that was all that passed between us,’ Ronni hastily assured Guido.
‘He didn't try to talk me into acting as a romantic go-between.’
‘Are you sure about that?’
Still he did not believe her.
Ronni flared with annoyance.
‘Yes, of course I'm sure!’
‘Absolutely sure?’
His eyes drove through her.
‘Absolutely sure!’
Her eyes drove right back at him.
There was a silence as they glared at one another across the coffee-table.
Then Guido said softly, ‘OK, let's say I believe you…
Let's say I believe that he's said nothing to you so far about the part he's hoping you'll play…’
He leaned closer towards her, his elbows resting on his thighs, causing Ronni to flatten back a little defensively in her seat.
‘The fact remains that, sooner or later, he will approach you…’
‘That's nonsense.
Jeff's not like that.
If he loves Silvia the way he says he does, he'll want her to study, not skive off and waste time!’
‘How little you know about love.’
Guido paused and smiled a crude smile that suggested that the same could never be said about him.
Then he continued, his tone scathing, ‘You can take my word for it, the kind of love your brother feels for my cousin is the selfish kind that demands she spend every moment with him.
He doesn't give a damn about her studies.
Wasting her time is precisely what he has in mind for her.
‘And I will not allow it!’
He rose to his feet abruptly.
‘I've promised her mother that Silvia will continue with her studies while she's staying here on holiday and pass the exams she's already failed once.
And I intend to keep that promise.’
‘And that's what I'm here for.’
Ronni looked into his angry face.
‘To help her pass these exams is the very job I've come to do.’
‘Yes, it is.
At least, it's the job I'm paying you to do.’
Guido paused, holding on to his anger for a moment.
Then he smiled, a smile Ronni found oddly chilling.
‘I've had an idea,’ he said.
‘Here's what we'll do…’
He circled the coffee-table and came to stand before her.
‘Since you claim that your objectives are the same as mine, and that you're not here to work against me, as I'd supposed, I'm going to put you in charge, as it were…make you responsible…’
Ronni swallowed, suddenly nervous.
‘Responsible for what?’
‘For Silvia's studies, and for her passing her exams.
These are to be your twin responsibilities.
If she doesn't study, you don't get paid.
Not a single penny.’
That didn't sound fair.
Ronni said so.
‘I don't like the sound of that at all.’
‘Don't you?
Then try this.’
Guido cast a harsh look down on her.
‘Not only will you not get paid one penny, but your darling brother will lose his job — and, into the bargain, never work in Italy again.’
He smiled down at her coldly.
‘I can do that,’ he told her.
Ronni did not doubt it.
She felt a shiver go through her.
Without thinking what she was doing, she reached for her glass and took a swig of the bitter Cynar.
She was still grimacing from the shock of it as Guido swept from the room, announcing over his shoulder, ‘So, you'd better deliver the goods — or else I will!’
CHAPTER TWO
‘I don't see why I should be held hostage over your quarrel with my brother!’
Ronni had followed Guido from the room, running to keep pace with him as he headed across the hall.
His naturally long strides, she suspected, he was deliberately making even longer in order to make it difficult for her to catch up!
She was breathless when she did catch up with him outside on the front doorstep.
Between snatched breaths, she told him, ‘I can't accept these conditions of yours.
They're totally unfair.
I demand to be paid for the hours I put in, whether your cousin passes her exams or not!’
‘My, you're out of shape.’
Guido had come to a halt, turning round to face her so that she almost ran right into him.
And from this close Ronni could see that the lashes that framed his eyes were as thick and sooty as a chimney-sweep's brush.
He ought to have a licence for eyelashes like that!
It took a considerable effort to rip her eyes away.
‘What did you say?’ she demanded, still gasping a little.
‘I said you're pretty out of shape.’
Guido had thrust his hands into the pockets of his white trousers.
He was looking down at her with a superior, amused smile on his face.
‘You only ran five metres and you're panting fit for the knacker's yard.’
‘I am nothing of the sort!
That's a gross exaggeration.’
Then Ronni conceded as her chest continued to heave, ‘I may be just a little out of breath.’
‘English understatement.’
Guido laughed at that, and he had the most musical, most delightfully appealing laugh, Ronni thought.
‘I would say it's quite a while since you did any exercise.’
‘I suppose it is.’
She could not dispute it.
And, frankly, she hadn't realised just how out of shape she was!
‘It's that unhealthy London life you lead.’
Guido flicked his gaze over her as he leaned against one of the geranium-filled stone urns.
‘All that sitting behind desks and riding around in tube trains…it's not good for you.
You should take up some form of exercise.’
‘Should I?’
Ronni folded her arms across her chest and tried to fix a disapproving scowl to her face.
Who was he, after all, to tell her what she ought to do?
But it was hard to scowl, she found, when her heart was suddenly skittering at the way the dark eyes were quite openly smiling as they continued to focus on her now lightly rising bosom.
In truth, she felt like smiling back.
Then he looked into her face, folding his own arms across his chest — arms that against the faded T-shirt were mahogany-dark.
He said, ‘At least in that respect you're not like your brother.
Jeff is one of the most sporty guys I know.’
‘He always has been.’
As she said it, Ronni frowned.
Once, she had been as sporty as her brother.
She wasn't quite sure why that had changed.
Maybe it had something to do with Arnie.
‘Never mind,’ Guido was saying, ‘this is the perfect place for you to get in a bit of physical training.
You can sail, you can ride…snorkel, swim…
You can even do a bit of water-skiing if you fancy it.’
‘Sounds good.’
Ronni did smile then.
Then suddenly she remembered.
More soberly, she added, ‘But who said I'll be staying?’
‘Why, aren't you?’
‘I may not be.’
‘And why might that be?’
‘I told you, I find your conditions unacceptable.
I won't be held hostage to your quarrel with Jeff.’
‘You're not being held hostage.
No need to dramatise.’
Guido smiled, lifting one eyebrow, and watched her for a moment.
His curly dark hair gleamed even darker and glossier against the backdrop of red geraniums.
It was the glossiest, darkest hair that Ronni had ever seen.
He continued.
‘All I'm demanding is that you be the guarantor of your brother's good behaviour.
You seem so certain he has only my cousin's best interests at heart.
It seems a perfectly good arrangement to put you in charge.’
‘It doesn't seem so to me.’
Ronni tilted her chin at him.
‘Why should I agree to only being paid if your cousin passes her exams?’
That's ludicrous.
I can't agree.’
She meant that absolutely.
But she was bluffing as she added, ‘I'd rather just go home.’
How could she just go home when she needed the money?
‘Don't you believe in payment by results?
That's the way things operate in my line of work.
If I don't deliver the goods, I don't get any money, In business you get paid for results, not for the hours you put in.’
Ronni looked at him.
On the evidence, he was good at getting results.
According to Jeff, he was one of the most successful businessmen in Italy.
And this villa was certainly a testament to that.
Nobody lived like this on a hired hand's hourly wage.
‘But teaching's different,’ she told him.
‘Sometimes one doesn't get results, or at least sometimes the results are hard to measure.
If teachers only got paid for pupils passing their exams, there are some pupils who'd never get any education at all.
No teacher would want to take them on.’
‘Are you saying that's why you don't want to take Silvia on?
Because you think she may not be capable of passing her exams?’
Ronni shrugged.
‘For all I know, that might very well be the case.’
‘Well, it isn't.
I can assure you she's a very bright girl.
All she needs is a few weeks of expert tuition.’
Guido paused and shifted his weight slightly against the stone urn.
‘Maybe it's you who's not up to it?
Maybe that's what you're afraid of?’
Ronni had the distinct sensation that she was being cleverly manipulated into a defensive little corner.
She narrowed her eyes at Guido.
Yes, he was clever all right.
No wonder he got such spectacular results at business!
She said, regarding him levelly, her tone not at all defensive — all she was doing was stating a simple fact, ‘No, I'm not afraid of that.
I'm a damned good teacher.’
She took pride in her expertise.
She'd worked hard to achieve it.
‘I'm a teacher with a very good record of getting results — even though I don't get paid on the strength of them.’
‘Touché !’
Guido smiled.
‘Then you've nothing to be afraid of.’
He straightened away from the stone urn and slipped his hands back into his trouser pockets.
‘I may even give you a bonus if Silvia does well in her exams.’
‘I don't need a bonus.
If she does well, it'll be because she's worked for it.
All I require is the payment we agreed on.’
‘Does that mean you're staying?’
‘I didn't say that.
I'll agree to stay when you lift these stupid conditions.’
Guido shook his head slowly as he looked back at her.
‘So you keep saying, but I think you'll stay anyway.’
‘And why would I do that when I find your terms unacceptable?’
Guido smiled.
‘Because you need the money.’
‘Who says I do?’
She felt suddenly at a disadvantage.
It was perfectly true, but she hadn't known he knew.
Still smiling, still watching her, Guido reached unhurriedly behind him and detached a stem of bright red geranium.
He said, ‘Your brother told me.
He said this job was a godsend for you, that you couldn't have managed financially without it.’
Jeff and his big mouth!
Ronni scowled at Guido mutinously, as he raised the red geranium to his nose.
‘I could have managed perfectly well without it.’
That was not strictly true, though she might have scraped by if she'd been prepared to go into debt.
The summer school job that she'd been relying on had been cancelled at the very last minute and other temporary jobs were a bit thin on the ground.
She'd been close to panicking when Jeff had phoned her about the Sardinia stint.
Guido rolled the red geranium stem between his fingers.
‘Jeff told me you promised your parents that you'd treat them to a holiday this autumn in celebration of their twenty-fifth wedding anniversary — but that now you're starting to worry about how you're going to pay for it.
It seems you find yourself rather short of funds…’
He raised one eyebrow.
‘Have I got the story right?’
‘Yes, more or less.’
Damn Jeff for snitching!
‘I suppose that's more or less how it is.’
Guido continued to watch her.
‘I would say that was rather —’
‘Bad planning.
I know.’
Now she did sound defensive.
‘It was rash of me to promise when I'm constantly so strapped for cash.’
That was what Arnie had said and Arnie was right.
She flicked a look at Guido.
‘I know what you were going to say.’
‘Well, I wasn't going to say that.’
Guido twirled the geranium, both eyebrows lifted now as the dark eyes watched her.
‘Well, what were you going to say?
Something equally damning, no doubt.’
‘What I was going to say was that I think that's rather sweet of you.
That's a very generous thing for a daughter to do for her parents.’
Ronni was taken aback.
He didn't appear to be joking.
‘They deserve it,’ she muttered, as he suddenly leaned towards her, holding the red geranium to her nose.
‘Smell that,’ he told her.
‘Doesn't it smell good?’
Suddenly, Ronni seemed to freeze.
She couldn't smell a thing.
Well, she could, but it certainly wasn't the geranium.
All she could smell was the clean masculine scent of Guido's skin.
It seemed to rush up her nostrils and enter her bloodstream.
‘Not the flower, the leaves,’ he was saying.
‘They're scented.
Can you smell them?’
He continued to hold the stem to her nose.
‘Go on, take a good sniff.’
Ronni took a good sniff.
‘Yes, I can smell it.’
Guido smiled.
‘It smells almost as sweet as you.’
Then, still smiling and holding her confused startled gaze, he brushed her cheek softly with the head of the flower, almost as though he was bestowing a caress, before leaning forward and tucking the stem behind her ear.
‘There.
Now you look like a Botticelli nymph.’
Ronni's tongue all at once was glued to her palate.
She was aware that her heart was clattering inside her, racketing against her ribs like a demented steam train.
Her skin was burning where his fingers had touched her.
Her legs were threatening to give way at the knees.
‘So, you really have to take this job, as I see it.’
Guido leaned back against the stone urn again.
‘You can't disappoint your parents and renege on their holiday.’
‘I can find some other way of paying for it, however.’
He was cornering her again and she didn't like it.
Ronni pulled herself together and looked him in the eye.
‘For a start, I can find something where payment is guaranteed.’
‘Payment is guaranteed on this job — if you deliver.’
‘You mean, if I agree to play the gaoler.
I'm sorry, but I don't find that a very attractive prospect.’
‘And if you deliver, you'll also be guaranteeing your brother's job.
Let's not forget about that aspect as well.’
Ronni hadn't forgotten.
‘I can't take that responsibility.
And I shouldn't have to,’ she added sharply.
‘Jeff's job shouldn't depend on your cousin passing her exams.’
‘Perhaps it shouldn't, but it does.’
He was immovable.
‘You see, if she fails, it'll be down to Jeff — and you.’
‘No, it won't.
It'll be her own fault.
She's not a child.’
Jeff had told her Silvia was nineteen, only four years younger than herself.
‘She's old enough to know what she's doing.’
‘She was until a short while ago, until she met your brother.’
Suddenly, abruptly, Guido's demeanour had altered.
‘But these days — and heaven knows why!— all she thinks about is Jeff!’
With the toe of his shoe he kicked a loose pebble on the path, sending it spinning and ricocheting over a nearby flowerbed.
‘I wish I'd never employed him in the first place!’
Ronni looked into his angry face and felt a rush of defensiveness for Jeff.
‘I imagine you employed him,’ she rebuked him tightly, ‘because he happens to be a first-class mechanic.’
She straightened.
‘He's also an extremely nice person, which is probably why your cousin fell for him.’
‘An extremely nice person!’
Guido's tone was dismissive.
‘Well, he's here to look after my boat, not to go sniffing around my cousin!’
There was something about his tone that lifted Ronni's hackles.
‘What have you really got against my brother?
Is it because he's just a mechanic?
Do you think he's not good enough for your cousin?’
‘I think he's got no damned business playing around with Silvia.
She's cut out for better things than wasting her time on some blue-eyed, grease-stained English Romeo.’
He kicked another stone, which went rocketing after the first one.
‘Damn him!’ he muttered.
‘Why did he have to come here?’
As Ronni watched him, jolted a little by this show of anger, she reflected that it was a blessing this wasn't Jeff's only job.
Her brother earned his living by hiring himself out to whoever needed his services on the island.
Fortunately, he didn't depend on Guido Falcone.
Then she remembered Guido's threat that he could stop him working anywhere in Italy, and suddenly she didn't feel quite so relieved any more.
She decided to try a more placatory approach.
In an even tone, she told Guido, ‘I don't know why you're getting so upset.
All it is is a harmless holiday romance.
What's the matter?
Don't you approve of romance?’
‘I don't approve of romance that's misguided and inappropriate.’
His eyes were suddenly as sharp as daggers.
They cut through her impatiently.
‘I suppose you do?’
Ronni shrugged.
‘Who are you to tell if it's misguided and inappropriate?
Only the people involved can tell.’
‘How very touching.’
Guido's tone was cutting.
‘Romance is all, is it?
Is that what you believe?
You'll be telling me next I'm wrong to interfere.’
‘Maybe you are.
Maybe at this point in her life what your cousin needs is a bit of romance.’
Her previous placatory approach had failed, so now she might as well just say what she believed.
‘Maybe her studies ought to wait till another time,’ she added.
‘You might even be doing her harm by trying to interfere.’
‘You think Jeff's a more worthwhile investment of her time than her studies?’
Guido shook his head.
‘Sorry, I can't agree.’
‘I'm not talking about investments — except maybe in an emotional sense.
Not everything comes down to monetary profit and loss, you know.’
Guido smiled and shook his head.
‘My, you are a romantic.’
‘And you're not, I suppose?’
‘Definitely not.
Not guilty.
I would say I have a more practical turn of mind.’
‘That sounds like a euphemism.’
Ronni felt oddly disappointed.
‘It sounds as though you really do believe that everything comes down to monetary profit and loss.’
‘We can't all be starry-eyed romantics like you.’
Guido paused for an instant, then added, smiling, ‘I expect that's why your personal monetary situation is rather more loss than profit at the moment — because you invest so much of your time in romance?’
Ronni laughed at that, then wished she hadn't.
She was aware of the speculative lift of his jet-black eyebrows.
And her reaction had been rather revealing, she was thinking.
And not only revealing, a little disloyal.
What was Arnie if not a romantic investment?
She said quickly, covering up, ‘My monetary situation is due to the fact that I'm a poorly paid teacher.
I'm afraid it really is as simple as that.’
But Guido ignored that.
‘You surprise me.
I've been told you have a steady boyfriend…
I would have thought romance would take up a lot of your time.’
‘Would you?’
‘But it would seem not.
Why on earth is that?’
‘Well, it does and it doesn't.’
Ronni felt uncomfortable.
The subject of Arnie was not one she wished to discuss with Guido.
Guido would never understand her relationship with Arnie.
She added a little tightly.
‘I've known Arnie for ages.
We don't have one of those starry-eyed relationships.’
‘I see.
The gilt's worn off?’
‘I didn't mean that.
I just mean we have a relaxed, easygoing sort of relationship.
We don't live in each other 's pockets.
We give each other space.’
‘Space to do what?’
‘To do whatever we please.’
As one dark eyebrow lifted, she added hurriedly, ‘Within limits, naturally.
We don't cheat on one another.’
‘Well, that's something, I suppose.’
As a smile touched his lips, it was hard to figure out what he was thinking.
Then suddenly his expression changed.
‘So, though there are no stars in your eyes, you consider yourself beyond temptation?’
In that moment what was in his mind was written clearly in his eyes.
Or so, at least, it seemed to Ronni.
An invitation.
A challenge.
That was what she saw.
And what she felt was an instant answering rush in her blood.
A little shocked at herself, she quickly snatched her gaze away.
But not before she had answered in a firm tone, ‘Definitely.’
The next moment, thankfully, they were interrupted.
‘Guido !
Eccoti !
Ti ho cercato dappertutto !’
Suddenly, through the front door came bursting like a tornado the lithe, dark-haired figure of a girl in a blue mini-skirt.
She came to a skidding stop in front of Guido and Ronni, her lovely bright-eyed face breaking into a huge smile.
‘You're Ronni!
Jeff's sister!’
She reached out for Ronni's hand and shook it.
‘Wow!
You're so like him.
The two of you could be twins.’
Ronni shook her hand warmly, instantly liking her.
‘And you must be Silvia.
I'm very pleased to meet you.’
Then Guido spoke.
‘You said you were looking for me.’
His tone was censorious, putting an instant damper on the moment.
He straightened and confronted Silvia.
‘What did you want?’
Silvia tossed back her dark hair, a gesture that was openly defiant.
‘I wasn't really looking for you, I was looking for Ronni.’
She turned back to Ronni.
‘I want to apologise.
I should have been here to meet you, but you were late arriving and I had an appointment in the village.’
She smiled a seductive smile.
‘I'm really sorry.’
‘That's OK.
It was my fault for being late.’
Ronni cast a quick, knowing glance at Guido, expecting to meet a pair of scowling dark eyes.
But his eyes were far from scowling.
They were turned on Silvia and they were filled with a look of oddly vulnerable concern.
It was a look that caused Ronni's heart to tighten.
He obviously loved his young cousin very much.
‘I can't get over how much you look like Jeff!’
Silvia's eyes were dancing as she looked into Ronni's face.
Then she laughed, ‘You're his double — apart from the red geranium!
I can't say I've ever seen Jeff with a geranium stuck behind his ear!’
Ronni had entirely forgotten about the red geranium that Guido had slipped behind her ear.
She reached for it now in sudden embarrassment, her cheeks turning as red as its flaming petals.
‘How silly I must look,’ she muttered, removing it.
‘It didn't look silly at all.
It looked beautiful,’ Silvia protested.
‘I already told her it made her look like a Botticelli nymph.’
As Guido spoke, his eyes met Ronni's, making her blush deepen.
He had spoken the compliment as though he really meant it, just as he had the first time he'd said it.
Ronni wouldn't have minded if it had been a less gracious compliment.
It would have been rather nice if it hadn't just been a joke.
‘Come with me.’
Silvia had taken her arm.
‘Let me show you the house and where we're going to be working.
I'll show you your room, too, if Guido hasn't already.’
‘No, he hasn't.’
Ronni hesitated and caught Guido's eye.
You and I, she reminded him silently, have unfinished business.
We still have to work out the terms of my contract.
For, though she wanted to take the job on now that she'd met Silvia, she was still not prepared to acept Guido's conditions.
As Silvia led her away, she told him over her shoulder, ‘We can continue our conversation later.’
Guido simply winked back at her and told Silvia with a smile, as he headed off across the garden, ‘Be sure to show her the games room while you're at it.
She's very keen to get in shape while she's here.’
Impudent devil, Ronni thought to herself, as she headed with Silvia towards the villa.
But she was smiling, an amused, lightly tolerant smile.
And in her hand she was still holding the red geranium.
‘And this is your room.
Do you like it?’
Silvia perched herself with a broad smile on the edge of the bed.
‘I picked it for you because Jeff told me that blue's your favourite colour.’
‘It's a gorgeous room.
I absolutely love it.’
Ronni stood and stared round her, eyes wide with pleasure.
‘And you're right, blue is my favourite colour.’
Here in this room was virtually every shade of that colour — from the cobalt-blue draperies, scattered with little hyacinth flowers, to the sapphire-blue cushions scattered over the bed and the powder-blue carpet, thick and soft beneath her feet.
It was a dream room, she thought — as well as a room to dream in.
But then the entire house, with its views out over the bay and the stunningly wild countryside, was a dream.
‘Note the double bed.’
Silvia patted the hyacinth bedspread and giggled as she gave the mattress a little bounce.
‘I thought you ought to have a room with a double bed, for when your boyfriend comes to visit you.’
‘Arnie?
Oh, he won't be coming.’
Ronni flushed to her hair roots, as Silvia continued to bounce and grin across at her.
‘Not coming?’
‘No.
He's teaching summer school in Bradford — that's a town in the north of England.’
‘And he won't be coming to see you?
Not even for a weekend?’
‘I shouldn't think so.’
Ronni shook her head.
Then she added, ‘Well, I'm only going to be here for three weeks.’
‘I don't know how you can bear that.’
Silvia's grin had vanished.
She was looking at Ronni now in stupefied horror.
‘I couldn't bear to be separated from Jeff for three weeks.
A couple of hours is almost more than I can stand!’
‘Well, it's different for Arnie and me.
We've known each other for two years.’
Ronni smiled.
This was a rehash of her conversation with Guido, only now she didn't feel uncomfortable touching on the subject of Arnie.
She added sagely, ‘Arnie and I are used to separations, and we know nothing's going to happen just because we're apart for a while.’
‘But don't you miss him?’
‘Of course I miss him.’
As Silvia continued to inflict on her that look of pained horror, Ronni folded her arms and assumed a school-teacherish expression.
‘But neither of us allows our feelings for the other to get in the way of all the things we have to do.
That's why he's in Bradford right now and I'm here in Sardinia — because each of us has to make a living.’
She kept her eyes fixed on Silvia and smiled a mock-stern smile.
‘Just as you're going to have to endure being separated from Jeff every day — at least for a few hours, while we do our English lessons.’
‘I want to talk to you about that.’
Silvia jumped up from the bed.
‘Guido says I have to do six hours every day.
Three in the morning and three in the afternoon.’
She made a face.
‘Don't you think that's too much?’
‘Quite frankly, I don't.’
At least on this she agreed with Guido.
Silvia's spoken English, as she had heard for herself, was excellent, but she'd had dreadfully poor results in her written papers.
She was going to need every moment of tutoring over the next three weeks.
Ronni told her, ‘I think you're going to need six hours a day.’
Silvia threw her a pained look as she came to stand before her.
‘I think it's too much.’
Then she smiled seductively.
‘Look, Guido will never know whether we're studying or not.
He's so preoccupied with his wretched speedboat race…
Every afternoon he's out at sea doing practice runs…
That's all he ever thinks about these days.’
Little minx, Ronni thought, as she looked into Silvia's cajoling face.
So Guido hadn't been entirely wrong, after all!
She said, ‘It doesn't matter whether Guido knows or not.
I'm contracted to tutor you for so many hours a day, and I'm afraid I must insist on fulfilling my contract.’
Then she added, suddenly curious, ‘What's this speedboat race Guido's involved in?’
Jeff had mentioned it to her fleetingly, but hadn't gone into details.
Silvia made a face.
‘The qualifying trials are in three weeks’ time — the day after my wretched exams, would you believe?
The race itself is a couple of weeks after that.
‘It's an annual thing,’ she continued, ‘organised locally.
Guido's won it for the past two years and he's absolutely desperate to get a hat trick — though some of his rivals are equally desperate to see that he doesn't.’
Ronni listened with interest.
So, this was something else to add to the list of things that Guido cared about.
In addition to getting his own way, monetary profits and his cousin Silvia, he also cared about winning races.
She found herself wondering, curiously, what she would discover next.
Silvia was glancing at her watch.
‘Look, I've got to go now.
I'm meeting your brother in half an hour.’
Then she bent down suddenly.
‘Oh, look, you've dropped this!’
She stood up, holding aloft the red geranium that had somehow slipped from Ronni's hand.
With a laugh, Silvia leaned and slipped it behind Ronni's ear.
‘Don't forget you're having dinner with Jeff and me tonight.’
Then she deliberately held Ronni's eyes for a moment.
‘Think about what I said about the lessons.
I'm sure we can come to some arrangement.’
Then, before Ronni could say a word, she was heading, laughing, for the door.
‘Guido was right, you look just like a Botticelli nymph!’
Ronni stood and watched the empty doorway for a moment, feeling a little as though she'd just encountered a whirlwind.
Then with a sigh she sank on to the hyacinth-coloured bedspread, feeling the soft springs of the mattress bounce beneath her weight.
‘What have I got myself into?’ she wondered aloud.
‘I'm going to be piggy in the middle between Guido and Silvia.
I'll never make it through the three weeks in one piece!’
She slid the geranium from her ear and stared at it for a moment, then shifted her gaze to her still unpacked cases by the door.
Perhaps, in spite of the fact that she did need the money, what she ought to do was just catch the first plane back home.
But that was when a shadow suddenly fell across the doorway.
Ronni glanced up to see Guido standing there watching her.
‘I want to speak to you,’ he told her brusquely.
‘Be down in the drawing-room in an hour.’
CHAPTER THREE
‘Well, have you got settled in OK?
Unpacked your bags?
Made yourself at home?’
Guido was standing by the bar table when Ronni walked into the drawing-room, pouring himself a generous measure of whisky.
He paused to glance at her over his shoulder.
‘I can see you've at least done some unpacking.
That's a very pretty dress you're wearing.
The colour suits you.’
Ronni fought back a blush.
The compliment had foolishly pleased her.
‘I'm having dinner with Jeff,’ she said.
‘Jeff and Silvia.’
‘I see.’
Guido took a mouthful of his whisky, his eyes scanning her amusedly over the top of his glass.
‘How very disappointing.
I thought your efforts were for me.’
‘For you?
Good grief!’
Ronni felt thrown for a moment.
Had he really thought that or was he joking?
Then she tossed her head at him.
‘No, I'm afraid not.
Though I can see why you must find that disappointing…’ she let her gaze drift over his white trousers and faded T-shirt, the same white trousers and faded T-shirt he'd been wearing earlier ‘…after all the trouble you've gone to changing for me.’
Guido laughed at that.
‘Do I detect a hint of criticism?
Perhaps you feel I'm slacking in my role as host?
Allow me to make amends.’
He waved a hand at the bar table and the array of bottles and glasses laid out there.
‘Tell me what you'd like to drink.’
This time Ronni didn't hesitate.
She had learned what happened to those who did!
‘A glass of wine, please,’ she said.
‘Red or white?’
‘Dry white, if you have it.’
‘Of course I have it.’
He paused and smiled at her.
‘And, even if I didn't, for you,signorina , I'd immediately send down to the cellar to get it.’
He was joking, half flirting, stirring an intimacy between them that had sent a flickering response, like warm fingers, down Ronni's spine.
It was an effort to sound scathing as she remarked, ‘How very gallant.’
‘A national characteristic.’
Guido poured her wine and held it out to her.
‘Like all Sards, I'm well known for my gallantry.’
Ronni took the glass, carefully avoiding his fingers.
All at once, though she was fighting it, she was overwhelmingly conscious of how dark and wild-looking and exciting he was, with his black hair spilling in curls over his ears and forehead, the short-sleeved T-shirt exposing the mahogany of his arms and the slim white trousers moulding the muscular lines of his legs.
His vibrancy and the way he drew her took her breath away.
And it struck her that he was indeed a son of this wild island, which she had glimpsed so far only briefly, yet which had struck her so vividly.
And it was this untamed quality, not his gallantry, that seemed to her characteristically Sardinian!
She said, once more trying her best to sound scathing, but sensing strongly that she was only half succeeding, ‘I'm glad to hear you have some redeeming features.’
‘Oh, I have many.’
Guido seated himself on the arm of a nearby armchair and looked at her with amusement in his eyes.
‘Thought I can't say that redemption is something that preoccupies me greatly.’
‘No, I don't expect it does.’
It hardly needed saying.
He had the shamelessly sensuous look of a man for whom being saved from his sins was the last thing on his mind.
Ronni took a mouthful of her drink, suddenly dry-mouthed at the thought of that.
‘Why did you want to see me?’
She glanced at her watch nervously.
‘I don't have much time.
I'll be going out soon.’
‘Not with Jeff and Silvia, you won't.’
‘Yes, I will.
Jeff's going to call me.’
Guido shook his head.
‘I very much doubt it.
I'd forget about dinner with those two, if I were you.’
‘And why do you say that?’
‘They'll be too busy consoling each other and agreeing with each other about what a bastard I am.’
He took an unconcerned mouthful of his whisky and rolled it in his mouth as he smiled and told her, ‘Alas, you see, your brother and I have crossed swords again.’
‘You've had another fight?
What about?
About Silvia again?’
‘No, not about Silvia again.
Silvia's not the only thing we fight about.
Your brother and I fight about just about everything.’
‘That must be your fault.
Jeff's not a quarrelsome person.
I've never had a quarrel with him in my life.’
‘That's because you're so much like him.’
Guido stretched his legs in front of him and crossed his canvas-shod feet at the ankles.
‘Although, in spite of that fact and in spite of my initial fears, I think that you and I can probably manage to get along.
You're definitely less bolshie than your brother.’
Ronni wasn't quite sure how she felt about that judgement.
In a way it made her feel like a traitor to her brother.
Was she being overly accommodating with Guido, she wondered, because of this strange effect he had on her?
Had he grown to think she would meekly do his bidding?
Well, he had another think coming if he did!
She proceeded to show him she could be bolshie when she wished.
‘The problem of our getting along may not arise,’ she informed him.
She straightened where she stood and regarded his feet critically.
They were placed now just a little too close to her own.
‘It may not arise because I may not be staying.’
Guido swirled his drink and took another mouthful.
‘You have to stay.
You need the money.’
‘Not that badly.’
In truth, she was still undecided.
She looked down into his face with its hard dark lines.
‘I'm only staying if you guarantee that you're going to pay me.’
‘We've been over that already.
I do guarantee it — just so long as Silvia passes her exams.’
‘And we've also been over the fact that I can't accept conditions.
I have to be paid whether she passes her exams or not.’
‘Absolutely not.’
Guido shook his head.
Then he shifted and leaned back against the back of the chair.
‘You've met Silvia now.
You can tell she's a bright girl.
If you're a half-decent teacher, she should have no difficulty in passing.’
‘Yes, if she studies.’
‘It's your job to see she does.’
‘I'm a teacher, not a gaoler.
She has to want to study.’
‘And you're not convinced she does?’
As his eyes fixed on her, Ronni hesitated for a moment, uncertain of how to combine honesty and diplomacy in her answer.
She'd taken a liking to Silvia and had no wish to betray her and get her into trouble with her quarrelsome cousin.
For, after all, though she'd talked about ‘coming to an arrangement’, Ronni had no reason to suspect that Silvia wasn't serious about her studies, and it would be wrong of her to give Guido that impression.
So she said, ‘I haven't had a chance to make up my mind yet, but I have no reason not to give her the benefit of the doubt.’
‘She hasn't got to you yet, then?’
Guido leaned forward.
‘That was why I wanted to speak to you — to find out, if during your time together, she'd managed to corrupt you.’
‘No, she hasn't.’
Ronni looked back at him and was aware of a flicker inside her as she suddenly caught sight of those wonderful eyelashes.
Seen from above they were twice as wonderful, seeming to sweep across his cheekbones like silky black feathers.
They're extraordinary, she reflected.
She longed to reach out and touch them.
She resisted the urge.
She said, ‘Anyway, I'm incorruptible.’
‘Even for the sake of love?’
Guido sat back a little, mercifully obscuring his eyelashes in shadow.
‘I thought you believed love should be allowed to flourish unrestrained?’
Ronni shrugged.
‘I suppose I do.’
‘So, you're not sure any more?’
‘I didn't say I wasn't sure.
I just wonder what you're getting at.’
She fixed him with a look and shifted her weight.
‘I think you're trying to trip me up.’
‘Trip you up?
Good heavens, no.
I'm just trying to find out to what extent I can trust you to keep my cousin's best interests at heart.
And, by best interests, as you know, I mean her studies, not her love life.’
He held her eyes a moment, drained his glass and laid it down.
‘You see, if I decide I can't trust you, I'll have to resort to certain measures.’
‘Certain measures?’
That sounded ominous.
‘What sort of certain measures?’
‘Very simple.
I'll have to keep an eye on you.
A very close eye indeed.’
‘Meaning?’
‘Meaning that I'll have to act as gaoler, clocking my cousin in and out of lessons, even sitting in on your classes should that prove to be necessary.’
Ronni blinked at him.
‘Would you really go to such lengths?’
‘If I thought I had no choice.
Silvia has to pass those exams of hers.
I've given my word to her mother that I will see to it that she does — she wouldn't have been allowed to come here on holiday otherwise, she would have been shut up in her mother's apartment in Rome.’
He smiled grimly.
‘And I intend to keep my word.’
He uncrossed his feet and began to stand up.
‘You see, the problem isn't that I don't want to pay you your salary.
I want you to have that money as much as you do.
I want Silvia to pass those wretched exams of hers.’
Then he paused as he stood there, dark eyes looking down at her.
And suddenly he smiled, his expression softening as he reached out to brush her cheek with a long brown finger.
‘And I want your parents to have their holiday.’
Ronni felt her heart give a sudden leap inside her.
She could barely focus as she forced herself to look back at him.
‘And there are two ways we can do it.’
His finger still lingered, scorching the soft skin of her cheek like a hot iron.
‘I can either trust you and allow you to take charge of the whole business, or I can decide you're not to be trusted and take charge of things myself.
I've told you what that would involve, and I don't think either of us really wants that.’
His finger slid down under her chin and tilted her head to look at him.
He held her eyes.
‘So, which is it to be?’
Ronni swallowed.
‘You can trust me.’
‘You're quite sure of that?’
‘Yes, you can trust me.’
‘And, if you have any problems, you'll come and tell me?’
Still he held her chin.
‘Can I trust you to do that, too?’
‘If it means the difference between being paid and not being paid, of course you can.
I have no desire to be watched over as though I were a child — but I promise I'll let you know if I have any problems.’
‘Good.
So, that's settled.’
At last he released her.
He stepped away with a smile.
‘I feel much happier now.’
Ronni couldn't quite say the same.
She felt reassured, but deeply unsettled.
At last it looked as though her fee was guaranteed — even if it might mean being constantly shadowed by Guido.
But suddenly she was filled with another fear — about the wisdom of staying on in such close proximity with him.
It wasn't right the way her heart had leapt when he'd touched her.
And the way her skin had smouldered, and continued to smoulder, even now.
She cast such thoughts from her.
‘Yes,’ she said, ‘it's settled.’
She felt a flickering sense of danger as she spoke the words.
‘So, what are you going to do now?’
‘Now?’
Ronni looked at him.
She was still having difficulty gathering her thoughts together.
Guido glanced at his watch.
‘It's now half-past seven, and I can't see any sign of your phone call from Jeff.’
Ronni had forgotten about her phone call, but now she remembered.
‘There's plenty of time,’ she said, reflecting to herself that she'd expected to hear from Jeff long before now.
She took a mouthful of her wine.
‘He'll ring any minute.’
‘I'll bet you anything he won't.
I already told you, he and Silvia will be far too busy consoling each other over me.’
Yes, he had told her that, but Ronni dismissed the idea.
‘He said he'll call, so he'll call,’ she insisted.
Guido laughed.
‘He said he'd pick up a spare part for me today, and he hasn't, which is why we fell out earlier and why I'm on my way now to pick it up myself.
So, if I were you, I wouldn't put too much trust in what he said.
He has a habit, as I keep telling you, of being unreliable.’
‘No, he hasn't.
You just can't see any good in Jeff because of Silvia.’
‘I can't see any good in him because there's not a great deal of good to see.’
He threw the statement like a challenge at her.
Ronni caught it and threw it back at him, impatient of his criticism.
‘If he's such an unreliable, untrustworthy individual,’ she put to him, ‘someone whom you obviously have no time for, how come you employ him?
How come you don't fire him?
Surely that would be the sensible thing to do.’
‘I may fire him, as I've told you.’
Guido did not bat an eyelid.
‘If he causes my cousin to fail her exams, I will indeed fire him.’
Then he smiled a malicious smile.
‘But not just yet.
I'll fire him after the speedboat race is over.
I won't need him after that.’
Ronni felt faintly shocked.
‘What do you mean you won't need him?’
‘I mean that the only reason I keep your brother on is because he's an absolute wizard with engines.’
He raised one hand and kissed the tips of his fingers in a gesture of unambiguous admiration.
‘No one understands my speedboat the way your brother does.’
He smiled, unrepentant.
‘That's why I need him.’
So, Silvia had been right; he really cared about winning that race.
Ronni glared at him.
‘Does Jeff know how cynically he's being used?’
Then, when he simply smiled in response, she added, ‘It would serve you right if Jeff walked out on you.
If he left you in the lurch when you needed him most.’
‘Thank you for that kind thought, but I don't think it's likely.’
Guido smiled a smug smile.
‘You see, I pay him too much.’
‘Money's not everything.’
Ronni glared at him.
‘I know my brother.
My brother has principles.’
‘Good for him.
I hope they'll pay the rent for him when he eventually finds himself out on his ear.’
Guido straightened and thrust his hands into his trouser pockets, snatching a quick glance at his watch as he did so.
‘In the meantime, as I told you, I have an errand to do, then I plan to stop off in the village and have a bite to eat.
Since you've obviously been left stranded, you're free to join me, if you wish.’
‘Thanks, but no, thanks.
Anyway, I haven't been left stranded.
Jeff's just a little late in calling, that's all.’
‘I'll give you one last chance.’
Guido was smiling amusedly down at her.
‘This is Bruna's night off.
If you don't want to go hungry, I suggest you accept my invitation.’
But Ronni was insistent.
‘No, thanks.
I'll wait for Jeff.’
‘Happy waiting.’
Guido turned on his heel.
‘Tell me all about it when I get back.’
Then, with an uncaring smile, he strode off through the open doorway.
It was just after nine-thirty when the telephone rang.
Almost faint with hunger by now, Ronni rushed out into the hall to answer it.
‘Hello?
Jeff, is that you?’ she demanded.
She could hear a lot of noise in the background before a voice spoke.
Jeff was obviously calling from a public place.
Except that it wasn't Jeff.
‘Still waiting, I see.’
Ronni felt her empty insides curl with annoyance as she instantly recognised Guido's voice.
‘Never mind,’ he continued.
‘Your dinner's on its way.
I've asked the restaurant to bring you round a takeaway.
It should be with you in about ten minutes.’
Then, before she could protest, he was saying, ‘Got to go now.
Mustn't let my coffee get cold.
Bon appetito ,’ he exhorted her.
And then he hung up.
Ronni was still fizzing with indignation — how dared he make fun of her?— when, sure enough, a car arrived at the front door, laden with dishes dovered in tin foil.
Ronni carried them indoors and laid them on the kitchen table, scarcely able to bear the mouth-watering aromas that were escaping from beneath the tin foil.
‘I ought to throw them in the bin,’ she told herself tetchily, casting one final plaintive glance in the direction of the telephone.
‘That would be treating them with the contempt with which they were given.’
But, as her stomach gave another helpless rumble of hunger, she sank down weakly on to one of the chairs and unceremoniously began ripping off the tin foil.
Jeff made up for his neglect by taking Ronni out for both lunch and dinner next day.
‘I'm sorry, Ron,’ he told her, kissing her when they met.
‘I had an absolute hell of a day.
I got stuck on a job at Olbia.
It took hours longer than I thought.
And then —’
‘And then you had a row with Guido.’
As Ronni finished the sentence for him, Jeff made a face.
‘How do you know?
Did he tell you?’
Ronni nodded.
‘It sounds like it's a regular thing.’
She might have added that Guido had also told her that Jeff would end up breaking their dinner date.
But she decided not to.
That had just been a lucky guess.
And a rather malicious lucky guess to boot.
So, instead, she said, ‘If all you do is fight with him, why on earth do you go on working for him?’
‘Because he pays damned well.’
Jeff grinned as he said it.
Then he added as Ronni responded with a scowl — don't say Guido had been right yet again!—‘But, more importantly, I stay with him because I respect him as a seaman.
He's got the best boats in the whole region, and he doesn't stint in looking after them.
And, what's more, he's an expert when it comes to sailing them.
He's the most professional boat owner I've ever worked for.’
That was praise indeed coming from Jeff.
Ronni nodded, glad to discover that Jeff hadn't sold out.
Silvia joined them halfway through lunch and had dinner with them in the evening.
They sat outside at a table overlooking the bay, with the twinkling lights of the harbour beyond, the big yachts and the smaller boats bobbing at anchor in the moonlight.
‘It's down to work tomorrow,’ Ronni observed, glancing across at Silvia, as the waiter cleared away their fruit plates and brought them coffee.
Guido had said she could have a day off, just to get acclimatised, but he'd been firm that the lessons should start immediately after that.
And, quite frankly, Ronni was keen to get started anyway.
‘We agreed on three hours in the morning and three in the afternoon.
I suggest we start at nine,’ she told Silvia.
‘That's no problem.’
Silvia smiled brightly.
‘Nine in the morning's OK with me.’
Then Ronni was aware of a look passing between her and Jeff before she continued, ‘The problem is the afternoon.
I always go out with Jeff in the afternoon.’
‘That's right,’ Jeff piped up, throwing his sister a soothing glance.
‘She comes out in the boat with me when I'm going round on other jobs.’
Ronni sighed.
So, once again, Guido had been right.
She sat back in her seat and looked across squarely at the pair of them.
‘We have to do three hours in the afternoon, to make up the six I'm contracted to do.
If I don't, I'm in trouble with Guido,’ she said plainly.
She fixed her gaze on Jeff.
‘And you will be, too.’
‘Been making threats, has he?’
Jeff scowled.
‘Well, that's only to be expected.
He always enjoys throwing his weight around.’
He shook his head.
‘But don't let it bother you.’
‘But I have to let it bother me.
I need the money.
And besides,’ Ronni added, ‘when I agree to do something, I do it.
I don't like taking something on and then failing to deliver.’
‘Don't take it so damn seriously.’
Jeff made fun of her.
‘You'd think somebody's life was at stake the way you're speaking.’
Ronni narrowed her eyes at him.
Now, that did sound irresponsible!
‘No one 's life depends on it, but someone's future might — the future of someone you claim to love.’
She shook her head.
‘I'm surprised at you, Jeff.’
But as Jeff dropped his gaze away, Silvia cut in, ‘Look, I know these lessons are important.
I need them to get me through my exams.
But all I'm suggesting, Ronni, is that we be a bit flexible.
We don't have to do three hours in the morning and three in the afternoon.
We can juggle the hours around a bit to fit in with other things.’
Ronni was far from convinced.
‘How?’ she demanded.
‘Well, we could start earlier in the morning and fit in more hours before lunchtime.
We could slip in an hour in the evening.
We could just juggle things around.’
‘But it has to add up to six hours a day.
In the midst of all this juggling we don't want to lose any hours.’
‘Sure.
We don't have to.’
‘I must insist on that.’
‘We won't lose any hours.
I promise you, Ronni.’
‘I don't know…’
As Ronni continued to ponder for a moment, Jeff leaned across the table.
‘Come on, Ron.
Don't be stuffy.’
He threw her a wink.
‘You've got nothing to worry about.
Besides, who can you trust more than your very own brother?’
Ronni shook her head and smiled, finally won over.
‘OK,’ she agreed.
‘We'll be flexible.’
Just four days later Ronni was regretting her decision.
Silvia had stuck to her promises for the first couple of days, but then had followed a catalogue of excuses and cancelled lessons that had left Ronni feeling angry and on edge.
There'd been yet another cancelled lesson only today and Ronni was feeling even angrier and edgier than ever as, just after lunchtime, she made her way down the garden towards the villa's private little jetty, a corner she hadn't explored before, to try and calm herself with a breath of air.
But she almost turned and fled as she came round a corner and found herself face to face with Guido.
‘Good afternoon.’
He glanced up from what he was doing.
‘What brings you to this quiet little corner?’
He was bent over the prow of a little wooden sailboat — he was obviously having a rest from speedboat practice today — and was busily tightening something with a big screwdriver.
And he was dressed only in faded jeans, his torso quite bare, his dark curly hair falling over his forehead.
He pushed it back as he turned to look at her, and Ronni was aware of following every movement — the cursory flick of dark-tanned fingers through his hair, the accompanying tightening of one muscular shoulder, the sinewy ripple across his broad back.
Good grief, she thought faintly, forgetting all her worrries, what a perfect visual feast he is.
He had the sort of body women dreamt of getting their arms round!
But she pushed that thought from her.
‘I was just taking a walk.’
She had to control her breathing as she looked into his face.
In the couple of days since she had last set eyes on him she had forgotten the virile power of that face.
He said what she was thinking — or at least a part of it!
‘Long time no see.
Where have you been hiding yourself?’
‘I haven't been hiding anywhere.’
Ronni stuffed her hands into the pockets of her pink Bermudas, which perfectly matched her pale pink T-shirt.
What she'd been doing was missing breakfasts and lunches and dinners in an effort to accommodate Silvia's erratic time-keeping — and still failing to do the stipulated six hours a day, she thought to herself with a dart of misery.
It wasn't surprising that her path and Guido's hadn't crossed.
She glanced at him guiltily, remembering her promise to confide in him if she had any problems.
But she would not tell him yet.
Silvia had made a hand-on-heart promise that they would make up all their lost hours this evening and this coming Monday, and Ronni in turn had promised to give her one more chance.
Forcing herself to sound as confident as she was trying to feel, she told Guido, ‘I've simply been busy, that's all.’
‘I thought maybe you'd been avoiding me.’
He smiled an amused smile.
‘I hope that isn't the case?
I'd be most upset.’
He was teasing her and, had he been anyone else, Ronni had no doubt she could have thought up some smart retort.
But it was hopeless; that smile of his seemed to mesmerise her.
‘Why should I be avoiding you?’ was all she could think of to say.
Guido shrugged.
‘I don't know.
Your brother sometimes tries to avoid me.’
‘Maybe he gets tired of all the rows.
Anyway, I'm not my brother.’
‘No, you're not.’
He surveyed her.
‘And thank heavens for that.
You're much nicer than your brother.
Much easier to get along with.’
His eyes drifted over her, making her shiver.
‘I'm rather glad that you and I don't have rows and fall out.’
He'd said something similar once before and it had made Ronni feel a tiny bit guilty.
She felt guilty now and a little uneasy.
She was being far too easygoing with him, she was thinking, too bowled over by his charm.
She ought to be a little less susceptible to this man who was causing her brother so many problems.
Ronni took a step back.
The easiest way to deal with that was simply to remove herself from his presence.
She glanced at the screwdriver he still held in his hand.
‘I'll leave you, then.
I wouldn't want to interrupt.’
‘Oh, you're not interrupting, but I suppose you ought to get back.’
The dark eyes fixed her for a moment.
‘It'll soon be time for your afternoon lesson.’
Ronni could have just said nothing.
She could have just nodded and turned away.
But she wouldn't allow herself that deception.
After all, there was no reason why Guido shouldn't know the truth.
So she told him it.
‘We're not having an afternoon lesson today.’
‘Oh?’
His expression grew curious.
‘And why is that?’
‘Because we've made an arrangement.
We've decided to be more flexible about how we organise the lessons.’
There was no reason why he shouldn't know this, too.
Ronni would probably have told him before if she'd seen him.
‘But don't worry,’ she added quickly, guessing what he was thinking.
‘I'm not forgetting the number of hours we agreed.’
‘That's OK, then.’
He nodded his satisfaction, and, to Ronni's chagrin, a guilty blush touched her cheeks.
She bit her lip.
It's not a lie, she told herself.
We'll be making up the lost hours tonight and on Monday.
Guido was still watching her and he had seen her guilty reaction.
His eyes narrowed.
‘You're not having any problems, are you?
Remember what you agreed if there were any problems?’
Ronni nodded, fighting back the colour in her cheeks.
‘No, I haven't forgotten, but I have nothing to tell you.’
After all, there was no real problem.
Yet.
And she'd promised Silvia she'd give her this last chance to keep her word.
She reassured Guido now, ‘Don't worry about it.’
‘Oh, I'm not worried.
You're the one who ought to be worrying.’
As he spoke, Guido tossed the screwdriver aside, and, still watching her closely, took a step towards her.
‘It would be most unwise of you to forget what I warned you.
If you were to forget that, then I'm afraid we would fall out.’
Ronni felt her heart leap and shrink simultaneously.
Suddenly, he was standing right in front of her.
‘You won't forget, will you?’
The black eyes burned into her.
She could feel them pierce through to the back of her head.
‘Of course not.’
She swallowed.
Her heart was clattering inside her.
What was he about to do to her? she wondered dimly.
For suddenly she knew he was about to do something.
And yet in spite of that — or maybe because of it — she could not move one single frozen muscle of her body.
They seemed to stare into each other 's faces for a very long time.
Ronni could feel her skin tingle from her scalp to her toes.
All at once, she was a helpless rabbit trapped in the headlamps of a car.
Then, at last, Guido broke the deadlock.
Suddenly, he reached out for her.
He smiled a smoky smile.
‘Come here,’ he said.
CHAPTER FOUR
‘Come where?
What are you doing?’
Ronni squeaked a puny protest, her body suddenly as stiff as a rod of iron, as Guido's hand closed around her wrist.
Yet her face reamined tilted up towards his, her lips softly puckered as though to welcome a kiss.
To be truthful, she hadn't a clue what she was doing.
‘Come here.’
He had taken hold of her other wrist now, and was gripping her lower arms firmly in his.
Then he was lifting her up, so that her feet left the ground and her breasts brushed briefly against his chest, making the blood leap in her veins.
Again Ronni asked herself, What was he about to do to her?
The next instant she knew.
He was swinging her into the sailboat, then, with a broad grin, leaping in beside her.
‘Let me show you what this little boat can do.’
‘But I don't want to go for a sail!’
Ronni felt strangely cheated.
No, not cheated, she corrected herself hurriedly — after all, she had seriously believed he was about to kiss her!
What she felt, and what she resented, was that she'd been tricked!
Guido was laughing.
Perhaps he knew what she'd expected.
In fact, as she met his eyes, Ronni was certain that he did, and that he was enjoying her consternation hugely.
‘Don't be silly.
Of course you do,’ he told her, pushing off.
‘How could anyone not want to go for a sail on a day like this?’
It wasn't the day, it was him and what he was doing to her.
Her heart was racing with horror and excitement at the prospect of being marooned all alone in this little boat with him.
Besides, her arms were still on fire from where he had lifted her and her nipples still burned from that brief contact with his chest.
All in all, she was suddenly feeling so deeply vulnerable that she was scared to death of what might happen next.
She stared at the receding shoreline and wondered if she should make a jump for it.
‘Sit down or you'll tip us over.’
Guido's hand was on her shoulder.
To free herself of it, Ronni sat down quickly on the wooden seat behind her.
Now I'm stuck, she thought in panic, as they sped off towards the horizon.
‘I'll do all the work.
All you have to do is sit there.’
Guido was swinging the sail round to catch the light wind.
‘Pay attention,’ he told her, ‘and you might learn something.’
‘I don't want to learn something.
I want to go back.’
Yet, as she watched him, perched as lithe as a cat on the prow, leaning back out over the waves to balance the little craft, his splendid chest scattered with little beads of water, Ronni was aware that she didn't really mean it.
Her heart was beating with excitement inside her.
She detached her gaze hurriedly and tried to slow her heart's beating.
Think of Jeff, she told herself.
Think of Arnie.
That sobered her a little.
She informed Guido in a cool tone, ‘Learning to sail isn't going to be a great deal of use to me.
I can't say I do much sailing in London.’
‘You can sail on the Thames.
I have friends who live in Essex.’
Guido shifted position slightly, as supple as a rubber band.
‘They go sailing all the time.’
‘Do they?’
Ronni kept her gaze averted.
‘Well, I'm afraid I don't move in such elevated circles.’
‘So, what circles do you move in?’
He had one hand on the tiller.
‘What do you do with yourself when you're not working?’
Ronni felt caught off guard.
‘Why do you want to know?’ she asked him.
‘Is that why you spirited me off — so you could ask me personal questions?’
‘I don't think I'm being terribly personal.
I'm just curious, that's all.’
Guido smiled and persisted.
‘So, what do you do with yourself in London?’
He was right, it wasn't terribly personal, yet Ronni still felt oddly threatened.
She stared at the sparkling blue horizon.
‘Things,’ she said unhelpfully.
‘What kind of things?
Be specific.
London's a city that's full of diversions.
I'm interested to know what you get up to.’
‘I go to the cinema sometimes.’
‘And the theatre?’
‘Sometimes.’
In truth, the last time had been over a year ago.
‘And restaurants?
I suppose you eat out a lot?
London has a fabulous selection of restaurants.’
Ronni nodded.
‘Yes, of course.’
Then she bit her lip guiltily.
The last time she and Arnie had eaten out they'd gone to the local curry house where they went about four times a year.
That could hardly be called sampling the capital's restaurants!
‘And is that all you do?
The theatre sometimes?
The cinema sometimes?’
Guido leaned on the tiller and adjusted the sails.
‘I hope you don't mind my saying so, but it sounds pretty boring to me.’
She'd known he'd think that and that was one of the reasons why she hadn't wanted to get into this conversation in the first place.
Ronni turned to deliver him a look of disapproval.
‘It may sound boring to you, but it isn't boring to me.
I'm perfectly happy with my lot.’
‘Your lot.’
Guido grinned.
‘Doesn't sound a lot to me.
In fact, I'd say it sounds pretty meagre.’
‘It isn't meagre at all.’
Guido raised an amused eyebrow.
‘In that case, there's obviously something you've forgotten to tell me.
Your weekly visit to the library, perhaps?’
Ronni glared at him, but wondered, Did it really sound as dull as that?
Would anyone else have mocked her, or was it just Guido?
It was just Guido, she decided, throwing him a harsh look, wishing he'd lose his balance and fall head first into the water.
‘But, of course, I was forgetting.’
His eyes were still on her, as he kept one hand on the tiller and the other controlling the sail.
It was irritating how easily he seemed to do several things at once.
‘I was forgetting about your love life,’ he continued, eyeing her.
‘I expect that takes up a lot of your time?’
‘I expect it does.’
Ronni stiffened defensively.
This was another reason she hadn't wanted to get into this conversation.
She'd known that it was bound to lead to Arnie.
‘I expect when you're not going to the theatre — sometimes — and going to the cinema — sometimes — you're having cosy little evenings in with Arnie?’
‘I expect I am.’
‘Now that sounds more exciting.’
He paused, surveying her.
‘Except that I seem to remember you telling me that you and Arnie don't like to live in each other 's pockets.
What was it you said?
You like to give each other space?’
‘Yes, that's what I said.’
Ronni was surprised he remembered that conversation by the urn of red geraniums.
She watched him for a moment, wishing she didn't feel so defensive every time he broached the subject of Arnie.
For, though she couldn't explain why, it somehow felt disloyal to be discussing Arnie with Guido Falcone.
As he looked back at her, waiting, she forced herself to elaborate, ‘Like me, Arnie's a teacher, and he does a lot of extra-curricular work.
We both do.
It takes up quite a lot of our time.
But we spend what time we can together.’
‘It doesn't sound like much.’
There was an amused smile in Guido's eyes as the wind whipped his dark hair in curling strands about his face.
The corners of his mouth lifted as he put to Ronni, ‘But, who knows?
Maybe it's more exciting than it sounds.
And if you're happy, why should I criticise?’
And why should I care whether you criticise or not?
Ronni told herself silently but firmly.
Yet his remark had caused a sudden emptiness to go through her, shocking her a little, taking her unawares.
And, suddenly, as she pushed the feeling from her, more than anything in the world what Ronni wanted to do was wipe that smug, amused smile from Guido's face, that smile that made her feel so exposed and vulnerable.
She lifted her chin and looked at him squarely.
‘Yes, I'm happy.
Arnie's a wonderful man.
Maybe the life we lead isn't what you'd call exciting, but we care about each other and that's what counts.’
Ronni was rewarded by seeing his expression falter.
And, just at that instant, as his concentration wavered, a side-wind suddenly caught the sail, momentarily snatching it from his grasp.
‘Look out!’
In the same instant he was yelling a warning.
But Ronni, distracted too, reacted too slowly.
As the boat swung round sharply, she toppled overboard.
She had a sensation of sailing briefly through the air, like a bird, she thought, rather enjoying the feeling.
Then with a splash she was plunging into the crystal-clear water, and, an instant later, bobbing unharmed to the surface.
She was almost surprised to see Guido swimming towards her.
‘Are you all right?’
His face wore a look of concern.
‘Of course I'm all right.
Why would anything be wrong with me?
All I did was fall in the water!’
He was helping her, quite unnecessarily, towards the drifting sailboat.
‘You never know.
I thought you might have got a fright.
For all I know, perhaps you can't even swim.’
‘In that case, you should never have taken me out sailing in the first place!’
Ronni scowled at him, suddenly filled with alarm at the way his arm was round her waist and at the way her body longed to sink unresisting against it.
‘You talk about other people being irresponsible!’ she accused him, taking refuge from her confused feelings in a display of outrage.
‘That was irresponsible in the extreme!’
‘Ah, but I knew we had a first-class lifeguard on board.’
Smiling and apparently oblivious of her alarm that was rapidly turning into panic, Guido continued to guide her towards the sailboat.
‘I knew you would never be in any danger.’
‘Then, if you knew so much, I wish you'd warned me that we were about to change direction quite so abruptly.’
The way he was embracing her was making it difficult to breathe.
The words came out in sharp little machine-gun bursts.
‘It would have saved me getting my shorts and T-shirt wet!’
‘They'll dry soon enough.
Anyway,’ he told her, ‘anyone who learns to sail has to experience at least one ducking.
It's all part of becoming a sailor.’
‘A sort of initiation rite?’
Ronni flashed a glance at him, struggling to match her expression to the staccato in her voice.
But she was forced to snatch her gaze away in total disarray at the sight of the way his thick dark hair was curling in delicate wet tendrils over his forehead.
It was like a thrust to the heart.
He looked so utterly gorgeous.
She swallowed hard.
‘I wasn't aware I was learning to sail.
I already told you I don't need to learn to sail.’
‘You never know.
One day it might come in handy.’
They'd reached the side of the boat and Guido's hands were at her waist, about to hoist her up on board.
‘One day you might find yourself moving in different social circles.’
That remark sent a flash of real irritation through her, as Ronni remembered how he had laughed at her before, mocking what he perceived to be her dull life in London.
Just as he began to hoist her upwards, she turned on him and snapped, ‘Leave me alone!
I can get on board myself!’
The sudden jerky movement rocked the boat, creating a wave that knocked them both off balance.
Suddenly, to Ronni's dismay, she was falling into Guido's arms.
‘What were you saying?’
The black eyes were pouring through her, amused and oddly smouldering at the same time.
‘I said I can get back on board by myself.’
‘I thought that was what you said.’
He smiled.
‘So, what are you waiting for?’
Ronni wasn't waiting for anything.
She just felt hopelessly entangled in the strong brown arms that were wrapped around her waist.
The eyes that burned through her seemed to hold her like rivets.
It was just like before, back at the jetty, only this time it was a hundred times worse.
Then he smiled again and she felt his arms tighten, drawing her ever so gently against him.
‘While we're waiting,’ he said, ‘how about this?’
Ronni felt something inside her switch on like a light bulb.
It was as sudden and dramatic and undeniable as that.
For the next moment he was kissing her and she was instantly realising that nothing quite so exciting had ever happened to her before.
The lips that covered hers were soft and warm and salty.
She loved the taste of them.
She loved the way they felt.
With a sigh, Ronni pressed her own lips against them, feeling sparks of electricity skitter down her spine.
Or perhaps it was his fingers that were having that effect.
As his hands caressed her back, the long strong fingers kneaded and moulded every vertebra along the way.
It was like a waterfall of sensation, sending shivers of longing through her.
With a sigh Ronni surrendered to the sensuous magic of those hands.
And it was all a surrender.
Not an ounce of her resisted, as he consumed her with kisses and slow-moving caresses.
As their two entwined bodies bobbed like corks in the water, Ronni closed her eyes and let herself melt against him.
It felt as though she'd drifted into some dreamlike watery paradise.
It wasn't until she felt his hand on her breast and experienced, like hot needles going through her, the sharp tug of responsive desire in her loins that Ronni belatedly realised what was happening.
She was being seduced by her employer, a man she barely knew — and, what was more, she was colluding in her own seduction.
She was walking right into it with a smile on her face!
Ronni dredged up some sanity from the depths of her half-stunned brain, detached her lips from Guido's and pushed him away.
‘That's quite enough of that!’ she declared.
‘Is it?
Ah, well.
I suppose so.
For the moment.’
‘No, not for the moment.
That's quite enough, period!’
Ronni turned away in confusion as Guido simply went on smiling, bobbing up and down unrepentantly in the water, his dark hair plastered like strands of silk to his forehead, quite obviously thoroughly enjoying her confusion.
And what confused her was the fact that she didn't really feel angry.
In fact, part of her felt like smiling right back at him.
She'd only pulled away because she knew what was happening was wrong, not because she hadn't been enjoying it.
‘So, are you going to climb on board or do you prefer to stay here in the water?
It's a perfect opportunity to have a swim.’
‘With all my clothes on?
No, I don't think that's a good idea.’
‘You could take your clothes off — at least as many of them as you want to.
Take my word for it, I wouldn't be shocked.’
That hardly needed saying.
Ronni sensed nothing would shock him.
She turned her back on him.
‘I'm going back on board.
You can stay here in the water, if you want.’
‘Without you?
That's no fun.’
He held the boat steady, as she proceeded, less than elegantly, to clamber back on board.
‘You're right,’ he observed, as she flopped breathless on the deck, ‘you really are incredibly unfit.’
Ronni turned to scowl at him as, with the easy grace of a pole vaulter, he swung himself over the edge of the boat.
The only reason her own embarkation had been so hopelessly clumsy was because her limbs were all suddenly shaking like jellies.
Delayed anger, she told herself, reassured by this analysis.
‘I'm not incredibly unfit.
I had a nasty experience, that's all.
I'm just a little shaken up.’
‘I thought you said it was nothing?’
He was adjusting the sail ropes and pulling the tiller back into position.
‘I thought you said you weren't bothered about falling in the water?’
‘Perhaps falling in the water —’ Ronni glared at him, bluffing, struggling to get back in control of her emotions ‘— wasn't the nasty experience I was referring to.’
He simply smiled at that.
‘I see,’ he said.
He let his dark eyes drift over her sodden figure, over the T-shirt, now quite transparent, which clung to her wetly, displaying a pair of nipples that stuck out like doorknobs.
He let his gaze rest there a moment.
‘I get your drift.
Quite clearly, as you say, something has shaken you up.’
Ronni followed his gaze and felt herself turn crimson.
‘That was the cold water,’ she bit at him in horror, folding her arms across her chest.
‘It has nothing to do with anything else.’
‘Heaven forbid.’
Guido was laughing, as the little boat began to scud across the waves again.
‘So, what shall we do now?’ he asked her, winking.
‘I must say I'm rather enjoying our little outing.’
In the event he took her round the Baia Sardinia, a stretch of dancing turquoise water nestling in the embrace of a tumbling rugged coast.
Then they sailed further on, to the fabled Costa Smeralda, one of the most luxurious resorts in all the world.
Where once upon a time there had only been fishing boats, now bobbed the magnificent yachts of international millionaires.
‘This place was developed by the Aga Khan,’ Guido told her.
‘He discovered it by chance about thirty years ago, when his yacht ran in for shelter from a storm.’
And the more Ronni saw of Guido's beautiful island with its contrasts of perfect chic and untamed wild, the more fascinated and drawn to it she felt.
It was like nowhere she had ever been before.
It felt magical, untouched, a paradise to discover.
All the same, she felt relieved when, just before five, they finally returned to the villa again and she was able to step out of the boat on to dry land.
Alone with Guido in the little boat, she'd felt a constant sense of danger, like sitting on a time bomb that might go off at any second.
For what would happen if he tried to kiss her again?
He had not tried, however, and now he was tying up the boat and expertly folding down the sails.
‘So, where are you off to now?’ he asked her over his shoulder.
Then he added before she had time to answer, ‘I expect you have an English lesson pretty soon — especially since you didn't have one this afternoon?’
He did not look at her as he said it, but there was a sudden unmistakably sharp edge to his voice that warned Ronni that the smile had gone from his face.
She hesitated on the jetty, hands in the pockets of her Bermudas — quite dry now, as was the once-revealing T-shirt!
She looked at Guido.
‘Yes, I expect I have.’
It was the truth, but she knew it sounded evasive and that evasiveness was not a quality that would appeal much to Guido.
But his interference in this issue was making her prickly.
She preferred to be left alone to handle her problem with Silvia — at least until Silvia had had a chance to keep her word.
Guido's reaction was predictable.
He turned to look at her, an expression of undisguised warning in his eyes.
‘I hope so,’ he said.
‘I hope very much so.
I hope there's nothing going on that I wouldn't like.’
Ronni bridled at that.
What was he accusing her of?
Though she suspected she knew.
He still believed her irresponsible.
He still believed her capable of conniving with Jeff and Silvia behind his back.
She looked him in the eye and forced herself to tell him calmly, ‘Don't worry.
Everything's under control.’
‘I hope that means what I want it to mean and not something else.’
His eyes bored back at her, unblinking.
‘It would be very unwise of you to mean something else.’
Ronni detached her gaze and turned away in irritation.
‘Thanks for the sailboat ride,’ she told him curtly.
Then, without a backward glance, she headed for the house.
Back at the villa, after she'd showered and changed, Ronni spent the next hour pacing her room.
Silvia had said she'd be back some time before dinner, and already the hands of the clock were nudging seven.
She was beginning to feel the faith trickle out of her.
She sank down on to the bed and glanced at the writing pad that she'd tossed there after a brief effort to write to Arnie.
For some reason, she couldn't think what on earth to write to him.
And that was another thing that was troubling her.
Ronni sighed and lay back on the hyacinth-coloured bedspread.
She'd been here four days and it was high time she wrote to him.
She'd promised she would as soon as she arrived.
But that was before she'd known the traumas that lay in store for her.
She gazed up at the ceiling with its painted blue flowers and wondered what Arnie was doing in Bradford.
Teaching summer school, she told herself with a quick dart of guilt, not kissing wild Sardinians in the middle of the ocean.
Which was something she had no business doing either!
But it had just happened.
Heaven knew how.
She hadn't meant it to happen.
She stared hard at the blue flowers.
And it would never happen again.
But, all the same, as she remembered those brief moments in the water, she felt her heart turn over with a flip-flop of pleasure.
Never in her whole life before had she experienced such feelings.
She sat up abruptly, more guilt rushing through her.
She was going crazy.
She must be.
She reached for the phone.
The next moment, with trembling fingers, she was dialling England.
She got through immediately.
‘I want to talk to Arnie.’
But Arnie wasn't available.
‘He's got a class, I'm afraid.’
‘Then give him a message, please.
Tell him Ronni called — just to say hello and to give him my love.
Thanks,’ she added, and quickly rang off.
She sighed a small sigh, feeling a little better.
That knot of tension in her had slackened a little.
Then as her gaze focused unconsciously on the hyacinth-coloured bedspread, she found herself remembering what Silvia had said: ‘I thought you ought to have a room with a double bed, for when your boyfriend comes to visit you’.
Ronni made a small face.
Arnie wouldn't be coming to visit her.
Theirs was not a relationship of expansive gestures like that.
It was a quiet relationship, the sort of relationship one slipped into.
For that was precisely what she'd done.
She'd just slipped into it over the years.
That sounded dull and unexciting, she reflected, feeling guilty and telling herself she shouldn't be thinking such things.
But what made her feel even guiltier was the simple fact that, somehow, no matter how hard she tried, she couldn't imagine Arnie lying with her in the big blue bed.
The only person she could imagine lying in it with her was Guido.
By eight o'clock there was still no sign of Silvia.
Ronni had very nearly paced a hole in her bedroom carpet.
I'll have to tell Guido, she kept thinking over and over.
This whole situation's getting ridiculous.
She had dinner alone — there was no sign of Guido — then went for a walk out in the moonlit garden.
She would wait up till he came back and then she'd speak to him.
For better or worse, she had no choice.
It was just before midnight and she was out on the terrace, staring out only half seeingly at the star-spangled horizon, when she heard the sound of a car drawing up at the front of the house.
That must be Guido.
She felt a dart of tension.
Then she squared her shoulders and headed indoors.
But on her way to the front hall she stopped in her tracks as, suddenly, all hell seemed to break loose around her.
Silvia had just came through the front door — that car hadn't been Guido after all.
But Guido was there all right; he must have come back without Ronni knowing, and he was facing Silvia in the enormous hallway, a fulminating tower of bristling black anger.
Ronni felt her heart quail as he exploded with fury, and, though he was yelling in Italian, there was no need for translation.
Silvia, in any language, was being torn to shreds.
‘Bastardo !
Ti odio !’
Silvia was screaming defiance, her lovely face as pale as the parchment walls around her.
‘Ti odio !’
I hate you! she screamed again.
Then she was making a dash for the huge carved staircase.
‘Vieni qua ,maledetta !’
Guido was stepping after her, like a crackle of lightning.
And, as he reached for the pale, fleeing figure of his cousin, he looked like a man with murder in his heart.
And that was when Ronni made her move.
Instinctively, she darted forward, throwing herself between them.
‘Leave her alone, you disgraceful bully!
Don't you dare lay a hand on Silvia!’
Every inch of her was shaking with outrage and indignation.
Silvia took advantage of Guido's surprise to escape up the staircase.
And, a moment later, as Ronni and Guido confronted each other, there was a lond bang as Silvia's bedroom door slammed shut behind her.
‘What the devil do you think you're doing?’
Guido had recovered from his surprise.
He scowled down at Ronni.
‘Get out of my way at once!’
‘No, I won't get out of your way!
Leave Silvia alone!’
‘I'll do what I like with Silvia, and I'd advise you not to interfere!’
‘No, you won't do what you like with Silvia, and yes, I will interfere!’
Ronni's heart was roaring like a steam train inside her.
She glared into his face, all sorts of emotions pouring through her, suddenly, for some reason, very close to tears herself.
‘What do you understand about anything — especially love?’ she found herself demanding.
‘All you care about is being boss and getting your own way.
You've no idea how a young girl in love must feel.
How dare you upset her and bully her that way?’
Guido's hand was on her shoulder, as tight as a steel snare.
‘Get out of my way,’ he demanded through his teeth.
‘I will not get out of your way.’
Ronni thrust her chin at him.
‘Leave Silvia alone.
She's already upset enough!’
The black glittering eyes seemed to tear at her like scissors.
Any minute, she was sure of it, he'd thrust her roughly to the ground.
But Ronni continued to resist him.
‘Say what you have to say in the morning.
There's no point in doing it now.
Wait till everyone's calmed down.’
‘Playing peace-maker again?
Silvia's faithful guardian angel.’
The flicker of an ironic smile touched his lips.
‘Well, don't think you're going to talk me out of having it out with her.
All you're doing is putting off the evil hour.’
‘I realise that.
I'm not trying to talk you out of anything.’
Was it her imagination or had his grip on her shoulder grown less tight?
There seemed to be a softness in his fingers now that was making her shiver.
Ronni looked into his face, feeling suddenly quite light-headed, and heard herself tell him, ‘Wait until morning.
Silvia's here now.
She's not going anywhere.
It won't do any harm to wait.’
There was a long, shivering pause.
‘You reckon not?’ he said at last.
Ronni snatched a quick breath.
‘I think it would be better.’
His fingers on her shoulder had definitely grown softer.
She could feel them move, almost like a caress, towards her neck, then flicker slowly upwards to brush against her jawline.
All at once it was very hard to breathe.
‘Perhaps I'll take your advice, then.’
His eyes were pouring into her as his fingers lightly tilted her chin.
‘I suppose it won't do any harm to wait.’
Ronni had to swallow.
All at once she could not speak.
Her tongue was glued to the roof of her mouth.
Guido continued to look down at her, almost making her heart stop, his fingers still lightly holding her chin.
Then he smiled a fleeting smile.
‘You win,’ he told her.
‘Just this once I'll take your advice.’
‘I think it's best.’
Ronni forced herself to speak, to fill the air that seemed to quiver all around them.
It would be too dangerous, she sensed, to let another silence fall.
‘I definitely think it's best,’ she said again.
‘We'll see.’
Guido sighed and drew his hand away.
His eyes seemed to study her for a moment.
Then his expression suddenly hardened as his eyes flicked past her to the staircase at the top of which lay Silvia's room.
‘But this is merely a postponement, not a cancellation,’ he reminded her.
‘First thing tomorrow morning that young lady's in for trouble.’
Then, without another glance at her, he was turning on his heel and striding on clipped steps across the hall.
It took a moment or two for Ronni to gather herself together, then she hurried upstairs and tapped on Silvia's door.
‘Are you all right?’ she whispered.
‘Do you want to talk?’
‘I'm OK.’
At last, a muffled voice answered.
‘But I don't want to talk.
I just want to sleep.’
‘OK.
Sleep well.
But if you change your mind, feel free to come and knock on my door.’
What a night! she was thinking, as she made her way to her own room.
And what a morning it promises to be!
Oh, well, she sighed, as she climbed into bed, it's probably all to the good.
Everything will finally be solved.
But, come the morning, Ronni was in for a rude awakening.
Suddenly, as she still slept, a hand was on her shoulder, ripping her roughly from her bed.
She blinked as a pair of black eyes glittered down at her.
‘OK, where is she?
I want to know —now !’
CHAPTER FIVE
‘Where is who?
What are you talking about?’
Ronni stumbled sleepily in his grip, as Guido snatched her from her bed to stand before him.
‘And what right do you think you have to assault me like this?’
She glared into his face, bristling with outrage.
‘For all you knew, I could have been sleeping naked!’
‘Don't try to change the subject.’
An amused flicker touched his lips.
But it had no sooner touched them than it had instantly melted away again.
He gave her an impatient shake.
‘You haven't answered my question.
Where the hell is Silvia and where is my boat?’
‘Where is Silvia?’
Ronni glanced at her bedside clock to discover it was only just after six-thirty.
‘At this hour I imagine she's fast asleep in bed — unless, like me, she's been ripped out of it by some hooligan!’
‘Don't get cute with me!’
Guido gave her another shake, holding her there by the scruff of her pyjama jacket.
‘Just do yourself a favour and tell me now where my cousin is.’
Ronni tried to wriggle free from him, but he held her firmly.
‘How would I know where your cousin is?’ she shot back at him.
Then she grew still as a sudden anxious thought occurred to her.
Silvia had been in a bad state last night.
Perhaps she'd done something silly.
She frowned at Guido.
‘You mean she's really disappeared?
You mean you really don't know where she is?’
Guido, quite evidently, did not share her anxieties.
‘No, I don't,’ he flared back at her.
‘But I think you do.’
His jaw was clenched tight and white with anger.
‘And I'd be grateful if you'd just tell me without the need to shake it out of you.’
‘But I don't know where she is!
Have you searched the villa?
Are you sure she's not just in the garden or down at the jetty or somewhere?’
‘She might have been down at the jetty a couple of hours ago.
In fact, she almost certainly was.
She had to go to the jetty in order to steal my speedboat — though, undoubtedly, it was your brother who did the actual stealing.’
Ronni was suddenly a great deal more confused than angry.
‘What do you mean?
Are you trying to tell me your boat's disappeared, too?
Silvia and your boat, all at the same time?’
‘Yes.
Silvia and the boat —and Jeff , all at the same time!
Quite a remarkable coincidence, isn't it?
Though you of all people shouldn't be surprised.’
He released her with a sudden, impatient gesture, so that she slumped down gratefully on to the bed.
‘You, after all, were a party to this little plot.’
‘What plot?’
‘What plot?
The malicious little plot that you and Silvia probably hatched up last night.’
He glowered down at her.
‘I heard you go to her room — after so cleverly reassuring me that she was going nowhere.’
‘But she wasn't!
Or I didn't think she was!’
‘Yes, that was very clever.’
He continued as though she hadn't spoken.
‘It got me out of the way while you put your nasty little heads together!’
‘But I hardly even spoke to her!
She said she wanted to sleep.’
With a moan of total helplessness, Ronni dropped her head in her hands.
‘Whatever's going on, I can assure you I've got nothing to do with it.’
‘Oh, I'll bet you haven't!’
He did not believe a word of it.
He reached down and grabbed her hair and snatched her head up.
‘Whose idea was it to take the speedboat?
Yours, I expect.
That sounds just like you.
And it's a great way for Silvia and your brother to pay me back for trying to interfere in their sordid little love-affair.
No doubt they absolutely jumped at the idea.’
‘So, that's what you're thinking!’
Even through the pain in her head where Guido was holding on to her hair the plain facts of what he was saying were finally sinking in.
‘You believe Jeff and Silvia have run away together, taking your speedboat with them out of spite — and you think the whole thing was my idea!’
‘Yes, that's precisely what I think.’
‘Well, you happen to be wrong!’
Ronni glared at him fiercely and tried to loosen his grip on her hair with a punch.
Then, when that failed, with all the strength she was capable of summoning, she sank her nails into his wrist.
As he swore and released her, she informed him angrily, ‘I can't say I'm sorry they've taken your boat.’
She rubbed her tingling scalp.
‘It's no more than you deserve!
But neither can I claim that I had anything to do with it.
I congratulate them.
They thought it up all by themselves!’
Then she jumped up from the bed before he could grab her again and darted past him to the window.
‘If you lay a hand on me again, I'll cry rape,’ she warned him.
And then, to her own total embarrassment, she blushed.
‘I never rape girls who wear such unenticing nightwear.’
An amused smile touched Guido's eyes as he let his gaze flicker over the rumpled high-necked cotton pyjamas she was wearing.
‘On that count, take my word for it, you're in no danger.’
Then, his smile vanishing, he shoved his hands into his trouser pockets.
‘However, you're right.
You ought to make yourself decent.
Get dressed and we'll continue this discussion downstairs.’
‘I'd rather not continue this discussion anywhere.
As I've already told you, I don't know anything.’
‘You've already told me a great many things, an alarming number of which have turned out not to be true.
So, whether you particularly want to or not, we'll continue our discussion as soon as you're dressed.’
He turned on his heel, heading for the door, then paused and informed her over his shoulder, ‘Oh, by the way, I ought to tell you I knew you weren't sleeping naked.
When I came into the room, you were lying with the sheet half off you, so I had the full benefit of the sight of your virginal pyjamas.’
He held her eye.
‘I knew your modesty was in no danger.’
Then, leaving her unaccountably blushing again, he strode from the room, pulling the door shut behind him.
Ronni dressed quickly after an even quicker shower and ran a brush through her shiny blonde hair.
What Guido had just told her was a little difficult to take in.
Not the part about Jeff and Silvia disappearing off together — though she felt angry with them for doing that, she wasn't totally surprised.
The way things had been going she could hardly be that.
But she was astonished, and deeply shocked, that they should have gone off with Guido's speedboat.
Though in her anger she'd told him it was no more than he deserved, in reality she considered it a rather low thing to have done.
She rolled up her pyjamas and stuffed them under her pillow, before quickly pulling the bedclothes to.
Then she paused and lifted the pillow and glanced down at the offending garments.
What was wrong with her cotton pyjamas? she thought with quick annoyance.
Maybe the women in Guido's life were rather more accustomed to red silk nightdresses with plunging necklines and the sides split halfway up the thigh, but personally she had never possessed anything quite so racy.
I've never had any call for it, she thought with a regretful little flicker.
Could it possibly be that she was missing something?
She dropped the pillow back into place and gave herself a shake.
What was she doing pondering the pros and cons of pyjamas and red silk nighties when Jeff, her brother, was up to his neck in trouble?
Pull yourself together, she told herself, and hurried downstairs.
Guido was waiting for her in the hallway, his face as black as thunder.
‘I want to show you something,’ he told her curtly.
And, with that, he proceeded to lead her outside.
Ronni followed, eyeing his broad muscular shoulders with annoyance.
‘Do you mind telling me what you want to show me?’ she demanded.
She didn't like the way he just snapped his fingers and expected her to follow.
‘Some of your brother's handiwork.’
He shot her a look across his shoulder.
‘No doubt it'll please you to see just how much damage he's done.’
‘Damage?
What kind of damage?’
They were headed across the garden, making their way down the winding palm-fringed path to the jetty where Guido's boats were kept.
‘This doesn't sound like Jeff,’ she told him.
‘He may occasionally be irresponsible, but he isn't a vandal.’
But what jumped before her eyes a moment later, as they rounded the corner towards the boatshed, was very definitely a work of vicious vandalism.
The door to the boathouse where the speedboat was kept hung open, swaying drunkenly on its broken hinges.
The lock had been forced — and with brutal, excessive force — so that the wood all around it was torn and splintered.
Ronni gasped with dismay.
‘Good grief!
What a mess!’
‘What a mess, indeed.’
Guido regarded her tightly.
‘You can imagine my feelings when I discovered it this morning.
I can assure you I said something a little stronger than ‘good grief’.’
‘I imagine you did.
I imagine the air was blue.’
And, quite frankly, Ronni couldn't blame him.
He was right.
‘Good grief’ was a gross understatement.
‘But Jeff couldn't have done this.’
As they drew nearer to the damage and she could see that it was even worse than it had looked from afar, Ronni felt herself recoil at the very thought that her own brother could be responsible for such a thing.
It was an act of violence that she found alien and shocking.
‘Well, Silvia as sure as hell didn't do it.’
Guido had turned to glance at her with a look of mocking distaste.
‘This little love note required the strength of a man.’
‘I can see that, but I still don't think Jeff could have done it.’
She shook her head unhappily.
‘He's not the destructive type.’
‘Isn't he?’
Guido ripped free the dangling drunken door like a man putting out of its misery a fatally wounded animal, and looked down at the broken pieces in his hand.
‘Don't believe it,’ he said.
‘We're all capable of violence.
And, invariably, it comes out when we hate someone enough.
‘But I can see you weren't expecting this.’
He paused for a moment and looked down into her stricken, ashen face.
‘I can see he's gone a little further than even you thought he would.’
‘I didn't think anything.
I didn't know anything about it.’
Ronni looked back at him numbly.
‘Why do you keep accusing me —?’
‘Is he going to wreck the speedboat, too?
Is that part of the plan?’
Guido spoke across her abruptly, his eyes accusing.
‘Is that a part of the plot you hatched up?’
‘What plot?
I've never been a part of any plot!
Why do you keep accusing me of everything?’
‘Because you've been a part of it from the start.’
With an angry, violent gesture he flung aside the broken piece of door.
‘Don't try to deny it.
I know you have.’
‘But I do deny it and you know nothing of the sort!’
Guido stepped towards her, making her jump back.
‘You've been lying to me and covering up for them all along.
Telling me that everything was under control.
Keeping me sweet.
Making me believe I could trust you.’
‘But you could — you can!
It wasn't like that.’
He was making her out to be a two-faced liar.
‘What was it like, then?’
He glared down at her in fury, his eyes as dark and dangerous as whirlpools.
‘Would you deny now that Silvia was skipping lessons — and, that you, in spite of your assurances, neglected to tell me?’
‘No, I can't deny it, but I was going to tell you.
I'd made up my mind that I was going to tell you last night.’
‘Liar!
You had no intention of any such thing!
The only thing on your mind last night was rushing to Silvia's defence!’
‘That was only because you were tearing her to pieces.
The poor girl was upset.
Someone had to stand up for her.’
Guido made a scoffing sound.
‘Silvia doesn't need you to stand up for her.
I can assure you she's more than capable of standing up for herself.’
Ronni suspected that was probably true and that she'd always known it.
Silvia was no helpless, downtrodden flower.
Which meant that something else, apart from the defence of Silvia, had provoked her own furious outburst yesterday evening.
Some more personal resentment that had come from within herself.
She turned away from that thought, unwilling to look it in the face.
‘You know, I had actually decided you might be genuine.’
Guido's eyes swept over her like tools of dissection.
‘I actually thought I might be able to trust you.’
Ronni started to respond, but he cut across her.
‘Not one hundred per cent, of course .
That would have been foolish.
But enough to allow you to go your own way.
I knew Silvia wasn't doing the hours we'd agreed on, but I decided it was possible that you'd come to some other arrangement —’
‘We had.’
Now it was Ronni who cut across him.
‘We had,’ she assured him, hating his accusations of deception.
‘We'd agreed that —’
‘What?
That she should just forget about her lessons and rush off to see your brother whenever she pleased?
Was that the convenient little arrangement you'd come to?’
‘No, of course it wasn't!’
‘Is Silvia paying you?
Is that it?
Is that why you could afford to go against me?’
‘Silvia isn't paying me anything.’
Ronni was outraged.
Suddenly, she was being accused of being a double agent!
‘I know she has money.
Quite a considerable sum, actually.’
Guido regarded her icily.
‘That's it, isn't it?’
‘No, it is not!
Do you really think I'd do that — take money from you for doing one thing, and at the same time take money from someone else to do the opposite?’
‘People do it all the time.’
‘Well, I don't.
Don't insult me!’
‘Don't be so damned high and mighty.
Why not just admit that's what you did?’
‘Because it's not what I did.
I'd never do a thing like that!’
‘I was right all along.
The three of you are in it together.
That's why Jeff brought you to Sardinia in the first place!’
‘I won't stay and listen to this!’
Angrily, Ronni swung away.
A sudden shocked coldness was sweeping through her.
How could anyone believe such a low, despicable thing of her?
But she got only two steps.
Suddenly, he had reached out and grabbed her.
‘Oh, you'll stay all right.’
His tone would have cut concrete.
‘You're not going anywhere.
I haven't finished with you.’
‘And what is that supposed to mean?’
Ronni had swung round to face him.
And all at once the coldness that had seemed to freeze her was being swept aside by a sudden rushing warmth.
His hand on her arm was sending burning pulses through her.
His fingers seemed to singe against her tender flesh.
‘It means you're going nowhere until you tell me where they've gone.
It means you're moving not one step from here until you've told me all you know!’
‘But I don't know anything!’
She gasped as he yanked her closer.
Suddenly, he was holding her pressed up against him, her breasts grazing his hard chest, her thighs brushing against his.
And suddenly she was back in that embrace in the water.
Suddenly it was as though they weren't enemies at all, but locked in a passionate, warm embrace.
Involuntarily, her eyes drifted from his eyes to his mouth.
Suddenly she could feel it pressing against hers.
The blood soared inside her.
She felt her body sink against him.
‘Please,’ she heard herself murmur.
‘Please.’
‘Please what?’
‘Please let me go.’
She couldn't stand it.
She could fight anything except what the nearness of him did to her.
Still holding her arm, he reached up slowly to tip her chin back.
‘I'll let you go when you tell me what I want to know.’
‘But I don't know where they are.
I have no idea.
I was never a part of any plot with them.’
She looked up into his face.
Some of the harshness had gone now.
There was a soft, cloudy light at the back of his eyes.
His grip on her seemed to slacken a little.
He said, ‘Are you sure you're telling me the truth?’
‘I am.
I swear I am.’
Ronni dropped her gaze away.
That soft, cloudy light in his eyes unhinged her.
She swallowed.
‘Look, you're right about the lessons.
We weren't doing the hours that I'd agreed to do, and Silvia and I had come to a sort of arrangement…’
Guido did not move a muscle.
He said quietly, ‘Continue.’
Ronni took a deep breath.
She wanted to move away from him, but she seemed to have lost all sensation in her limbs.
The only parts of her anatomy with any feeling in them were the parts that were pressed against the harder parts of Guido.
It was as though all of her nerve-ends had flown to these spots.
She swallowed.
‘We agreed to do the same number of hours…’
She glanced into his face quickly.
‘I wasn't trying to cheat you…’
Then she glanced away again, equally quickly.
She would drown in them if she allowed herself to look into those eyes.
Again she sighed, in an effort to steady herself.
‘We arranged to spread the hours differently from the original agreement, working extra in the mornings and in the evenings…’
She shook her head miserably.
‘But it wasn't working out.’
‘I would say it definitely wasn't.’
There was no sympathy in the statement.
‘So, now we come to the crucial bit.
Why didn't you come and tell me?’
‘I was planning to.
I really mean it.’
She did look up at him then, pleading with her eyes to be believed.
‘If that row with Silvia hadn't happened, I would have.
I swear to you.
I was waiting out in the garden for you to come back.’
‘But I'd been home for two hours when Silvia got back.
Why were you waiting in the garden?’
‘I don't know.
I didn't hear you.
I thought you were still out.’
She flushed now, remembering how she'd realised last night that he must have returned without her hearing.
It was a flush of confusion and shame and despair, for she could see in his eyes that that stumble had condemned her.
He did not believe a single word of her story.
Guido released her and stepped away, and where there'd been warmth there was suddenly coldness.
All the points of her body that had been pressed against him were suddenly touched with fingers of ice.
He said, dismissing her explanations as worthless, ‘I'd rather not hear any more stories.
All I want you to do now is tell me where they are.’
Ronni sagged.
‘I don't know.
I keep telling you I don't know.
Please don't keep on at me.
I'd tell you if I knew.’
In a flash his hand had reached out to catch her chin again.
He jerked it up, forcing her to look at him.
He fixed her with a look.
‘Would you really?’
The impact of his eyes caused her to blink almost defensively.
They were as hard and intractable as bars of iron.
And suddenly she felt fierce anger flare up inside her at the way he continually misjudged and denied her and seemed to reject every good and decent thing about her.
She glared at him.
‘Suddenly I'm not so sure I would tell you!’
‘That's what I thought.’
Again, dismissively, he released her.
‘But don't worry,’ he added, ‘I'll get it out of you.
If it's the last thing I do, I'll get it out of you.’
His eyes sparked at her like firecrackers.
‘You can count on that.’
‘Is that supposed to be a threat?’
‘More of a promise.’
‘And how can you make me do something that I have no power to do?’
Ronni glared at him, hating his arrogant self-assurance, as he stood there looking down at her as though he ruled the world.
‘How can you make me tell you something I don't know?’
‘Perhaps I'll jog your memory.
Perhaps I'll remind you that it's not a good idea to play games with me.’
‘More threats?’
‘No.
More promises.’
He thrust his hands into his pockets.
‘And I would be grateful if you would come to your senses sooner rather than later.
I need the boat back by the end of the week to get it in shape for the pre-race trials.’
He threw her a final black look and proceeded to storm past her, then paused at the edge of the path that led back through the gardens.
‘I need your brother back even sooner than that — though perhaps I'd better not say what fate I'm planning for him.’
Death by a thousand tortures, Ronni imagined, if the look on his face was anything to go by.
When he caught Jeff — and he would, she didn't doubt that for a second — her poor foolish brother would have hell to pay.
Well, he's brought it on himself, she couldn't help thinking, and I don't see why I should stick around and be made to pay too.
As Guido stepped on to the garden path, Ronni stepped forward and called after him, ‘I won't be staying on now, whatever you threaten!
I don't know where Jeff is and I have no more business here now that your cousin's disappeared as well!’
The words sent a huge wave of relief pouring through her.
She smiled to herself.
It would be an absolute blessing to get away from here and back to quiet sanity.
Back to England and back to Arnie.
Guido barely turned to look at her, but his message was unmistakable.
‘You're not going anywhere.
I've already told you that.
You leave here when I've finished with you and not a moment earlier.’
‘I'll leave here tomorrow, as soon as I can book a flight.’
Ronni glared at his arrogant, retreating back.
Who the devil did he think he was?
‘And you can't stop me!’
He swivelled round then to look at her.
Oh, no? his eyes challenged.
Then, as though no further communication were necessary, he turned and strode quickly up the path.
‘Pig!’
Ronni fumed all the way back to the villa.
She had allowed five minutes for him to get back ahead of her — she'd no desire to go trailing in his arrogant footsteps!
Then on determined steps she made her way up the path, cursing and swearing under her breath.
‘I'll show him!’ she told herself.
‘I'll damn well leave tonight!’
Back at the villa, Ronni went straight to her room, closed the door behind her, sat down on the bed, picked up the phone and quickly dialled.
She must get this phone call done before Guido could interrupt her.
The operator answered.
‘Pronto ?’
‘Do you speak English?’
Ronni cursed her lack of Italian.
‘Can you get Olbia airport, please?
Reservations.’
A minute or so later she had been connected and the reservations clerk was asking for details of her ticket.
Ronni reached for her bag, which was lying on a nearby armchair.
‘Just a minute,’ she said, scrabbling inside it.
‘Just a minute.
I've got it right here.’
But she couldn't find the ticket.
She laid the phone down.
‘Hold on,’ she told the clerk.
‘I'll be with you in a second.’
Starting to panic, she turned her bag upside-down — and the situation was a great deal worse than she'd first feared.
Suddenly, from head to toe, she was starting to feel cold.
She picked up the receiver numbly.
‘I'll have to call you back.’
The next minute she was leaping up from the bed, striding across the room and snatching the door open.
‘Guido!’ she yelled furiously.
‘Guido!
Where are you?’
‘I'm here.’
She was startled by his calm reply.
Suddenly, he was standing at the top of the staircase, apparently on his way to his bedroom.
He stood and looked at her with an expression of total innocence.
‘Is there something you wish to say to me?’
‘There certainly is!’
Ronni was jumping with fury.
‘I've just this minute turned out my bag,’ she told him.
‘And guess what?
My tickets, my passport and all my traveller's cheques have suddenly, mysteriously disappeared!’
She glared at him furiously.
‘I know you've taken them!
And I demand that you give them back this minute!’
To her dismay, Guido smiled.
‘I'm sorry, it can't be done.’
Then, hands in pockets, still smiling, he swept past her.
‘You see, I was right.
You're going nowhere,’ he said.
CHAPTER SIX
Furiously, Ronni stormed after him.
‘Do you think I'm going to let you get away with it?
You must be joking!
I want my things back!’
‘You'd better find them, then.’
Guido turned and paused to confront her with a smile in the doorway of his bedroom.
‘After all, you won't get very far without them.’
‘I won't get anywhere without them!
That's why you took them!’
Ronni glared at him, her blue eyes sparking.
‘You probably took them this morning while I was sleeping, or maybe right now, before I got back from the jetty.’
‘You're right.
The possibilities are endless.
Perhaps I sneaked into your room in the middle of the night, while you were lying there dreaming in your cotton pyjamas.’
He cocked his dark head at her in amusement.
‘I wonder what you were dreaming about?
Were you dreaming about Arnie?’
‘I was probably dreaming of seeing him again somewhere far from here!’
Ronni shot her response at him like a reflex action, a little guiltily aware that it had rather less to do with the truth and rather more to do with her sudden need for a shield.
Guido's totally unexpected reference to Arnie, and the way he'd cocked his head at her and smiled as he'd said it, had thrown her and made her feel totally vulnerable.
She added, drawing her shield more closely about her, ‘That's probably what I was dreaming of.
It's what I dream of all the time.’
‘So, you're missing Arnie?’
‘Of course I'm missing him.’
She kept her gaze steady, suddenly feeling safer.
Guido said nothing for a moment, but simply watched her.
Then he observed in a flat tone, ‘What a tragedy, in that case, that you won't be seeing him for a while.’
‘Because you've taken my things.
I notice that at least you don't deny it!’
‘I neither confirm nor deny anything.’
Guido smiled a relaxed smile, slipping his hands into his trouser pockets, and leaned more comfortably against the door-jamb.
He looked, thought Ronni, like male arrogance on legs.
‘But that's not the point.
The point is you're stuck.’
‘I know I'm stuck.
But I intend to become unstuck.’
Ronni thrust out her hand to him.
‘Give me my things back.’
In response, Guido simply smiled more widely.
‘Find them,’ he taunted.
‘Search anywhere you like.’
He made a gesture to indicate she could even search his bedroom.
‘Feel free,’ he told her.
‘I won't stop you.’
Ronni found herself glancing beyond his broad shoulders to the half-shuttered, sumptuously furnished room beyond, with its rug-strewn floor, picture-covered walls and vast, deeply unsettling canopied bed.
What on earth does he need a bed that size for? she wondered.
Then, as the obvious answer occurred to her, she became doubly uncomfortably conscious of the dynamically virile physical presence of him.
She took a half-step back, smothering the blush that warmed her cheeks.
‘It would be pointless me searching.
You've probably locked them in some safe.
I doubt very much they're hidden under your pillow.’
‘Check if you like.’
With a mocking smile, he stood aside.
‘But I confess you're right.
You won't find them there.
As a rule, I don't keep passports and money under my pillow.’
This conversation was centring too much on bedrooms and pillows, and Ronni was finding it increasingly hard to handle.
Wanton images kept flashing across her brain of Guido with some ladyfriend in the vast double bed engaged in the vigorous pursuit of fleshly pleasure.
Somehow, it was the easiest thing in the world to imagine, though it definitely wasn't her habit to go around imagining such things!
She pulled herself together.
‘Let's stop playing games.
Just give me my things back —now , if you don't mind.’
‘Or?’
The black eyes danced at her.
‘Or I'll go to the police.
I imagine that even you are not above the law?’
‘Certainly not.’
He shrugged.
‘Then go ahead.’
‘Does that mean you won't give me them?’
‘Yes, I guess it does.’
‘OK.’
Ronni swung round angrily.
‘Then you leave me no choice.’
Inside, she was suddenly filled with helpless frustration.
What hope would she have with the local police when the issue came down to her word against Guido's?
For, of course, he would deny everything to the police, and, though she knew she was right, she didn't have a shred of evidence.
But she had only gone two steps when Guido spoke again.
‘Why are you in such a hurry to leave, anyway?
You've only been here a few days.
You've scarcely had time to see a thing.’
‘I didn't come to sightsee.’
Ronni delivered a scathing glance.
‘I came here to do a job of work, and since that quite clearly is no longer possible — I can hardly tutor a pupil who isn't even here!— I can see not the slightest reason to stay.
Particularly,’ she added cuttingly, ‘since the few days I have been here I have found disagreeable in the extreme.’
‘As your host, I'm sorry to hear that.’
The dark eyes surveyed her, but he did not sound inconsolably sorry.
‘But that's all the more reason to stay on and take the opportunity to redress the lamentable impression you seem to have had of my country.’
‘Oh, it's not your country I have a lamentable impression of.’
Ronni fixed him with a look that required no interpretation.
‘On the contrary, what I've seen of your country I rather like.’
‘Good.
Then you'll enjoy seeing a little bit more of it.’
A look crossed his eyes, almost like a warning.
Then he seemed to change the subject as he continued, ‘You surely don't think I plan just to sit around and do nothing about getting my speedboat back, not to mention my cousin?
The police are on to it, but that's not enough for me.’
‘No, it wouldn't be.’
Ronni scowled at him.
‘I wish you success.’
‘I think you'll do more than just wish me success.
I think what you'll do is help me to find them.
You may not know exactly where they are, but I still think you know more than you're telling.’
Ronni gritted her teeth in silence as he went on, ‘It's in your interests as well that I find them quickly.
The sooner you have your pupil back, the sooner you can resume your tutoring — needless to say, without any little ‘arrangements’— and the sooner you can get on with earning that money you need.’
He paused.
‘I feel sure you'll agree to co-operate.’
What he was saying made sense, yet Ronni was reluctant to concede.
She continued to grit her teeth in silence.
But then another thought occurred to her and she said, ‘OK.
For Jeff's sake I'll agree to help you.’
‘For Jeff's sake?’
‘Yes, for Jeff's sake.
I know he deserves to be punished, but when the time comes I'd like to be around to stick up for him.’
She'd decided at first that her brother deserved what was coming to him, but on reflection no one deserved to be thrown at Guido's mercy.
Guido smiled now.
‘So, you think you can persuade me to be lenient?’
‘I can try.’
She spoke without much conviction.
When had she ever had any influence over Guido?
‘So, that's settled, then.
I have your co-operation.’
Guido straightened slightly as he went on to observe, ‘I'm sure we'll succeed more quickly working together — and you'll have a chance to see more of this country you like so much…’
He paused just long enough to ensure he had her full attention before going on to deliver his thuderbolt.
‘I expect our journey to track down Jeff will take us to areas you haven't seen.’
‘Our journey?’
Ronni blinked.
‘What do you mean our journey?
I'm not going anywhere with you!’
‘Oh, yes, you are.’
There was a definite warning in his eyes now, as he stood away from the door-frame and folded his arms across his chest.
‘Like you, I hope our journey won't take long, but, however long it takes — hours or days or weeks — we're going to cover every centimetre of this island until we find them!
‘And our search starts right away!’
His eyes blazed down at her, as he proceeded to issue his final order.
‘So, kindly pack a bag.
We leave within the hour!’
Ronni wondered, as she flung some T-shirts and things into a bag, if she ought to have put up a stronger fight against Guido.
Maybe she ought to have carried out her threat to go to the police.
Maybe if she had she would now be planning her escape from Sardinia.
After all, though she wasn't quite sure how she would have done it, she could have found some other way to lay hands on the money she needed.
But she knew she couldn't have gone and left Jeff in such a fix.
What he'd done was wrong, but he was her brother.
She owed it to him to be on hand when he needed her.
And there was nothing surer than that he was going to need her when Guido finally caught up with him!
She pulled the zip of her bag shut and glanced around the room, checking that she hadn't forgotten anything she would need.
So, it was really thanks to Jeff, she thought, that she was being unwillingly forced to join Guido in his search for his boat.
She shivered elaborately at the thought, then, unexpectedly, caught a glimpse of her reflection in the mirror and was utterly horrified and shocked at what she saw.
Her cheeks were pink with excitement, her eyes shiny and bright, as though she was getting ready to go off on some adventure.
She didn't look unwilling in the slightest.
It's just the thought of seeing more of the island that appeals to me, she told herself firmly, hefting her travel bag across her shoulder.
That's the only reason I'm looking so pleased.
But as she left the room she had to make an effort not to hurry with excitement down the stairs.
She felt a warning twinge of alarm deep inside her, as she very deliberately slowed her steps.
Was she taking leave of her senses?
What was happening to her?
But, no matter how hard she fought to squash it, a flicker of excitement continued to torment her, like the buzz of a mosquito that just wouldn't go away.
‘I thought we'd be going by boat.’
‘Well, we're not, we're going by car.
The car is faster and, in case you're forgetting, I'm in a hurry.’
‘I wasn't forgetting, and I'm in a hurry, too.
I have no desire for this ordeal to last any longer than need be.’
It made Ronni feel a great deal better to say that.
Saying it helped to quell that flicker of excitement.
They were out on the villa forecourt and Guido was loading the car, the same racy-looking open-top red Alfa Romeo that he had brought her to the villa in on the day of her arrival.
Ronni took the opportunity to make a scathing comment — which she was aware had the effect of adding to her sense of well-being.
‘Fast cars, fast boats…’
She met his gaze with disapproval.
‘You seem to have an unhealthy obsession with speed.’
‘Do I?’
He met her gaze with his customary amusement, which dented her sense of well-being slightly.
‘I can't say I've ever thought of it as an obsession.
And certainly not as an unhealthy one.’
‘No?’
She watched as he dropped their bags into the boot and slammed the lid shut.
He had changed into a cotton shirt with the sleeves rolled back and a pair of faded black jeans that hugged the contours of his body.
And she reflected that even his body was built for speed.
Aerodynamic.
Powerful.
Honed to perfection.
She felt aggrieved at that thought and the accompanying flare inside her.
Banishing both, she said, ‘Well, it sounds obsessional to me.
You don't seem to be interested in anything that doesn't involve going fast.’
‘I don't play bridge, you mean?’
‘No, I didn't mean bridge.’
Trust him to go to the other extreme.
‘You don't involve yourself in ordinary, leisurely sports.
Like tennis, for example.
Or golf.’
‘I'll take up golf in my old age.’
He had opened up the passenger door for her.
He smiled.
‘That is, if I've slowed down enough.’
Then, as she climbed in and he slid into the driver's seat beside her, he turned to look at her.
‘OK.
Where are we going?’
‘How would I know where we're going?
You're supposed to be in charge.’
He gave her a meaningful look.
‘Where are we going?’ he repeated.
He really did believe she knew something she wasn't telling.
Ronni sighed, once more about to protest her innocence.
But maybe it was the way he was looking across at her with those all-seeing predatory jet-black eyes of his, or maybe it was the way she felt just a bit claustrophobic at being shut up beside him in the narrow confines of the car and the desire that sparked in her to have this ordeal over quickly, but all at once an idea popped into her head.
She said, ‘The other day Silvia said something to me about going to Alghero.’
She shrugged.
‘I don't know, but maybe they're there.’
Guido seemed to think about that for a moment.
‘I know Jeff has a couple of clients in Alghero.
Even if he's not there now, I suppose it's possible they might know something.’
Then, as Ronni watched him, he decided, ‘OK, we'll try that lead first.’
He flicked a quick smile in her direction.
‘Alghero's on the other side of the island.
We'll cut across and let you see a bit of inland Sardinia.’
A moment later, tyres spitting gravel, they headed out of the forecourt.
Guido turned to her with a grin.
‘Let's see how fast we can go.’
They drove speedily but safely along the main road that headed west through the mountainous inner regions of the island, skirting villages where black-shawled women sat in doorways, past almond groves and fields full of woolly black goats.
‘This is the real Sardinia,’ Guido told her.
‘These mountains are the soul of the island, and the people who live here are its heart.’
Ronni could believe that without difficulty.
As they wound along the twisting tarmac, she had a sense that this was what the island was all about.
She could taste its remoteness, its ever-present wildness.
It was a sanctuary, untouched by the mad modern world.
‘What are these?’
Suddenly, as the road narrowed, she raised her finger and pointed to what looked like a hedge of tall cactus lining one side of the road.
‘They're prickly pears.
Haven't you ever had one?’
Guido drew up abruptly at the side of the road.
‘You can't be in Sardinia and not try a prickly pear.’
He was so impulsive, Ronni thought, watching as he climbed from the car, then, snatching a wad of tissues from the box in the back seat, proceeded to pick half a dozen of the greeny red fruit.
It was an aspect of his character that she found deeply appealing.
He didn't seem to stop and ponder, he just went ahead and did things.
He was returning to the car, holding out his booty.
‘You can eat these later, once we've disarmed them,’ he told her, wrapping them in more tissues and laying them on the back seat.
‘They're lethal if you try to eat them as they are.’
Ronni glanced at the back seat and instantly saw what he meant.
‘I can see they're not called prickly pears for nothing!’
For the surface of each one was covered, like a sea urchin, in long, rather nasty-looking spikes.
‘They can be a devil,’ Guido told her, climbing back into the driver's seat.
‘The spikes break off under your skin and you can't get them out.’
As he gunned the engine, Ronni looked across at him.
‘It's so kind of you to have my welfare at heart.
I would have thought it would quite amuse you to see me with my hands full of spikes!’
‘Amuse me?’
Guido raised one curved black eyebrow.
Then he shook his head.
‘No, that wouldn't amuse me.’
As he looked at her, Ronni was aware of a tiny curl of pleasure.
Don't say he was actually capable of feeling compassion towards her?
But he proceeded to disabuse her, smiling wickedly as he did so.
‘Such a sight might not altogether displease me, but I certainly wouldn't find it amusing.
I pride myself on having a slightly more sophisticated sense of humour than that.’
As they screeched off down the road again, Ronni felt duly chastened.
So much for her rash assumptions of compassion!
But what had really struck her in his remark was that word sophisticated.
It was a word that, up until that moment, Ronni had never thought to associate with Guido.
But now she suddenly realised it fitted him like a glove.
Beneath that wild, impulsive exterior lurked as sophisticated a character as she was ever likely to encounter.
She found that realisation deeply intriguing.
There were many layers to this man, she was fast discovering.
They stopped for lunch at a wayside trattoria and were shown into a shady courtyard at the back, where half a dozen tables were set out under the trees.
All of them were occupied, but, without even a word from Guido, the proprietor snapped his fingers, and even as they were being led towards it an extra table was being laid.
‘I see you're known here.’
Ronni cast him a glance, as they seated themselves at opposite sides of the table.
She was feeling perfectly relaxed, almost carefree, she reflected, a mood that had unfolded in the course of their journey.
It's because Guido hasn't been picking on me, she decided.
He's been too preoccupied with his driving.
‘I've been here once or twice.’
He seemed relaxed, too, as he turned to the beaming waitress and ordered water and a carafe of wine.
‘It's very flattering that they should recognise me,’ he added, addressing Ronni again, as the woman bustled off.
Only once or twice?
Ronni wondered if he was joking.
From the welcome he'd received, she'd assumed he was a regular.
But it could well be true.
He was a man anyone would remember, she reflected with a flicker of admiration.
The restaurant was one of those informal places where there was no written menu and the waiters simply told you what was on offer.
As the woman returned with their carafe of wine and their water, she proceeded to reel off in rapid Italian the various dishes of the day.
Guido turned to Ronni and quickly translated.
Then he told her, ‘I insist you try the porcheddu .
It's a local speciality and I'm sure you'll love it.’
‘If you say so.’
Ronni was prepared to take his word for it.
‘In fact,’ she told him, ‘I'll have whatever you suggest.
I'm in your hands.
You choose the entire meal for me.’
‘Such faith.’
He held her eyes and smiled that careless smile of his, causing a quick warm blush to touch her cheeks.
Then he turned and reeled off their order to the woman.
Ronni watched him from beneath her lashes.
Had that sounded a little too cosy? she wondered.
That ‘I'm in your hands’…
Ought she not to have said that?
But she was being silly, she decided, continuing to watch him.
A man like Guido would have no problem with such a small intimacy.
And he would probably rather enjoy looking after a woman, even one he had as little time for as her.
She found that thought warming and rather appealing.
It was a novel situation for her and she definitely liked it.
They had pasta to start, delicious home-made shells served with a piquant wild mushroom sauce.
Ronni had rarely tasted anything quite so delicious.
‘That was heavenly,’ she told Guido, mopping up her sauce with a lump of bread.
‘I'll say one thing — you Sards certainly know how to cook.’
‘We Sards know how to do a great many things.’
Guido held her eye with an amused smile for a moment.
‘And what we know how to do we know how to do well.’
I'll bet, thought Ronni, interpreting the sensuous smile and feeling a warm little shiver go through her.
She remembered those kisses they'd exchanged in the water.
He certainly knew how to kiss pretty well!
As he finished his pasta, Guido sat back in his seat, touching his napkin briefly to his lips.
‘So, what do you reckon the boyfriend's doing right now?
Do you reckon he's with some young lady, enjoying an al fresco lunch?’
Ronni shrugged.
‘I suppose he might well be with one of his female colleagues.’
As she said it, she managed to look back at him levelly, though she'd had to suppress a dart of guilt before she spoke.
Had she, she wondered, been enjoying Guido's company a little too much for one who had a steady boyfriend back home?
Nonsense, she decided.
And if Guido was trying to get her back up by suggesting that Arnie might be enjoying some romantic peccadillo, he would have to look for another way to upset her.
Arnie, she knew, was as faithful as a Labrador.
Guido continued to watch her, toying with the salt cellar, his long tanned fingers very dark against the white cloth.
He said, ‘Silvia told me he might be coming over.’
‘Silvia's got romance on the brain.’
Ronni shook her head at Guido, remembering how Silvia had said the same thing to her.
‘I can assure you Arnie definitely won't be coming over.’
‘Got better things to do, has he?’
‘Not better.
He's working.’
‘Him over there.
You over here.
Why couldn't you arrange to be together?’
Ronni shrugged.
‘That's the way it happened.
There's no big deal about it.
Arnie and I often end up teaching in different places.
Last summer he went to Scotland and I stayed in London.’
‘That's a bit unsatisfactory, isn't it?’
Guido continued to finger the salt callar.
To her annoyance, Ronni found herself watching the long tanned fingers and remembering with a start how they had felt against her flesh.
She was rather glad that at that moment the waiter brought them their porcheddu .
‘It's roast suckling pig,’ Guido told her as she took a mouthful.
‘I'll bet you've never tasted anything like it.’
Ronni hadn't, and it was melt-in-the-mouth delicious.
She nodded with enthsiasm.
‘Scrumptious,’ she assured him.
‘I'm glad I left the choice to you.’
‘I'll bet Arnie doesn't look after you as well as this.’
Guido raised his glass and drank.
‘Go on, admit it.’
Ronni felt faintly put out by this further reference to Arnie — especially since the allegation was perfectly true.
Arnie had never looked after her in the way Guido meant, performing the sort of small but pleasing acts of chivalry that seemed to come so naturally to him.
But then Ronni had never expected that of Arnie.
‘What's your sudden fascination with my boyfriend?’ she put to him.
‘I'm intrigued, that's all.
Why?
Does it bother you?’
He laid down his glass and looked across at her.
‘No, of course not.
Why should it?’
‘I've no idea.
But it appears to.’
‘It doesn't bother me.
I just find it strange that you should be so fascinated.’
Guido shrugged.
‘It's not so strange.
Human relationships fascinate me.
And most people enjoy talking about their relationships, anyway.’
‘Then you talk about yours.’
Ronni narrowed her eyes at him.
Discussing Arnie with Guido didn't appeal to her in the least.
She might as well have addressed her request to the tablecloth.
Guido continued, sitting back in his seat and watching her, ‘Is this all part of your practice of giving each other space?
He goes to Bradford and you go to Sardinia?’
He chewed on a mouthful of porcheddu .
‘You do your thing and he does his?’
‘You make it sound rather cold and rather uncaring.’
Ronni's tone was defensive.
‘And that's not the way it is.’
‘Isn't it?’
‘No.’
‘It rather sounds that way to me.’
‘That's because you know nothing about it.
I care a lot for Arnie and I know he cares for me.’
Guido seemed to consider this.
He said nothing for a moment.
Then he leaned towards her and narrowed his eyes at her.
‘Would Arnie mind if he knew you were here with me?’
‘Of course not.
What's to mind?’
But she felt a guilty flare inside.
She sat back in her seat, distancing herself a little.
‘Arnie's not silly that way.
He wouldn't object to an innocent lunch.’
‘I suppose not.’
As he watched her, Ronni held his eyes, but she was aware that her heart was suddenly racing inside her.
It was appalling the way he could affect her like this.
She held her breath on another quick dart of guilt.
There was a pause.
A taut, ticking silence flowed between them.
Then Guido said, ‘But somehting strikes me as not quite right.
You're too composed, you and Arnie.’
Dark eyes flashing, he leaned closer.
‘See that couple over there?
Now, they look right.
There's nothing tight and composed about them.’
Almost with relief Ronni snatched her gaze away and turned in the direction he had nodded.
And what she saw was a handsome dark-haired young man who sat laughing with a girl in a bright green dress.
And Guido was right.
Ronni could see instantly what he meant.
Even from this distance of a couple of tables away one could sense the crackle of electricity between them.
They looked vital, alive, anything but tight and composed.
‘I don't think he would like it much if she was having lunch with another man.
Do you?’
Guido added, as Ronni turned to meet his gaze.
Ronni suspected he probably wouldn't, but before she had time to answer Guido elaborated, ‘But little wonder.
She's an extraordinarily attractive girl.’
And at that moment, as he turned to look at the girl again with a glint of admiration in his eyes, Ronni was aware of a reaction deep inside her.
It was so sudden and so fierce that she could not deny it.
Instantly, she thrust it from her as though it were the plague.
It was after they'd finished their porcheddu and the conversation had switched to other things that Guido suddenly excused himself.
‘I have something I have to do.’
Then he was rising to his feet, beckoning to the waitress and heading towards the main part of the restaurant.
He probably had to make a phone call or something, Ronni decided, her eyes following him as he disappeared inside.
She sat back in her seat contentedly.
It had been a splendid meal.
He certainly knew how to feed a woman!
She didn't notice Guido's return just over ten minutes later.
She only glanced up when she felt his shadow fall across her.
And, as she raised her eyes, Ronni broke into a smile as she caught sight of the plate he was holding out to her.
For on it lay the prickly pears he had picked for her earlier, now denuded of their spikes and cut into quarters.
‘Why, thank you!’ she exclaimed as he laid the plate before her.
She felt an almost silly surge of pleasure rushing through her.
‘Don't mention it.’
Guido was seating himself opposite her again.
Then he added with a wink, clearly teasing her, ‘But all the same, I'll bet Arnie doesn't look after you like this.’
‘No, he doesn't.’
This time Ronni admitted it, feeling a little like a traitor at the confession — and at the sense of pure delight she felt at Guido's gesture.
Her heart had turned to liquid inside her.
It was at that moment that the couple whom Guido had pointed out earlier finished paying their bill and headed out to the car park.
As they passed Guido and Ronni's table, just for an instant Guido turned and seemed to smile directly at the girl.
And that was when, for the second time, Ronni felt a fierce jolt inside her.
She dropped her eyes to the tablecloth, suddenly confused and deeply ashamed of herself.
Not only, she was thinking, didn't Arnie look after her the way Guido did, but, far more alarming, there was something else he'd never done.
Never in the entire two years she'd known him had he inspired in her such a hopeless rage of jealousy as she'd experienced when Guido had looked at that girl.
CHAPTER SEVEN
They were on the road again just before four, when the fierce pin-point sun had lost some of its bite.
Yet a soporific stillness hung about the air, as though the dusty dry land was still enjoying a siesta.
There was scarcely another car on the road.
‘We'll be there in about an hour or so,’ Guido told her, as Ronni sat by his side stiffly, staring out the window.
‘Where are we going, exactly?’
She did not look at him.
To look at him filled her with too many confusing feelings.
She was still recovering from the shock of that earlier bout of jealousy.
Nothing even remotely similar had ever afflicted her before.
‘We're going first to some friends of mine — Filippo and Agnese.
Jeff does a bit of work on their boat from time to time.
If he's been in the area, they may know something.’
Then he paused and swivelled round to look at her.
‘That is, of course , if you were telling the truth and Silvia really did say something about going to Alghero.’
‘Of course I was telling the truth.’
She did glance round then, and was shocked, as her eyes met his, by the jolt of her heart.
Just for a moment she felt totally winded.
‘Let's hope so.’
He had turned away, leaving her tight and shaking.
The blood seemed to be driving in great swoops through her head.
I must get a grip on myself, she told herself firmly.
This is ridiculous.
And more.
It's shameful and dangerous.
She'd always felt drawn to him.
She could not deny that.
Something in her had responded to him from the first moment they'd met.
But that had been just harmless, meaningless attraction.
It would seem her feelings were now turning into something else.
If I let them.
But I mustn't, she told herself firmly.
I mustn't and I won't.
I would have to be mad.
They arrived at Alghero a little before five and headed straight for the home of Guido's friends.
‘Their house is on the seafront,’ Guido told her.
‘They have one of the most spectacular sea views on the island.’
That was no exaggeration, Ronni soon discovered, as fifteen minutes later they were winding their way through the narrow, colourful streets of the walled city of Alghero to climb a hill to a cliff-top where they were suddenly confronted by a breath-taking panorama of endless blue sea.
Ronni blinked down at the glittering sea that was divided from the craggy landscape by a broad silken ribbon of glittering pale gold sand.
‘Wow!
This is almost as beautiful as where you live!’ she exclaimed.
‘This island is just full of beautiful places.’
‘And full of surprises, too.
How's your Spanish?’
Guido asked her.
‘Spanish?’
Ronni blinked at him.
‘No better, alas, than my Italian.
Why do you ask?
Are your friends from Spain?’
Guido smiled.
‘No, they're locals, born and bred.
But in this part of Sardinia the local tongue is a version of Catalan.
Six hundred years ago it was settled by Spaniards — just as the south part of the island was settled by Moors and Turks.’
As Ronni's eyebrows rose with interest, he added with a wink, ‘I keep telling you we're a complex and fascinating people.’
Ronni couldn't argue with that.
‘And what about you?’ she asked.
‘Where did your ancestors come from?’
‘Italy, Spain, North Africa, Turkey.’
Guido smiled.
‘I have a bit of everything in me.’
And the best of everything, Ronni found herself thinking, though wishing with all her heart that she hadn't thought it.
She also wished he didn't sound so damned exotic.
It simply added to the fatal pull he had over her!
His friends' villa, set in sprawling gardens, had a distinctly Spanish air — with its balconies decorated with wrought-iron scrollwork and a pretty bell tower in one corner.
At the end of the wide driveway Guido drew to a halt, and instantly the blue front door burst open and a brightly smiling young woman appeared.
‘Guido Falcone !
Che diavolo fai qui ?’
What the devil brings you here? she laughed, rushing towards him.
The next minute Guido was out of the car and the young woman was in his arms, kissing him on both cheeks, obviously delighted to see him.
Ronni climbed from the car, hating the dismay that suddenly filled her.
It wasn't sexual jealousy that was afflicting her this time, for it was obvious that the woman was just a good friend.
Instead, she felt frozen by a sense of desolation that she would never be on the receiving end of such a display of warmth from Guido.
That suddenly felt like a terrible thing.
He was turning towards her.
‘Agnese, this is Ronni.
She's Jeff Cole's sister — and Silvia's English tutor.’
‘I ought to have guessed!’
Agnese held out her hand to her, her lovely green eyes shining at Ronni.
‘You're your brother's image.
I've always thought he was good-looking, but that blonde hair and those blue eyes look even better on a girl!’
She laughed as they shook hands.
‘Welcome to Alghero.’
‘Thank you.’
Ronni was instantly ashamed of her jealous feelings.
Agnese was charming.
No wonder Guido was fond of her.
She had the kind of warm personality it was impossible not to be drawn to.
Agnese was leading them through the front door into a cool tiled hallway, strewn with locally woven rugs and sweet with the delicate scent of freesias.
‘So, what brings you here?’ she asked Guido, then glanced at Ronni.
‘We'll speak English for Ronni's sake, unless of course you speak Italian or Spanish?’
‘Only a few words, I'm afraid,’ Ronni answered.
‘Just about enough to order a coffee.’
Agnese laughed.
‘What a splendid idea!
Let's all have coffee out on the terrace!’
Fifteen minutes later they were doing just that.
Coffee had been brought in a huge white porcelain pot and matching white cups arranged around the white-painted table that stood at the edge of a huge paved terrace overlooking the endless sparkling blue sea.
And miraculously, too, a dish of sandwiches had appeared and another one piled high with disgraceful-looking cakes.
‘Help yourselves,’ Agnese invited.
Ronni tried to control herself, but the temptation was too great.
She reached out and helped herself to an almond pastry.
It took a long time to get round to the subject of Silvia and Jeff.
Guido and Agnese had so much to talk about, and Ronni found herself included with perfect ease.
In fact, she was feeling so relaxed that she ate a second pastry.
‘You know, you timed this visit perfectly,’ Agnese suddenly revealed.
‘Filippo and I are throwing a bit of a party this evening.
All pretty informal — we only decided last night.
I phoned to invite you this morning, Guido, but of course you weren't there.’
She, too, helped herself to an almond pastry.
‘It's just a small celebration in honour of the fact that it's six years to the day tomorrow since Filippo and I met —’ She broke off and giggled.
‘We met in a car park.
I'd just made rather a good job of denting his back bumper.’
Ronni looked into her smiling face and felt a sudden stab of envy.
Dredge her mind as she might, she couldn't even begin to remember the moment that she and Arnie had met.
And that had been just two years ago.
She ought to remember.
She heard Guido say, ‘I remember Filippo telling me that story.
He said it was the most expensive accident he's ever had.
It ended up costing him a diamond engagement ring.’
As Agnese laughed delightedly, Ronni's eyes drifted to Guido.
But she wasn't really thinking about what he was saying.
What she was thinking was that, unlike her memory block with Arnie, she couldn't imagine ever forgetting the first time she'd laid eyes on Guido.
That moment when she had seen him standing on the jetty, a tall dark figure against the bright sun, would remain locked in her memory foever.
That thought brought a sob of pain and pleasure to her heart.
‘No, we won't stay for the party,’ Guido was saying, as Ronni fought to shake the feeling from her.
‘We're here on an errand.
We're looking for Jeff and Silvia.
I wondered if you might have seen either of them or heard from them over the past few days.’
Agnese shook her head.
‘I haven't seen either of them.’
She was plainly curious, but too polite to ask what was going on.
‘But then I very rarely come into contact with Jeff.
Filippo would know better than me if either of them have been here.’
‘Is he out on the boat?
When do you expect him back?’
Guido was glancing at his watch.
‘He should be back any minute.
He's just gone for a sail.’
Agnese grimaced across at Ronni.
‘These men and their boats!’
Then she laughed.
‘He'd better be back pretty soon.
He promised to help with the preparations for the party!’
In fact Filippo appeared just as they were clearing away the coffee things.
A lean, dark-haired man with a smile as bright as his wife's, he appeared delighted at the sight of Guido.
‘You're a little early for the party,’ he joked.
‘Unless you've come to lend a hand with the preparations?’
Guido explained what he'd told Agnese earlier, that he was looking for Jeff and Silvia.
‘I was told there was a possibility they might have been here yesterday,’ he explained, carefully avoiding glancing at Ronni.
Instantly, Filippo nodded.
‘They were here yesterday, both of them.
Jeff had a small job to do on the boat.
But they left about five o'clock in the evening.’
‘I see.’
Guido nodded, and then glanced across at Ronni — and she was surprised at the look of open apology in his eyes.
She felt a sense of giddy relief rush through her.
At last he knew, and had acknowledged, that she wasn't a liar.
Guido continued, looking back at Filippo, ‘Have you any idea where they might be now?
Did either of them mention anywhere they might be going?’
Filippo shook his head.
‘I understood they were going back home.’
Then he frowned and seemed to consider for a moment.
‘But I do remember something…’
He paused to rack his brains.
‘He was speaking to himself rather than to me at the time, but I recall Jeff muttering under his breath something about having to go to the mainland soon…’
‘To the mainland?’
Guido frowned.
‘Did he mention what for?’
‘No.
As I said, it was just a passing mumble.
I'm not even sure if I heard him correctly.’
‘Do you mind if I use your phone?’
Ronni could see that Guido's brain was whirring.
‘I'd like to make a couple of calls.’
‘Of course.
Help yourself.
You can use my study.’
Guido disappeared for nearly half an hour.
When he re-emerged, the others had adjourned to the kitchen, where Ronni was helping Agnese arrange stuffed salami slices on a plate, while a couple of young girls, specially recruited from the neighbourhood, busily chopped and whipped and blended, and Filippo polished a mountain of crystal glasses.
‘I'm glad you're back.’
Agnese grinned at Guido.
‘You can help Filippo with those glasses.’
Then she added more soberly, ‘Did you have any luck?’
‘Yes and no.’
To Ronni's astonishment, Guido picked up a tea towel and proceeded to polish glasses.
Did he know what he was doing? she wondered, smiling.
He certainly was looking a little distracted.
‘I got on to a friend in Civitavecchia who seems to think that some mate of his saw Jeff this morning down at the harbour.’
Guido scowled.
‘But I can't get hold of the mate in question.
I spoke to his wife and she said to try later this evening.’
‘So, you're staying, after all.’
Agnese beamed with pleasure.
‘Now, just keep polishing those glasses while I go and check the drinks.’
As Agnese bustled off, Ronni was dying to ask what connection Jeff could have with Civitavecchia.
It was a port town not far from Rome.
She knew that, but not much more.
Why would Jeff and Silvia have taken the speedboat there?
But for the moment she kept her questions to herself.
Guido was being mercifully discreet about what Silvia and Jeff had done to him, when she had thought it would be more his style to rant and rave in anger.
Though, on reflection, she realised she'd been silly to think that.
As she was already aware, Guido had many complex layers.
And one aspect of his character she ought to have guessed at was his total loyalty to family.
He wouldn't blab, even to close friends, about family problems.
She liked him and deeply respected him for that.
The party was due to kick off about half-past eight.
‘You'll stay overnight, of course,’ Agnese had decreed, when it became obvious that they would indeed be around for the party.
But Guido shook his head.
‘We may not be staying long.
It depends what happens when I get through to that guy in Civitavecchia.
We may want to make a dash straight back to Olbia so that we can catch the first ferry across in the morning.’
Ronni felt a sharp stab of disappointment.
Though she had nothing remotely suitable with her to wear to a party, over the past hour or so, as she'd arranged salami slices and stuffed olives and listened to Agnese and Filippo's bubbly chatter, she'd found herself slipping into a party mood.
It would be lovely, she'd been thinking, to be at a party with Guido.
Which was maybe a good reason why it probably wouldn't happen, she told herself sternly as she stuffed another olive.
She ought to be hoping instead that they did go to Civitavecchia and finally sorted out the mystery of Jeff and Silvia.
To be thinking about partying was downright frivolous!
But it began to look as though they were destined to attend at least part of the party.
Guido returned from another phone call attempt just after eight, looking doleful.
‘Still no luck,’ he said.
‘I've got to try again in a couple of hours.’
‘In that case…’
With a firm hand, the redoubtable Agnese, by now all done up in a slinky black number, proceeded to take charge of Ronni.
‘In that case, it's time you got changed, young lady.’
‘But I've nothing to change into.’
Ronni frowned.
‘Only another T-shirt.’
‘You can borrow something of mine.
We're about the same size.
And you can have one of the spare rooms to get yourself ready in.’
She glanced at Guido who was watching with wry amusement.
‘As for you, if you want to make yourself pretty, you can borrow the blue room.’
The two women giggled all the way upstairs to the bedroom.
‘The trouble with Guido,’ smiled Agnese, flinging the doors of her wardrobe open, ‘is that he's far too pretty to begin with.’
She sighed.
‘If I wasn't a happily married lady, I'd envy you having such a gorgeous partner.’
Ronni blushed to her hair roots.
But Guido's not my partner!
She wanted to say it, but she didn't.
Somehow the thought was too delicious just to reject instantly.
She wanted to savour it for a moment.
But already Agnese was leaving her.
‘Take whatever you want.
The guest room's two doors down the corridor.
It has its own bathroom if you want a shower.’
She glanced at her watch.
‘And now I've got to dash.
The guests will be arriving any minute.’
In the end, after much hesitation — all Agnese's stuff looked so expensive!— Ronni selected a blue silk jersey dress the colour of her eyes that clung to her in all the right places and looked sensational, and a pair of matching blue sandals that, miraculously, fitted.
She grinned at her reflection in the mirror.
‘Yes, you shall go to the ball!’ she told herself, giggling.
Suddenly, she was brimming with happy excitement — which had nothing whatsoever to do with Guido, she kept telling herself.
He'd probably spend all evening making phone calls anyway.
By the time she appeared, the party was in full swing.
A band was playing out on the huge terrace and one or two couples were lazily dancing.
The rest seemed to be engrossed in animated conversation, filling the sweet night air beneath a huge pale moon with the sounds of laughter and happy chatter.
Ronni stepped out on to the terrace feeling elated with excitement.
All her instincts were telling her this was going to be a fabulous evening.
But then, like a balloon encountering an unexpected thorn, there was a loud pop in her heart as all her good spirits were blown out of her.
For there, at the other end of the terrace, standing far too close to a girl in a pink dress and deep in conversation with her, was Guido.
He was wearing a pair of his customary white trousers and a plain white shirt, rolled back to the elbows, with a black belt at his waist and a pair of shiny black shoes.
And Agnese was quite right — he looked far more gorgeous than any mortal had right to.
Ronni felt her heart roll over and die at the sight of him.
And again, too, she felt the merciless lash of jealousy.
She turned away abruptly and snatched up a glass of champagne as a waiter passed by with a tray of brimming glasses.
Then, a moment later, Agnese appeared.
‘Ah, there you are.
Come with me.
There's someone over here I'd like you to meet.
He's a professor of English.
He and his wife have a house in London.’
As Agnese proceeded to steer her across the terrace, Ronni stole a glance at the spot where Guido had been.
But he was no longer there, and neither was the girl.
She felt a plummet of misery.
They weren't on the dance-floor, either.
Where had they gone and what were they up to?
The professor and his wife were charming people.
In other circumstances Ronni would have been delighted to chat with them.
As it was, she made a good show of appearing delighted.
But she kept thinking of Guido and the girl in the pink dress.
‘I used to have a tutee who lived there,’ she responded brightly when the professor's wife told her in which part of London they had their house.
‘It's a lovely area.
So close to the park.’
‘Just a stone's throw,’ agreed the professor.
‘We absolutely love it.’
The waiter was coming by with more glasses of champagne.
Ronni knocked back the remains of her first glass and reached for another.
Drunken oblivion, she thought cravenly.
That would suit me nicely.
But her fingers never quite made contact with the glass.
She froze as a hand suddenly slipped round her waist.
‘Let's dance,’ murmured a voice.
‘They're playing our tune.’
Ronni whirled round, cheeks flushing, recognising his voice instantly.
‘Guido!’ she gasped, feeling her stomach disappear, as she looked into his smiling, handsome face.
Then, making their apologies to the professor and his wife, he was whisking her off towards the dance-floor.
‘You look sensational.’
Thank heavens the band was playing a waltz and not a rumba.
Ronni looked into his eyes and smiled at the compliment, inwardly shuddering as he took her in his arms and proceeded to lead her in time to the music.
Suddenly she wasn't looking half as sensational as she felt.
She nodded her head at him.
‘Thank you,’ she said.
‘What were you talking to the professor about?’
It sounded almost proprietorial.
Ronni flushed with inward pleasure.
‘London,’ she said.
‘Ah, yes, he has a house there.
I'd forgotten.
Richmond, isn't it?’
‘Yes, it's Richmond.’
But Ronni wasn't thinking about Richmond.
She was thinking how delicious the hand at her waist felt and how she longed to let her body sink against it and luxuriate in its gentle, virile strength.
With an effort of will she resisted the temptation.
‘Do you know it?’
‘Know what?’
‘This Richmond we were talking about.
This place where the professor has his London house.’
‘I know it a bit.’
Ronni was suddenly grateful that just a moment ago she'd already had this conversation.
It meant she could answer without thinking, which was an infinite mercy, for suddenly she was quite incapable of thinking.
She was too busy fighting another temptation.
It was her hand that lay decorously on his shoulder.
Suddenly it was taking every atom of her will-power to stop that hand from doing what it longed to do — namely rise up and tangle with the silky black hair that curled so invitingly round Guido's left ear.
She swallowed hard.
Pull yourself together, she told herself.
‘I used to have a tutee who lived there,’ she told Guido.
‘A tutee.’
Guido laughed at that.
‘Little miss schoolmistress.’
Then his hand seemed to tighten against her waist, making her judder and catch her breath.
‘Well, you definitely don't look like a schoolmistress tonight.’
‘Don't I?’
‘Definitely not.’
His hand tightened a little more.
Suddenly, Ronni was finding it difficult to breathe.
‘Tonight you look far too beautiful to be locked in a classroom.
The only place you ought to be is locked on this dance-floor with me.’
It was a line.
Ronni knew it.
But it still turned her knees to water.
Oh, to be locked anywhere with him, she was thinking foolishly.
He paused and looked down at her.
‘There's only one thing wrong…
One small thing that doesn't fit…’
‘What doesn't fit?’
Those wicked dark eyes of his were lifting her up into another planet.
Ronni felt as though her heart was floating on starlight.
‘Nothing that can't be fixed…’
Then, ‘Wait a minute,’ he interrupted himself, unclasping his left hand that had been holding hers, and reaching out to brush her hair.
‘A bit of acacia blossom,’ he told her.
‘It gets everywhere.’
Ronni wished an entire treeload of acacia blossom would fall on her if she could just experience again the thrilling touch of that hand.
Where he had touched her her scalp was prickling like a porcupine.
Her hair felt as though it was standing on end.
But he was continuing.
‘As I was saying, there's just one thing wrong…’
‘Oh?’
She started to ask what, then swallowed instead.
For the hand that had set her scalp alight was now doing the same to her hand.
Before, he had held her hand lightly, so that she was barely aware of it, but now, making her heart skitter, he was lacing his fingers with hers.
Ronni felt a sear of heat right up to her shoulder.
He said, ‘It's nothing that can't be fixed.’
Then he smiled.
‘Only your name.’
‘My name?’
Ronni blinked.
‘What's wrong with my name?’
‘Nothing serious.’
With a small smile playing round his lips, he drew their two hands with the intertwined fingers into the space between them and leaned them lightly against his chest.
Ronni almost fainted as she imagined she could feel the beat of his heart.
He went on, black eyes watching her, smiling down at her, ‘How can I call the most beautiful woman at this party by a name that sounds as though it belongs to a man?
Tonight you most definitely do not look like a Ronni.’
Ronni's heart was thumping at at least twice its normal rate.
‘It's short for Veronica,’ she told him.
‘My real name's Veronica, but I've always been called Ronni.’
‘Not tonight, you won't be.
Tonight you'll be Veronica.
It's a beautiful name.’
His eyes poured into her.
‘A woman as beautiful as you are deserves a beautiful name.’
Ronni was dying with happiness.
‘No one 's ever called me that,’ she said.
‘I was Ronni to everyone before I could even walk.’
‘Well, not any more.’
He smiled.
‘Veronica.’
The way he said it made the name sound like orchids and honey.
‘Tonight it would be a sin to call you Ronni.’
He raised her hand to his lips and kissed it, then continued to hold it against his lips.
‘Why didn't you tell me you had such a beautiful name?’
Ronni shook her head helplessly, sensing it would be wiser not to speak.
If she were to try, she would only end up gabbling something silly, for the heat of his lips against her fingers had sent her brain into a kind of mental tailspin.
She felt incapable of putting two sensible words together.
And anyway, who needs words? she told herself blissfully, as they continued to float across the dance-floor together — though Ronni wasn't on the dance-floor, she had both feet in heaven.
But then, to her dismay, she realised the music had stopped.
Some couples were moving away while others waited for the band to strike up again.
Ronni held her breath, wondering what her fate would be.
Was this the end or would he want to dance some more?
‘I enjoyed that.
That was almost as good as swimming.’
He was smiling down at her, dark eyes twinkling, making a warm blush fly across her cheeks.
Then, to her dismay, he released her and glanced quickly at his watch.
‘However, I'm afraid I have to go and make a phone call.’
‘Of course.’
Almost weeping, Ronni slid her hand from his shoulder.
‘I'd forgotten.
You have to call Civitavecchia.’
‘It shouldn't take me long.’
He was leading her to the edge of the dance-floor.
‘Shall I leave you in the care of the good professor?’
Stupidly, that hurt.
It felt as though she was being off-loaded.
There was certainly nothing even the least bit proprietorial about that remark!
‘That won't be necessary,’ she said, drawing away from him, speaking a little more sharply than she'd intended.
‘Just you go and make your phone call.’
He held her eyes a moment, but his gaze was oddly shuttered.
There was no way of telling what he was thinking.
Then as a waiter passed by bearing a laden tray, he reached out swiftly and snatched up a glass of champagne.
He handed it to Ronni.
‘I think this is where I came in.’
Then, throwing her a wink, he turned and moved off into the crowd.
At first Ronni didn't look as he headed back towards the villa.
She tried to keep her blurred eyes focused on the sky.
Then at the last minute she swung round, her heart bursting inside her, just in time to see him disappear through the terrace doors.
And suddenly she felt as stiff and cold and fragile as the champagne glass that was clutched in her shaking hand.
I'm done for, she thought.
Wiped out.
Finished.
What on earth is to become of me?
I'm in love with this man.
CHAPTER EIGHT
It was all too much to bear.
Ronni had to escape.
Still clutching her champagne glass, she hurried from the terrace and made her way along a path through the garden towards the sea.
At last, she reached a wall, waist-high, stone-built, below which stretched the shore, as pale as a seashell in the moonlight.
With a sigh, she leaned against it, laying down her champagne glass, then closed her eyes and forced herself to breathe deeply and slowly.
Surely it wasn't possible, she told herself in horror.
Surely she couldn't really have been so foolish as to fall in love with Guido Falcone?
He was a man whom, by rights, she ought not even to like.
He was a tyrant, a bully, and he'd stolen her things — which made him a thief into the bargain!
Ronni opened her eyes and stared at the moon, feeling her poor heart quiver inside her.
He was all of these things, but somehow none of it seemed to matter.
All that mattered was that he was the most exciting man she'd ever met in her life.
She thought quickly of Arnie, feeling deeply disloyal, but she couldn't help the feeling of elation that swept through her as her thoughts flitted instantly back to Guido.
He made her feel alive.
He'd lit a bonfire beneath her, releasing in her all sorts of wild emotions that she had never, even fleetingly, experienced before.
He had taken her heart and given it wings.
But that was the problem.
Instantly, she sobered.
In truth, he had given her nothing but dreams.
As he had flashed into her life, so he was destined to flash out of it again, leaving her heart and her dreams turned to ashes.
‘So, this is where you've got to?’
Ronni swung round with a start to find Guido standing just a few feet away from her.
And in that instant her heart seemed to burst with love inside her and simultaneously shrivel with grief and helplessness.
Her fairy-tale prince, so handsome that it hurt to look at him.
‘What are you doing down here?’
He was stepping towards her, taking a mouthful from the champagne glass in his hand as he came.
‘When I couldn't find you I thought maybe you'd run off with the professor.’
He smiled as he said it, that careless smile she loved so much.
But, though she tried, Ronni found she couldn't smile back.
It was so obvious that he wouldn't have cared in the slightest if she really had run off with the professor.
On the contrary, he'd simply have found it amusing.
She half turned away and stared at the horizon.
‘I felt like a walk.
A breath of fresh air.
You really needn't have troubled yourself to come looking for me.’
‘Needn't I?
I disagree.
I wanted to find you.’
Ronni understood then.
She turned back quickly to look at him.
‘You got through to that man, then?
The one in Civitavecchia.
I suppose you've come to tell me you want us to go straight back to Olbia?’
‘And if I have?’
He had come to stand alongside her, leaning one hip lightly against the stone wall.
‘Would you be sorry to leave the party?’
Ronni kept her gaze fixed seawards as her stomach leapt inside her, remembering that dance they'd shared together.
To dance with him again was a prize she'd sell her soul for, and tonight, here at the party, would be her only chance ever.
Yes, she thought, I'd hate it if we had to leave the party.
But, out loud, she said, shrugging, ‘It makes no difference.’
‘Aren't you enjoying yourself, then?’
She could feel his eyes watching her.
Then he smiled.
‘Perhaps you're missing Arnie again?’
Ronni flushed.
That hurt, too, just like his gibe about the professor.
It didn't bother him in the least that she might be missing Arnie.
Which she wasn't, of course, she admitted to herself guiltily.
She kept her eyes glued to the moon and didn't answer.
‘Poor old Arnie.’
Ronni could sense his smile as he said it.
She swivelled round irritably.
‘And what's poor about Arnie?’
‘I feel sorry for him, that's all.’
That sounded condescending.
‘And why on earth should you feel sorry for Arnie?’
Guido drained his champagne glass and laid it down on the wall beside him.
Lazily, making her skin jump, he let his dark gaze drift over her.
‘I feel sorry for him,’ he said, ‘because he's not here with you.
He's not here to see his beloved Veronica looking more beautiful than any Botticelli nymph.’
He smiled again, darkly.
‘How could I not feel sorry for him?’
It was a game, that was all.
Ronni knew it in her heart.
It amused him to flirt with her and flatter her and see her blush.
He probably did it to countless women all the time.
But, though she knew that, she couldn't help it, her insides had turned to jelly.
Humiliated by her own foolishness, she turned abruptly away again.
‘Don't be so glum.
What you need is some of this.’
Suddenly, he was reaching past her to pick up her untouched glass.
‘Champagne is very good for cheering people up.
Have some.
It'll help you to stop missing Arnie so much.’
Then, before she could speak, he held the glass to her lips.
‘Go on,’ he told her.
‘Take a sip.’
‘I can manage by myself.’
She made a move to take the glass.
But he caught her hand and held it.
‘Just keep still and drink,’ he told her.
‘You wouldn't like me to spill the whole lot down the front of Agnese's dress?’
Most definitely she wouldn't.
So Ronni kept still and allowed him to hold the glass to her lips.
She took a sip.
‘Thank you,’ she said, wondering why he was still holding her hand.
‘You don't mind if I have some, too?’
He raised the glass to his own lips and, as she shook her head, took a mouthful.
‘I think there's nothing more therapeutic than sharing a glass of champagne.’
‘I wouldn't know.’
She could see his lips slightly wet with champagne and was suddenly seized with a desire to feel that wetness against her own mouth.
At the thought she felt her insides squeeze with longing.
‘Are you telling me you've never shared a glass of champagne before?’
As Guido spoke, he held the glass once more to her lips.
‘What an awful lot of things you haven't done.’
‘It may seem like that to you.’
Obediently, Ronni drank.
The hand he held in his was slowly going numb from the effort required to stop her fingers curling round his.
‘And I suppose there are quite a few things I haven't done.
Yet.’
‘Now, that's what I like to hear.’
He raised her hand to his lips and kissed it.
His lips were soft and gentle and cool.
The touch of them made her heart turn over.
Then he looked into her eyes.
‘Now are you feeling any better?
Has the champagne helped your mood?’
‘There was nothing wrong with my mood.’
‘I thought you were missing Arnie?’
Ronni snatched her gaze away, discomfited by the dark-eyed scrutiny.
Did he know, she wondered, that he was miles from the truth?
‘You don't have to worry.
I'm feeling fine,’ she said.
‘It nearly always works, I find, a glass of champagne.’
He smiled.
‘And when it doesn't, I know another trick.’
As he spoke, he held her hand against his cheek.
Ronni could feel the slight roughness where he had recently shaved.
A dart went through her, of hopeless, hungry yearning.
This is disgraceful, she told herself.
But it made no difference.
She looked into his eyes.
‘Oh, yes?’ she said.
He held the glass to her lips again and watched her while she drank.
‘Finish it,’ he told her, tipping the glass up.
Then, when she left a few drops, he drained it himself before laying the empty glass beside his own on the wall.
‘Yes,’ he told her.
‘I know another trick.’
Ronni's poor heart was galloping uncontrollably.
She opened her mouth to speak and found she couldn't.
She couldn't even think what she'd wanted to say.
‘Come here.
Let me show you.’
He was straightening slightly, slipping his free hand round her waist and gathering her against him.
He smiled.
‘It's one of my favourite tricks.’
‘I think you showed it to me once before.’
Ronni's voice was thick and gravelly.
She felt both shocked and outrageously delighted by the way their two bodies moulded so perfectly together.
They seemed to cling and collide effortlessly in all the right places.
‘Yes, I believe I did.’
One hand caressed her spine, while the other still held on tightly to her hand.
He kissed her fingertips again, making her shiver.
‘This time, so I won't bore you, I'll show you a variation.’
Ronni felt herself smile.
It was hopeless the way he charmed her.
She found the gall of him delightful.
Delightful and exciting.
As he released her hand and slid his fingers through her hair, drawing her unresisting head towards him, she reached out at last to touch the dark curls at his ear.
As her fingers made contact, her legs melted beneath her.
Show me any variation you like, her heart was singing.
A moment later her arms were twining round his neck as his lips brushed hers as soft as gossamer.
Softly, gently, cruelly, he teased her, his lips alighting for a moment, then moving away again, arousing her hunger, making her blood cry out for him.
He kissed each corner of her mouth, her chin, her nose.
Then he brushed her lips again, lightly, fleetingly.
‘This is one variation,’ he murmured against her cheek.
‘Would you like me to show you another?’
Ronni sighed in response.
‘Yes, please,’ she whispered.
This time his fingers seemed to tighten in her hair, drawing her mouth like a prisoner against his.
But it was a happy, willing prisoner.
Ronni shuddered against him, her lips parting as flames of desire shot through her.
This was no gossamer kiss.
This was thunder and lightning.
It rocked her senses and turned her soul to powder.
As his lips plundered hers, greedy, insatiable, she could taste him warm and sweet on her tongue.
I could devour you, she thought, every glorious inch of you.
And when I'd finished, I'd want to devour you again.
Guido seemed to feel the same.
He pressed hard and hot against her, his lips echoing the hunger she could sense in his body.
And she longed to unleash that hunger, that virile, pulsing craving that seemed to strain through every muscle of his hard-limbed body.
‘Veronica…
My lovely nymph…’
He breathed the words against her ear.
‘Isn't this better than champagne?
Doesn't it make you forget everything…?’
He sighed and kissed her again.
‘I know it does me.’
Then, as his lips possessed her, carrying her towards heaven, his hand swept round suddenly to possess her swelling breast.
Ronni felt her blood leap and burn within her as he held it for a moment, squeezing gently, then, almost as though the gesture was an afterthought, allowing his thumb to graze lightly against the burning peak.
It was just like before.
Ronni jerked against him, feeling a sensation like sheet lightning root her to the spot.
A moan escaped her lips.
Her fingers tangled in his hair.
She came very close to whispering, I love you.
That sobered her somewhat.
She drew back a little.
Suddenly she felt afraid of where this might be leading.
To my ruination, she thought, if I'm thinking thoughts like that.
What's happening here, though sublime, isn't love, it's purely physical.
To him I'm just another body.
And too willing a body.
She drew back a little more.
Far too willing for my own good.
He stopped kissing her and looked down at her, his black eyes smiling.
‘These are all the variations I can show you for the moment.’
As he spoke, he continued to caress her swollen breast, clearly sensing that she had no desire for him to stop.
‘All the other variations require a horizontal position, and I can tell we're not quite ready for that.’
Ronni blushed, but smiled back at him.
‘No, we're not,’ she answered.
It took a great deal of effort to resist adding the word ‘yet’.
‘So, in the meantime —’ it was almost as though he'd read her mind!‘— I suggest that you and I go back to the party.
If they're playing another slow tune, I'd like to dance.’
‘You mean we're not going to drive straight back to Olbia?
You mean we don't have to leave, after all?’
Guido shook his head and laid his hands on her shoulders.
‘We're going nowhere — at least, not until tomorrow.
We're staying for the party and we're spending the night here.’
He smiled.
‘I believe your room is just down the corridor from mine.’
Then, as she blushed again, he slipped an arm around her waist and led her back through the garden to the party.
They danced almost till dawn, till there was no more champagne and almost all of the other guests had long gone home.
Ronni had never been so deliriously happy in her life.
‘Time we were off to bed.’
At last, Guido said it, as they stood together on the edge of the dance-floor and he dropped a kiss into her hair.
‘Shall I carry you or will you carry me?’
Ronni giggled.
‘I suggest we carry each other.’
‘Come on, then.’
He wrapped an arm around her waist and smiled as she wrapped an arm around his.
Then he was leading her across the terrace and through the open doors of the villa, across the drawing-room and out into the hall.
At the foot of the stairs Ronni darted him a quick look.
On the next floor lay their separate rooms, just along the corridor from each other, as Guido had already pointed out.
What was about to happen now? she wondered, her stomach tensing.
Would he invite her to taste his horizontal variations?
As they began to climb the stairs, arms still wrapped around each other, Ronni asked herself for the hundredth time what she would do if he did.
And for the hundredth time she found it impossible to envisage saying no.
For the hundredth time her insides twisted and shivered with excitement.
They reached the top of the stairs and headed along the corridor, Ronni's heart beating so loudly she was sure he must hear it.
And suddenly she was hopelessly, desperately aware of the hard male body that her arm was circling.
Every inch of her was pulsing and seething with anticipation.
‘Did you enjoy your party?’
Guido had stopped to gaze down at her.
They were standing very near to the door to her room.
‘It was wonderful,’ she nodded.
‘The best evening ever.’
‘I'm glad.’
He kissed her.
‘I enjoyed it, too.
At least for a while we both managed to forget.’
He paused.
‘And now, there's only one thing left to do…’
He slid a finger beneath her chin and tilted her head to look at him.
Ronni imagined she saw a question form in his eyes and already she was forming her answer in her head.
I shall say yes, she was thinking.
I have to say yes.
But then he took her by surprise.
‘The only thing that's left now is for me to kiss you and wish you a very good night.’
He bent briefly to brush her lips, then he was reaching behind her to turn the handle of her bedroom door.
‘I'll see you some time in the morning.’
Ronni was afraid her disappointment might be showing in her face.
She turned away abruptly.
‘Goodnight,’ she told him.
Suddenly she was feeling as though she'd been dropped from a great height.
Guido was already heading down the corridor towards his own room, but he stopped suddenly and glanced back at her across his shoulder.
‘By the way, I forgot to tell you…you're a hell of a dancer.’
He threw her a wink.
‘We must do it again some time.’
Later, Ronni lay and seethed in her bed.
‘By the way, I forgot to tell you…
We must do it again some time’.
If that wasn't a brush-off, she didn't know what was.
There she'd been, aching for a night of passion and the best he'd felt moved to offer her was a compliment on her dancing!
Though I should feel grateful, she decided.
He could have taken advantage.
He could have humiliated me totally with a one-night stand.
But that really wasn't the point.
She didn't want to feel grateful that the whole thing hadn't degenerated into something absurd and degrading.
What she wanted was to understand why she'd misjudged the evening so totally.
To her it had felt as though something special was happening between them.
Not love.
If there was love, it was entirely on her side.
It had never occurred to her to delude herself that it might be otherwise.
But she had been rash enough to believe he was starting to care for her.
His smiles, his glances, his gentle intimacies…somehow they had all seemed to be pointing in that direction.
She had dared to believe they might be moving towards something together.
And she had been wrong.
Of course.
He had merely been playing with her.
Still seething with anger, she pulled the bedclothes around her.
Well, she told herself, what else did she expect?
She lay there and seethed, stoking her anger.
Anger against Guido and anger against herself.
But deep inside she knew she wasn't as angry as she was pretending, that anger was really only a small part of what she felt.
Only it was safer, less painful, to fill her heart with anger, so that there was no room left for anything else.
For suddenly she was remembering those enigmatic remarks he'd made, which she'd paid barely any heed to at the time.
What was it he'd said?
‘Doesn't it make you forget everything?
I know it does me’.
And then, later, ‘At least for a while we both managed to forget’.
She'd thought at the time — fleetingly, without really dwelling on it — that he'd been referring to Arnie with these remarks.
But now she wondered if she'd been wrong — or, at least, only partly right.
Perhaps he'd been referring to someone else as well?
Someone that he was trying to forget.
The thought sent a chill of anguish lapping round her heart, puncturing her anger, making tears rise in her throat.
Was there another element in the equation that she hadn't even considered?
Was Guido in love with someone else?
It was after ten next morning when Ronni emerged from the villa, wearing a T-shirt over her swimsuit, to find Filippo and Agnese having breakfast out on the terrace.
‘I thought I'd go for a quick swim before breakfast,’ she told them, deeply grateful that there was no sign of Guido.
Right at that moment, on an empty stomach, she couldn't have faced him.
‘Go ahead.’
Agnese was looking as bright and lovely as ever.
She had evidently, Ronni thought, slept rather better than she had.
‘There's no rush.
Have breakfast whenever you're ready.’
There was a gate in the wall that overlooked the seashore — the wall where she and Guido had stood last night — with a flight of stone steps leading down to the beach.
Ronni hurried down, pulling her T-shirt over her head, and ran across the warm silver sand to the sea's edge.
The water felt delicious.
Ronni sighed as it embraced her.
Then she struck out towards the horizon, doing a slow, leisurely crawl.
She had barely slept last night — even what little of it had been left when she had finally crawled beneath the bedcovers.
Round and round in her head had gone the memory of the evening, undoubtedly the most magical evening of her life, but tarnished now by the memory of how it had ended, with Guido's crude brush-off and her belated realisation that he was in love with someone else.
For Ronni was sure of that now.
There was someone he was trying to forget.
In fact, the entire evening, spent flirting and dancing with her, had probably been no more than a cynical exercise in keeping his mind off someone else.
Damn him!
Ronni thought, as she continued to spear through the water.
Well, one thing was for sure…he wouldn't catch her out again!
With a sigh, she rolled over and floated on her back for a bit and did her best to talk herself out of her feelings for Guido.
I don't love him, she told herself.
How could I possibly love him?
I've known the wretched man for less than a week!
He's just turned my head, that's all, and I intend to turn it right back again.
From now on there'll be no more going weak at the knees!
She felt a pang of hunger.
It was time for breakfast.
She rolled over and headed back towards the shore.
It wasn't until Ronni stood up at the shore's edge that she saw Guido standing watching her, bare feet planted in the sand.
‘That was better,’ he told her.
‘And you're not even out of breath.
I would say you're definitely fitter than you were.’
Ronni tried not to look at him and squeezed the water from her hair.
In spite of all her fine resolutions, her heart had slammed against her ribs at the sight of him and suddenly she felt decidedly weak at the knees.
She said, curtly, ‘How nice to know you approve.’
He was dressed in white trousers and T-shirt, his hands in his trouser pockets.
‘I came to tell you I'd quite like us to leave before too long — just in case you were planning a lengthy swim.’
‘You thought maybe I was planning on swimming all the way to Africa?’
Compared to his easy tone, she sounded stiff and hostile.
Which was precisely the way she wanted to sound, she told herself.
This man had simply made a fool of her last night.
She added, ‘I wasn't planning anything quite so strenuous.’
‘Good.’
He met her gaze, and now his tone had altered.
There was a touch of steel as he told her, ‘We'll be leaving as soon as you've had breakfast.’
‘Might I know where we're going?’
Ronni proceeded to stride past him.
Her legs felt like pokers jabbing into the sand.
‘I suppose we're going to the mainland on another wild-goose chase?’
‘No, we're not going to the mainland.’
He was following behind her, and Ronni could feel his annoyance growing.
‘It appears that won't be necessary, after all.’
‘Then where are we going?’
She flicked a look over her shoulder, glad to have provoked this bad feeling between them.
She was suddenly feeling a great deal safer.
‘I'm getting a little tired,’ she added tetchily, ‘of being shunted all over the place looking for your wretched cousin.’
‘And your wretched brother.’
His tone was a cool warning.
Ronni could tell he didn't like her attitude one bit.
Good, she thought, snatching up her T-shirt from the sand.
Let him see I'm no longer the pushover I was last night!
As she started up the steps, he was following her, telling her, ‘The latest news I have is that they're planning to return to Olbia today.
I intend to be at the harbour to meet them.’
‘I see.’
At the top of the steps, Ronni turned to look at him, as a sudden curious question popped into her head.
‘What about the speedboat?
Are they bringing that back, too?’
‘There's no word about the speedboat.’
Guido's eyes lanced through her.
‘No one 's seen the speedboat.
It seems to have disappeared.’
‘Oh.’
She ought to feel pleased by that, but the truth was she didn't.
And those lancing dark eyes were making her heart weep.
She had a sudden desperate longing to relive last night — at least, the part up until when they had said goodnight.
She said, softening her tone a little, ‘It has to be somewhere.’
‘Oh, it's somewhere all right.’
‘Maybe they've hidden it.’
‘Or sold it.’
‘Surely not.’
Ronni pondered for a moment.
Then she shook her head.
‘Jeff wouldn't sell your boat.
Whatever else he is, my brother's not a thief.’
‘Well, you could have fooled me.’
Guido's tone was harsh and angry.
‘He's made a pretty good job of spiriting off my speedboat, not to mention spiriting off my cousin.’
‘But he hasn't stolen it.
I'm sure he hasn't.
He's only taken it temporarily.
It'll be somewhere.
Jeff's not a thief.’
‘Don't defend him to me!’
Suddenly the dark eyes were flashing.
‘Your brother's an irresponsible, thieving blackguard.
I'll never forgive him for involving Silvia in all this.
But he'll pay for it.
That's one thing I can guarantee!’
Ronni felt herself wince in the face of his sudden anger, but at the same time, finally, she understood something.
It was Silvia he was really concerned about, not the speedboat.
And it was his concern for Silvia that was at the root of his anger.
She frowned into his face, suddenly anxious to reassure him.
‘I'm sure you needn't worry,’ she started to tell him.
She'd been about to add, I'm sure Jeff's taking good care of her.
But before she could continue, he was brushing past her roughtly, almost causing her to stagger and stumble back down the steps.
‘Kindly don't waste any more of my time,’ he ordered her.
‘Just make sure you're ready to leave in half an hour!’
Then, like a whirlwind, he was storming off through the garden, heading back towards the villa.
When Ronni reached the terrace, there was no sign of him, but Agnese was waiting for her, a concerned look on her face.
‘I just saw Guido,’ she said, coming up to Ronni.
‘He looked furious.’
Then she laid a hand on Ronni's arm and smiled into her pale face.
‘Whatever passed between you, don't take it personally,’ she said kindly.
She squeezed Ronni's arm.
‘He's just worried about Silvia.’
Then as Ronni looked into her face, she nodded wisely.
‘You've got to understand about Guido and Silvia.
Guido's feelings for Silvia have always been very special.
More special, perhaps, than is strictly wise.
Sometimes I think that girl will break his heart.’
Ronni stared back at her with a sense of helpless inevitability, suddenly, with a shiver, putting two and two together.
She had been right in her deduction that he was in love with someone.
And that someone, it now appeared, was Silvia, his cousin.
CHAPTER NINE
Of course.
Now it all made sense.
She should have have thought of it before.
That was why Guido was so against the romance between Jeff and Silvia.
Because he was in love with his beautiful cousin himself.
Ronni had plenty of time to torture herself with these thoughts as they made the journey back to Olbia, barely exchanging a word the whole way.
An icy distance had grown up between them.
They barely even glanced at one another.
But now, at last, they had reached Olbia harbour and, leaving the car in the car park, were on their way to meet the ferry.
Guido was deliberately going faster than Ronni could comfortably keep up with and she was being forced to run to avoid being left behind.
‘What makes you so sure they'll be on this ferry, anyway?’
Catching her breath, Ronni added, ‘All this panic could be for nothing.’
‘It could be, but I don't think so.’
Guido had found a perfect position with a good view of the approaching ferry.
‘According to my information, they're almost certainly on board.’
Ronni wasn't sure whether she hoped they were or not, as she watched the ferry dock and the landing plank go down.
If they were, it would almost certainly mean a major row, but even if they weren't the prospects weren't too bright.
Either way, she wasn't looking forward to what was coming next.
There was much pushing and shoving and shouting and waving as the passengers at last began to disembark.
Ronni peered at the faces coming off the boat.
Poor Jeff, she was thinking, you're in for it now.
And then suddenly he appeared, making her heart smile inside her, as he stood out from the crowd with his shock of bright blond hair.
She felt a surge of solidarity and loyalty towards him.
Even in the face of Guido's wrath, she would stand by him.
She couldn't believe he was guilty of anything really bad.
She glanced at Guido and saw that his eyes were fixed on Silvia, who was following behind Jeff as they made their way down the landing plank.
And there was such a look of stark relief in his eyes that his beloved cousin was safe, after all, that, just for a moment, to hide her own pain, Ronni had to drop her gaze away.
It was as she raised her eyes again that Silvia suddenly caught sight of Guido.
Ronni saw her say something to Jeff and point.
They're going to make a run for it, she thought.
But that was not what happened.
In fact, what happened was quite the opposite.
All at once, a dignified Jeff was walking towards her and Guido, looking Guido straight in the eye as though he had nothing to fear.
He stopped in front of the taller man and held up the parcel in his hand.
‘I hope you're grateful for all the trouble I've just gone to,’ he said.
‘This is the petrol gauge part we needed for your speedboat.
I couldn't get it locally.
I had to go to the mainland.’
For a moment Guido just looked at him, clearly slightly thrown.
He said in a flat tone, ‘And where's the speedboat?’
Now it was Jeff's turn to look thrown.
He paused and said, frowning, ‘I presume it's in the boathouse, where it always is.’
‘No, it's not in the boathouse.’
Guido spoke quietly, his eyes never leaving the other man's face.
‘It vanished from the boathouse a couple of days ago.’
‘Vanished?
You mean it's been stolen?’
Jeff looked thunderstruck.
His blue eyes were flashing.
‘Who the devil could have taken it?’
It was at that moment, Ronni thought later, that Guido made up his mind that he'd been wrong in associating Jeff with the disappearance of his speedboat.
It must have been as clear to him as it was to her that Jeff, most definitely, wasn't acting.
Nobody could have faked the shocked look on his face.
And it was greatly to Guido's credit the way he proceeded to react.
He laid a hand on Jeff's shoulder.
‘I apologise,’ he said.
‘I confess that I thought you'd taken the boat.
I can see now I was mistaken and I'm sorry I ever thought it.’
Ronni felt proud of him at that moment.
Her heart swelled within her.
As she looked at him, for a moment the icy distance between them vanished.
At least no one could ever accuse him of lacking decency and moral courage.
‘You thought I took the boat?’
Jeff's eyes widened in astonishment.
‘How could you think a thing like that?’
Then he smiled and proceeded to make Ronni feel even prouder — her brother was a pretty decent fellow, too!
‘You crazy man, I love that boat as much as you do.’
Jeff slapped Guido amicably on the shoulder.
‘And I'm going to help you find it.
Come on,’ he added.
‘Let's get cracking!’
But that was when the atmosphere subtly altered.
‘Not so fast.’
Guido's expression had darkened.
‘I haven't finished with you yet.
In fact, I haven't even started.’
Scowling, he glanced at Silvia who, so far, hadn't spoken, then his dark eyes darted back to Jeff once more.
‘What do you mean by sneaking my cousin off to the mainland when she's supposed to be at my place, studying?
Are you totally without even a gram of responsibility?’
‘He didn't sneak me off.’
At last, Silvia piped up.
‘It was my idea as much as Jeff's that I went with him.’
She held up the sports bag she held in one hand.
‘But I took my English books with me.’
She glanced apologetically at Ronni.
‘I've been studying every spare minute.
I promise I have.’
‘Well, I'm afraid that's not good enough.’
Guido was unforgiving.
‘You made an undertaking with Ronni to do so many hours a day and you have flagrantly disregarded that undertaking.’
‘I know.’
To Ronni's surprise, and apparently also to Guido's, Silvia stared humbly down at the ground for a moment.
Then, surprising them both further, she apologised to Ronni.
‘I'm sorry.
I've behaved badly.
And after you coming all the way from England.
But I hope you'll forgive me and decide to stay on.
I need you if I'm going to pass those exams.’
Then, with a touch of her old defiance, she turned back to Guido.
‘I went off with Jeff because I was so angry with you.
And that was also why I didn't leave you a note explaining what we were up to as Jeff told me to.
I get sick of you always trying to tell me what to do.
I really hate you when you're like that.’
Ronni was aware of a look of withdrawal touching Guido's eyes.
She's hurt him, she thought.
He really does love her.
Agnese was right, his feelings for her are very special.
And, just for a moment, in spite of the pain that brought her, it was the thought of his hurt that tore at her heart.
She couldn't bear to think of Guido suffering.
She laid a hand on his arm.
‘We ought to go back…so you and Jeff can start trying to find the boat.’
Her tone expressed the warmth that flowed through her heart as she added, looking into his eyes with a smile, ‘And so that Silvia and I can start making up for lost time.’
Their eyes met for a moment and Guido smiled back at her, flooding her heart with foolish pleasure.
‘You're right,’ he said.
‘We've wasted enough time.’
Then he was turning back to Jeff and Silvia.
‘I take it you came here with Jeff's boat?’ he was saying.
‘So I'll leave you to find your own way back to the villa.
As soon as possible,’ he added crisply.
‘No diversions.’
‘No diversions.’
Jeff nodded in agreement.
‘Come on, Silvia.’
He turned away.
‘Let's get cracking.’
Guido was silent until he and Ronni reached the car park.
Then as he pulled open the door of the Alfa Romeo and invited her to climb inside, he suddenly caught her arm and looked down into her face.
‘I owe you an apology, too,’ he told her.
‘You clearly knew nothing about what Jeff and Silvia were up to.
I jumped to conclusions that I had no right to jump to.’
He pulled an apologetic face.
‘I hope you can forgive me?’
Ronni glanced away to hide the flush that touched her cheeks.
Didn't he know she would have forgiven him anything?
‘I hope you'll agree to stay on,’ he was adding.
‘I have a feeling that Silvia may have finally come to her senses.’
He looked oddly withdrawn, the dark eyes shuttered.
Compassion flooded through Ronni.
She longed to reach up and kiss him.
It must be hard, she was thinking, to see the person you love so obviously in love with someone else.
And for a moment the irony of the observation escaped her.
She should save her pity for herself.
Her situation was the same.
But her tone was lightly teasing as she tried to cheer him up.
‘You mean I have a choice as to whether I stay on or not?’
Guido smiled and touched her arm, then, too quickly, dropped his hand away.
‘After the way the Falcone family have treated you, I would say we have no right to stop you if you want to go — and, whatever you decide, I'll pay you in full.
I think that's the very least I owe you.’
‘Oh, yes, you'll pay me in full all right.’
Ronni spoke mock-sternly.
Then she softened her tone and added, smiling, ‘You'll pay me in full because I intend to stay on and make damned sure Silvia passes her exams.
You're looking at a lady,’ she added sparkily, ‘who doesn't walk out on a job half done.
I like to see things through to the finish — and to see them through successfully.’
But a minute or two later, as they turned out of the car park and headed for the road that led back to the villa, Ronni gave way to the growing desolation within her.
She meant what she'd said and she intended to keep her promise — but how would she survive another two weeks of living in such close proximity to Guido, when with every moment that passed her hopeless love for him grew deeper?
She felt suddenly, confusedly, a little like a man who had voluntarily passed a death sentence on himself.
At least there was one thing to be grateful for.
Silvia was as good as her word.
Over the days that followed she and Ronni dutifully worked together for at least six hours a day.
And it was Silvia, not Ronni, who was the first to arrive and the more reluctant to leave at the end of each lesson.
‘You mustn't overdo it,’ Ronni warned her one day, amazed that such a necessity should ever come to pass.
‘You'll tire yourself out.
It'll be counter-productive.’
But Silvia was relentless.
‘Don't worry, I can stand the pace.
As long as you can?’ she added with concern.
‘Oh, don't worry about me.
I can stand the pace all right.
But you're the one who's putting in most of the effort.’
‘And about time, too.’
Silvia smiled a wry smile.
Then she laughed.
‘Right, that's enough chat.
Let's get back to work!’
There was another small mercy for which to be grateful.
Ronni had barely set eyes on Guido for days.
He and Jeff were out most of the time, trying to track down the speedboat, for which a popular local search had been mounted, and he was hardly ever at the villa.
That's a blessing, Ronni told herself, trying not to think how much she missed him.
Maybe I'll make it through the next couple of weeks, after all.
But then, quite by accident, she made a discovery that more or less forced her to seek him out.
At first, she put it off.
The thought of seeing him deranged her.
But then she pulled herself together.
It had to be done.
And so, about a week after their last direct encounter, she found herself one evening waiting up for him, sitting with a glass of vodka and tonic in the drawing-room, long after Silvia had gone to bed.
It was well after midnight when at last she heard his car.
At the sound of his footsteps approaching down the hall, she rose to her feet and hurried out to meet him.
‘Guido…’
How bittersweet that name tasted on her tongue.
‘Guido,’ she said again.
‘I'd like a word with you.’
He was dressed in a pair of faded black jeans and a striped blue shirt with the sleeves rolled back.
And, as she looked into his face, her heart thundering inside her, Ronni wondered how she had survived without him.
He was her life.
Her sun.
He was what made her world go round.
He seemed in good spirits and mercifully oblivious of her torment.
‘Well, this is a surprise.
What are you doing up so late?’
He glanced at the glass she held in her hand.
‘What a good idea.
I could do with a drink.’
‘I was waiting up for you.’
Ronni followed him back into the sitting-room and stood awkwardly watching him as he poured himself a whisky.
Just being in the same room with him was an exquisite torment.
‘As I said, I want to have a word.’
‘Oh, yes?’
He seemed distracted.
He dropped ice into his glass and crossed to sink down into one of the nearby sofas.
Then he smiled up at her.
‘We've had a breakthrough.
I think we're finally on the track of the speedboat.
It's beginning to look as though one of my rivals may have stolen it.’
‘That's marvellous — I mean that's terrible — I mean I'm glad you've almost found it.’
Ronni's brain was tripping and tumbling inside her.
She could hardly speak for the ache in her heart.
An ache of hopelessly mixed-up pleasure and pain.
She longed to fall into his arms and at the same time to run away.
‘I'm hoping that by tomorrow we'll know something definite.
But it looks as though we're on the right track at last.’
Guido took a mouthful of his drink and paused in what he was saying, looking up at her with an amused, curious glint in his eye.
‘Why are you standing there looking like a startled deer?
Take a seat.
Make yourself comfortable.
Surely you don't need to be invited?’
‘Of course not.’
Did she really look like a startled deer?
Ronni supposed she must.
It was rather how she felt.
She sat down gingerly on the edge of a nearby armchair, took a mouthful of vodka and pulled herself together.
‘I was just fascinated and delighted by your story,’ she fudged.
‘So, what did you want to see me about?’
Guido leaned back against the cushions.
His hair, caught in the light from the table lamp at his back, was transformed into a luminescent halo of black curls.
Ronni felt another layer of her feeble defences crumble.
He said, ‘I hope you're not having problems with Silvia again?’
‘Oh, no, nothing like that.
I can't complain about Silvia.
She's working like a beaver and improving in leaps and bounds.’
Ronni smiled, relaxing a little, feeling a genuine sense of pleasure.
‘I think you can be sure now that she's going to pass her exams,’ she added.
‘I'm sure she will.’
Suddenly his expression had grown sober.
‘As long as we can continue to keep her away from your brother.’
His eyes narrowed and a muscle seemed to tighten in his cheek.
‘I'm almost sorry we're so close to finding the boat.
Helping me look for it was keeping your brother away from Silvia.’
Ronni felt a thrust to her heart.
Nothing had changed.
He was still in love with his cousin and still against her relationship with Jeff.
Instantly, she was filled with the need to protect herself from the hopelessly vulnerable way that made her feel.
‘I don't know why you're still annoyed with Jeff after the way he's been helping you.’
There was a satisfying, distancing edge of criticism in her voice.
‘I would have thought you'd be feeling grateful to him.’
‘I am.
I'm most grateful for his help with the boat.’
Guido looked back at her, eyes narrowed, and took a mouthful of whisky.
‘But I still can't say I'm grateful for his behaviour regarding Silvia.’
No.
Of course he wasn't.
And Ronni knew why.
She looked back at him and challenged him, ‘What's wrong with his behaviour regarding Silvia?’
‘Everything, in my opinion.’
Ronni felt her stomach tighten.
‘What's the matter?’ she said a little cruelly.
‘Don't you like your cousin being in love?’
‘Not when it's with a man who has no regard for her welfare.’
To his credit, not a flicker crossed his eyes as he said it.
Had she not already known, Ronni would never have guessed the truth.
Guido elaborated, ‘I'm afraid I'm still a long way from forgiving your brother for his irresponsible behaviour.’
‘Yes, I can see that.
But you're wrong about Jeff.
He may have behaved irresponsibly, but he's not an irresponsible person.’
‘We shall see.’
For a moment, Guido stared into his whisky.
‘Personally, I'm rather hoping that the romance will just fizzle out.’
Ronni wanted to say, I don't think it will, somehow.
That, after all, was what she believed.
But it would have been too cruel, and she had already been cruel once, and being cruel to him didn't help her own pain.
So, instead, saying nothing, she too stared into her glass.
There was a silence.
Ronni could hear the beating of her heart and she fancied she could hear the beat of Guido's, too — beating with hopeless love for Silvia.
All at once, she felt driven to the floor with sheer misery.
Then, at last, Guido broke the silence.
‘You said you wanted to speak to me.
I take it the subject you wished to discuss was not Jeff and Silvia?’
‘Oh, no.’
She shook her head and smiled a wry inner smile.
That thorny subject, if he but knew it, was as painful to her as it was to him.
She straightened in her seat and regarded him steadily.
‘I wanted to see you,’ she told him, ‘in order to apologise.’
‘Apologise for what?’
His dark eyebrows lifted.
‘I can think of nothing you need to apologise to me for.’
‘Ah, but there is something.’
Ronni smiled a small smile, grateful that the subject of Jeff and Silvia had been left behind, and enjoying, for once, the fact that she had him at a disadvantage.
She sat back a little more relaxed in her seat.
‘That business about my tickets and my passport and my traveller's cheques…’
As she paused, Guido nodded.
‘I take it, then, that you've found them?’
‘They were down the side of the armchair in my room.
They must have dropped out of my bag and slipped behind the cushion.’
Ronni flushed and frowned in shameful consternation.
‘I'm sorry that I accused you of taking them.’
Guido smiled then, without rancour.
‘We've both been doing a bit of that — accusing each other of things that neither of us is guilty of.’
He gave a small laugh.
‘I guess it must be something in the chemistry.’
For a moment he held her eyes with an oddly searching expression.
He looked as though he was about to say something, Ronni thought.
Then he shrugged instead.
‘I'm glad you found them.
As a matter of fact, I'd forgotten all about them.’
‘So had I, oddly enough…’
I had other things on my mind.
She added that to herself while, aloud, she elaborated, ‘I was fishing for a coin that I'd accidentally dropped down the back of the chair…and there was my passport and the rest of my stuff.’
She shook her head.
‘Anyway, that's why I waited up for you.
I wanted to apologise for that.’
‘And your apology is accepted and the gesture much appreciated.’
Guido drained his whisky glass and laid it down on a nearby table.
Suddenly, the dark eyes were twinkling across at her.
‘We seem to be spending a great deal of time apologising to one another these days.
But I'm glad we finally seem to have got everything straight.’
‘Yes.
I'm glad, too.’
Though Ronni knew the remark was hollow.
What was there to be so glad about when nothing made any difference?
Things might finally be straight, but he still didn't love her.
She glanced at her watch, all at once anxious to escape.
‘Well, I've told you what I wanted to tell you, and now it's rather late.’
She started to stand up.
‘It's time I went to bed.’
But then, to her dismay, Guido stood up, too.
He said, ‘Yes, I suppose it is rather late.’
Then he stepped towards her to stand just a couple of feet away.
Ronni swallowed.
She longed to turn and walk away.
But her feet were fixed with six-inch nails to the floor.
Then suddenly Guido smiled and reached out to touch her cheek.
‘Tonight,’ he said, ‘you look like Veronica again.’
Ronni felt like weeping with the desire that flowed through her.
Just the touch of his hand and she was turned to putty.
She gazed at him helplessly.
‘I don't know what you mean.’
‘What I mean is that I wish I could snap my fingers and suddenly there'd be a band playing some soft, slow music.’
He smiled.
‘Then you wouldn't say no if I asked to take you in my arms under the pretext of inviting you to dance.’
Ronni couldn't bear to listen.
Her soul was bleeding.
She opened her mouth to speak, but no sound came out.
‘Still, we could always pretend…’
He had moved a little closer.
She could feel the heat of him pressing against her.
She longed for it to swallow her.
Barely breathing, she closed her eyes.
A moment later, it seemed to Ronni, she could indeed hear music.
She made no attempt to move away as his arms slipped round her.
With a sigh she fell against him, her heart in uproar.
The music was carrying her away as his fingers laced her hair.
The slow, steady rhythm was pulsing in her veins.
Then suddenly her breath caught as the tempo quickened at the touch of his fingers against the back of her neck.
‘Veronica…’
He breathed the name against her cheek, just as he had on the night of the party.
And Ronni was suddenly helpless.
She felt her arms twine round his neck.
‘Oh, Guido…!’ she murmured with a strangled sob.
The next minute he was kissing her and she was kissing him back, her fingers in his hair, her breath sobbing in her throat.
And all at once it was as though a fire raged between them, scorching their hungry bodies, sending sparks into the air around them.
His hand was on her breast, moulding, caressing through the thin cotton fabric of her T-shirt.
Then, impatiently, he was pulling the T-shirt aside, freeing her breast from her bra and taking hold of her naked flesh.
It was what she had longed for.
Ronni moaned and pressed against him, her own hand seeking the buttons of his shirt, undoing them quickly then sliding inside to press against the muscular warmth of his chest.
‘Veronica, let's go upstairs.’
Suddenly, he was gathering her against him, as though he would lift her up into his arms and carry her off.
And she knew it was what she wanted.
She longed for it desperately.
With every atom of her being.
But she knew it could not be.
What would happen when it was over?
No, she could not live with that.
Summoning all the will-power she possessed, she took a step back away from him.
‘I can't,’ she said.
‘I can't.
It's Arnie.’
She ought to have been struck down by a thunderbolt, Ronni thought later.
No one had been further from her mind at that moment than Arnie.
But desperate situations called for desperate lies.
And Arnie was the first lie that popped into her head.
And to her relief and utter despair, the lie worked a treat.
‘Arnie.
Ah, yes.
I was forgetting about Arnie.’
A look crossed Guido's face as he dropped his hands away.
He took a step back from her.
‘How could I have forgotten Arnie?’
There was a cruel taunt in his voice that cut her to the quick.
Ronni nearly retaliated, And what about Silvia?
She's the one who's really standing in our way!
But, instead, she heard herself say, ‘I'm terribly sorry.’
Then, unable to look at him, she was turning and rushing from the room.
Up in her room with the door locked, she stood quivering and shaking, her emotions oddly dulled, unable to cry.
It was as though all the pain and grief inside her was so heavy and immense that it had totally stunned her.
Good, she thought, I don't want to feel.
But then suddenly she saw it, lying on the tallboy, its petals turning brown now, withered and dry, the red geranium that Guido had picked from the urn.
She stared at it for a moment, her body feeling frozen, her heart as still as a stone in her chest.
Then, like a dam bursting, suddenly she was diving across the room, a sob escaping from her lips as she reached out to snatch it up.
Just to hold it, that was all she wanted, and press its dry petals against her cheek.
It was the only thing she had that Guido had given her.
But as she seized it in her hand, before her horrified eyes the dried petals fell away and fluttered to the floor, scattering like confetti at her feet.
Oh, no!
Now she had nothing!
With a cry of despair, Ronni sank to her knees and collapsed into tears.
Ronni heard through Silvia that the speedboat had been found.
‘It was Guido's arch-rival who he's beaten into second place twice…he's the one who took it, and now he's been arrested.’
Silvia laughed.
‘He won't even be coming second this year!’
‘But what about Guido…?
Is his speedboat all right?
The thief didn't do any damage to it, did he?’
‘No, the speedboat's OK.
At least, more or less.
Guido reckons he'll have it ready for the qualifying trials.’
‘Thank heavens for that.’
Ronni felt a weight lift from her.
It had crucified her to think that the boat might be damaged and Guido deprived after all of his hat trick.
‘Don't worry,’ Silvia told her proudly.
‘Guido will win.
There's no one in the world who can beat my wonderful cousin.’
And Guido was putting in long hours to ensure that he did win.
Over the following week, Ronni rarely saw him.
But she made a point of going down to the jetty one day to tell him, ‘I'm really glad you found your boat.’
‘Thanks.’
He turned to smile at her as he answered, making her heart slam with love and helpless grief against her ribs.
‘Now all I've got to do is get it in shape and make sure I pass the qualifying trials this weekend.’
‘Oh, you'll pass all right, and then go on to win the race.’
Just like Silvia, Ronni had no doubt about that.
‘I'd lay my very last penny on it,’ she told him.
‘Such faith.’
He smiled again, so that she had to look away.
And then he asked her, ‘And what about you?’
‘Me?’
‘Yes, you.
Are you going to win, too?’
How can I do that when I've already lost?
The thought seared through her brain, and then belatedly she understood.
Ronni managed to force a smile.
‘I'm pretty sure I'll win — or, rather, that Silvia will.
I think she'll pass.’
‘Then we can have a double celebration.
I'll look out the champagne.’
As he said it, he held her eyes and suddenly Ronni was remembering that glass of champagne they'd shared at the party.
She turned away abruptly, fighting the pain that choked her.
‘I'd better leave you now,’ she muttered over her shoulder.
‘You've got things to do and I've got a lesson.’
Then, head bent, she was hurrying back to the villa, suddenly knowing in her heart what had to be done.
She said nothing to anyone until the very last moment.
Then, as she and Silvia packed up their things after their final English lesson, she told the other girl, ‘I'll be leaving tomorrow, just as soon as your exam is over.’
As she spoke, she fiddled with the corner of her notepad.
Silvia was horrified.
‘You can't!’ she protested.
‘You'll miss Guido's test run!
You'll miss the celebrations!’
‘I know.
But I have to go.’
‘Why, for heaven's sake?
I thought you didn't have to start work again for another three weeks?’
‘I don't, but there are things I have to do at home.’
Nervously, Ronni continued to fiddle with her notepad.
‘Urgent things that need my attention.
And besides,’ she added, before Silvia could protest again, ‘once your exam's over, my job here is done.
I really have no reason to stay on.
‘I wish Guido all the best in the trials, of course,’ she added, ‘but there's only one thing that really matters to me now — and that's going home as soon as I can.’
As she said it, she stared fixedly at the shredded corner of her notepad and wished vainly, but with all her heart, that it were true.
CHAPTER TEN
Ronni flew off with a heavy and tormented heart.
How could she survive knowing she would never see Guido again?
But I must, she told herself.
Even when the sun goes down, the world still has to keep going round.
And, somehow, I too must keep going without my sun.
It was raining when her flight arrived at Heathrow and it rained all the way back to her flat in Islington.
But Ronni almost felt glad.
The rain fitted her mood.
Dumping her bags in the bedroom, she sat down at the kitchen table and began to sift lethargically through the pile of accumulated mail, from time to time eyeing the phone in the hall.
She ought to phone Arnie to let him know she was back, but he was the last person she felt like speaking to right now.
For one thing, what on earth was she going to say to him?
She laid down her letters and stared blankly at the wall.
You have to speak to Arnie, she told herself firmly.
You have to speak to Arnie and tell him everything.
Not about Guido.
He needn't know about Guido.
Guido had nothing to do with what she had to tell him.
For Guido, she realised, had only been the catalyst that had finally forced her to confront her true feelings for Arnie.
Or rather, her lack of feelings, she admitted shamefully.
Guido hadn't stolen her affections from Arnie.
There hadn't been much in the way of affection to steal.
No, that wasn't quite true, she corrected herself, frowning.
She had been fond of Arnie.
In a way, she still was.
They'd been friends, companions, they'd got on well together, but, now that she knew what real love was, she knew that she had never for one moment loved him.
Her heart clenched inside her as she thought of Guido and the dizzy, consuming passions he aroused in her.
That was love.
Something to die for.
She felt a sob break within her.
More appropriately in her case, it was something to die without.
She dropped her eyes back to the pile of letters.
It was no good dreaming.
What she had to do, finally, was face reality.
And reality meant speaking to Arnie face to face.
A letter or a phone call would be much easier, but that was the coward's way and she had too much pride for that — not to mention too much respect for Arnie.
He deserved to be told the truth to his face.
She brushed away the tear that she'd been totally unaware was slowly trickling down her face.
Then she took a deep breath.
I must go to Bradford right away.
The following day she caught an early train from King's Cross station and set off on the two-hundred-mile journey north.
She'd slept badly and felt numb with weariness and grief.
The last thing she felt like coping with was a confrontation.
But this was something she knew she had to do.
This was the urgent business she'd spoken of to Silvia.
It was a bright sunny day when she arrived in Bradford, the late July sun slanting against the rooftops, bathing the city in a warm, gentling light.
Ronni took a taxi to the college where Arnie was doing his summer school — she'd phoned his flat from the station and been told that was where he'd be.
At the college gates, she got out, preferring to walk across the campus.
Putting off the evil hour, she suspected.
Gathering up her courage.
All the way up on the train, she'd been rehearsing what she'd say to him.
She was praying with all her heart that he wouldn't be too hurt.
Groups of students and teachers were sitting on the grass, chatting and laughing in the sun.
There was a feeling of high spirits and jollity in the air.
Ronni felt like an executioner at a party.
And then she saw them and stopped dead in her tracks.
Her mouth fell open.
Surely, it couldn't be?
But it was, there was absolutely no doubt about it.
Walking towards her, yet totally oblivious of her presence, was a smiling, literally radiant-faced Arnie, one arm circling the waist of a red-haired girl.
Ronni caught her breath.
Well, I never!
They were almost right on top of her before they saw her.
And they mightn't have seen her yet if Ronni hadn't spoken, so totally absorbed were they in one another.
Ronni could scarcely keep her face straight.
‘Hi,’ she said.
Now it was Arnie's turn to stop dead in his tracks.
He looked at Ronni as though she were a particularly disappointing novelty that had just fallen out of his Christmas cracker.
‘Hi,’ he said, dropping his arm from the girl's waist.
‘Don't bother.
I saw.’
Ronni smiled a wry smile.
And I really don't mind, she was about to add.
But Arnie cut in.
‘I was going to tell you.’
He looked shamefaced.
‘I didn't know you'd got back.’
Ronni shook her head and laid a hand on his arm, smiling kindly at the blushing red-haired girl as she did so.
‘It's OK.
Don't worry.
But I think we ought to talk.
Is there anywhere around here where we can have a cup of coffee?’
An hour later, after coffee and cakes in the canteen, all three of them were feeling a great deal better.
‘I hope we can be friends,’ Arnie said, looking earnestly at Ronni.
‘All three of us, I mean.
I hope we can keep in touch.’
‘I hope so, too.’
Ronni meant it.
She'd taken an instant liking to Arnie's new girlfriend, who was patently far more suited to him than she'd ever been.
And she bore Arnie no hard feelings.
On the contrary, she felt happy that he'd found true love at last.
She raised her coffee-cup in a toast.
‘I wish you both all the best.’
Arnie and Penny, as she was called, had tried to insist that Ronni stay overnight and return to London the following morning.
‘We'll take you out for dinner,’ Penny suggested.
But Ronni declined.
‘No, I have to get back.
I've got a thousand and one things I have to do.
Perhaps we can have dinner some other time.’
And, as she climbed on to the train, she was glad she was going home.
She did have a thousand and one things to do, though there wasn't a single one of them that couldn't have waited.
The real reason she'd wanted to leave was the harsh discovery that when you were nursing a broken heart there was nothing more painful than being surrounded by others who were happily in love.
‘All mankind love a lover’.
All the world but a lover spurned.
She stared at the darkening landscape as the train headed towards London, feeling that sense of numbness settle inside her once again.
And again she asked herself, How will I survive now that the sun has been taken out of my life?
The phone rang.
It was Betty calling off their game of tennis.
‘Sorry, I've got to take Jerry to a chum's party,’ she told Ronni.
‘Tony was going to do it, but he's got tied up with something else.’
‘That's all right.’
Ronni was understanding.
‘Maybe I'll go along to the club anyway and see if I can get a game with someone else.’
As she laid down the phone, she decided she'd do that.
Even if she couldn't get a game, there'd be something going on at the club, and it would be better than moping around at home.
Moping was definitely a dangerous pursuit.
Over the past two weeks Ronni had done her share of moping.
And her share of weeping and lying sleepless until dawn.
And there'd be more to endure.
Though she was learning to cope, she was a long way from being over Guido yet.
She'd managed to cope, principally, by keeping busy.
She'd rejoined the sports club she used to belong to before she'd allowed her membership to lapse during her time with Arnie.
And she and her friend Betty had spent long hours together, playing tennis and squash and doing a bit of swimming.
Though occasionally, like now, Betty's family commitments — she had a husband and a three-year-old son — meant that she had to cancel a date.
‘I got into all this sports stuff after Jerry was born,’ Betty had told her.
‘I needed something to get me back in shape.’
Precisely what I need, too, Ronni had thought privately.
Though it's my head, not my body that needs pulling into shape.
After her three weeks in Sardinia she was physically quite fit.
As Guido had promised her, her stay there had knocked her into pretty good shape.
But she hadn't dwelt on that thought.
She never dwelt on thoughts of Guido.
To dwell on thoughts of Guido would be to drive herself mad.
She glanced at her watch now.
It was just after eleven.
She would go down to the club and do some keep fit for an hour, then have a fruit juice lunch and see if she could find a game of tennis.
Grabbing her sports bag, she glanced at her reflection in the hall mirror.
She looked a little less hollow-eyed than she had a week ago.
If she kept working on it, a week from now, she might look even better.
She slung the bag over her shoulder and stepped towards the front door.
And in that very same instant the doorbell rang.
Ronni yanked the door open.
Who could it be?
Then she saw and felt her heart turn to powder inside her.
Her mouth fell open.
She stood there, paralysed.
‘I see I just caught you.
May I come in?’
‘I was on my way to tennis.’
Ronni looked back at him, dumbstruck.
‘I —’ She stopped and stared at him.
‘What are you doing here?’
‘I've come to see you.’
He leaned one hand against the door-frame.
‘Aren't you going to let me in?’
Ronni was barely aware of what he was saying.
Her brain was still having a great deal of difficulty coping with what her eyes were telling her.
Was this really Guido standing before her, looking unbearably handsome in a pale linen suit?
Were those dark eyes that were gazing down at her really Guido's?
If she reached out to touch him, would he vanish like a ghost?
She dared not put that suspicion to the test.
She remained rigidly immobile, suddenly quite incapable of moving anyway.
Even her heart seemed to have stopped in mid-beat in her breast.
But dimly she heard him say again, ‘Aren't you going to let me in?’
Ronni struggled from her stupor and stepped back into the hallway, her legs feeling like bales of straw beneath her.
Then she heard herself say in a voice that sounded almost normal, ‘Of course.
Forgive me.
Please come in.’
The next moment he was inside and she was closing the door behind him, then leading him along the narrow hallway towards the living-room.
He'll have disappeared when I turn round, she thought.
I'll discover it was all a dream.
But to her amazement he was still there as she turned to tell him, ‘Please make yourself comfortable.
Take a seat.’
He looked too big for the room as he seated himself in one of the armchairs.
Too big and too dramatic, with his wild black hair, copper-dark suntan and eyes as black as midnight.
Too big, too dramatic and too impossibly wonderful.
She felt the love in her heart thrust sharply against her ribs.
Helpless pain and longing went flooding through her.
‘How have you been?’
He was looking across at her as she seated herself gingerly in the armchair opposite him.
She licked her dry lips.
‘Terrific,’ she said.
‘That's good.’
He leaned back against the cushions, but there was a stiffness to his movements and a stiffness in his voice.
‘I hear you qualified for the race.’
Jeff had rung to tell her — and to tell her at the same time that Silvia had passed her exams with flying colours.
Even more stiffly now than Guido, Ronni leaned back in her chair.
‘That's good,’ she said.
‘Congratulations.’
‘Thank you.’
‘And what about the the race itself?
Did you win your hat trick?’
‘The race itself is not until next week.’
Guido paused, his eyes surveying her.
‘Next Wednesday, in fact.’
‘Oh, yes, of course.’
If she'd thought about it, of course, she'd known that.
But thinking about Guido and the race were two things she'd been trying very hard not to do.
She said, ‘I would have thought you'd be busy practising.’
And as something flickered across his eyes, for the first time she wondered what on earth he was doing here in London.
And, more to the point, what was he doing in her flat?
‘Silvia and Jeff have got engaged.’
It was as though he'd answered that last question.
‘They made it official just a couple of days ago.’
So, he was in London on some business or other and had simply dropped by to tell her that Jeff and Silvia had got engaged.
Ronni felt a swooping, irrational plummet of disappointment.
What on earth else had she thought he'd come here to tell her?
She said, ‘That's nice.’
Then, remembering Silvia and his feelings for her, she asked him quietly, ‘Are you pleased?’
‘I'm coming round to the idea.’
He paused, then smiled suddenly.
‘Actually, I think I've already come round.
I've finally forgiven Jeff and I'm delighted at the engagement.’
How could he be?
Ronni frowned at him as he continued, ‘I think they'll make a go of it.
I think they make a very good couple.’
He certainly sounded pleased.
But how was that possible when he was secretly in love with Silvia?
Ronni fiddled with her chair arm.
‘I'm surprised to hear you're pleased.’
‘Well, I am.’
Guido sighed and seemed to relax a little, as he told her with a light smile, ‘In fact, I'm very pleased.
Now that Jeff's in the picture, it means I can back off a little and stop feeling quite so responsible for Silvia.’
‘Back off a little?’
Ronni's heart had grown still.
‘What do you mean back off a little?’
Guido shrugged.
‘I don't know if you know the story…?
Perhaps Jeff's told you…?
About me and Silvia?’
Ronni shook her head stiffly.
‘I don't know any story.’
She had grown so still now she was barely breathing.
Guido gave a brief sigh.
‘It all started with the accident…the accident five years ago when Silvia's father was killed.’
He lowered his eyes briefly, as pain flickered across them, then raised them to look at Ronni again.
‘He was on his way to Rome airport, coming to visit me…
There was a terrible accident…
He was killed…’
As he paused, Ronni watched him.
What was coming next?
‘Silvia was distraught.’
Guido was continuing with his story, and again Ronni caught that flicker of pain.
‘She was young at the time, just fourteen, and I suppose didn't really know what she was saying.
But at the funeral, in a fit of hysteria, she turned on me and blamed me for causing her father's death.
If he hadn't been coming to visit me, it would never have happened.’
‘But that's outrageous!’
Ronni sat forward in her seat, momentarily forgetting about everything else.
‘Don't tell me you ended up feeling guilty?’
‘I'm afraid I did.
I know it's not logical, but I couldn't get it out of my head that Silvia blamed me.
So, I tried to make it up to her in every way I could — though it wasn't easy — she went on hating me for years.’
‘How absolutely terrible!’
Now Ronni understood what Agnese had meant by her remarks about Guido's special feelings for Silvia and her fear that Silvia would break his heart.
And it was a million miles from what Ronni had assumed!
She frowned across at him, her heart going out to him.
‘I hope she doesn't still blame you?’ she said.
‘I don't think so.
At least, she says she doesn't.
But there are still times, when she gets angry with me, that I can't help remembering, and wondering what's in her heart.’
‘Oh, but you mustn't wonder!’
Ronni also understood now that hurt look she'd sometimes seen in his eyes during his angry exchanges with Silvia.
‘She loves you!’ she told him.
‘I'm sure she does.
I've heard her refer to you as ‘my wonderful cousin’!’
Guido smiled at that.
‘Thank you for telling me.’
Then he paused for a moment.
‘But why are we talking about Silvia?’
The dark eyes flickered.
‘I didn't come here to talk about Silvia.’
‘Oh?’
Ronni remained leaning forward in her chair.
She wanted to lean back, but her muscles had become paralysed.
‘And why did you come?’ she heard herself ask.
Guido was leaning forward too now, dark eyes shadowed by long dark lashes.
‘I came to ask you to come back to Sardinia.
I want you there for the speedboat race.’
‘Why?’
‘Because there's no way I'll win it if you're not there.’
‘You passed the trials without me.’
Was that all he wanted?
An extra supporter to cheer him on in his race?
‘I don't see why the race should be any different.’
‘I didn't know you weren't there at the trials.’
Ronni was aware of that stiffness about him again, and suddenly she noticed too that, like herself, he had a slightly hollow look about the eyes.
‘I didn't know,’ he went on, ‘that you'd already gone back to England.
If I'd known that, I wouldn't have stood a chance.’
What was he saying?
But before Ronni could wonder further, suddenly he was rising to his feet.
‘I scared you off, didn't I?’
He was standing over her.
‘That night when I suggested we go upstairs…
I moved too fast…
That was why you left…’
Ronni gazed at him, astonished.
He hadn't scared her off.
It was her silly fears about Silvia that had scared her off.
But before she could say anything, he was continuing, ‘You said it was Arnie, but I knew it wasn't.
I was pretty certain you weren't in love with Arnie.’
He smiled a small smile.
‘And I gather from Jeff that I was right.’
Then all at once he was taking her hand and drawing her up to stand before him.
‘Come back for the race.
Come back and stay forever.
I love you, Ronni.
I can't live without you.’
Ronni could not speak.
She reached up and touched his cheek.
Her heart was beating like a drum inside her.
Then, shivering, she told him, ‘I love you, too.’
There was a moment of total stillness, then suddenly he was embracing her, holding her against him, raining kissing across her face.
‘Marry me, Veronica.
Say you'll never leave me.’
He gazed down at her almost fiercely, his voice breaking as he told her, ‘I cannot endure another day like the last two weeks.’
‘Nor I.’
Her heart full to bursting with love and happiness, Ronni fell against him, burying her face against his neck.
‘I'll never leave you.
How could I leave you?
Without you I am nothing.’
She looked into his eyes.
‘I love you with all my heart.
You are my sun.’
The marriage took place the day after the race.
‘You are my prize,’ Guido told Ronni.
‘My prize for all my life.’
‘And what if you'd lost?’
For, of course, he'd won, easily, miles and miles ahead of the rest.
Ronni teased him, ‘Perhaps you wouldn't be so happy if you'd lost?’
But he grew serious now as they sat out on the terrace, two blissful days into their marriage, watching a blood-red sun sink into a blood-red sea.
‘It wouldn't have mattered,’ he told her.
‘Now nothing matters.
How can anything matter now that I have you?’
Ronni felt her heart turn over.
‘I love you,’ she told him.
He smiled.
‘Tell me again.
I can't hear it enough.’
Ronni obliged.
‘I love you.
I love you,’ she repeated.
‘And I love you.
I love everything about you.’
He smiled.
‘I even love your parents.’
Ronni laughed.
‘I think it's mutual.
And you'd better go on loving them.
It looks as though they're going to be regular visitors here.’
She felt a pang of gratitude, remembering his generous offer to provide them with a month-long Sardinian holiday, not only on their anniversary this year, but every single year to come.
Her poor parents had been totally overwhelmed.
Just as I am, Ronni thought, glancing across at him, feeling her heart swell inside her with love and longing.
I never knew it was possible to be happy like this.
To love someone this much and to want them so badly.
Guido slipped an arm around her and bent to kiss her, then reached out suddenly to the stone urn beside them and pulled off the stem of a red geranium.
‘My Botticelli nymph,’ he smiled, slipping it behind her ear.
Ronni blushed with pleasure, then reached up to kiss him as, with a glint in his eye that she knew and loved well, he added, ‘And now shall we go upstairs?’