

CHAPTER ONE
‘I think this will ‘elp you,’ the young library assistant declared, in heavily accented English, as she set the large atlas down on a nearby table.
Paige smiled her thanks and pulled out a chair, yet before she sat down she couldn't resist the urge to cast a furtive glance over her shoulder.
Apart from the staff, the reference-room was empty, and she grimaced.
Lord, she was becoming paranoid.
She'd be checking under the bed next!
But she couldn't help it, for wherever she went she knew Travis McKenna wouldn't be far behind.
She had been reduced to using ploys straight out of spy stories.
Yet he had found her all the same.
Turning up like the proverbial bad penny, acting for all the world like the Mountie who always got his man — or, in her case, woman.
He was testing her natural friendliness and warmth towards her fellow man to the limit.
If he ever reached that point, contrary to what her natal sign would seem to suggest, she might explode.
Librans did, when the balances of their lives were out of kilter.
And the frustration of the last month had aggravated a downward trend considerably.
It was hard to be all sweetness and light when she was desperately trying to catch up with her own quarry before McKenna did.
This time she had missed Lori by only three days.
She had been that close!
Hardly any time at all, and yet enough for Lori to have travelled on, still that one step ahead of her.
Paige sat down and opened the atlas, flicking over the pages until finally her finger came to rest on the country of Costa Rica.
Her eye backtracked the almost circular route Lori had set through the Caribbean, the southern USA and Mexico.
A route she had been forced to follow, never quite closing the gap, though it narrowed all the time.
It was uncanny, really, almost as if Lori knew she was being followed.
Yet even if she suspected it, Paige couldn't be sure.
And Lori's erratic course as good as told her she had no fear of the outcome if Paige did catch up with her.
She flitted from country to country as if money was no object, which, knowing Lori, it probably wasn't.
She was going her own sweet way, totally unconcerned about what might be going on in her wake.
While she, Paige, had to duck and dive, in fruitless attempts to shake a limpet-like pursuit in order to keep up the chase.
At first she had travelled first class and stayed in only the best hotels, but McKenna had found her with no trouble at all.
So she had downgraded herself, attempting by each step to lose herself in the back-streets of the cities she went to.
She had lost count of the seedy hotels she had stayed in.
If what she was doing weren't so important she would never have put so much as a foot inside them.
Not because she considered herself better than the people who were forced by circumstance to reside there, but because she found the atmosphere depressing.
She liked fine things around her.
Not expensive objects necessarily, but things that lightened the soul.
She was prepared to work hard to get them, and, indeed, had done so all her adult life.
Which brought her back to the point of her travels.
If she didn't clear her name then everything she had worked for would be wasted, and there was only one way to do it.
She had debated long and hard with herself over the course she should take, and reaching the decision she had hadn't been easy.
In fact, her friends would be amazed at how quickly she had made up her mind.
It was something of a standing joke that she lived up to her Libran indecisiveness.
But she had chosen her path, and there was no turning back now.
She was so close.
If only the delights of San José had held Lori for one more week!
Abruptly she shook her head.
No, that was only half of it.
If only she had been able to evade her pursuer sooner.
But Travis McKenna had put paid to that by being particularly vigilant.
She was swamped by a wave of impotent anger at and violent dislike for the man whose dogged persistence bordered on persecution.
Because of him she had had to waste valuable days sightseeing, all the time aware of him breathing down her neck, and conscious that Lori had an extremely low boredom level.
So it had proved.
It had taken her precious time to track down the people Lori had stayed with, only to discover, when she arrived, that Lori had flown off to Caracas.
Fortunately the couple had had a telephone number for the party Lori had left with, and a telephone call this morning had vouchsafed the unwelcome information that Lori had already flown on to Medellín.
A frown marred the smoothness of her heart-shaped face.
Her blonde head dipped as she traced the path to get to the Colombian city.
Her perfect Cupid's-bow mouth, more used to curving in a heart-stopping smile, pursed, and concern clouded her large blue eyes.
It was hundreds of miles away.
For the first time her shoulders slumped and a tearful lump clogged her throat before she quickly shook it off.
She wasn't a feeble female.
Contrary to appearances, she had the requisite amount of Libran steel behind her sugar-frosting exterior.
More than that, she had an instinct for tactical manoeuvring which had helped her in her chosen profession, and which had served her well up till now.
She was tired, that was all, and who wouldn't be after all the mad rushing around she had done — when allowed?
She grinned to herself.
She felt very much like an ordinary squaddy whose life revolved around the phrase ‘hurry up and wait’!
The scrape of a chair's being drawn out jerked her from her musings, and she looked up quickly.
The grin vanished like magic, her whole body stiffening in antipathy as her eyes locked with fathomless brown ones.
A sense of fatalism kept her still as long legs in thigh-hugging jeans were lowered on to the chair.
As ever, his six feet of height and broad shoulders, just now clad in a chambray shirt, made her feel overwhelmed by his presence.
From their very first meeting she had known he was a man in control of himself and his life.
She had known, too, that he was quite the most ruggedly handsome male she had ever seen.
He was a dark man, his hair several shades deeper brown than his eyes, and swarthy complexioned.
His bone-structure showed strength, yet his mouth had a masculine sensuality that should have carried a health warning.
Right now it was curved in a smile that had as much warmth as the Arctic Ocean.
Which was fine by her, because this man was her sworn enemy.
‘Mr McKenna,’ she acknowledged in her attractive, melodious voice, not quite managing to mask her antipathy, as the broadening of his smile bore witness.
‘Miss Emerson,’ Travis McKenna returned smoothly, easing the chair sideways so that he could cross his legs.
He looked totally at ease, prepared to wait forever, and Paige's temper began to simmer.
Nevertheless, she enquired politely in as loud a voice as she dared, ‘Just how long is this hounding going to go on?’
Brown eyes narrowed.
‘Until you make a mistake, and, believe me, you will.
Although I'd hardly call it hounding myself, merely a timely reminder that you haven't got away with it,’ he corrected warningly.
Paige ground her teeth, very nearly tempted to behave in an unladylike way and fling herself across the table and scratch his eyes out — anything to stop their icy mockery.
But the best weapon of defence she had was words.
‘I've done nothing that I need to get away with.
At the risk of being boring, let me repeat myself.
I didn't take the jade.
I don't have it, and never did have it!’
One eyebrow rose.
‘And you don't know where it is?’
Delicate colour tinged her porcelain cheeks.
She hated dishonesty, as the guilty flush witnessed.
It was against her nature to tell anything but the whitest of white lies, but she was of necessity getting better at it, though it would never sit comfortably with her conscience and her sense of fairness and justice.
Yet needs must when the devil drove.
‘No, I don't,’ she declared.
And it was the truth, more or less.
Right this minute she didn't know where it was — exactly.
He didn't believe her, as he made abundantly clear by looking contemptuously down his straight nose at her.
She smiled to offset it.
‘Don't you have a job to do?
Can you afford to be away so long?
I hope you employ people you can trust.’
‘Oh, I do.
They are completely trustworthy.
I have no worries about my business.
Right now my concern is my grandfather's interests.
We're a very close family.
Harm one of us and you harm the others.
I love my grandfather, and I won't see him being taken advantage of.’
Paige didn't miss the allusion.
‘I like him too, and I share your sentiment absolutely.’
He laughed, not without a tinge of real humour.
‘You always say the right thing, don't you?’
She shrugged.
It was another trait of her birth sign, but that didn't mean she used words emptily.
If she said it, she meant it.
It was as genuine as her affection for the old man.
Travis's gaze dropped to the book beneath her hands.
‘Going somewhere?’ he enquired mildly.
In dismay Paige realised that the atlas lay open to his inspection.
If her hurried attempt to close it was a betrayal then it was only another in a long line of mistakes.
Besides, he foiled her easily, spinning the book so that he could run his eye rapidly over it.
Revealed to his gaze was a large-scale map of Mexico, Central America and the West Indies.
Mockery danced in his eyes as he looked across at her finally.
‘Where to now?
Another trip for your health?
You've island-hopped the Caribbean like a demented flea.
I've plotted your course on the map, and you don't seem to stay anywhere long.’
Only her eyes flashed her dislike as she held on to her composure.
‘It's a free country, and I can go anywhere I like in it,’ she said tartly.
Travis laughed unkindly.
‘It's a free world, true, but accommodation isn't, and nor is food.
It hasn't escaped my notice that you've gone from five-star hotels to virtual slums.
That's quite a rapid decline.
Feeling the pinch, are you?
You know what they say — thieves never prosper.’
Paige was startled by his assumption, but knew better than to deny it.
She had to take her advantages where she could.
So she concentrated on his last remark.
‘I'm not a thief,’ she denied coldly.
‘Only because I haven't been able to prove it yet.
When you run out of money you'll have to use the only asset you have left, and then, my dear Paige, I'll have you!’
She gasped, outraged by the suggestion.
‘That's inhuman!’
‘And theft is beneath contempt.
Don't expect me to pity you.
I have no compunction about seeing you in the gutter.
It's where you belong,’ he snarled through his teeth, all pretence at humour gone.
Paige pushed herself up, trembling with anger.
‘You're wrong.
And, even if you force me down, I'll rise again.’
His lips curled.
‘Not if I have anything to do with it.
If the law fails I have other resources.
You'll never prosper, Paige, you have my word on that.’
She stared at him, knowing he had all the power he said he did.
He would not rest until he saw her behind bars.
It didn't matter that she wasn't in the straits he believed her to be in; his threat was enough to chill her blood.
‘Poor Paige.’
It became important that he should go on believing the lie, for what he could do if he discovered the truth of the situation didn't bear thinking about.
So she sat down again, schooling her features into a chilly smile.
‘I think I hate you.’
It was water off a duck's back to him.
‘Your hatred is a matter of complete indifference to me.
Give me the jade and your troubles are over,’ Travis advised shortly.
Paige's brain was ticking over rapidly, now she had cooled down again.
His beliefs were a breathing-space for her.
He wouldn't find his way to Lori if he concentrated solely on herself.
‘I don't have it.
You've had my rooms searched often enough to know that!’
She shuddered inwardly, the same as she did every time she realised nameless fingers had gone through her belongings.
It made her feel violated, unclean.
‘Your damned shadows follow me everywhere I go, don't they?’
A glance up at his mocking face was answer enough.
‘I like to know where you are, what you've been doing.
I find everything about you fascinating, Paige Emerson.
Where you go, what you do, whom you talk to.’
She might not like the situation, but she wasn't about to take the line of least resistance.
‘I have my rights, too, you know.
This is harassment, plain and simple,’ she charged him grittily, only to see that insolent grin appear on his face.
‘Then go to the police and complain, honey,’ he taunted her, watching in satisfaction as her face closed up.
‘No?
I wonder why I'm not surprised?’
Effortlessly he rose to his feet, looming over her.
‘If you should change your mind, I'm staying at the Holiday Inn.
I'll be seeing you.’
Not if I see you first, Paige thought, watching him turn and walk away.
Only when he was no longer in sight did she release a very shaky breath.
She was trembling like a leaf.
Partly from anger and partly from the shock of the encounter.
She hated unpleasantness, though she wouldn't back down from a fight.
And this was one of the no-holds-barred variety.
She rested a damp forehead on her hand.
Damn Lori and her unreasoning jealousy; but for her she would never have been in this position.
From the day Paige had gone to live with her aunt and uncle, when her own parents had died, Lori had hated her.
She hated having to share her parents' affection with anyone.
In her jealousy she had taken her revenge in a series of petty actions.
Somehow a favourite dress or toy of Paige's would be damaged, but she had done it with such guile that her parents could never be sure it was intentional.
They had given their only child the benefit of the doubt, but Paige had known, and Lori had hated her for knowing — and for not telling tales.
As teenagers, Lori had resented Paige's popularity with the opposite sex.
She had made trouble whenever she could, stealing her boyfriends by telling downright lies.
Yet somehow Paige had always felt protective of her cousin, covering up for her so that she didn't get into trouble with her parents.
Lori had taken advantage of it while disliking her cousin even more for it.
Paige felt sorry for her; they could so easily have been friends, but for Lori's jealousy.
Problems had eased between them when Lori had left home to make her career in modelling, and Paige had actually thought they would end completely when Lori had married a wealthy American and gone to live in the States.
During the lull Paige had gone to university and acquired her degree.
Then she had started on a career that had always appealed to her: in the world of antiques.
She had joined a world-famous company, learning her trade well until finally starting her own business.
Now, at the age of twenty-six, she travelled widely, searching out hidden gems, secure in the knowledge that she had an outlet for them with the clientele she had built up.
That was how she had met Jonas Hamilton, at an antique sale in Martinique.
Their mutual interest had transcended the age difference, and he had invited her back to his island home on Grand Cayman.
The friendship had blossomed, and mutual respect had turned to a deep liking.
He had a wealth of stories she had loved to listen to, and in return had agreed to help him begin a proper catalogue of his collection.
Then a month ago everything had changed.
Jonas Hamilton's health had deteriorated and he had had to go to the States for tests.
Paige had been happy to house-sit for him until a relative could arrive, and in the meantime she had done a little searching around of her own in the markets.
Then Lori had erupted back into her life.
She had chosen a day when only Paige was at home, the staff having taken their regular day off.
Paige herself had gone into town to do some shopping and had scarcely made it to the front door when the sound of another car coming up the drive had made her turn.
Her feelings had been mixed when she had seen who it was climbing out of the taxi.
‘So it was you!’
Lori had declared as she had crossed to her.
‘I could hardly believe my eyes when I saw you in the market.
I told Marty I just had to go and find out.’
‘Marty?
Aren't you with Bob?’
Paige had rather liked her cousin's husband, though they had only met a couple of times.
‘Oh, Bob!’
Lori had waved an airy hand.
‘We agreed to go our own ways a year ago.
It was the smartest thing I ever did, believe me.
Now I've simply oodles of money.
I tell you, I never knew Bob was so rich!
He didn't tell me the half of it.
But I made sure I got my fair share.
After all, that's what the community property law is all about.’
Paige had been dumbfounded.
‘That can't be all you married him for?
His money?’
Lori had given her an old-fashioned look.
‘What else?’
‘Then you took off with this Marty?’
‘Oh, don't be so provincial, Paige!’
Lori had scorned.
‘Why stick with one man when there are so many around?
I met Marty last week.
We enjoy the same things.’
Paige could imagine.
‘Well, now that you've satisfied your curiosity, don't let me keep you from him,’ she had said, not bothering to hide her disapproval.
Lori's cat-like eyes had narrowed in a way Paige remembered only too well.
‘The least you could do is invite me in for a coffee.’
Not unnaturally, Paige had been reluctant.
‘This isn't my house.’
Her cousin's look had been full of spite.
‘I never imagined anything else.
Good heavens, is it really likely that someone like you could catch a man rich enough to own a house like this?
But I'm sure the owner wouldn't mind you offering a cup of coffee to your own cousin.’
Paige had raised her eyebrows at Lori's claim, but had said nothing, because to give her an opening was only to invite more of the same.
In fact she had been approached by wealthier men than Jonas, whose interests in her were sometimes honourable but mostly not, and she had a realistic enough sense of her attraction not to be ruffled by anything her cousin could say.
If she wanted Lori gone then the quickest way was to give her the coffee she'd asked for.
‘You'd better come in, then,’ she had offered, leading the way inside.
They had chatted fairly amicably over coffee in the lounge, much to Paige's amazement.
Actually, Lori had done most of the talking.
An hour later she had ordered a taxi and Paige had waved her goodbye in some bemusement.
It wasn't until she had returned to the lounge after washing-up that she had discovered that the door of the glass display cabinet was swinging open.
Alarmed, she had hurried to it, to notice immediately that a small jade figurine was missing.
She'd known then who had taken it, and why Lori had left with so much friendliness.
This was her final act of spite, to take the piece and leave Paige to face the consequences.
Sheer shock at the vindictiveness of it had kept Paige rooted to the spot, and then her brain had started to work again.
Lori had said something about a plane to catch, but she hadn't said what time.
Even as the thought had come Paige had been gathering up her purse and the car keys.
As she'd set off down the drive her one thought had been that perhaps it wasn't too late.
She had scarcely seen the Mercedes that had swung into the drive just as she'd been about to go out, but by sheer instinct she had swerved to miss it, sparing only a glance in the mirror to tell her the other car was safe before speeding on her way again.
Her whole concentration had been on getting to the airport as quickly as possible.
Parking in a restricted zone, she had rushed into the concourse.
By sheer good luck, the first desk she had tried had informed her that yes, a Lori Templeton was booked on to one of their flights.
In fact, it was just boarding.
She hadn't waited to hear more.
Her progress had been one of near-collisions, dodging round cases and people, and just as the gate she'd wanted had come in sight she had seen Lori and a man passing through.
She had tried arguing with the guard at the gate, but it had been no use — they wouldn't allow her through.
She had watched in dismay as the steps had been removed and the plane had taxied away.
And, as the big metal bird had lifted up into the sky, two heavy hands had taken her by the shoulders.
That was how she had first met Travis McKenna, Jonas Hamilton's grandson.
The driver of the car she had so nearly collided with.
The man who, finding the doors of his grandfather's house wide open and the jade missing from the cabinet, had set off in hot pursuit of her.
What had followed had become part of a continuing nightmare.
He had had her arrested for theft, but, although the jade was gone, they hadn't been able to prove she had taken it.
It had been a nine days' wonder, during which no charges had been brought, but Travis had told her to her face that he knew she had taken it.
That, knowing she was pursued, she had hidden the booty and tried to escape the island.
She had denied everything, but, as Lori must have known, she hadn't been able to save herself by denouncing her cousin.
Perhaps it had been crazy, but loyalty to her aunt and uncle had made it impossible to save herself by telling the truth.
The only thing she had been able to think of doing was going after Lori and getting the jade back herself.
But in that she hadn't counted on Lori's erratic travelling or on Travis McKenna's bloodhound instincts.
She had heard of him from his grandfather.
A computer whiz-kid, he had built up an electronics empire that rivalled the best in the world.
She had expected to meet him one day, but never like this.
He had come down to the island to make sure all was well while his grandfather was in hospital.
He had stayed to hound her into betraying the truth.
He had set people to follow her, and everywhere she went he would eventually turn up, demanding to know what had happened to the jade.
Yet it had become a point of honour not to tell him about Lori.
Had Jonas Hamilton himself asked her she probably would have confided, but not to Travis.
Not to this hard man who wanted to grind her into the dirt.
No, sir, she wouldn't give him the satisfaction.
She would find Lori on her own, get the jade back, and take it direct to its owner.
This she had sworn to do.
Which was all well and good in principle.
Chewing her lip, she debated her next course of action.
There was little point in staying in San José; she had to head for Medellín as quickly as possible.
Which meant finding a plane going that way.
Not a scheduled flight, for McKenna would be watching those.
She'd have to charter a small plane.
And that meant going to the local airfield.
But first she would have to shake her shadow.
She didn't want Travis McKenna to know where she was going.
She wasn't about to make it easy for him, and if Lori was as close as she believed then she needed every edge she could get.
Picking up her bag, she made her way outside.
Looking about at the crowd of faces, she tried to discover who was watching her.
The melodrama of it appealed to her sense of the ridiculous, and she hastily stifled a laugh as a youth passing inside gave her an odd look.
A man in a doorway across the road caught her eye.
He looked too uninterested, and when he saw her watching him he avoided her eyes.
Pretty certain this must be the man, Paige set off down the street, stopping every now and then to look in shop windows and cast surreptitious glances backwards.
After five minutes she had no doubts — that was the man all right.
It gave her confidence a boost to know that she had spotted him, and it made her actions easy.
She headed for the market.
In a veritable sea of people it was easy to get lost, and so it proved.
With a laugh she watched from a doorway as the man searched aimlessly for her.
When he headed back into the heart of the crowd she headed the other way, hailed a taxi and went in search of a plane.
CHAPTER TWO
Paige snapped the locks on her case and put the remainder of her possessions into her shoulder-bag.
It was six o'clock in the morning and already the temperature was rising.
She had left the ceiling fan on all night, but as ever it did little more than sluggishly push the warm air around.
A glance at her watch informed her she would have to be leaving soon.
The last thing she needed was for the plane to go without her.
It had taken her virtually the rest of the afternoon to find someone to take her.
The outfit was small and dealt mainly in freight, but they did occasionally take passengers — for a price.
Fortunately it was a price she could afford, and she had made the arrangements, coming back to her room to eat the best meal and sleep the best sleep she had done for quite a while.
All due, of course, to the fact that she had bested Travis McKenna.
Yet she wasn't about to take any chances.
She would leave by the back door and pick up a taxi several blocks away.
As she stood up she caught sight of her reflection in the fly-spotted mirror.
She had dressed for comfort, knowing the travelling conditions would be fairly primitive.
Her good clothes she had left behind when she had decided to downgrade her status.
They were waiting for her in Miami, if she ever got back there.
The rest of her clothes were durable, and, what was more important, blended in with the rest of society so that she didn't stand out in a crowd.
The jeans and sleeveless T-shirt were serviceable.
Her ankle boots she had picked up in an army surplus store, and were the most comfortable she had ever possessed.
The whole gave her a rather leggy, tomboyish look, especially with her long blonde hair pulled back in a fashionable plait.
But the lush swell of her hips and breasts gave the lie to it.
She curved in all the right places and could never be anything but feminine.
All of which became hidden as she shrugged on an oversized khaki shirt, the sleeves hitched up to her elbows.
She was ready to go.
Picking up her bags, she dropped an envelope with her rent on the dresser and left without a backward glance.
She hadn't enjoyed her stay here, and she had no intention of ever coming back.
Ten minutes later she was speeding on her way to the airfield.
Everything had gone without a hitch.
She was as sure as she could be that she hadn't been followed, but she knew she wouldn't breathe freely again until she was airborne.
They were already waiting for her at the field, but she had no objection to being hustled aboard.
The sooner they took off, the better, so far as she was concerned.
Shortly afterwards Paige watched the ground recede, her nose almost pressed against the glass.
She didn't know what she expected to see — a car screeching to a halt on the edge of the runway, or something equally dramatic.
Yet there was nothing to disturb the peace of the morning except the noise of their own engine.
There was a vague sense of anticlimax mingled with her vast feeling of freedom.
It lasted perhaps five minutes more, and then her attention was rudely claimed from the cockpit.
‘You can unfasten your seatbelt now.’
Hearing that voice was like a douche of icy water running down her spine.
Eyes rounded in appalled realisation, she stared up at the man who stood stooped in the confined space up ahead.
‘You!’
Travis McKenna inclined his head in mocking acknowledgement.
Paige's brain turned to mush.
‘But…how…?’
She tailed off helplessly.
Her bête noire eased his long frame into the empty seat across the aisle.
Like her, he was dressed in jeans, and a denim shirt.
The cuffs were rolled back to reveal tanned forearms.
Around one wrist a gold Rolex winked at her.
He took his time answering.
They both knew she was going nowhere.
‘I don't make it my business to hire fools, Miss Emerson.
While you were congratulating yourself on dodging Louie, Ambrose had you in view all the time.’
Sick humiliation choked her as she realised how naïvely self-satisfied she had been, and her spirits sank.
‘Damn you!’
Travis observed her dispassionately.
‘He followed you to the airfield and reported to me.
It was an easy matter to buy my way on to the same flight.
Though I have to admit Medellín surprised me.
I was expecting Caracas.’
That piece of information gave her a severe jolt of alarm.
‘Ca-Caracas?’
‘Louie didn't waste his time either.
He went back to your hotel and had a very interesting chat with the switchboard operator.
You called a number in Caracas yesterday morning, asking for someone called Laurie.
Who is he, Paige?’
She blinked twice, rapidly, then a third time more slowly as the significance of his question sank in.
Hurriedly she looked away, hiding her surprise, playing for time.
‘Who is he?’
Her stumbling repetition masked a growing delight at his basic error.
See-saw-like, her spirits rose again.
‘Why prevaricate?’
Travis went on.
‘I've a pretty good idea, now that I know of his existence.
He's your accomplice, isn't he?
You don't have the jade because you passed it on to him.
Was he your lover too?’
That brought her head round, her lips parted in a faint gasp.
Travis smiled unkindly.
‘Did he take the figure and run out on you?’
Paige moistened her lips.
‘I don't have to tell you anything,’ she declared sharply, thereby giving credibility to a plot worthy of any film.
Hopefully, when he discovered his mistake it would be too late.
‘Did he sweet-talk you into thinking it was forever, when all he wanted was the jade?
But hell hath no fury like a woman scorned, does it, Paige?
That's why you've been tracking him all over Central America.
You want your share.’
She couldn't help laughing at the absurdity of the whole situation.
‘You should be writing novels.
You could make a fortune,’ she said in genuine amusement.
He didn't like her laughter, that was obvious.
His face closed up angrily.
‘So, you deny it?’
Paige quirked an eyebrow, mirroring his earlier mockery.
‘Certainly I deny it.
If I had anything to admit, why would I admit it to you?
You want to see me in gaol.
I'm not sticking my neck in a noose for you.’
Actually, when it came right down to it, and ignoring the circumstances, crossing swords with him was quite fun.
Certainly a challenge.
‘You were being used, or hasn't that dawned on you yet?
He's not worth your loyalty.
Some people find prison easy to take, but I don't think you're one of those.
You've got used to the taste of the good life, haven't you?
Good clothes, the best hotels.
It must be galling to be reduced to wearing denim instead of silk.’
He was so wide of the mark that it made her smile.
Yes, she loved the finer things, but she was equally at home dressed as she was.
She was as at home in jeans, hiking over rough country, as she was curled up in silk lounging pyjamas, reading a book.
But he was right about prison.
The mere thought of being confined made her breathless.
Paige pushed the thought away; until the day dawned that she had to she refused to contemplate it.
She forced herself to relax.
‘Speaking hypothetically, are you saying I'd have a choice?’
‘There's always a choice.
If you were to change sides, with mitigating circumstances, you could get a suspended sentence.
Show you're willing to make reparation,’ Travis added, oh, so persuasively.
‘Help me get the jade back, Paige.
I'll have more respect for you if you do.’
He couldn't know how tempting the thought of laying down her burden was, but it would mean admitting guilt where there was none — to a man who would as soon see her sink as swim.
It wasn't a choice at all.
‘And if I place no value on your respect?’
His lip curled, as if he had known all along what her answer would be.
‘That's par for the course, honey.
You sure as hell put no value on your own self-respect.’
He'd gone too far.
‘That's a lie!
I know my worth.
I'm not a thief.
I'm innocent and I'll prove it!’ she burst out passionately, but Travis didn't look impressed.
‘And Laurie?
Let's not forget him,’ he reminded her, eyes challenging hers until she was forced to let her gaze drop.
‘Lori is just someone I know.’
Travis shook his head dismissively.
‘Your loyalty does you little credit.
You had your chance and you blew it.
There won't be another.’
Paige summoned up a shrug of indifference.
‘Spare me your moral judgements.
I haven't asked for any favours from you.’
‘And now I know who I'm looking for I don't need any from you,’ he responded succinctly and, pushing himself to his feet, disappeared back into the cockpit.
Paige could hear him talking to the pilot, and from time to time the sound of their combined laughter.
She saw nothing to laugh at herself.
She just had to hold on to the thought that, although he believed he knew who, he didn't know where.
She had the advantage of knowing the sort of places her cousin might be.
But to find her meant giving him the slip, and she hadn't been too successful at that the last time.
There had to be a way — she would just have to be a lot cleverer.
And whatever else she did, she must never underestimate him again.
The ‘how’ of it occupied her mind as she stared out of the window, yet she had come to no definite conclusions when the sonorous drone of the engines made her eyelids start to droop.
For a while she tried to stay awake, but in the end she gave up.
Making herself comfortable, she dozed.
It must have been the change in engine tone that woke her a long time later.
The drone had become a hiccup — a variation on a theme of coughing and spluttering.
Then, to her heart-sinking alarm, there was a second or two of an eerie lack of noise altogether before the engine spluttered into life again.
Paige sat up, ice in her stomach, her heart thumping sickeningly in her chest.
Again there was a silence.
Longer by a second or two.
Enough to hear the rush of air as they lost height.
Up front she could hear the pilot talking to Travis, his voice urgent as he gave instructions.
As the engine caught again Travis came through the curtains, his face pale and tense.
He paused a moment, his eyes locking with hers, before he came to sit beside her.
She swallowed hard on a rising sense of panic, and caught at his hand instinctively.
‘What is it?
What's wrong?’
By the same token he gave her hand a reassuring squeeze before releasing it.
‘The pilot doesn't know.
It could be dirt in the fuel line.
Whatever it is, he can't fix it up here.
He's going to try and land,’ he told her, not mincing his words.
‘Land?’
Paige let her eyes go to the window.
Down below, as far as the eye could see, the hills and valleys were covered in trees.
‘Where, for God's sake?
There isn't anywhere!’
She looked back at him in horror.
Travis gritted his teeth.
‘While we have power and height we can look.
For now, you'd better fasten your seatbelt.’
He was already taking his own advice.
Paige followed suit with hands that trembled.
She felt cold and clammy at the same time.
‘We're going to crash, aren't we?’
When he didn't answer she shot him a fierce look.
‘Don't lie to me.
I'd rather know the truth.
What are our chances?’
Something in her tone brought a look of respect to his face.
‘Not good, but don't give up yet.’
Briefly his hand came out and pressed her knee reassuringly.
She tried to smile, but it was a poor, tense effort.
‘I won't.
But if…
I want you to know I didn't take that jade, Travis.’
He gave her a twisted smile.
‘Right now that's rather academic.
Tell me again if we make it.’
Just then the engine gave one final splutter and died, and once again they were enveloped in that rushing eerie silence.
They lost height rapidly, but the pilot still had control.
He shouted back to them.
‘Brace yourselves.
There's a break in the trees ahead.
I'm taking her in.’
There wasn't time for more.
A large hand pushed her head down to her knees, and automatically she obeyed the voice that told her to protect herself with her arms.
She closed her eyes and began to pray, but everything went from her mind as the plane struck.
Her scream mixed with the screech of tortured metal.
The small aircraft bucked and tossed, throwing her forward, then something caught her a glancing blow and she knew a moment's pain before the blessed darkness closed in.
The next thing Paige became aware of was someone trying to cut her in two.
She groaned, and opened her eyes.
The sight that met them brought everything back with a rush.
The flight — the crash.
And with it the unbelievable fact that she had survived.
She was alive.
Alive, but in a very precarious position.
The plane had come to rest nose down, but also tipped to one side, and the only thing that had stopped her being thrown about like a rag doll was her seatbelt.
It was that which was cutting her in two as she dangled from it.
It was a miracle she hadn't broken any ribs, but she could breathe without pain, so she knew she hadn't.
Even as she was considering how to get herself free, a movement below caught her eye.
Through her hair, which now lay in a tangle about her face, she saw a pair of long legs flex.
There followed a groan of pain and a whole string of expletives.
Paige had never been so relieved to hear that voice.
‘Travis?’
Her voice was little more than a whispery croak and she tried again.
‘Travis?
Is that you?’
Another string of curses followed and she heard him moving about.
‘Who the hell else would it be?
That's the most damn-fool question I…’
He stopped abruptly, and she knew he must have looked up and seen her.
‘Hell!
Don't move.
Don't do anything,’ he ordered sharply.
Travis stood up, accompanied by an ominous creak and a shudder of the plane.
They both froze.
‘Listen,’ Travis's voice was sharp with tension, ‘I don't know what state we're in.
We seem to be balancing, but God knows on what.
I'll have to check, but I can't move too much, just in case.’
He didn't need to elaborate in case of what.
‘Are you hurt at all?’
‘I-I've got a bump on my head, but I think that's all.’
‘OK.
Just hang in there a second or two.’
She tried to laugh.
‘Wh-where else would I go?’
Travis seemed to appreciate the attempt at humour.
‘That's the spirit,’ he said bracingly.
She heard him move, but there was no more reaction from the small craft.
The minutes dragged by before he came back again.
There was a brisk grimness in the way he spoke.
‘We seem to be lodged against some trees.
Fortunately the escape hatch is clear.’
He took her arms and braced them on his shoulders.
‘OK, honey, lets get you down.
Hold on tight to me.’
She did so with relief, feeling him take her weight and relieve the pressure on her waist.
She still virtually fell into his arms and they closed about her swiftly, holding her tightly to him.
Nothing moved, but the world tilted, and she looked down into eyes that registered he had felt it too.
Both froze.
Paige felt her nerves leap.
He was so close that she could see little gold flecks in the brown of his eyes.
She could feel the warm brush of his breath and smell the maleness of him.
It was instantly, shockingly arousing.
The gold in his eyes was flames, and his lips invited the press of hers.
For an instant there was nothing she wanted more than to feel the heat of them on hers.
And just as surely she knew he wanted the same thing.
Time stopped, then almost immediately she remembered who he was, and shock of another kind rippled through her.
With a gasping breath she thrust herself away.
‘Put me down,’ she ordered, in a voice so unlike her own that it seemed a betrayal.
She was released instantly.
Her nerves skittered in utter disbelief.
How could that have happened?
With him?
She couldn't look at him, but she was vitally aware of his ragged breathing only inches above her.
Out of the corner of her eye she could see the rise and fall of his chest, and closed her eyes against a pull on her senses that set her heart tripping.
Dragging in air, Paige struggled to pull herself together.
Be logical, she urged herself.
They'd just survived a crash and had over-reacted.
Yes.
That was it.
A natural reaction to relief.
It wasn't Travis, but the situation that had made her so aware of him.
Her heart regained its normal beat as common sense returned.
In an unusual situation they had reacted out of character, but the moment had passed.
A glance up at Travis confirmed it.
There were no fires in his eyes now, only an icy contempt she was used to.
Her world righted itself as her blood cooled.
Yet she couldn't withhold a compassionate gasp as her eye caught sight of blood trickling down his cheek.
‘You're hurt!’
Travis touched his cheek and studied the blood on his fingers.
‘Just a scratch,’ he said dismissively.
‘Must have been flying glass.
We were damned lucky.’
Paige nodded solemnly at the truism.
‘The pilot — is he all right?’
There had been no sound from the cockpit area.
Travis's expression became grim.
‘I'm afraid the pilot didn't make it.
His neck's broken,’ he declared tersely.
She stared at him, aghast, and tears of remorse welled up.
‘Oh, no!’
Strong hands gripped her shoulders.
‘Stop crying.
I feel as badly as you do, but we don't have time for this.
If we ever get out of here you can be damn sure I won't forget how he saved our lives.’
Paige brushed her tears away with a careless hand.
‘What do you mean,if we get out?’
‘We can't discuss that now.
I can't smell petrol, and I'm pretty certain she'd have blown already if she was going to, but I'm not prepared to take the chance.
We've got to move quickly.
We've got to gather up everything that might be useful.
Once we leave the plane there'll be no going back for anything we've forgotten.
There should be a survival kit of some kind, and a first-aid box.
Use your common sense.
Stack everything you find over by the hatch.
I'll go forward and check there.
I want to try the radio.
We've been lucky so far, and maybe it's still working.’
With a nod he disappeared forward.
Paige made herself move, because action was infinitely more preferable than thought right then.
Her head throbbed, but she ignored it as she probed and pried.
Everything was in such a mess.
The cargo lay in a broken heap.
It was a wonder they hadn't been buried under it, and their injuries correspondingly worse.
As she worked, adding to the pitifully small pile, she could hear Travis talking on the radio behind her.
She prayed that he got through, that help would come soon.
The forests that had looked cool and shady from above now seemed menacing.
An alien place in which they were the intruders.
Her searching produced a roll of blankets, the first-aid box and a plastic container full of water.
There was also a larger box, which she was examining when Travis made his precarious way back aft.
In one hand he carried a canvas satchel, some maps and a flashlight, which he added to the pile before eyeing her find.
‘Good, you found the emergency rations.
I've a feeling we may need them before this is over.’
Her heart dropped at the ominous statement.
‘Didn't you get through?’
Travis shook his head.
‘The radio had had it.
I gave it a shot, but I doubt if it worked.’
He saw the questions forming on her lips and forestalled them.
‘Let's get out of here.
You wait there while I open the hatch.’
It wasn't easy.
It took all of his strength to free the buckled doorway, but eventually it broke free with a protesting groan.
Kneeling by the opening, Travis beckoned her across.
‘Sit on the edge and give me your hand.
I'll lower you down, OK?’
Paige did as she was told, not looking at the distance to the ground.
His hand closed firmly about her wrist, shooting something akin to an electric charge along her arm.
She looked up sharply, but there was only mockery glittering in Travis's eyes.
No sign if he had experienced it too.
‘Trust me, I won't let you fall.’
Irritation at her own wayward flesh sharpened her retort.
‘Said the spider to the fly!’
His teeth gleamed as he smiled.
‘Honey, you can rest assured I won't let anything happen to you.
If it did I'd never get the jade back — and, one way or another, I mean to have it!’
Her chin rose, but her attempt to pull free was easily thwarted.
‘I told you —’
‘A deathbed confession requires a death.
I admire your powers of invention, but you're still very much alive.
If you intend to stay that way I suggest you stop talking and do as you're told,’ he added succinctly.
Paige ground her teeth in angry frustration.
Damn him!
Nearly flouncing, she edged forward.
Following his directions, it was only a matter of seconds before she was standing on the ground beneath the wreckage.
She hastily stood aside as Travis dropped their cases down, then caught the more sensitive equipment.
Finally Travis let himelf down by his arms and dropped to the ground.
Dusting off his hands, he took a swift survey of their surroundings.
The plane loomed drunkenly above them like an abandoned toy, which only seemed to magnify the tragedy and their miraculous escape.
‘We can't stay here, it's too close,’ Travis decided a moment or two later.
‘Grab a bag and we'll look for somewhere safer.’
There was no time for thought as they transported their meagre goods to a place Travis considered a safe distance from the wreck.
The clearing, the one the pilot had seen, was not very large, just a break in the forest's vastness, carpeted by thigh-high grass and brush.
They had been lucky to find it in this hilly and heavily forested terrain.
The move completed, Paige sank to the ground and rested her head back against the rising bulk of a tree.
She stared unseeingly upwards through the virtually motionless leaves to the empty sky above.
Despite the heat of the afternoon, she felt shivery, and guessed it was delayed shock.
Her head ached, too, and she probed her scalp experimentally.
Her fingers found the swelling and she winced.
‘Here, take these.’
Travis's commanding tone drew her attention as two aspirins were pushed into one hand and a mug of coffee in the other.
She stared at the steaming, aromatic liquid in surprise.
‘Coffee?’
‘The pilot's lunch, I guess.
The Thermos was full.’
He caught her appalled expression as she hastily looked up.
‘Don't think about it.
Just be grateful.
Once it's gone, who knows when we'll get another cup?’
It was only common sense, Paige knew, but it was hard to disassociate the two.
The pilot wouldn't need it now, and they did.
With a determined effort she blanked her mind, raising the mug to her lips.
It tasted good, and reminded her she was thirsty.
Fear had dried her mouth.
She swallowed the tablets and drained the mug, feeling a great deal better.
She rolled the mug between her hands as she looked over at Travis, who was sorting through their belongings.
‘When are we going to bury him?’ she asked into the silence.
Travis's brown eyes flashed her way briefly before he bent to his task again.
‘We're not,’ he told her shortly.
Paige sat up, back rigid.
There was a right and wrong way of doing things, and her Libran soul demanded the right way for the man who had lost his life saving theirs.
‘What do you mean, we're not?
We have to.
It's the Christian thing to do.
He saved our lives!’
Travis's face was set as he looked up.
‘I'm aware of that, but we don't have the tools, or the time.
He'll be safer where he is.’
Paige frowned.
‘Of course we'll have time.
We'll be here until they rescue us,’ she argued.
‘And just when do you expect the cavalry to arrive?’ he countered with heavy irony.
She flushed angrily, refusing to back down on a point of principle.
‘There's no need to be sarcastic.
You know they'll set up a search as soon as we're reported missing.
The pilot sent out a mayday.
I heard him.’
Travis sighed heavily.
‘OK, let's face some basic facts.
We sent out a mayday, but your guess is as good as mine if anyone heard it.
Our safest bet is to assume they didn't, but if they did the soonest they could launch a search is first thing tomorrow.
Then what are they looking for?
We came down in a small clearing and ended up in the trees.
I can't see the wreckage from here, so how do you expect someone to see it from up there?’
He pointed a finger skywards.
‘If the plane carries a distress signal I don't know if it's working.
Even if it is, the chances are the hills are masking it.’
Paige felt her heart contract.
‘What you're saying is, they'll never find us.’
Travis raked a hand through his hair.
‘There's always a chance, but not one I'd want to bank our lives on.’
She tried to keep her voice calm.
‘Then what do you suggest we do?
You must have a plan.’
‘The only thing we can do — make our own way out on foot,’ he declared levelly.
Paige laughed.
It seemed the only thing to do in face of what he said.
‘Walk out?
We've come down in the middle of nowhere, and you calmly suggest we walk out!
You're crazy.
We don't even know where we are!’
She knew she was being argumentative, a trait not exactly geared to ease frayed nerves.
In contrast, Travis must have been blessed with the patience of a saint.
But then, hadn't she already found that out?
‘Granted, I can't point to a place on the map and say this is where we are, but I've got a pretty good idea.’
Reaching down beside him, he retrieved a map, unfolded it and spread it out on the ground.
‘Come and have a look.’
It was a command, not a suggestion, and, though she resented being ordered about, she crossed and knelt beside him.
She watched as his finger traced a drawn line.
‘This is the course the pilot was following.
We know how long we were travelling and roughly the speed we were going.
Dead reckoning, that would put us roughly here.’
He jabbed a finger at a mass of green.
‘It's hilly and covered in forest, and the going won't be easy, but not nearly as difficult as if we tried to go south over the mountains.
Our alternative is to head north, to the coast.
I've no idea what sort of people inhabit the area.
We're in Central America, and there must be native Indians.
Just because we're in the nineties doesn't mean we can assume they'll be friendly.
We don't want to run into trouble, so we'll have to go carefully.
Once on the coast, I'm hoping we'll find a village and help.’
Paige stared unseeingly at the map.
He made it sound simple, but she was no fool.
She'd read stories about other crashes where the survivors had tried to rescue themselves, and the odds were against their making it.
Yet the alternative, to sit and wait for help that might never arrive, was terrifying.
She didn't want to die, but if it came to that she'd rather go out fighting.
She swallowed a sick panic.
‘When would we go?’ she asked, turning eyes that were unwittingly large and vulnerable on him.
Travis stared at her, his expression gradually softening into a grudging admiration.
‘You've one hell of a lot of guts, I'll say that for you, Paige Emerson,’ he said, reaching out to brush the knuckles of one hand gently across her cheek.
Then, as her startled eyes met his, admiration drifted into derision.
‘But for a woman in your profession it's probably required.’
With which comment he returned his attention to the map.
‘Getting back to more important matters, we've only a limited supply of food and water, so I don't think we dare spend too much time here.
We've ditched not too many miles from the coast, so…’
Paige scarcely heard him as he continued to talk; she was battling her own reaction to that brief caress.
Her heart had accelerated alarmingly and that same hot electrical charge had raced across her nerve-endings.
It was incredible, and until today she'd never experienced anything remotely like it.
She'd had plenty of boyfriends, but none of them serious, and none had made her react in quite such a way, despite their determined attempts to arouse her.
She hadn't enjoyed the heavy petting that her peers took for granted.
She was searching for Mr Right, and didn't care who knew it.
So she had played the field, enjoying male company without getting in too deep or too seriously.
She had a lot of love to give to the right man.
The mate her Libran soul needed to make her complete.
To her mind, Travis McKenna was definitely Mr Wrong…and yet today had brought a shivering awareness of him as a man — and herself as a woman.
‘We should make it in three or four days, if we're lucky, if we leave tomorrow,’ Travis finished, recalling her to the here and now with a start.
It was a relief to attend to his words and not his presence, although he was not the sort of man to be easily put from the mind.
‘Shouldn't we wait a day, just in case they do find us?’ she put forward stiltedly, and drew his narrow-eyed inspection.
‘I've just got through telling you the food situation.
Didn't you hear a word I said?’ he growled.
‘Don't snap at me!’ she retorted instantly, then bit down hard on her lip.
Lord, he made her so off-balance, like no one else she had ever met.
Not at all the sensible woman she had always been until the moment he had erupted into her life.
Of course, having always possessed an interest in astrology, she knew that it was her Arien opposition that made her react so whenever she was under threat.
It was a defence mechanism her softer side needed at times.
But it didn't always make for an easy life.
Agitatedly she ran a hand through her hair.
‘I'm sorry.
It's not every day I survive a plane crash!’
She tried to make light of it and failed.
Tears of reaction to him and the whole situation flooded her eyes.
‘Oh, damn!’
She took a shaky breath and turned her head away.
A firm hand came out to close on her shoulder.
‘Take it easy.
Don't fall apart on me now, Paige Emerson.
However you came by it, I need that gutsy bravery of yours to get us out of here.’
His tone was a mixture of reproof and encouragement.
Paige found herself blinking at him.
‘I don't feel very brave,’ she admitted weakly.
For an instant his fingers tightened on her flesh before he released her and turned to refold the map.
‘True bravery is measured by the things you do when you don't feel brave.’
His words made her feel an odd glow of warmth deep inside her, and her tears dried up.
She took another steadying breath, feeling better.
‘You think we've got a chance, then?’
Travis gave her a quirky grin.
‘I don't know about you, but I'm sure as hell not ready to die yet.
And where I go, you go.
We've still got some unfinished business to settle, haven't we?’ he added pointedly.
It was an intentional slap in the face, this reminder of why they were in the position they were.
His mind was set, no matter what she said.
It had to be part of his make-up, and for an instant she wished she could decide what sign he was.
Could it be Leo, or Capricorn?
It might help to know exactly who she was dealing with.
Perhaps then she wouldn't allow his open distrust to hurt her.
Because it was pointless to deny that it did.
It was her nature to like people and have them like her.
Which, though he didn't know it, made her an easy target.
It would be possible for him to wear her down, so she must be ultra-careful and protect herself.
He still believed she was a thief, and was determined to prove it.
She would do well to remember that.
For now she withdrew into herself, her spine stiffening automatically.
Her eyes rebuked him.
‘I meant what I said on the plane,’ she reminded him stiffly, even though she knew it was a wasted effort.
Travis glanced sideways at her.
‘I don't doubt you did, but, as I said, that doesn't make it true.
I have absolutely no reason to believe you, and every reason not to.
You were alone in the house.
You had the means and the opportunity.’
‘But no motive.
I had no reason to take the jade.’
‘On the contrary, you had the oldest one in the book: money.
The pursuit and acquisition thereof.
There's an awful lot of good times locked up in that jade, honey, but you'll never see one of them.
You'll never profit from it if you live a hundred years.
As long as you have it, you'll never be free of me,’ Travis declared with absolute certainty.
She shivered.
‘You're condemning yourself, too.’
‘I can live with it, but can you?’ he jeered.
‘It's all a matter of survival, and right now I intend to concentrate on surviving this disaster.
Whoever said the nearness of death focuses the mind knew what he was talking about.
First we get out of here.’
Hate him as she might for his intractability, sheer common sense forced her to agree with him.
Survival was the main thing right now.
If they didn't make it then nothing mattered.
‘OK, we'll get out, but I'll never submit to your caveman tactics.
I'll survive this and you!’ she declared forcefully.
‘Well, what do we do now?’
Travis glanced up at the lowering sun.
Already the shadows were lengthening.
‘Now we collect firewood before it gets too dark to see.
Night falls suddenly out here.
You go left, I'll go right.
Choose only the dry stuff, and don't wander too far into the trees.
Keep the clearing in sight at all times.
OK?’
She wouldn't argue with that.
Already the forest had taken on a menacing gloom.
Just looking at it made her feel creepy, and she rubbed her hands along her arms instinctively.
Yet that didn't stop her gritting her teeth and nodding.
‘OK.’
A flicker of something crossed his face but he said nothing, merely inclined his head in return.
Then he was on his feet and moving away.
Paige watched him go with a sinking heart.
She didn't want to be alone, but disliked even more the thought of making a fool of herself by running after him.
Balefully she eyed the tree line.
At the moment it was hard to remember who the enemy was.
Calling herself a fool, she squared her shoulders, took a deep breath and stepped into the leafy shade.
CHAPTER THREE
As the gloom of evening began to settle over the leafy canopy Paige carried her last bundle of kindling back to their campsite.
For the past half-hour she had been feeling distinctly uneasy as the ever-present shadows had deepened into almost impenetrable blackness.
She wasn't usually given to fanciful musings, but in her tiredness the surroundings, already blurring in the faint wisps of mist from the drop in temperature, looked like a perfect setting for Macbeth's meeting with the witches.
From the look of the pile of branches, Travis had been back a few times, but he was absent still as she added her load to the mound.
Relieved of the weight, she eased the tight muscles in her shoulders by stretching luxuriously.
It was bliss to feel some of the tension ease out of her, but it returned abruptly at the sharp sound of a breaking twig.
Frozen, she shot her head round towards the noise, her eyes widening as she saw Travis's still figure not a dozen yards away.
They widened still further as his eyes ran slowly over the visible curves of her body.
His gaze came up to lock with hers, and she couldn't move.
It was as if she was under some sort of hypnotic spell.
Her mouth went dry, and her blood began to pump hot and thick through ultra-sensitive veins.
His eyes had been a brand on her flesh, stripping away her clothes, caressing her so that she had felt her heartbeat quickening.
Her nerves jolted and she was shocked by the intensity of her response to the signals he was sending.
He saw, and he wanted.
It was basic, primitive and very, very real.
Only when Travis took a step forward did the invisible bonds that held her fast snap.
‘Sorry, did I startle you?’ he queried with husky irony, and with a gasp she hastily lowered her arms to her sides.
Shocked still by the way her breathing remained ragged, her voice was sharp in retort.
‘I didn't hear you arrive.’
She didn't need to see his face to know he had masked his reaction.
Travis dropped his load and dusted off his hands.
One eyebrow quirked her way.
‘No?’ he scoffed softly.
Colour flooded her cheeks as she realised he was accusing her of posing and denying he had had anything to do with it.
But she knew she had seen that covetous look in his eyes as he had watched her.
It hadn't been her imagination, and she bitterly resented the hypocrisy of his charge.
For an instant he had liked what he had seen, and the knowledge brought a shiver that raised the fine hairs on her flesh.
Angrily she watched him crouch down and begin to clear a patch of ground.
She didn't want to feel this attraction, and didn't want to know that he felt it too.
But she wouldn't take the blame, because she had done nothing to encourage it.
Which was what he was making out!
‘I didn't hear you because you were creeping about like…like Hiawatha!’ she snapped.
His teeth flashed whitely as he glanced up from his task.
‘There's no need to make a federal case out of it.
I believe you.’
Fuming, Paige tossed her head, realising that to point out his own behaviour might cause her more embarrassment than satisfaction.
She took refuge in sarcasm.
‘And pigs might fly!’
She gibed, and found her attention unwillingly caught by the efficient way he was preparing the ground.
Every muscle-flexing movement was effortless.
He looked at home in this wilderness, and the newborn something inside her responded to that male strength.
Then in the next instant she groaned inwardly, cursing her wayward thoughts.
She had to remember who he was.
Must not allow her senses any room to manoeuvre.
If he was into denial then that suited her too.
‘Who are you trying to impress?’ she asked sarcastically.
Travis didn't look up.
‘Do you know how to set a fire?’
‘Who, me?
I'm the girl who likes living in style, remember?’ she drawled cuttingly.
This time he did raise his head.
‘Am I likely to forget?
But while we're on the subject a dose of hard living might do you the world of good.’
Paige crossed her arms.
‘Oh, please!
Spare me the holier-than-thou routine!’
There wasn't much amusement in his smile.
‘Heard it all before, have you?
Well, play the madam if you must, but it'll get you no favours from me.
But knowing how to make a fire might just save your life one day, so you'd better watch me carefully in case you have to do this yourself.’
Well done, Paige, you've certainly raised his opinion of you! she thought wryly.
But what did she care for his opinion anyway?
He was the enemy, and at least this way she got to score some points!
She watched, not pursuing in what event he might not be there to make it himself.
Contrary to her words, she found the process fascinating, not that she'd ever admit it to him!
‘Were you a boy Scout, too?’ she enquired sweetly.
‘Uh-uh.
I learnt this on holidays with my father.
He was a great outdoors man.
As kids, we used to spend a month in the hills during the summer,’ he informed her as he worked.
Ridiculously she felt a twinge of envy.
She would have liked to have had that sort of relationship with her own father, only he had died, and her uncle had definitely had no affinity with the great outdoors.
‘How quaint,’ she scoffed, none the less.
Travis reached into his pocket for matches.
‘Don't knock it, honey.
This should at least keep the snakes away.’
Paige was alarmed.
Not because she was scared of snakes, but because she hadn't given them a thought.
‘Are there snakes here?’ she asked sharply.
‘Who knows?
But it's as well to remember you're not on Fifth Avenue now,’ he returned smartly.
Annoyed at herself for allowing herself to be suckered into that, Paige said nothing.
In no time at all Travis had a good fire going, and the heat from it drew her to her knees beside it, hands held out to the warmth.
Even as the flames seemed to deepen the blackness around them, the light gave comfort and a sense of security.
‘Time for some food, I think,’ Travis declared, dusting off his hands.
Paige glanced across at him.
‘Don't tell me, that's my job, right?’
‘Unless you're going to object to soiling your lily-white hands on something so menial,’ he agreed.
She stared into his hateful face.
‘Your opinion of me couldn't be lower, could it?’ she said bitterly.
‘Every time I think so you open your mouth and I'm forced to re-evaluate,’ he returned bitingly.
‘However, you can relax.
We'll share what chores we have.
We'll be a democracy of two.’
‘Oh, really?’ she gibed.
‘Meaning, I can have my say so long as I do what you tell me!’
‘Got it in one!
Rule number one: never argue on an empty stomach.’
Travis reached for the satchel.
‘Are you hungry?
There's not much, I'm afraid.
Just some bread and cheese and the last of the coffee.
Plus whatever's in the emergency rations.’
Paige dragged a hand through her hair, very much aware that the darkness closing in was enforcing the sense of intimacy.
The forest was noisy with night sounds that only seemed to lock them closer into the area of light thrown by the fire.
They had never been this alone and this close together, and there was just no way not to be intensely aware of him.
So much that she fell on the first excuse to put some distance between them.
‘Oh, yes, the rations box.
It's with the other things.
I'll get it.’
She made to get up, but Travis waved her back.
‘Stay where you are.
You look about all in.’
She subsided, bemused by the show of concern.
Now that she bothered to look she saw he didn't look a great deal better himself.
Yet, despite his dislike of her, his male instinct was to be protective.
From nowhere she knew just as instinctively that the woman who married this man would always feel secure and cherished by his strength and kindness.
She felt a stirring of envy at this unknown woman.
It was a strange way to feel about your enemy, but today the lines had blurred a little.
She watched him cross to the pile and rummage around.
He came back with the tin and two jumpers, one of which he tossed on her lap.
Paige recognised it as her own.
With a lightning switch of mood, his high-handedness made her blood boil.
‘You forced the locks on my case!’ she charged furiously.
Travis merely nodded.
‘We won't be taking it with us.’
She gasped.
‘That's not the point.
There might be things in there I don't want you to see!’
He cocked an eyebrow.
‘Like the jade?
But aren't you forgetting I already know the contents of your case?’
Which was already a sore point.
‘You've a heck of a nerve!’
‘Privacy is a luxury you forsook when you took something that didn't belong to you.
Now, I suggest you'd better put that on — it's going to get a lot colder.’
Following his own advice, Travis shrugged into an army sweater.
Seething, Paige followed suit, aggrieved that she felt much better for the thickness of the Aran.
As her head emerged from the neck hole Travis held up a small square package.
‘What's that?’ she asked grumpily.
Travis grinned.
‘Don't be bitter!
This, honey, is gold dust.
Coffee!
Plus soup, tinned meat, crackers, chocolate and a billycan to boil up in.’
‘Firstly I can be bitter if I damn well want to, and secondly I'm not your honey!’ she sniped witheringly.
‘For which we're both grateful.
Now, what's it to be, tomato soup or tomato soup?’
Arguing with him was like trying to wade through treacle — impossible!
However, the mention of food made her stomach rumble.
‘I think I'd better have tomato,’ she said dolefully, and refused to like the sound of his laughter.
As feasts went, it wouldn't have rated a mention, but to Paige it was the best food she could ever remember eating.
Perhaps it was that close brush with death that had sharpened all her senses.
With a sigh of satisfation she drained the last of her soup from the Thermos cup and chewed the remaining scrap of bread and cheese.
‘Coffee?’
Travis held up the Thermos and Paige nodded, proffering her cup, cradling it in her hands a while to savour the warmth and aroma.
She watched carefully as Travis lingered over his own cup.
In a mellower mood now, she could observe him more dispassionately.
The firelight highlighted the angles of his face, turning it into a pattern of light and dark.
Yet it was infinitely him.
What a man of contradictions he was.
Family meant a great deal to him, obviously, and she had witnessed for herself his kindness and strength.
Yet he had pursued her with a single-minded intent that was unnerving.
Once again it made her wonder what sign he was born under.
It was surprising just how people fitted their natal sign.
Now, she'd say Travis was a…
‘When were you born, Travis?’
If the question surprised him he gave no sign.
‘Trying to work out how old I am?’
‘I already know that.
Jonas told me.
You're thirty-six, going on a hundred.
His words, not mine.
He said you were born old, and that you needed to have a wife to soften you up a bit.’
His grandfather's words had been meant kindly, as Travis seemed to realise.
‘So he keeps telling me.’
One eyebrow quirked.
‘Are you trying to work out if we're compatible?
If it helps, I was a Christmas baby.’
Capricorn.
She should have guessed, really, for all the clues were there.
When they went after something nothing made them waver, just as he had set after her.
And it told her he wouldn't give up either.
‘Well?’
His question made her glance up.
‘Are we compatible?’
There was something lurking in his eyes.
‘Hardly!’ she retorted quickly, not knowing if it was true or not.
The possibility was alarming, because she had already found herself susceptible to his masculinity.
‘That's a pity.’
The quietly voiced statement made her nerves jump, and Paige looked at him suspiciously.
‘Why?’ she asked, then a jaw-breaking yawn overtook her and she hastily covered her mouth.
‘Sorry,’ she apologised, ‘but all of a sudden I can't seem to keep my eyes open.’
‘We'll both be better for an early night.
We've a long day ahead of us tomorrow,’ Travis agreed, but there was something in his voice that alerted Paige to the fact that he had more to say, and that it wasn't particularly good news.
She glanced at him sharply.
Travis met her eyes.
‘As I said, it's a pity we're not compatible.’
Her heart missed a beat.
‘What does that mean?’
‘There was only one sleeping-bag on the plane, rolled up in the blankets, and I'm not gentleman enough to let you have it to yourself.’
In a day of shocks her brain had become sluggardly, and it took a full thirty seconds for the import of his words to sink in.
‘Are you saying you intend for us to share it?’ she queried finally, body stiffening in automatic rejection.
His eyes narrowed.
‘Do you have some other idea?
The temperature drops sharply at night.
We'll need to conserve heat, and the best way to do that is to share the sleeping-bag,’ he pointed out with the sort of logic that was unbeatable.
However, Paige wasn't thinking logically.
She was thinking of the fact that she was far too aware of him for comfort as it was.
It seemed sheer lunacy to share such intimate sleeping arrangements.
‘There's no need to share anything, as I intend to sleep by the fire,’ she declared firmly, and punctuated her decision by draining her mug and setting it aside.
Travis sent her a thoughtful look.
‘What are you afraid of?’
That gave her a severe jolt, and suddenly the night was fraught with hidden nuances.
She set her chin defiantly.
‘I'm not afraid of anything, just choosy.
I'll be perfectly comfortable right here.’
‘If you've some crazy notion in that muddled excuse for a brain that I've got designs on your person, allow me to disabuse you of it right now,’ he told her bluntly, bringing hot, but thankfully invisible, colour to her cheeks.
‘Let me tell you something, Travis McKenna.
The thought never entered my head!’
‘Is that so?’
Travis challenged right back, tossing his mug aside.
‘I wonder if you're telling the truth.
Isn't this what you've been angling for ever since we crashed?
That little exhibition just now — was it to test the water?
To discover if I was interested or not?
Well, never let it be said I disappointed a lady!’ he growled, coming to his knees and reaching for her.
Too late Paige tried to avoid him, but all she managed to do was be off balance as his hands caught her shoulders, and with a muffled yelp she toppled backwards.
Travis followed her down, his hard body half-covering her, one of his legs thrown over hers to keep her still.
He looked down into her shocked face for interminable seconds before lowering his head.
Angrily she kept her lips pressed tightly together, determined not to fight or show any response whatsoever, but pretty soon she realised her mistake.
With every nerve attuned to him it simply wasn't possible to lie still.
Her flesh cried out to be closer, and, with the last vestiges of sanity, alarm bells rang.
She would have fought him then, but within seconds it was too late as his kiss kept her transfixed by its seductiveness.
His mouth was hot as it explored her lips, his teeth nipping at her lower lip, sending exquisite frissons along her nerves until she let out a small gasp.
Swiftly he took advantage, to begin a sensual invasion.
His tongue tasted her, exploring with delicate strokes which gradually deepened into a passionate demand that blew her mind and exploded all her misconceptions of what a kiss could be.
Their tongues met, and desire exploded around them.
Paige could feel her heart beating like a trapped bird in her chest and her senses reeled.
She lost all awareness of time and place, sinking into a realm of the senses where she could not help but bring her hand up to run her fingers into his hair to hold his mouth to hers as she returned his kiss.
Travis responded with a groan, his hand seeking the swift rise and fall of her breast beneath her jumper.
It closed possessively on the aroused peak, sending delicious waves of pleasure shuddering through her.
Adrift in a new world of rapture, it came as the profoundest shock to Paige to feel Travis push himself up and away from her.
She looked up at him in confusion, her body still trembling, lips still swollen from his kiss.
Travis was breathing hard, and there were banked fires in his eyes, yet his voice was coolly controlled.
‘I'm a red-blooded man, Paige, and you're a very desirable woman.
We nearly died today, and I could think of nothing I'd rather do than exult in life by taking you to bed.
But I learnt to control my baser urges a long time ago.
What just happened between us could have gone much further, but it didn't because I chose not to let it.
I have to respect the woman I go to bed with.’
Paige had never been more thankful for the darkness.
It hid the shamed colour that stormed into her cheeks as she sat up, half turning away from him.
Self-disgust churned in her stomach.
While she had been a slave to her newly awakened senses, Travis had always been in control.
She felt sick.
He might not respect her, but she could live with it.
It was the rock-bottom level of her own self-respect which troubled her.
‘Pig!’ she choked out bitterly.
‘If you think I'd dream of sharing so much as a blanket with you after that you're crazy!’
‘Why not?
You'd be perfectly safe,’ he returned sardonically, standing up.
Paige closed her eyes.
That made it even worse.
Yet she wouldn't let him see just how he had got to her.
She turned, eyes flashing.
‘I detest you.
Don't you ever lay a finger on me again, or, so help me, I'll see you live to regret it!’
Travis stared down at her in disdain.
‘OK, just what will satisfy your ego and get you to see sense?
Do you want me to apologise for picking up the gauntlet you threw down?’
Paige ground her teeth, grateful for the rush of anger.
‘I did not throw down the gauntlet!
And the answer is still no.’
‘You're not going to be sensible?’
‘In my opinion, I am being sensible.
Just stay away from me, McKenna!’
‘If that's what you want, but you'll soon be changing your mind.
I'll give you an hour, two at the outside, then you'll be begging me to let you in.’
Dear lord, he was insufferable!
‘Hah!
Don't hold your breath!’
He said nothing more, merely gave her a last withering look before moving away.
Paige turned back to the fire, trying to ignore the sounds that were coming from her right.
Lord, what a fool she'd made of herself!
How could she have melted so completely under his kiss?
Why had it had to be Travis McKenna, of all people, who had made her experience things she never had before?
It made her shudder just to think of how mindlessly she had behaved.
Then, after that humiliation, he had added insult to injury by saying she'd be perfectly safe with him!
The insensitive rat!
Out of the corner of her eye she watched Travis unroll the sleeping-bag and sit down to remove his boots.
Even when he was clothed, the firelight played up his flexing muscles as he removed his jumper to use as a pillow.
Something tugged inside her, and, biting her lip, she turned away.
The blankets lay to one side of the fire and she reached out for them.
Crawling a little closer to the heat, she wrapped herself up and lay down, pillowing her head on her arm as she stared at the flickering flames.
Anger gave way to an unhappy truth.
Those moments in his arms had been revealing.
She had been like clay in the hands of a master craftsman, and the most unpalatable knowledge was that she hadn't had the strength to resist that breathtaking attraction.
She simply didn't trust herself so close to him.
She had never felt this way before, and didn't know how to cope with it.
With a groan she squeezed her eyes shut.
In those moments he had made her want things that some feminine instinct knew only he could provide.
She had wanted him .
Which had to be the craziest thing she had ever done.
She was determined to fight it.
A grimace distorted her fine mouth.
In that, Travis was her ally.
His lack of respect would keep her safe!
But it hurt, damn it, to know that anyone held that opinion of her.
Grim amusement followed.
He might not respect her, but he was as attracted as she was.
He hadn't bothered to hide it, just controlled it.
Which only served to remind her once again of her own lack of control.
In the circumstances, the hardness of the ground was a welcome penance.
She made herself as comfortable as she could, listening to the sounds Travis made as he zipped himself into the sleeping-bag and made himself comfortable.
Ten minutes later, when silence reigned from the other side of the flames, she sat up to add more fuel to the fire.
She hadn't realised how quickly the stock had been gobbled up by the hungry flames.
An hour later she added the last few remaining sticks and huddled down again.
She knew, as Travis must surely have known, that in a little while she would begin to feel really cold.
As the fire slowly died she tried to doze, but the ground had become not only hard, but cold and damp too.
The chill worked its way into her bones and she curled up, trying to preserve her warmth, knowing she was failing as her body became racked by one continuous shiver.
Only by gritting her teeth could she stop them chattering.
Once she raised her head to glance across at the still figure of Travis.
He looked warm and cosy.
The temptation to crawl over to him was strong, but she resisted.
She'd rather die first!
A teeth-chattering laugh escaped her.
She probably would, too!
‘For the love of Pete!’
The angry male exclamation was punctuated by the angry sound of a zip opening and angry footsteps rounding the now only glowing fire.
Paige blinked up at the furious male figure above her.
Travis swore and bent down, stripping away the blankets and lifting her into his arms without any effort at all.
Her coldness struck him at once.
‘You stupid little fool!’ he snapped, carrying her round to where the sleeping-bag lay open.
Yet he deposited her on it as carefully as if she were china, and that brought a weak tear to her eye.
‘Don't move.
Don't fight me, and for God's sake do as you're told!’ he commanded in a voice of wrath.
Paige didn't have the strength or the will.
Already the warmth was invading her.
She made no protest when Travis removed her boots and jumper, nor when he lay down beside her, turning her so that they lay spoon-fashion before zipping them up into the quilted cocoon.
He put his arm around her then, drawing her close.
‘God, you're frozen!’ he muttered next to her ear.
‘Was it worth all that pride?’
Paige didn't answer.
To her shivering body, he felt like a furnace.
One that gradually took the ice from her veins and relaxed her until she felt as snug as a bug and ready to purr like a kitten.
‘Better?’
Travis's husky question brought her to realisation of where she was and with whom.
‘Sorry,’ she apologised stiffly, and he sighed, arm tightening about her.
‘Go to sleep, Paige,’ he ordered and settled his head beside hers.
She didn't find it as easy as he seemed to do.
The warm breath rhythmically caressing her nape sent shivers of awareness down her spine, and, despite their clothes, Paige could feel the imprint of his body down the whole length of hers, as if they were both naked.
She found it unnerving to be made aware that she could want a man so much physically when her mind was totally against it.
All she knew of Travis was that he despised her and believed her to be a thief.
Travis moved, and she tensed, holding her breath until he settled down to sleep again.
She released her breath, and with it went the tension her body had been locked in.
Sheer tiredness relaxed her limbs, and slowly but surely the warmth sent her off to sleep.
She didn't see Travis lift his head to look down at her sleeping form, nor the strange little smile that twisted his lips before he lay down again, tucking her body closely into the warmth of his.
When Paige awoke it was still early, not long past dawn, and she was alone in the sleeping-bag.
She jack-knifed into a sitting position and hastily surveyed their camp.
Before panic could set in she realised that the fire was burning merrily again and that a billycan of water was starting to steam.
With a sigh she slumped back into herself, shoulders hunched.
For one awful moment she had thought he was gone, but those signs of activity proved otherwise.
Crawling out, she shivered in the cool morning air and hurried into her jumper.
She was just reaching for her boots when Travis's voice behind her made her jump violently.
‘I'd shake those out before I put them on, if I were you.
You don't know what might have crawled in there for warmth during the night,’ he advised.
Paige looked round, unsure if he was making some allusion to her or not.
After the events of the night she met his gaze self-consciously, grateful for the excuse he had given her to drop her eyes.
‘Good morning,’ she greeted huskily, shaking the boots before putting them on.
Travis dumped the firewood he had collected and eyed her dishevelled figure with a vague twist of his lips.
‘If you wish to avail yourself of the bathroom facilities, feel free.
Just don't go too far away.’
He waved a hand towards the forest before hunkering down by the fire.
If he imagined she would be disgusted by the idea he was wrong.
She had done a great deal of hiking in her university years, and using whatever cover nature provided had been the order of the day.
But he didn't know that, and a perverse sense of devilry urged her to lead him on.
To live up to his low opinion of her.
She wrinkled her nose.
‘You can't mean me to use the bushes!’
He glanced over his shoulder.
‘Too earthy for you, princess?’ he gibed.
She gave a very artistic shudder.
‘But there's all bugs and…things.’
Contempt was plain on his face.
‘Tough.
Take it or leave it.’
He really was the most dislikeable man!
Biting her tongue, she walked off.
It would serve him right if she was attacked by something.
She paused mid-stride.
Dared she?
He deserved to be taken down a peg or two.
She debated it while she used the facilities, and decided — why not?
Which was why, a few minutes later, the forest resounded to the echo of a piercing scream.
Paige waited only until she heard Travis calling her name and the sounds of running feet, before escaping in the opposite direction.
Describing a large circle, she arrived back at the hastily abandoned camp, heart racing and a huge grin on her face.
Retrieving a comb from her bag, she was seated by the fire, attempting to restore order to her hair, when she heard Travis come back.
She looked up, and her heart quailed at the thunderous expression he wore.
Still, in for a penny…
‘Did you hear a scream?’ she asked dulcetly, then blinked at the speed with which he crossed the ground.
Fingers like a vice on her wrist, he jerked her to her feet.
‘What the hell kind of game are you playing now?’ he demanded.
Blue eyes glittered triumphantly.
‘I don't know what you mean.’
‘Perhaps this will jog your memory!’ he warned, and with an economy of movement had taken her seat and pulled her down across his knees.
His intention obvious, Paige fought to be free.
‘Don't you dare!’ she cried, struggling, but to no avail.
He foiled her easily, holding her down while his palm dealt her six of the best.
They stung, as they were meant to, and there were tears in her eyes when he roughly turned her over.
‘Damn you!’ she cursed him thickly.
‘Behave like a child and you'll get treated like one!’ he gritted out, staring down into her flushed face.
‘You're nothing but a brute and a bully!
You didn't care if I was in any danger, just so long as I was suitably humbled!’
A pulse beat wildly at the base of Travis's throat, and Paige found her eyes drawn to it.
‘If you were in danger I would have told you,’ he went on.
Balanced across his knees as she was, Paige felt the close proximity of his broad chest begin to impinge on her consciousness.
She forgot the indignity of the position in the advance of a tingling awareness.
Nervously she licked dry lips and, into what seemed a sudden stillness, heard him catch his breath.
In the next instant Travis was rising and she was set back on her feet as he put some distance between them.
She didn't have to ask why.
For one fleeting moment she had seen the temptation to kiss her in his eyes, and, gallingly, part of her had wanted him to.
After a step or two Travis turned to her.
Like boxers in a ring, they confronted one another, only the contest had little to do with the pugilistic art.
They were fighting something far stronger and potentially devastating: sexual attraction.
‘I take it you were making a point?’
Paige bent down to retrieve the comb from where it had fallen, wincing as her abused flesh protested.
‘You make too many assumptions about me.’
His eyes narrowed, lasering through her.
‘Meaning what, precisely?’
She used the comb like an accusing finger.
‘You assumed I'd be disgusted, and when I pretended to be you were thrilled.’
Travis's chest expanded as he took a deep breath.
‘And for that you played your little game?
Very impressive!
Why did you pretend not to know how to make a fire, if the outdoors is no novelty to you?’
‘I didn't pretend.
I didn't know.
I belonged to a ramblers’ club at university, not a survival organisation,’she explained shortly.
Travis raked a hand through his hair.
‘Perhaps I did jump, but on the evidence I was justified.
Your life has taken quite a different turn since then.’
Her mouth tightened grimly.
‘Since I turned to theft, you mean?’
Even now he wasn't going to admit he was in the wrong and apologise!
‘Exactly,’ he nodded.
Impotent anger curled her lip.
‘How wonderful it must be never to doubt yourself!’ she jeered and turned her back on him, fixing her hair into a loose plait with hands that held a faint tremble.
‘Oh, I do, but not in your case.
You've done nothing to alter my opinion.
On the contrary, everything has only served to strengthen it,’ Travis countered heavily.
Her lips twisted into a bitter smile.
‘Then there's no more to be said, is there?’
‘Not a thing,’ he agreed.
‘We're just wasting time.
Let's eat and get out of here.
The sooner the better!’
They breakfasted on hot black coffee, biscuits and chocolate, eating in a silence cut by polite requests and answers.
Afterwards Travis began sorting out the things they were to take with them.
They used her shoulder-bag and the satchel Travis had found on the plane to pack them in.
The idea was to travel light, so Travis allowed her to pack only one change of clothing.
The sleeping-bag he rolled up in the blankets and tied with belts so that he could carry it on his back.
An hour later they were ready to leave.
The campsite showed little evidence of their occupation save for their abandoned cases and a burned-out fire.
Travis straightened from one last study of the map, tucking it inside his shirt and pocketing a compass that he must have found on the plane too.
Shouldering his load, he turned to Paige, expression serious.
‘Just a few things before we start out.
I've put the Thermos of water in your pack — use it sparingly.
We don't know how soon we'll hit fresh water.
Secondly, and most importantly, there can only be one leader in this group, and I'm it.
The journey is going to be hard enough without you questioning every decision I make.
So you'll do as I say, when and where I say.
Is that clear?’
He had the unhappy knack of putting her back up, even though she knew he was right.
She raised an eyebrow.
‘I don't remember casting my vote.’
Travis's grin was mocking.
‘I did it for you, to save argument.
So, is it clear?’
Paige slung her bag over her shoulder.
‘As crystal.
I'll follow your orders, unless I think you're wrong.’
He gave her a long look.
‘I'm never wrong, Paige.’
‘And the Titanic was unsinkable,’ she shot back swiftly.
Travis gave a wry smile of acknowledgement.
‘Time will prove which one of us is right, won't it?
Meanwhile, let's get going.
The sooner we start, the sooner the journey will be over.
Come on.’
The going, as Travis had predicted, was not easy, for the forest was virgin territory.
The only path for them to follow was the one they forged themselves.
Once into the trees, they lost sight of the sun and the sky and had to rely on the compass to keep them heading in the right direction.
It wasn't rain forest, but neither was it an English oak wood.
Without a machete it was hot, exhausting work.
She was thankful that from an early age she had taken up sports and, latterly, exercise classes, which meant that her body was in good condition.
It needed to be, too, for much of the time she was pushing her way through undergrowth and around patches of thicket too dense for them to penetrate.
It was tiring work, leaving no time to think of what they had left behind, or what might lie ahead of them.
Paige was glad of her strong boots, but she would gladly have thrown her bag away, for it either kept falling off or got caught on stray branches.
She was muttering to herself about it crossly, and nearly cannoned into Travis, who had stopped in his tracks at the sounds issuing from behind him.
‘What the hell's the matter with you now?’ he demanded testily.
‘You sound like my Aunt Minnie with toothache!’
Paige dropped the offending bag at his feet.
‘I pity the lady if that's all the sympathy she gets from you!’ she snapped.
‘The lady is ninety-odd, and entitled to moan a little.’
‘Whereas I'm not?
Gee thanks!’
‘Oh, for the —’ Travis caught hold of his temper, speaking softly through clenched teeth.
‘Just tell me what's wrong, Paige.’
Paige nudged the offending bag with her foot.
‘That's what's wrong.
It keeps falling off.
It's driving me crazy!
If it were alive I'd strangle it!’
Travis stared at her as if she had indeed gone crazy.
‘That's it?
That's what's had you muttering under your breath for the last hour?’
He dropped his head, then his shoulders began to shake, and when he looked up again he was laughing.
Her breathing went haywire.
Oh, lord, how devastating he looked when he laughed, and how much she longed to join in.
With a feeling of despair she knew there was altogether too much about him that attracted her, that made her want to respond.
It was getting ridiculous, not to say dangerous.
Her only defence was to pretend offence and cross her arms.
‘It's not funny!’
Travis shook his head.
‘No, I can see that.’
He bent and picked up the bag, then eyed her curiously.
‘Don't you have a sense of humour?’
Careful, Paige.
‘I lost it a month ago.
There hasn't been much to laugh about since.
Or perhaps you'd find being hounded into the ground by an amateur detective positively rib-splitting!’
He sobered at once.
‘What annoys you most?
The hounding, or the fact that an amateur had no trouble keeping tabs on you?’
She raised an eyebrow mockingly.
‘Don't pat yourself on the back too soon.
You're assuming I was trying to make it difficult!’
‘And you weren't?’ he queried sceptically, holding open the strap of her bag.
‘Put your head and arm through,’ he recommended, before adding, ‘You've been trying to avoid me.’
The bag came to rest at the small of her back.
‘Only because I don't like you,’ she parried, and lost her breath as Travis smoothed the strap down to a position between her breasts.
His knuckles brushed against her breast.
It might have been deliberate or not, but the result was the same; low down inside, her muscles clenched in instant response.
Her eyes shot to his and encountered a fire that held her mesmerised and sent a shiver down her spine.
‘I don't like you, either,’ he admitted, and they both knew that liking had nothing to do with the seething emotions aroused every time they touched or came close.
Only slowly did he release the strap, as if he was reluctant to do so, and it stretched her nerves unbearably.
‘Is that better?’
It took an effort to bring her thoughts under control.
‘Much.
Thanks.’
‘Don't go overboard with the gratitude,’ he rejoined with heavy irony.
‘I said thanks.
What would you have me do?’ she snapped, and their eyes fused with shocking knowledge.
Visions of silken limbs locked together assaulted her mind, and she paled.
Shaken, she dragged her eyes away.
This was crazy!
Were they mad?
‘Let's get out of here.
We've wasted enough time already,’ Travis suggested in a gravelly voice.
He set off, leaving Paige to follow.
Dazedly she did.
What was happening to them that this awareness had reached such a pitch in so short a time?
Could the forest have anything to do with it?
The air was warm and sultry, with the heady scents of plants perhaps never seen before.
It enclosed them, heightening the most primitive emotions.
Surely that must account for it?
Once they were out in the fresh air, away from this green tomb, their blood would cool.
She hoped so.
Oh, how she hoped so.
Two hours later they pushed their way out from the cover of the trees into a tiny clearing no more than a handful of yards across.
The sudden entrance into hot sunlight caused Paige to shiver.
She hadn't realised how much cooler it was in the shade until she came out of it.
Travis halted beside a fallen tree trunk almost completely buried in the long grass.
‘We'll stop here for something to eat,’ he pronounced, lowering his load to the ground.
Gratefully Paige dumped her bag beside the fallen tree.
It was sheer bliss to have the cumbersome weight removed from her back, and she stretched.
Then she froze, head cocked to one side.
‘Listen!
It sounds like…
Oh, God, it is!
It's a plane!’
She spun round to Travis, but he was already gazing skywards, shading his eyes as he quartered the sky.
‘Where is it?
Can you see it?’
Haphazardly her eyes skimmed the blueness as the sound grew.
She found herself uttering silent prayers, and was rewarded as a small shape came into view from the east.
‘There it is!’
Her heart thumping, her finger pointed it out.
‘What shall we do?’
She looked at Travis for support and found him grim-faced.
‘There's nothing we can do,’ he told her tonelessly, never taking his eyes from that small shape.
Paige gasped.
‘What do you mean?
There must be!
They're looking for us, damn it!
Do something before it goes!’ she cried, catching his arm and trying to shake him into action.
But Travis was as immovable as a mountain, and angrily she let him go.
There had to be something she could do.
People waved things, didn't they?
She reached for her bag and tore at the zip, dragging a T-shirt and jumper out.
Running to the centre of the clearing, she began waving and shouting, doubling her efforts as the small aircraft proceeded on its way and within minutes had disappeared from sight, if not from hearing.
Paige dropped her aching arms.
She felt like crying as dejection hit her like a ton of bricks.
Help had been so close — and the disappointment was all the greater for it.
All they'd needed was a little luck, and he had refused to help.
Anger boiled up inside her, and she turned to where Travis stood watching her, totally unmoved.
‘Why didn't you do something?’ she charged, walking towards him and halting a foot away.
His calmness was a goad she hated him for.
Dropping her clothes, she launched herself at him, battering away at his chest with clenched fists.
‘You bastard!
Why didn't you do something!’
Travis fought her off, avoiding hands and feet until her own exertions wore her out and she sagged helplessly, weak sobs escaping her lips.
Only his grip on her arms held her upright.
‘Look at me,’ he ordered, giving her a sharp shake so that she raised her head.
‘Now listen.
I did nothing because there was nothing to do.
The plane was too far away and going in the wrong direction.
He hadn't a hope of seeing us.’
The truth was there in his eyes, and she hated him for that, too.
She'd been wasting her time.
Her eyes fell from his, widening as she caught sight of a reddening patch on his cheek.
She must have caught him with her fist, though she hadn't felt it.
She'd never done anything so violent in her life, and she raised eyes full of compunction to his.
Only Travis's attention wasn't centred on her face.
She followed his eyes downwards and cringed inwardly when she realised the top buttons of her shirt had come undone.
Before leaving camp that morning she had removed her T-shirt and jumper, retaining only her shirt, and now her exertions had stretched the gap to reveal an embarrassingly large amount of cleavage.
His eyes were still fixed upon her, and Paige was profoundly aware of the reaction his intense perusal was having on her body.
Against her will her breasts swelled, hardened nipples forcing themselves against the cotton.
She felt his eyes as if he had actually touched her, and a dull flush spread up her neck and into her cheeks.
‘Twenty-four hours ago you were just a common little thief.
Now, God help me, I want you so much that I ache,’ he growled huskily.
She swallowed painfully.
The open neck of his shirt was so close that she could see the sheen of sweat on his skin.
A bead of moisture clung, and she squeezed her eyes shut for a second lest she reach out and lick it away.
‘It's this place!’ she charged in anguish.
‘Can't you feel it?
Tendrils that invade your mind and make you think crazy thoughts!’
His eyes came up and she saw his jaw tense before the shutters came down and blanked off his thoughts.
Releasing her, he stepped back, eyes scanning the small tract of land.
‘Perhaps you're right.
The cure for jungle fever is civilisation.
You'd better pray we reach it soon,’ he declared, and stalked away.
Speechless, and more than a little shaken, Paige returned to where she had left her things.
She sat with her back against the log and busily set about finding the Thermos of water with hands that shook so much that it took every ounce of her control not to spill a drop of the precious liquid as she raised the cup to her lips.
The cool water slipping down her throat was a welcome relief.
Wearily she dropped her forehead on to her hand.
What is happening to me? she questioned herself in dismay.
I cannot want a man who wants to see me in gaol.
It's not possible.
Yet she did.
She ached, like him.
She felt torn by conflicting emotions.
She wanted to be gone, away from this turmoil of passion, and yet she felt trapped by a sensuality undreamed of.
She scarcely recognised herself in the woman who confronted her.
She forced herself to eat some more dry biscuits and chocolate, washing them down with a small amount of water.
Against her will her head turned to see what Travis was doing.
He was lounging back against the tree trunk a few yards away, consulting his compass and studying the map intently.
He looked solid and dependable.
He moved, and his shock of hair caught the sun as he raked a hand through it.
Paige watched the movement in terrible fascination, watching the play of muscles in his tanned arms beneath the rolled-up sleeves of his shirt.
There was latent power in every careless move he made.
His body was extremely fit, not an ounce of surplus flesh on him, and every trained muscle and sinew was ready to act in a split-second to whatever the brain required of it.
Paige could only admit that she had never seen a better male specimen.
It was painfully amusing.
Temptation on two legs.
The desired forbidden fruit.
Where would it all end?
She became aware of that red mark on his cheek.
‘I'm sorry I hit you,’ she apologised, drawing Travis's gaze.
He rubbed his cheek thoughtfully.
‘Forget it.’
‘I don't know what came over me.’
One eyebrow lifted.
‘I'd say disappointment came over you.
You forget that I want to get out of here too.
I had just as much percentage in attracting that plane if it had been humanly possible.
It wasn't.’
Paige produced a wobbly smile.
‘I suppose I always knew that.
I just wanted…’
His eyes held hers.
‘We're going to get out.
Believe it, because it's true.
I've been studying the map.
There's a river not far away, if my calculations are correct.
We should reach it by dusk.
With any luck, we'll be able to follow it down to the coast.’
‘I suppose that means you want us to get moving again?’ she sighed.
He was so businesslike that those heady moments might never have been.
She envied him his ability to distance himself.
She had no such armour.
‘The longer we take, the slower we'll get.
We need to cover the ground now, while we have the energy,’ Travis confirmed, climbing lithely to his feet.
Paige scrambled upright far less elegantly.
‘Are you deliberately trying to scare me?’
‘Just telling it how it is.
Pack up your things.
We'll move out in five minutes.’
CHAPTER FOUR
As the afternoon wore on, the going got tougher.
They spent an hour descending one side of a large valley, only to take twice as long ascending the other side.
Paige was thankful that it wasn't jungle, but the effort of forcing a way through thick undergrowth slowed them up, sapping their reserves of energy.
Their passage startled birds and invisible animals out of their path with shrieks of warning to others of their kind.
But, apart from the sound of their own slightly laboured breathing as they toiled steadily uphill, the chattering of birds and the rustlings of small animals in the undergrowth were the only sounds they heard for the rest of the day.
By the time the gloom of evening began to settle in they had reached the river Travis had spoken of.
The forest itself ran right down to the edge of the quickly flowing water.
The banks were boulder-strewn, but there were small inlets, and Travis chose one of these for their campsite.
He shrugged off his packs and flexed tired shoulders.
‘I think I'll go and check upstream for a short way.
I may be able to see something.
Do you think you can start a fire while I'm gone?’
Paige glanced up from the rock she had wearily sunk on to.
‘You'd better leave me the matches, then.’
She held out her hand.
Travis produced them from his pocket and dropped them into her palm, carefully avoiding touching her.
‘Try not to set yourself alight.
I shan't be long.’
Strange how that little manoeuvre stung.
‘Don't hurry on my account!’ she said acidly.
Damn it, she wasn't unclean!
Immediately his face tightened up and he strode away.
Paige watched him go with shoulders slumped.
Why had she said that?
Hadn't she already acknowledged to herself that it was better that they didn't touch — or do anything to aggravate a volatile situation?
She didn't understand herself at all!
Shrugging off her bag, she forced her mind on to more mundane things.
She concentrated on the fire, producing something that owed more to determination than competence.
But it stayed alight and soon began to burn merrily.
She was quite proud of it.
Travis was as good as his word.
She heard him returning just as she sat back to admire her handiwork.
It didn't compare to his effort, but it had a certain naïve charm.
She glanced round as his footsteps grew louder, and when his tall figure loomed up out of the gloom she frowned, because she had discovered she was pleased to see him.
Not relieved — pleased.
He came to squat by the fire, holding out his hands to the warmth.
‘You did a good job,’ he praised her efforts.
Like a pendulum, her emotions swung the other way.
‘Were you expecting me to fail?’
He turned his head slowly, eyes chilly.
‘Can't you accept a compliment graciously?’
She moved, uncomfortably aware that he had good reason to be annoyed.
She was also very much aware that with his return the atmosphere had intensified.
Once more the trees began to close in, locking them into their own tiny world.
As the universe shrank so a prickly sense of danger grew, and her only defence was words.
‘Perhaps I'm just unused to getting them from you,’ she countered.
‘Did you see anything?’
Travis shook his head.
‘Nothing.
I didn't really expect to.
It was just a chance.
Something smells good.’
Paige glanced down at the steaming billy that she had balanced over two rocks.
‘I added some of the tinned meat to the soup.
We'll have to use the biscuits as spoons, I'm afraid.
I used my water.
I didn't know if it was safe to use the river.’
‘It looks clear, and it's running fast enough.
So long as we boil it, it should be OK.
It's a risk we're going to have to take.’
He made himelf more comfortable, resting back against a convenient boulder.
‘I don't know about you, but my stomach thinks my throat's been cut.’
She took the hint, sharing out their simple meal, which they consumed in silence.
As she ate Paige found herself watching him again, attempting to analyse her feelings.
She had thought she was just physically attracted to him, but the way her heart had leapt when he'd returned just now was something else.
She couldn't seriously be falling for him, could she?
Travis McKenna, her bête noire ?
‘Coffee?’
Travis's query drew her thoughts back to the present.
He looked grim, distant, and she dismissed the idea as fanciful.
It was the forest again, distorting everything.
Heightening emotions to a pitch where something had to give.
‘Have I grown another head?’
Travis's mocking query made her start.
‘Sorry?’ she said guiltily.
One eyebrow lifted.
‘You were staring.
What did you see, I wonder?
You didn't look pleased.’
‘Sometimes I think I see the devil incarnate,’ she muttered, more to herself, but his sharp ears picked it up.
‘I prefer to think of myself as an avenging angel,’ he returned smoothly.
‘Satan was an angel.’
He laughed.
‘You have an answer for everything.’
She only wished she did.
Then she wouldn't be sitting here wondering how on earth they were going to get through the night.
She held out her cup.
‘Did you say coffee?’
‘Why do women always change the subject?’ he taunted, filling her cup.
‘Why do men always assume it's a female habit?’ she countered.
‘When it's to their advantage men use the same ploy.’
Looking down into the aromatic liquid, she cleared her throat.
‘Anyway, I'm going to change the subject again.
I've been wanting to ask you about Jonas.
Is he all right?’
It was a boat-rocking question, but she had to know.
Travis brought one knee up, draping an arm over it while he studied his own mug of coffee.
‘He's well.
He had to have a bypass operation.
Fortunately he was remarkably well for his age.
He's back home again.’
Her pleasure was genuine.
‘I'm so glad,’ she responded with a faint smile, which quickly faded.
‘Is he…does he…?
What have you told him about me?’
Both brows lifted.
‘The truth, naturally.
We hide nothing from him.’
Paige winced.
She had hoped Travis would have kept it to himself.
She really should have known better.
Worse was to imagine what Jonas must think of her now.
She had to know, but she kept her voice deliberately casual.
‘What did he say?’
Travis's lips curled.
‘He didn't believe me.
He said there had to be some mistake.
That you wouldn't do anything like that.’
Paige felt totally choked.
The old man's faith in her did wonders for her morale.
If she did nothing else she was going to make sure his statement was vindicated.
‘Oh, the darling!’ she half laughed to mask her discomposure.
Travis snorted.
‘That was pretty much what he called you.
The pair of you seem to have a mutual-admiration society going.’
Her chin went up.
‘I do admire him.
He's the nicest man I've met for a long time.
I wouldn't do anything to hurt him.’
Travis laughed grimly.
‘Fine words butter no parsnips.
It's what you do that counts.
I told my grandfather I was going to prove him wrong.’
She wouldn't have expected him to say anything else.
‘You won't be able to,’ she countered firmly.
‘You think not?
All I have to do is find Laurie, don't I?’ he reminded her softly.
Paige caught her breath.
She hadn't looked at it quite that way before.
Her only plan had been to get to her cousin and retrieve the jade.
Now she realised that if Travis got to Lori her cousin would say anything to land her in more trouble, thus playing right into Travis's hands.
At all costs, she had to keep them apart.
‘You're barking up the wrong tree.
I've already told you Lori is just someone I know, and has nothing to do with any of this,’ she countered.
‘You brought the subject up, not me,’ Travis pointed out with aggravating coolness.
‘I was asking about the health of your grandfather, someone I care about very much.
He's the sort of grandfather I would have liked to have,’ Paige said shortly, then softened her tone as she thought of the kindly gentleman who had taken her under his wing.
‘He treated me in such a way that…
He made you feel you'd have done anything for him and never counted the price too high.’
Travis watched her, his expression inscrutable.
‘That's a surprisingly astute remark.’
Already sensitive to his doubting her every sentiment, she jumped.
‘Coming from me, you mean?
You don't expect finer feelings in a thief?’
‘To steal something of sentimental value shows a total lack of common decency and sensitivity,’ he condemned swiftly, eyes chilling.
‘Such people should be prosecuted to the utmost limit of the law.’
Paige leant forward earnestly.
‘I agree with you, in principle.
But sometimes it's not that simple.
Things aren't always black and white.’
Travis laughed scornfully.
‘What else could you say?
You have to cover yourself.
I appreciate you're a very clever woman, but then I never took you for a fool.
You made two mistakes.
The first was in choosing my family, the second in singling out my grandfather.
In business he commanded intense loyalty, and in the family he inspires great affection and respect.’
‘Why is it so hard to accept that I could feel all that too?’
His smile had the warmth of a jackal's.
‘Because if you did you'd never have betrayed his trust and taken the jade.’
A laugh escaped her, though it held scant humour.
‘My God, but you're stubborn!
Nothing gets through, does it?
Everything I say you twist to your own ends.
For the same reason you came to your grandfather's defence,I could never have taken the jade!’ she insisted passionately.
Brown eyes scanned the beautiful intensity of her face and triggered a breathless response.
Her lips parted on a tiny gasp.
At the backs of his eyes, embers began to glow, and he reached out to run one finger along her bottom lip.
‘When you look at a man like that he'd want to believe anything you said,’ Travis declared huskily.
Paige strove for rationality in a world that was suddenly threatening to dissolve at the seduction of touch and tone.
‘But not you?’
Travis's voice dropped to a husky growl.
‘Oh, I'm no different from any man.
You're a very desirable woman.
Your charms could make me forget the world.
But I have to ask myself this — would I hate myself in the morning?’
With a stab of pain she realised he was laughing at her.
That his seduction had been deliberate.
A fact confirmed by the mockery in his eyes.
She drew away instantly.
‘You're insufferable!’ she choked out.
He sat back, smiling grimly.
‘And you're reverting to type, sweetheart.
When all else fails a woman always uses her wiles.
Only you chose the wrong man to play with.
You miscalculated, but it was a nice try.
Now I think we should bring down the curtain on this little episode, and go to bed.
May I take it you aren't going to argue about the sleeping arrangements tonight?’
She would have loved to, hating the cynical smile on his face, but common sense prevailed.
‘You may,’ she gritted through clenched teeth.
He found her highly amusing.
‘Then you might as well go to bed while I finish up here,’ he suggested.
Paige turned her back on him, unrolling the sleeping-bag and removing her boots.
She climbed inside, disliking him as much as she ever had.
She was too tense and angry to sleep, although she was dog-tired, her spirits sinking to a low ebb.
Despair choked her as she waited tensely for him to join her.
She stiffened as the zip was lowered and Travis eased his length in beside her.
There was no way they could avoid touching, and it only added to her torment of mind and spirit.
Rigidly she listened to the even sound of his breathing, so aware of him pressed against her that her very skin prickled.
His heat scorched her, and unbearably stretched nerves urged her to turn and put an end to this agony of wanting.
Yet how could she, even if she was so destructively inclined, when he had quite clearly fallen asleep?
He hadn't moved since he'd joined her.
With a weary sigh she rubbed a hand over her eyes.
Her shoulder protested at the hardness of the ground, and she shifted, trying to ease it.
The movement aggravated the sensations she was already experiencing at the contact with Travis's warm body.
She shifted again, trying to find some small amount of room to give her ease, and froze at the tormented sound of his voice.
‘For God's sake, lie still, or I might be tempted to forget I don't respect you and take what we both want!’ he ordered tersely.
‘I thought you were asleep,’ she whispered hoarsely.
His laugh was strained.
‘Sleep?
I'm not made of wood, and neither are you.
Don't move, and perhaps we'll both get through the night with our sanity!’
Paige subsided, aware of a grim satisfaction in knowing he felt the strain every bit as much as she did.
But what a mess it all was!
For a long time she listened to his breathing, praying for sleep.
She knew he lay awake too, but they had no comfort to give each other.
Eventually, though, sheer tiredness had her lids drooping.
The body had its own medicine.
Exhausted, she slept.
Paige stirred and frowned.
Something was tickling her nose.
She twitched and blew at it, but it remained and she tried again.
Still it obstinately returned, and this time she opened her eyes, only to receive a jolt of shock as she focused.
The irritating fly, as she had thought it, was Travis's hair.
In the night they had moved, so that now she lay with her arm about his waist, her body pressed so tightly against his back that it would have taken a can-opener to prise them apart.
Instinctively she made to move away before Travis awoke, but she had scarcely budged when a strong hand clamped down over hers, holding her still.
‘Keep blowing in my ear like that, honey, and you'll get more than you bargained for,’ he warned gruffly.
Paige tried to pull her hand free, but in the close confines there was nowhere to go unless he let her.
Angrily she subsided.
‘I was doing no such thing,’ she protested.
‘I thought there was a fly.’
Even as she said it, she knew how feeble it sounded.
Travis thought so too.
His reply was to trail his fingers caressingly along her bare forearm, raising the hairs on her skin and her temperature.
‘Was Laurie a morning man?
Are you trying to tell me you're frustrated?’ he mused derisively.
She gasped, and this time pulled her arm free easily.
‘That's a foul suggestion!’
He laughed.
‘Is it?
Or are you just protesting for form's sake?
Ask me nicely and I might even oblige.’
What an obnoxious, hateful man he could be.
‘Why, so that you can ease your own frustration and put the blame on me?’ she managed to shoot back, and tried to wriggle out of the bag, unsuccessfully.
‘Will you let me out of here?’ she gritted through her teeth.
‘Anything to oblige a lady,’ he responded, releasing the zip.
Scrambling out and to her feet, she glowered down at him.
‘You really are contemptible!’
Travis sat up with a shrug.
‘You'll find the river as effective as a cold shower.’
Shaking out her boots, she stamped them on.
‘I don't need the river — one look at you is enough!’ she declared, and stalked off into the trees.
‘Breakfast in ten minutes,’ Travis called after her, but she didn't deign to answer.
She silently called him all the names she could think of, then repeated the choicer ones for good measure, as she sluiced her face in cold water.
She had been right when she'd called him the devil, because he was — but oh, how she wished she didn't find him so incredibly attractive.
Back at the camp, she ate her breakfast in silence.
‘Still sulking?’ he needled after a while
She ground her teeth.
‘I'm not sulking, I just have nothing to say to you.’
One eyebrow rose expressively.
‘That will make a change.’
Still he said no more, merely eating his own rations then packing up ready to leave.
The second day's trek mirrored the first in difficulty.
They had exchanged the slow passage through the forest for picking their way over the rocks and boulders that littered the banks of the upper reaches of the river.
Sheltering among the rocks, to gather what relief they could from the heat of a sun which beat down remorselessly upon their uncovered heads, they ate their cold lunch in silence.
Travis had been every inch the hard, chilly Capricorn that morning, not seeming to need anybody in his single-minded pursuit of his goal.
He had ranged ahead, limiting himself to brusque commands and a variety of signals.
But it had suited her mood, too.
Travis allowed them only a half-hour rest before moving off again.
Without a grumble she forced protesting muscles to obey her commands.
An hour later they were halted in their tracks by a cataract not marked on the map.
They had heard it some time before they reached it, the rumble of thunder growing louder as they approached, to become almost deafening at the point where a cloud of spray hovered overhead, the droplets becoming tiny rainbows as they caught the sun.
It was breathtakingly beautiful, but the sheer drop left them with no option but to make their way into the forest to bypass the hazard before heading back to the river again.
The going was steep and treacherously slick in places, and Paige had all her concentration centred on staying upright.
Her eyes on where to place her feet, she failed to notice that Travis had come to a halt, and cannoned right into him.
Before she could utter the cry of alarm which rose in her throat his hand had closed over her mouth, and Paige's startled eyes blinked at him over the top.
Travis motioned her to keep quiet, and cocked his head in a listening attitude.
Soon Paige could hear it too — there were people climbing up towards them and they were getting closer by the second.
In a flash he was pushing her away from the path they were making and into the cover of the undergrowth.
Instantly Paige balked, trying to prise his hand from the death-grip it had on her arm.
‘What are you doing?’ she spat angrily.
‘They could help us.
They could even be looking for us!’
Travis didn't break stride but threw her a steely glare.
‘They could also be drug-runners who don't care for strangers.
I'm not prepared to take the risk.’
The thought sobered her enough to allow him to urge her onwards.
Perhaps he had a point there, and it was better to be safe than sorry.
So she made no protest as they wriggled their way beneath the bushes and waited in tense silence for the approaching party to appear.
Minutes passed.
Paige strained her ears to pick up even the slightest sound.
They could still hear the voices, closer now than before, then the clear ring of footsteps.
Beside her, Travis raised his head to gain a better view, and she followed suit.
Half a dozen figures came slowly into view, dressed in army camouflage and carrying automatic weapons.
Soldiers!
The imminence of rescue had her tensing to rise, but, to her alarm, Travis pulled her down abruptly.
‘Get down, you fool!’ he grated in her ear as his arm drew her into the protection of his body, her face pressing against his neck.
‘But they're soldiers!’ she protested, only to have her head jerked in closer against him.
He spoke right next to her ear.
‘No regular soldier I ever knew wore cross bandoleers, or had long hair held back by a headband.
They're either drug runners or guerrillas, and I don't want to meet either.’
Guerillas!
The word sent a chill down her spine and she subsided instantly.
She had heard such tales of those irregular armies that the thought of them brought sweat breaking out all over her.
Tensely they waited, expecting to be discovered at any moment.
It seemed to take two lifetimes for the group to climb past them, but finally they passed from sight if not sound.
The noise of their progress floated back to where Paige and Travis lay hidden for many minutes, before fading away completely.
When the silence had once more settled around them Paige let out her breath in a ragged sigh.
Her heart had been beating painfully fast, and now she became aware of the rapid pulse in Travis's neck where her cheek rested against it.
The alarms of the past minutes faded before a tantalising awareness of the strong body cradling her.
With it came an overwhelming desire to press herself closer.
Fear had raised their body heat, and the scent of him was a powerful stimulus her senses responded to.
His skin was so close that she barely had to move to touch him, taste him — to know all of him with all of her.
Yet it was as impossible now as it had always been, and she groaned.
Instantly Travis's head lifted to look down at her.
‘Paige?
Are you all right?’
She knew her face would be too revealing, and refused to look at him.
But Travis wasn't having that.
Firm fingers turned her head round, and helplessly she met his eyes.
He went still.
The concern faded from his face and was replaced by something else.
Something which ignited in those brown depths as he gazed down at her.
His hand cupped her face as he seemed to delve into her soul.
‘This is madness,’ he groaned and brought his head down, his lips taking hers in a kiss that brooked no opposition.
Paige had no thought of denying him.
Her lips opened beneath his assault like petals in sunlight and welcomed his exploration of her mouth, returning his kiss with a shocking intensity.
Senses rioted, coherent thought fled, and for mindless seconds they were oblivious to the world about them.
She arched her neck in delight as Travis's lips left hers and set out in a heated exploration of the sensitive skin of her throat.
Shivers of incredible pleasure danced across her skin as his avid mouth searched even lower, only to be stopped by the barrier of her clothes and the strap of her bag.
With an oath, Travis went still.
‘What the hell am I doing?’ he muttered thickly.
Paige felt like crying.
The world had returned with a vengeance.
How could they soar so high one minute, then plumb the depths?
To glimpse paradise in his arms, yet know she could never enter…
‘It's no good, is it?’ she declared in despair.
With a savage movement he rolled away from her, breathing heavily as he gazed up at their canopy of leaves.
‘We're going insane, and you're refusing to issue the cure!’
Shaken by the charge, she sat up.
‘What do you mean?’
He turned his head, eyes seething with dark emotions.
‘Tell me where the jade is.
I won't prosecute.
Tell me, damn you, and then we can stop tearing each other apart this way!’ he urged, sitting up.
Paige clamped her hands over her ears.
‘Stop it!
What are you saying?
You're blackmailing me with sex?
I tell you where the jade is and you'll…you'll…’
She tried to laugh but it cracked.
‘My God, that's sick.’
Her eyes clouded with pain.
‘How could you think I would do that?
I'd never be so desperate for you, Travis McKenna, that I'd stoop so low!’ she cried and pushed herself to her feet, wanting only to get out of there.
Away from him.
Away from a pain that speared her heart.
Haphazardly she thrust her way from the bush.
‘Paige!
Wait!’
Travis's command followed her, but she ignored it.
She hated him.
If she never saw him again it would be too soon!
Blindly she hurried on, tearing herself free of branches that attempted to hold her back.
Her hair was a tangled mess as she finally stumbled on to the path the guerrillas had used.
Breathing hard, she raked her hair back.
A noise behind her made her spin round.
Believing it was Travis, she froze round-eyed as she found herself gazing into four faces as surprised as her own.
She recognised them as some of the soldiers immediately.
They had come back!
She turned to run, but a hand caught in her hair.
She had time to let out one shrill scream before a dirty hand was clamped over her mouth.
She could scarcely breathe, let alone struggle, but when she heard the sound of someone in the undergrowth she knew it was Travis and tried to get out a warning.
To no avail.
Mere seconds later he burst out on to the path.
To his eyes there were now only her and her captor; the other three had melted into the bushes.
She tried to tell him with her eyes as he advanced, hands balled into fists, but he didn't understand.
‘Let her go!’
Travis ordered.
A shape moved behind him, and magically she got a hand free.
She tugged at the arm around her neck and it shifted enough for her to yell, ‘Travis look out!’
But it wasn't quick enough.
Even as Travis was turning, the man behind lifted his weapon and cracked it against Travis's head.
He had ducked enough to soften the blow, but even so he crumpled to the ground.
In horror she saw the guerrilla's hand go to the knife at his belt.
She didn't stop to think.
Her teeth sank into the hand at her mouth and the man yelped, staggering away.
Paige ran forward.
‘No!’ she cried, her impetus enough to push Travis's assailant aside.
‘Let him alone!’
She dropped to her knees beside Travis, hands shaking as she lifted his head.
He was conscious — just.
Something flickered in his eyes, and then he slumped against her.
‘Travis!’
That was her last conscious thought.
Something nipped at her neck, and she pitched forward into blackness.
CHAPTER FIVE
Paige grimaced and tried to make herself comfortable.
Not easy to do when she was bound hand and foot.
Not tightly enough to restrict the blood flow, but sufficient to make her long to be able to stretch.
Beside her, still unconscious, Travis lay similarly bound.
They were in another clearing.
She didn't know where, for she hadn't come to until after the guerrillas had brought them here.
It was much used, judging by the permanent fire built in the centre.
The men hadn't bothered her in any way.
They had gone into a huddle, obviously discussing their captives.
It had taken some time to reach a decision, but eventually they had come across to check their bonds were in place, and then had gone off.
That had been hours ago, she thought.
She couldn't be sure how many, but the sun was clearly going down now, casting deep shadows over the ground.
She wished Travis would wake up.
She had tried hard not to think about what might happen to them when the men returned, but, as evening began to draw in, panic fluttered in her chest.
What if Travis didn't wake up?
What if…?
A moan drew her head round in time to see him move.
‘Travis, thank God!
Are you all right?’
‘I've had better days!’ he drawled.
Tears of relief streamed down her cheeks.
‘I thought they'd killed you,’ she sobbed weakly, unable to stop now she'd started.
Painfully Travis rolled over until he was facing her.
‘Hey, come on, you know I'm not that easy to kill.
I've got a cracking headache, but I'll survive.’
Paige sniffed inelegantly, tears easing off.
‘That's good.’
He smiled weakly.
‘I thought you wanted me dead.’
That reminded her of their last argument.
‘Only if I can kill you myself!’
So much had happened that it hardly seemed so important any more.
‘Well, you'll get your chance, I hope,’ he said wryly, and tried to flex his arms.
‘Where are we?’
‘In a clearing.
I don't know where.
We were here when I woke up,’ she explained, watching him raise his head to search the area.
‘I'm sorry I ran and got us into this mess.
I tried to warn you, but I wasn't much help.
Why did they come back?’
Travis subsided, letting his eyes examine her.
‘Who knows?
Perhaps they found our tracks.
The important thing is, did they hurt you at all?’
She shook her head.
‘No.
I'm OK.
I just wish my hands were free.’
‘We'll see what we can do about that in a minute,’ Travis decided.
‘Where did they go?’
‘I don't know.
I think we surprised them.
They left soon after bringing us here.
All I managed to overhear was the name Eduardo, and mañana .
I think this man will decide what's to happen to us tomorrow.’
‘Which doesn't give us much time.
Where are our packs?’
Travis asked, thinking fast.
‘Over by the fire.’
He swore.
‘Did they search me, do you know?’
‘I don't think so.
They seemed in too much of a hurry.’
His eyes were expressive.
‘I hope you're right, because I'm not counting on their benevolence.
We've got to escape.
There should be a knife in my right trouser pocket.
You'll have to turn over and try to get it out.’
Rolling over was a painful if not too difficult manoeuvre, but, even with Travis helping all he could, it was an exhausting process trying to find his pocket and reach into it when she could only go by touch.
But manage it she did, eventually, and with a sense of elation her fingers closed on the knife.
‘Got it!’ she gasped.
‘Good girl!’ he praised, sighing.
‘Now take it out and keep a firm hold on it.
I've got to try and open one of the blades with my teeth.’
An agonisingly long period followed, which tested their patience to the very limit.
Finally a blade was eased out.
Every new action required rolling over, so that they were pretty near spent by now.
Ironically the easiest thing of all was actually cutting through the rope that bound them.
Travis freed her first, and after stretching cramped limbs she cut the rope about his wrists, then about both their ankles.
Free at last, they sat up.
It was pitch-dark by now, and cold.
It took a while to get their night vision, then Travis crossed to where their packs lay.
A second or two later the powerful beam of the flashlight cut through the darkness.
‘They haven't touched a thing.’
Travis's voice sounded uncanny in the darkness.
‘I think we must have interrupted them; that's why they left us here.’
Paige made her way over to him.
‘What do we do now?’
‘We put as much distance between ourselves and our martial friends as possible.’
She shivered.
‘I don't want to meet them again in a hurry.
But where do we go?’
‘In the opposite direction to them,’ he said succinctly.
He pointed the flashlight across the clearing.
‘We were over there.
Which way did they go when they left?’
Orientating herself, she pointed behind him.
‘That way.
Probably back to the river.
It's where we met them.’
‘East, to go north, at a rough guess.
We'll go west.
We'd better not waste any time.
I don't want to be anywhere near here when the sun comes up.
Take your bag and hold on to me.’
That wild flight through the night lived in her memory for years to come.
Tired as they were, they stumbled through the dark hours, picking themselves up when they fell, keeping up a pace that left no time for thought or speech.
As dawn began to lighten the sky they topped the rise of another mist-shrouded valley and began to descend the other side.
As they stumbled lower one sound rose up to meet them.
Travis halted and Paige staggered to a halt swaying on her feet.
‘Listen; there's water ahead of us,’ he declared.
At her lack of response, he turned the yellowing beam of the flashlight on her white face.
Immediately he slipped his arm about her.
‘You're all in.
But it's not much further now.
If it's a river we can find a place to hole up and get some rest.
Do you think you can make it?’
She straightened her spine.
‘Do babies cry?’
He laughed briefly.
‘OK, come on.’
The river, as indeed it turned out to be, was wreathed in wispy tendrils of mist.
‘With luck we'll be able to follow this down to the coast instead, and I do believe I see a cave just up ahead,’ Travis said encouragingly.
Cave, perhaps, was a misnomer.
It was a cavity made by the tumbling together of several large boulders, and roofed by the encroaching undergrowth.
The floor was sandy, and Paige sank on to it in relief.
Curling up in a ball, she rested her head on her arm and closed her eyes.
Travis watched her for a second, then eased off his load and knelt down beside her.
She was already asleep, and even the manoeuvring he had to do to remove her pack and settle her in his arms failed to rouse her.
An admiring smile curved his lips as he rested back against the boulder and closed his eyes.
‘You're something else, Paige Emerson,’ he murmured into her hair, and slept.
Hours later Paige was roused from a deep sleep by a hand on her shoulder.
Disorientated, she took a while to realise where she was.
The cave might have been unfamiliar, but Travis's face wasn't as he knelt beside her, holding out a cup.
‘Coffee.’
Straightening, she winced, brushing the hair out of her eyes before accepting the cup.
‘What time is it?’
Travis squinted out into the sunshine.
‘About midday.
How do you feel?’
‘Stiff,’ she confessed.
‘Are we safe?’
He picked up his own cup and sat down opposite her.
‘I think so — that's why I chanced a small fire.
My guess is they'll leave us to the forest.
All the same, once we've eaten we'll head downriver again for the night.’
She shuddered.
‘Once upon a time I thought I'd like to go on a trek through a jungle or rain forest.
I don't think I'll bother now,’ she said drily, and smiled.
‘What's for breakfast, or should I say brunch?’
Travis handed over some biscuits topped with slices of tinned meat.
‘You didn't complain once yesterday, or last night,’ he observed conversationally.
Paige swallowed a mouthful before answering.
‘We hardened criminals learn to take the rough with the smooth,’ she joked, then could have bitten out her tongue, because it had been a friendly overture, and now his face had closed up.
‘You've been on the run before?’
‘I'm not on the run now,’ she pointed out.
‘Which hardly answers the question.’
Lord, she'd been awake ten minutes and already they were at each other 's throats!
‘It's the only answer you're going to get.’
Travis took in a deep breath.
‘I notice you've stopped protesting your innocence.’
‘Because you don't want to hear it, and I refuse to keep wasting my time!’
She popped in the last piece of meat and biscuit, and chewed it fiercely.
‘I should have let him hit you properly!’ she snapped.
He grinned.
‘Why didn't you?’
Paige flung up her arms.
‘There's probably a streak of insanity in the family, and I've inherited it!’
Travis laughed, a full-blooded sound.
At the tone, warm fingers curled about her heart, making her feel weak.
She groaned inwardly.
Was there nothing this man did that she didn't like, didn't respond to?
Why was it that one laugh could make her forget how maddeningly single-minded he was?
Leave her wanting just to watch the way his face lightened, losing years?
To reach out and touch that enticing dimple in his cheek — and then perhaps say something to change the amusement in his eyes to something more heady?
The sound of the water faded, there were only the two of them locked in this tiny space, and suddenly it became difficult to breathe.
They could make love here and nobody would ever know.
They could let loose the stormy passions that seemd to multiply in this forest hothouse.
All she had to do was reach out and —
Abruptly she caught herself up.
She had to get out before he saw what must be written large on her face.
Clambering to her feet, she forgot her stiff legs, and in the next instant had stumbled, as they'd refused to obey her brain.
Travis caught her and she fell against him.
Fingers that longed to cling curled into her fists as she made to push herself away.
Yet as she did so their eyes met, and it was all there in those brown depths.
The powerful attraction they both fought against.
Barely held in check beneath the surface.
One touch, one thought, one look was enough to break through the flimsy barrier.
There were so many cracks in it now that it barely held at all.
It could have been something wonderful, but it had to be denied.
Travis recovered quicker than she, thrusting her away.
‘I think insanity must run in my family, too.
Why else would I be tempted to ignore all caution?
You'd better go.’
She escaped into the sunlight, gulping in fresh air.
How long could they go on like this?
How long before madness of one sort or another took over?
There had to be a cure for this fever of the blood.
There was little time for thinking as they progressed lower down this new valley.
The river slowed and broadened out slightly, the banks becoming wider and more easily traversed.
The forest still encroached to the shoreline, falling back only when meeting occasional inlets where smaller streams joined the major river.
They had to ford these hazards, Travis going first to pick out the best route.
Luckily they were usually no more than a few feet deep.
Travis said very little, but there was a strange quality to that quietness.
It was a silence that held knowledge of those moments back in the cave.
They could no longer pretend they were just hunter and hunted.
They saw each other far too strongly as man and woman.
She felt it in every touch of his hand as he helped her over hazards.
Hands that were quickly withdrawn when the need for them was over.
Yet the very decision not to touch only served to heighten the awareness of what could happen when they did.
Consequently Paige's nerves were stretched as tight as a drum by the time they stopped for the night on the banks of one of the streams they had waded through.
The further side had offered a fair-sized patch of flat ground.
Travis set about building the fire before Paige could offer to do so.
She watched him for a while, feeling superfluous.
He was shutting her out, and she acknowledged the wisdom of the move.
Their relationship had changed irrevocably.
They could never go back, and she squared her shoulders.
‘I thought I might go upstream a bit and wash off some of this dirt,’ she said evenly, fingering her hair distastefully.
Travis frowned up at her for a second, then took a quick look around and nodded.
‘You should be safe enough, but don't go too far.
I'll do the same when you get back.’
‘Fine.’
She turned to go, but he called her back.
‘Just a minute, you'll need this.’
He rummaged in his bag and brought over a small package and dropped it into her hand.
‘Soap.
Save some for me.’
Surprised, she sniffed at it appreciatively.
‘You think of everything, don't you?’ she said with a delighted smile.
Brown eyes dropped to her lips.
‘I try to,’ he conceded, then lifted a hand to rub it over the dark growth of beard on his jaw.
‘Unfortunately I forgot to pack a razor.’
She followed the movement, realising she hadn't actually noticed.
It seemed a part of him.
‘It makes you look rakish,’ she decided, and drew in a ragged breath as she encountered a smouldering look in his eyes.
It was gone almost instantly, but the air about them was charged.
‘Don't be too long,’ Travis advised tautly, stepping back.
Somehow the words just tumbled from her lips.
‘I'll give you a shout if I need my back done.’
Travis tensed.
‘Don't!’ he ordered sharply.
She didn't have to ask what he meant.
They both knew.
It was shimmering under the surface as it had been all afternoon.
And that stupidly provocative remark hadn't helped.
Contrite, she backed off, collecting a change of clothes from her bag.
She headed off upstream, and discovered a fair-sized pool after only a couple of minutes' walk.
Quickly she slipped out of her clothes and into its refreshing coolness.
It was sheer bliss.
She cavorted about in its depths for a while before gliding to the side to retrieve the soap and wash the collected grime from her skin and hair.
Before it grew too chilly she climbed out and dried herself on her dirty shirt before dressing.
She had one pair of trousers, and she couldn't put them on again until they were dry.
Instead she wore her big baggy khaki shirt over her panties like a dress.
She bit her lip over the length, but there was little she could do about it.
It was very nearly respectable, reaching over halfway down her thighs.
Quickly, to mask her doubts, she rinsed out her dirty clothes and was ready to return.
Picking up her washing and her boots, she clambered barefoot back to their camp.
Travis gave her appearance one long look before disappearing upstream the way she had come.
He had set some water on to boil and rigged up a makeshift affair of branches for her to hang her clothes on to dry.
She spread them out, then settled herself down on the sleeping-bag beside the fire to comb her hair dry.
Her thoughts flew to Travis.
That look had been far from cold, and her insides had melted.
She felt like a tightrope-walker without a net.
How on earth had they managed to get themselves into this mess?
Would they ever be able to extricate themselves from it without irreparable damage being done?
It was a sobering thought, but one that was whipped out of her mind by Travis's return.
With his hair slicked wetly back and his shirt cast casually over one tanned shoulder, leaving his impressively muscular torso bare, he was a vision that turned her mouth into a desert.
As she watched he draped the shirt next to hers by the fire before squatting down opposite her.
The comb stilled in her hands as her heart began to knock.
‘Ready to eat?’
She should have been ravenous, but her appetite had faded.
Still, she had to eat to keep up her strength.
‘Um-hm.’
Once again they dined on their bland diet of soup, meat and biscuits.
The stress in the air was awesome.
They had gone from fairly relaxed enemies, who could at least eat together, to this state of nerve-breaking tension.
Paige found herself having to force the food down past a constriction in her throat.
In the end, recognising that either the tension must crack or she would, she found her voice.
‘I don't think I'll ever touch soup again once we get out of here,’ she declared with a shudder, setting her empty mug aside.
Across the fire Travis studied his cup before tossing it away with an irritable gesture.
For the first time during the meal he looked directly at her.
‘You must have acquired quite a taste for French champagne and pâté de foie gras .’
Already overstretched, her temper snapped.
‘You just can't resist getting a dig in, can you?’
Travis looked surprised, and that aggravated her as much as his reply.
‘It seemed a reasonable statement.’
She tossed her head.
‘Oh naturally!
To you it would.
You know nothing about me, and yet you insist on crediting me with a lifestyle more likely your own!’
‘Oh, no, I'm not in that league.
I prefer to live simply.
Plain, wholesome food, well prepared.
However, I can't believe that, having chosen such a precarious means of earning a living, you wouldn't get the best out of it.’
‘My line of work pays well, but I suppose if I say I prefer to live simply, too, you'll call me a liar,’ Paige challenged indignantly.
‘Then what do you spend you ill-gotten gains on?’ he queried bluntly.
‘You can't even ask that without being obnoxious,’ she spluttered.
‘I'm not a thief, and I don't have any ill-gotten gains to spend.’
His smile was mocking.
‘And so we come full circle.
You're back to denial.’
‘Of course I damn well am!
You're so stubborn that you won't even allow the possibility that you're wrong.’
Travis shrugged.
‘If I did I don't think I'd ever see the jade again.’
She went cold.
‘You're totally ruthless.
Why is it so hard for you to believe me?’
This time Travis laughed.
‘Why?
Because it wouldn't be hard at all.
You're so plausible that I could make a case for you.
But what would it achieve?
The momentary satisfaction of you in my bed?
And the knowledge I'd betrayed all I believe in to have you?’
Paige gasped.
‘You mean you think all you have to say is you believe me and I'll fall into your arms?’
He sobered.
‘Deny what you like, but not that,’ he said, holding her eyes.
She couldn't deny it.
How could she when she knew she would use the same words to justify her actions?
All she had to do was admit to something she hadn't done.
But in the morning the self-betrayal would blacken all memories.
Lips twisting, she picked up her comb and began to pull it through her hair.
‘I wish to God I'd never met you,’ she whispered hoarsely.
‘Amen to that.’
In the long silence that followed Paige concentrated on the tangles in her hair.
They brought tears to her eyes, but tears of pain soon welled up from an overwhelming sense of despair.
Because, despite what had been said, she was still so very much aware of him sitting mere yards away.
So that she knew when he stood up and walked round to drop to his knees beside her.
His hand stilled hers and took the comb.
‘Let me do that,’ he ordered huskily, and her resolve crumpled like a house of cards.
Her heart thudded as she kept her head averted.
‘Travis, I don't think…’ she began, only to hear, in horror, her voice break on a sob.
He froze, then firm but gentle fingers raised her head.
‘Oh, hell!’ he swore softly, and released her.
Slowly he began to stroke the comb through the silken strands.
Paige had not known how sensual an experience having her hair combed could be.
Exhausted, she gave herself up to the motion.
Her tears dried.
She scarcely felt the snags.
His touch was soft and gentle, undermining her resistance.
It broke her heart.
Desperately she sought for something to break the enchantment of his rhythmic strokes.
‘Er — your grandfather…
Jonas, said that you'd — er — had to take over the family business when you were very young,’ she offered tensely.
‘My father died when I was twenty,’ Travis responded, but his voice seemed distant, as if he was forcing it.
Oh, lord, he had to be strong if she was to be.
‘That's…that's young.’
Travis seemed to make an effort.
‘I enjoyed the challenge, though I would rather have had my father back.’
Paige willingly followed his line to avoid disaster.
‘I know what you mean.
My parents died when I was only eight.
I went to live with my aunt and uncle.’
His movements stopped.
‘Weren't you happy?’
Automatically she turned so that she could see him, and knew immediately it was a fatal error.
‘Oh, yes, I…grew to love…them.’
Her words tailed off at the expression in his eyes.
She swallowed hard.
‘Travis?’
His name was a plea for him to take control and end this before it began.
But Travis was as caught as she.
It had always been too late.
‘You're very beautiful,’ he whispered huskily, fingers curving caressingly about her silky throat.
Helplessly her eyes closed to mere slits.
‘You shouldn't say that,’ she deplored without real conviction.
She wasn't aware of his putting the comb aside, only of strong hands turning her so that she lay across his knees.
His thumb caressed her jaw, the tender skin behind her ear.
‘I shouldn't be touching you either, but, dear God, I think I must.’
The passionate desperation in his voice brought her eyes wide.
She saw the utter concentration on his face as he watched his hand move, tracing a line from her frantically beating pulse to the V of her shirt, slipping inside to close about her breast.
As her nipple hardened into his palm, sending spears of desire to the very heart of her, his eyes locked with hers.
‘You want this too.
And this…’
His lips took the place of his hand, drawing her flesh into the moist cavern of his mouth, tongue teasing back and forth, tasting her.
His head lifted.
‘And this…’
This time he took her mouth, and she had no fight left in her.
Everything was sensation.
Somehow they were lying down, his strong body pressed intimately close along the whole length of hers.
Her hands slid up around his neck and she was kissing him back, her tongue meeting his with an intensity that was shocking.
His hand scalded her as it moved down her body, gliding silkily over the depression of her waist, across the flat planes of her quivering stomach, and back again to the graceful sweep of her hip.
It closed warmly about her, lifting her to meet, and be aware of, the hard arousal of his body.
Paige could feel herself dissolving, losing everything she knew of herself, and yet finding herself more real in the re-moulding.
She had never felt with this intensity before, and knew she never would again, unless it was Travis who was holding her.
Travis, who…was still her enemy.
Cold realisation of what she was doing swamped her fevered body.
With a sob she tore her mouth from his.
‘No!
No more!’ she cried, but Travis didn't seem to hear her.
With a strength she hadn't known she possessed she caught a handful of hair and dragged his head up.
‘No, Travis,’ she said again, and watched reality overwhelm him.
Without a word he rolled off her, one arm raised to cover his eyes, chest heaving as he sought for control.
Paige sat up, half turning from him as she dragged the sides of her shirt together.
‘This can't be happening,’ Travis declared gruffly.
‘I used to pride myself on my self-control.’
Her throat hurt, the muscles were so tight.
‘Me too.’
His hand caught her wrist and she felt the electric charge to her bones.
She looked round.
‘Perhaps the only way to end this is to give in to it,’ Travis offered, unconscious of the fact that his thumb began to caress her skin.
‘Do you really believe that?’ she whispered painfully.
Suddenly aware of what he was doing, he released her.
‘Hell, I don't know what I believe any more.
But could it be worse than this?’
Her eyes burned with unshed tears.
‘I don't know.’
Travis climbed to his feet, his movements without their usual grace.
Without looking at her, he rounded the fire, bending to add more fuel.
‘You'd better go to bed,’ he said curtly.
Paige bit her lip.
‘Aren't you coming?’
He laughed, tossing on a log that made the sparks fly.
Through their pyrotechnic effect he looked unreal.
‘If I touched you again tonight I wouldn't stop.’
She knew how he felt and shivered in reaction.
‘You'll be cold,’ she had to point out.
‘Don't worry about me.
I'll manage.
I doubt if I'll sleep anyway.
Go to bed, Paige — for both our sakes.’
There was no way she could ignore the appeal of that.
Yet once inside the quilted cocoon she couldn't sleep, but lay there watching him from beneath her lashes.
Swaddled in a large sweater, Travis sat with his arms about his legs, so still that he could have been a statue.
He looked so alone that she wanted to go to him and offer him comfort.
To receive it too.
Because the blinkers had finally fallen from her eyes when he had asked her if it could be worse.
It could.
It could destroy her, because she had fallen in love with him.
Despite everything.
In him she had found something her Libran soul had been searching for.
The other half of herself that made her whole.
And, now she had found him, there was born in her the need to give.
Give whatever was needed to make him happy.
What that might eventually be, only time would tell.
CHAPTER SIX
A hand on her shoulder roused Paige with a start early next day.
‘Coffee,’ Travis declared, setting the cup down beside her.
Pushing the hair from her eyes, she sat up, staring at the man crouched down beside the fire.
The events of yesterday were vivid.
She took a reviving sip of coffee before saying softly, ‘Did you get any sleep?’
Travis glanced up.
‘All I needed,’ he said shortly.
Paige drew her knees up inside the bag, resting her chin on them.
The long night had had a result; he was back in control again.
Travis picked up the map he must have been consulting while she slept.
‘I've been doing some calculations.
If we're where I think we are we've done very well.
In fact, I wouldn't be surprised if we reached the coast today.’
Paige swallowed down a sense of having lost something irreplaceable.
‘That's good,’ she agreed, draining her cup.
He looked at her sharply.
‘You don't sound too excited.
It means we could be back in civilisation in a couple of days.
I won't be sorry to get back to a little sanity,’ he added in an undertone.
She understood what he meant.
The insanity was the last few days and everything that had happened.
What she had discovered about herself last night would always have been doomed.
It would be madness to think otherwise.
‘I won't be sorry either.’
His gaze sharpened.
‘Good, I'm glad you agree.
Because you've lost the chance to use our physical attraction to divert me.’
Paige blanched, as much in anger as pain at those derisive words.
‘I can't believe it.
You're saying it's all been my fault?’
‘You can't deny that the only advantage to be gained is on your side,’ Travis countered coldly.
There was just no way she could let that pass unanswered.
Angry and hurt, she aimed for a vulnerable spot.
‘Do you really think so little of yourself that that could be all I wanted?’ she stabbed back and was pleased to see dull colour rise in his cheeks.
‘You underestimate yourself.
And in case you're in any doubt, that was a compliment!’ she added tartly as she climbed from the bag and began to struggle into her now dry clothes.
Travis's lips curled.
‘Do you usually compliment your lovers on their expertise?’
Paige ground her teeth.
‘I've never said it to anybody but you.’
Travis couldn't have looked more sceptical if she'd told him the world was flat after all.
‘Really?
Why single me out for this honour?’ he mocked.
She stared him out.
‘Because I thought a little honesty was needed.’
In a twinkling his jaw became set.
‘OK, so it's honesty you want.
The truth is, we're adversaries who have discovered that we want each other badly.
I'm only human.
Giving in to the impulse would be very easy.
And satisfying.
But where will it get us?
Our relationship isn't founded on trust.
The only basis we have is mutual desire,’ he grated out.
‘Is that honest enough for you?’
Too painfully honest.
If she didn't like it then it was her fault for rocking the boat.
It wasn't his fault that she had discovered her feelings were more than just desire.
If she hurt it was her own fault.
She should have remembered his Capricorn head would always rule.
‘At least you won't have to hate yourself in the morning, will you?’ she said acidly.
It was a neat line to end on and she used it to excuse herself and go upstream to wash, using the chilly water to freeze her blood and perhaps put a coat of ice about her heart.
When she returned to the camp Travis had already packed up.
She didn't feel very hungry, but forced down her breakfast with plenty of water.
Travis was impatient to get on, but Paige was in a Libran mood, depressed and bloody-minded enough not to allow herself to be chivvied before she was ready.
Of course, the mood didn't last.
Her emotions swung about all through the morning's stolidly silent descent, at times depressed, at others defiant.
Until finally, about lunchtime she achieved a state of resignation: you couldn't make someone love you if they didn't, and you couldn't make them accept love from you if they didn't want it.
It didn't help to be able to see why he had done what he had in fostering their enmity.
Nor did it help that the morning, which had started so bright, began to cloud over.
It was like an omen, and she wasn't at all surprised that, not long after they had resumed after their meagre lunch, the first raindrops fell.
After that first warning it fell like a sheet.
Within seconds they were both drenched to the skin.
They sought shelter under the trees, and Travis checked that their bags were as waterproof as possible.
‘If this doesn't let up we'll need something dry to change into,’ he said, squinting up at what could be seen of a lowering sky.
‘Damn it, we should have known things were going too well.’
Paige said nothing, but stared morosely out at the wall of water.
As a rule, she liked rain, but this was a deluge.
It was turning the path into a river and the river into a torrent.
Half an hour later, the deluge became a steady downpour with no sign of lifting.
Travis turned to her, having remained silent all the while.
‘We can't stay here.
We'll need somewhere dry to spend the night if we're not to go down with pneumonia.
The last thing we need is having to spend more time in the God-forsaken place than we have to.
I think we'll have to take our chance out there.
What do you say?’
A trickle of water ran down her spine and she shivered.
‘I can't get much wetter than I am already,’ she declared philosophically.
Travis bent down to peer out.
‘That's what I like about you, Paige Emerson.
You're full of spunk.’
‘So, there is something about me you like?’ she retorted sarcastically.
He glanced at her briefly.
‘Too damn much for my own peace of mind,’ he returned, ‘but I'm working on it.
Come on, let's go.’
As they stepped out from their shelter the treacherousness of the ground beneath their feet allowed no room for anything except total concentration.
Even so, some two hours later that didn't stop Paige from missing her footing completely and coming down heavily on her ankle.
The shooting pain brought an involuntary cry to her lips, loud enough to halt Travis, who was some yards ahead.
When he turned and saw her on the ground he strode back, hunkering down beside her.
‘What happened?’
‘I slipped and twisted my ankle,’ she gasped, clutching the injured limb.
‘Damn it, that's all we need!’
His insensitivity hurt, and she reacted accordingly.
‘Of course, I did it on purpose, just to annoy you!’
Travis shot her a daggers look.
‘I suppose you're expecting me to carry you now?’ he charged tersely.
If she could have picked up a rock she would have hurled it at his rotten head.
‘Not while I have a breath in my body you won't.
I'd rather crawl!’
‘Don't be ridiculous,’ he growled.
Pain and Travis combined to fuel her temper.
‘Call me ridiculous once more, and I'll spit in your eye!
Don't touch me!’ she added as he began to carefully straighten her leg and probe the flesh at the top of her boot.
‘Shut up, you annoying little wretch!
Does this hurt?’
‘Of course it damn well hurts!’ she shouted, tears welling up to mingle with the rain.
‘You're an insensitive clod, and I hope you fall and break your neck!’
Suddenly he gave her a rueful grin.
‘Then you'd really have to crawl.
OK, I apologise for being a clod.
It's a sprain all right.
If I take your boot off you'll never get it on again.
We can tighten the laces, though, to give you some support.
Do you think you'll be able to walk?’
At his apology, she subsided.
‘Help me up and I'll try,’ she said, smothering a grimace.
Travis looked at her, seemed about to say something, then changed his mind.
He rose and helped her to her feet, steadying her as she eased her weight on to the injured ankle.
‘How does it feel?’
Wincing a little, she forced a smile.
‘Fine,’ she said blithely, then met his eyes and shrugged.
‘OK, not too bad.
If I had a stick I could manage all right, really.’
He shook his head, spreading raindrops around, dog-fashion.
‘I've a feeling you're lying, but I won't get you to admit it, will I?’ he said wryly, glancing about him.
Producing a knife from his pocket, he disappeared into the trees.
With a sigh of relief Paige eased the weight from her ankle.
It hurt, but she wasn't about to hold them back if she could help it.
She straightened again as Travis returned with a branch.
He had lopped off the leaves and twigs at a joint so that it made a very crude crutch.
‘Try that,’ he recommended, setting it beneath her arm.
It was a little short, but she managed quite well after a few practice steps.
She stopped before him and smiled.
‘This is fine.
Now I won't slow you down.’
Travis swore, silently and at some length.
‘Are you trying for sainthood?
If it hurts, tell me.
If I go too fast, tell me — or, so help me, I'll…’
He broke off, breathing deeply.
‘Hell, you'd try the patience of a saint!’
‘And we both know you're not a saint, don't we?’ she mocked and precipitated them back into that heady realm of awareness that they had seemed to subdue.
She noticed things about him that she had been forced to ignore.
Like how his lashes spiked and held the raindrops, and how a small river ran tantalisingly down his throat to disappear into the V of his shirt.
That his clothes hugged him like a second skin, hiding nothing.
She had not looked deliberately, not wanting to tempt herself with the sight of him.
Now it all went for nought because of a few careless words.
Travis turned away, but not before she had seen the way his face closed up.
‘Let's go — we've wasted enough time,’ he ordered abruptly, and led off again.
With a helpless sigh Paige followed.
To begin with it wasn't too bad, and the stick definitely helped, but all the same the constant use soon took its toll.
The dull ache became a throb, so that every step became agony, taking the colour from her cheeks and drawing her lips into a tight line.
True to Travis's estimation, they reached the coast some hours before dark.
The trees had thinned out a little, the closer they got to the coast, until they passed by the last of them and stepped on to sand that seemed to stretch endlessly in either direction.
Not that Paige cared; all she could feel was the pain in her ankle.
She took a couple of steps on to the damp surface, lost her balance and collapsed to her knees.
She was exhausted by the effort it had taken to keep putting one foot in front of the other.
Now, on her knees, she sobbed weakly, shivering as the rain fell unrelentingly down.
She didn't hear Travis come over to her, only felt his strong arms raising her up.
Face grim, he studied her ashen cheeks.
‘You little fool!
Why didn't you tell me?’ he growled roughly, swinging her up into his arms.
Paige made a half-hearted protest.
‘I can manage.’
Travis strode out.
‘Sure you can.
About as well as a newborn babe.
Just shut up, Paige, and stop wriggling.
There's some sort of building up ahead.’
She gave up because she really didn't have the strength to fight.
Besides, now that she had stopped walking she didn't seem to be able to stop herself from shivering.
It seemed a long way to the building, but eventually she heard his footsteps on wood and knew they had arrived.
‘It looks abandoned, or seldom used,’ Travis observed as he elbowed his way inside.
‘A fisherman's hut, by the looks of it,’ he added, and her nose confirmed it, wrinkling at a stale smell of fish and disuse.
He deposited her on a stool with that casual strength of his and glanced around.
‘Good, there's a fireplace.
Stay there.
Don't even think of moving while I see if I can find some dry firewood.’
Hugging herself, Paige watched him disappear outside again.
Blinking, she surveyed her surroundings.
There weren't many items of furniture, and what there was was basic.
Just a table and a couple of stools, and above the fireplace a shelf holding various cooking utensils.
Dust and sand coated everything.
She was shuddering in distaste when Travis came in carrying an armful of kindling, which he tossed down by the fire.
Kneeling down, he quickly set about laying a fire.
‘Whoever uses this place keeps the woodpile stocked.
I found a boxful around the back.
There's a rain-water barrel too.
I don't know how fresh it is, even with this rain, but we can boil everything.’
He glanced at her briefly.
‘I'll soon have this going; then we'll get you dry.’
True to his word, before very long there was a cheery fire crackling away, giving off warmth and light.
Travis stripped off his shirt and tossed it aside before unrolling the sleeping-bag and spreading it before the fire.
Then he turned to Paige, removing her bag before turning his attention to her clothes.
She stopped his hands as they began to release the buttons.
‘I'll do it,’ she protested, and Travis sat back on his heels.
‘This is no time for false modesty, Paige.
If we don't get you dry and warm you could be really ill.
We can't risk that out here.
I can do it quicker than you can.
Are you still going to fight me?’
Her lip trembled weakly, but she shook her head and dropped her hands.
Truth be told, she didn't have the energy to do anything.
Travis worked with impersonal speed, stripping off all her wet clothes, taking extra care with her foot and rubbing her dry with one of his own, only slightly damp, shirts.
Then he bundled her now rosy body into her dry shirt and sat her down on the sleeping-bag to vigorously rub her hair dry.
She was still shivering when he finished, but the warmth gradually began to seep inwards to where her bones were chilled.
She watched his downbent head as he examined her foot.
Out of the constricting boot, the swelling was all too visible.
‘Stupid, crazy female,’ was all he said as he set about bandaging it with the meagre contents of the first-aid box.
When it was done he ordered her into the sleeping-bag.
‘You won't be walking on that again in a hurry.’
Her teeth chattered as she managed to produce a small smile.
‘Sorry.’
‘No need to apologise.
You didn't do it on purpose.’
Then he quirked an eyebrow.
‘At least, I assume even you wouldn't be crazy enough to sprain your ankle just to get into my arms.’
His wry humour made her laugh.
‘I don't know.
Maybe I would,’
He stood up.
‘Not you.
Your methods are far more subtle, and far more effective.’
Her heart skipped a beat.
‘I'd never have guessed,’ she quipped, and it ended in a raucous cough.
‘Don't let it go to your head,’ he murmured, bending down to rest his palm on her forehead.
‘You're hot.
The last thing you want is a chill.
I'll get you something hot to drink.
Meanwhile, take two aspirin with some water — that should help.’
He turned away and the firelight glinted off the planes of his back.
It made it look like golden silk, and she had the urge to run her hands over it to find out.
‘You're very strong, aren't you?’
He glanced round, eyebrow raised.
‘Your shoulders are broad enough to bear anything.’
‘If you say so.
Here.’
He handed her the tablets and water, and she swallowed them obediently.
Paige lay back, watching him mooch about, putting a pot over the fire and ranging their clothes to dry.
Steam drifted upwards; the aroma of soup permeated the air.
She began to warm up.
‘You should get out of those wet trousers, Travis.’
He looked up from putting more wood on the fire.
‘Don't you think you ought to wait until you're well to try seducing me?’
She flushed.
‘Now who's being provocative?’
‘Turn about is fair play,’ he corrected drily, pouring soup into mugs.
‘I don't have it,’ she stated firmly.
Travis frowned as he handed her a mug of soup.
‘What are you talking about?’
She blew on her soup and sipped carefully.
‘The jade.
That's what you're up to, isn't it?
Getting me to admit where it is?
That's the rottenest of rat-fink tricks!’ she said peevishly, and held out the mug.
‘I've had enough.
It's too hot to eat.
Don't you feel hot?’
Travis took the mug and set it on the table.
‘It's probably the aspirin sweating the chill out.
You'll feel better tomorrow.’
‘You're enjoying seeing me laid low, aren't you?’ she snapped testily.
‘Shut up, Paige, there's a good girl.
You'll wear your teeth out.
Now, close your eyes for a minute while I get out of these.’
His hand went to the button of his jeans and she hastily lowered her lids.
However, she couldn't resist looking.
Travis had turned his back, and as he reached for his other pair of jeans she had the perfect view of long tanned, muscular legs, a taut, narrow behind and a torso that widened to an impressive width of shoulder.
She couldn't withhold a gasp, and had to close her eyes quickly as his head came round.
‘Seen enough?’
She couldn't help it.
‘No.’
There came the unmistakable sound of legs shooting into denim, then the zip going up.
‘One day some man is going to call your bluff, sweetheart.’
She felt unaccountably like tears.
‘But not you, Travis.
That's sad,’ she said softly.
Footsteps came closer.
‘Go to sleep, Paige.
You're worn out.
You don't know what you're saying any more.
Don't worry, I won't take you seriously,’ he told her gently.
She already knew that, but was too tired to argue the point.
Closing her eyes, she dozed.
But it was a restless sleep, as her watcher was fully aware.
She didn't feel him bathe her forehead or moisten her lips from time to time.
Neither was she aware of the mumbled words that passed her lips as the hours went by, nor of the method he used to warm her when she started to shiver again.
She lay lost in troubled, feverish dreams.
Paige was startled awake by a raucous cry.
Her sluggish brain took a while to recognise the call of a seagull.
With a sigh of relief she subsided on to her silky pillow, snuggling up like a kitten.
It took only slightly less time for her to remember there were no pillows in the sleeping-bag.
The eye she opened travelled across an expanse of hairy chest, shocking her into awareness of who she lay on and that, by the feel of it, both of them were next to naked.
She still wore her shirt, but it had ridden up over her thighs, while all her senses registered that Travis wore nothing save his skin.
Her head shot up — it was all of her that she could move in the confined space — and blue eyes locked with sleepy brown ones.
‘You look better,’ he observed matter-of-factly.
‘Who's Chris?’
Paige's wits slowly reassembled themselves.
‘Chris?’ she echoed, diverted.
‘When I climbed in here last night you called me Chris and started to fight for your honour,’ Travis went on conversationally.
Her teeth came together in a snap.
‘I happen to think my honour is worth fighting for!
And why did you climb in in the first place?’
‘You were cold and I had to get you warm.
It worked, apart from Chris.
Who is he?’
There was a hardness in his tone.
She was getting to know the way his mind worked.
‘You'd like me to say he's my fence, wouldn't you?
Sorry, he's just someone I went out with who thought he had exclusive rights to my body.’
She had put him right in no uncertain terms, after a hearty struggle.
‘I decide who has rights, and until then they're exclusively mine!’
There was a pregnant pause.
‘You have more twists than a snake!
What are you trying to get me to believe now?
After the way you've responded to me, you can't be telling me you've never had an affair with anyone?’
Travis dismissed scornfully.
It wasn't a statement she was used to making, or having questioned.
‘Guilty as charged.’
‘Am I to infer that Laurie isn't your lover?’ he went on in patent disbelief.
‘I never said he was any such thing.
It was you who jumped to the conclusion.
Lori and I have a relationship based on mutual distrust.
Which is why we see each other so rarely.’
It didn't please her to admit it, because she preferred to get on with people.
Travis said nothing for a moment, then opened the zip so that he could sit up.
When he looked down at her again his expression was strangely blank.
‘No lover, no accomplice — no thief?’
Paige held her breath.
‘Are you saying you believe me now?’
‘I'm saying it's an interesting theory.
One you haven't tried on me before.
Actually, it's quite clever.
What was it, the result of a fevered mind?’ he taunted.
She looked away, swallowing hard as disappointment choked her.
Damn him!
‘Now I'd better get up.
If I tell you to close your eyes, will you do it this time?’
Eyes of a glittering blue swung to spear him.
‘Please, don't tell me you're shy!’ she jeered thickly.
Travis's eyes gleamed right back.
‘No, but my body is exclusively mine until I decide to share it.’
The use of her own words against her was a body blow and she looked away.
She heard the sound of him dressing, but waited until she heard him add wood to the fire before sitting up.
The action jarred her foot and she winced, but it didn't seem to ache as much as yesterday.
‘Still hurts?’
Travis asked from the fire, where he was setting up a pan of water.
‘Do you really care?’ she challenged bitterly.
‘Now and again you have this unbecoming habit of acting as if you were a tortured innocent,’ he said shortly.
‘It couldn't be because I am, I suppose?’
He tipped his head quizzically.
‘Do you really need me to answer that?
You still haven't told me how your ankle is.’
‘Painful,’ she snapped.
‘Better rest it today.
We can afford to stay here.
There's fresh water, and I found some fishing tackle, so with a bit of luck we could be eating in style tonight.’
The very thought made her mouth water, but she'd cut her tongue out before admitting it to him after what he had said.
‘I have to go to the bathroom.’
Travis carried her outside, then back to bed when she called, handling her with a care that would have made her feel cherished if it hadn't been so impersonal.
Breakfast was another bland affair.
Paige found herself quite hungry, but that was probably because she'd eaten very little the night before.
While they ate Travis examined the fishing tackle he had found.
She watched him.
His absorption was total.
From somewhere he had summoned up new defences.
Stronger ones, at least to her eyes.
Now and again there was a light in his eyes, a far-off look, that was so appealing to her senses that she had to break it to ease her own pain.
‘A penny for your thoughts,’ she said brusquely, and he glanced up.
From the way he frowned, he hadn't missed her tone.
‘I was wondering what it would be like to battle with a marlin.’
She couldn't seem to stop her tongue.
‘Don't tell me the great McKenna has never done so!’
Brown eyes narrowed.
‘There's never been the time.’
Travis shrugged.
‘There was my family to look after, and the business to run.
Not that I regretted taking on the responsibilities, but it meant shelving any dreams I'd had.’
Despite herself, Paige's heart went out to him.
‘You must have been lonely.’
‘Sometimes.
But I knew what I had to do, so I did it.’
‘You spoke of dreams.
What would you have liked to do?’ she probed, intrigued by this new insight into the man.
Travis ran a hand through his hair.
‘Kid's stuff mostly.
Travelling the silk road, perhaps.
Diving for pearls in the South Seas.
Following in the steps of Marco Polo.’
His words struck a chord, making her turn away.
She had always wanted to see the Spice Islands.
To visit Java and Tonga, and Tahiti.
Had things been different they could even have gone together.
They could have lived on a tropic isle.
He could have dived for pearls and she could have painted.
What more could they have asked for?
He was a romantic at heart, who longed for adventure, but who was trapped inside the Capricorn convention of duty.
It had brought them together and would drive them apart.
But she could have made the whole of his life an adventure, so that he never need feel lonely again.
She could have done it, she knew she could, because she loved him, and love could move mountains.
But the mountain had to be willing to be moved, which turned her thoughts to ashes in her mouth.
‘Dreams are for children, Travis,’ she said flatly, eyes on the flames in the hearth.
‘I think, for us, it's too late.’
CHAPTER SEVEN
Seated on one stool by the wall of the hut, with her foot resting on another, Paige stared gloomily at Travis's figure down by the water's edge.
He had been there since lunchtime, and it had been while she'd watched him that she had come to the decision that she must go.
She had always known that she must get away from him some time in order to reach Lori, and there couldn't be a better opportunity.
Travis showed every sign of staying there for hours.
He wouldn't miss her right away, and even if he looked up and saw the empty stool he'd probably assume she was inside the hut.
Besides, he'd never expect her to try and escape because he thought her ankle too painful to walk on.
She'd lied about it out of pique, but now it seemed to be turning to her advantage.
Once more she studied his position.
He'd moved away, back the way they had come yesterday.
It seemed symbolic.
Her reluctance to go made her heart ache, but the truth was patent.
There was no future for her here.
There could never be a future with Travis.
It was enough to propel her to her feet and inside.
With an economy of movement she collected up her things, some of the remaining rations and a flask of water.
Then with her crutch to aid her she slipped out of the door and round the blind side of the building, hobbling into the cover of the under-brush.
Her aim was simple; to head up the coast under cover of the bushes and seek out the first help she could.
She didn't doubt that Travis would follow her as soon as he could, but her hope was to reach a village before he reached her.
From safety she could notify the authorities of Travis's whereabouts and still get out of the country before he caught up.
At first she covered the ground fairly easily and quickly, but, as with even the best-laid plans, things went wrong.
Her trusty crutch found a hidden hole, sending her to the ground, to lie winded but undamaged.
It was the crutch that had snapped in two.
There was no way to repair it and no means of cutting herself another.
Which left her with no alternative but to hobble on as best she could.
But it slowed her up considerably, and as time passed she found herself casting furtive glances over her shoulder.
Travis must have discovered her disappearance by now, and with a sinking heart she realised she hadn't put nearly enough distance between them for safety.
Sure enough, not long afterwards she heard the first faint sounds of pursuit.
Something or someone behind her didn't seem to care how much noise they were making.
It had to be Travis, and that spurred her on to reckless speed, putting too much weight on her much tried ankle, until it could only do one thing — collapse under her.
She fell headlong, with a cry of alarm, and lay gasping for breath as the pain shot up her leg.
The crashing sounds grew louder and then a pair of shoes came into her field of vision.
‘It would serve you right if you had broken the damn ankle,’ Travis declared with suppressed violence as he knelt down.
‘What were you trying to do?’
Paige allowed him to help her roll over into a sitting position.
‘Get away from you, of course!’ she retorted, angry and despairing at how pleased she was to hear his voice.
He shook his head in disbelief.
‘You could have killed yourself.
Were you really so desperate to get away from me that you'd risk that?’
He frowned, brushing dust and leaves from her cheeks.
‘Yes,’ she gritted hardily.
‘All for a jade figurine?’
She saw red, and her fist thudded against his chest.
‘Damn you, not for the jade!
Because you never believe a word I say!’
A muscle flexed in his jaw.
‘Neither is worth dying for,’ he said gruffly, standing up with her in his arms.
‘I'm taking you back.’
Her laugh had a hysterical edge.
‘What else?
You're nothing if not predictable, Travis McKenna!’
It was nearly dark by the time they reached the hut.
It had been a long walk, but Travis was barely breathing hard, a fact she wished she hadn't noticed because it underlined his strength and she found that such a potent attraction.
Despite his anger, she had enjoyed being carried by him — rather too much.
She had had to put her arms around his neck, but it had been hard keeping her hands from charting the planes of his shoulders as they had wanted to do.
Yet she didn't think she had imagined that, when her head had dropped wearily on to his shoulder, his arms had tightened about her.
An unspoken reason for her attempted escape had also been the growing certainty that this attraction was coming to a head.
Things couldn't go on as they were without something happening, and she had intuitively known that when it did her life would be forever changed.
So she had sought to avoid it, only to end up back where she had started.
As Travis set her down on her good leg inside the hut she gave herself up to a sense of fatalism.
What would be, would be.
Bracing her hands on his shoulders, she looked up.
‘I'm nothing but a nuisance to you.
You should have let me go.’
His expression was inscrutable as he gazed back at her.
‘I considered it for perhaps ten seconds.’
She raised a brow.
‘So long?
I must have made an impression!’
Travis's lips twitched.
‘An indelible one.
However, whatever I know you to be, and whatever you've done, I couldn't let a woman spend the night out there alone.’
Her lids dropped, shielding her thoughts.
‘You were being noble.
Saving me in spite of myself?’
She could have been anyone, and that hurt.
She wanted to be special — and that was the height of foolishness.
‘You could be something fine,’ he declared, surprising her completely.
‘You took a wrong path years ago, but that doesn't mean to say you can't change, if you want to.’
She eyed him fully.
‘And I suppose my first step on the path would be to tell you where the jade is?’
‘It would be a start,’ he conceded.
Paige laughed hollowly.
‘I'm sorry, but I can't help you.’
Anger flashed in his eyes.
‘Won't, you mean.’
She was suddenly just as angry.
‘No!
I don't mean!
You're always telling me what I should be — or do — or say.
Why is it so important to you that I admit I'm a thief?
Will it make you feel better?
I am who I am, right now, this minute, and if you can't see who that person is — then to hell with you!’ she renounced and hobbled away to the nearest stool.
Travis drew in an irritable breath.
‘This is getting us nowhere.
Everything you've done points to your guilt, yet you want me to believe otherwise.
You've no alibi to help you.’
Sitting down, Paige rested her ankle on her knee and started to massage it.
‘Oh, silly me!’ she drawled sarcastically.
‘That's what I forgot to get when I went to the market!
It completely slipped my mind I was going to be accused of theft!
And aren't you forgetting something?
The onus of proof is on you, and so far you've failed to prove me guilty!’
Travis crossed to where the first-aid box sat and extracted some pain-killers.
‘A temporary setback,’ he declared, handing them to her with some water.
Paige took the tablets wearily.
They were at the same impasse.
Everything always led back to this.
Defeatedly she glanced around and caught sight of the abandoned fishing gear.
It seemed a nice safe topic.
‘Did you catch any fish?’
‘Two.
I left them outside.
They should still be there if some animal hasn't carried them off,’ Travis answered, and went out of the door.
He came back with a brace of fish of a species she couldn't put a name to.
‘They're not very big, are they?
What about the one that got away?’
That at least brought a laugh from him.
‘You've known some fishermen, then?’
‘My uncle,’ she nodded.
‘If you like, I'll cook them once you've cleaned them,’ she offered.
‘You don't have to,’ he rejected shortly, putting her back up again.
‘I know I don't, but I might as well make myself useful, seeing as I'm back,’ she snapped.
Travis ground his teeth.
‘One of these days I'm either going to kill you or kiss you, I haven't decided which!’ he retorted and walked out.
They ate their meal on the tiny porch, watching the moon rise and send out dancing streaks of light upon the constant motion of the sea.
The rhythmic breaking of the waves upon the sand was infinitely soothing.
Paige could almost have imagined they were on some deserted tropic isle.
If they had been, even now they would be thinking of the night to come.
Perhaps going for a moonlit swim before making love under the stars.
She would be all silver, he gold, and —
Swiftly she got a hold on her wayward thoughts.
It was a dangerous game to play.
But the daggers had remained sheathed during the meal, and she had allowed her thoughts to drift into those glittering waters.
How could she help it?
Unless they were arguing, she was a prey to her senses.
He was impossible to ignore and all too easy to fantasise about.
Yes, it was a very dangerous game, and she had to stop.
Her mind searched for a safer topic.
‘Do you think they've found the plane?’
From the way he started, he had been miles away, too.
‘Perhaps.
It would be like looking for a needle in a haystack.
If they have, they will have found the message I left saying what we were going to do, and our heading.’
She hadn't known that.
‘You left nothing to chance, did you?’
He shrugged.
‘It was the only way to lessen the risks, and maximise our chances of survival.’
She had to smile.
‘No wonder you're a whiz at what you do.’
‘I aim to win, not lose.
It's knowing what risks are acceptable.’
Elbows on the table, Paige rested her chin on her hands.
‘Hm, I know what you mean.
It can be like that in my business, too.’
Travis's grin was dry.
‘I can imagine.
Which house do you crack, and which do you leave?’
In a flash, her hazy pictures were well and truly dissolved.
‘I was referring to my business.
Or did you imagine I did nothing else all day but case joints and then rob them at night?’
Travis held up his hand.
‘OK, I admit I was at fault.
I should have guessed you'd have a legitimate business.
What line of work are you in?’
Now that really did astound her, for she had assumed he must know, and that was why he was so convinced of her guilt.
Her face clearly showed her surprise.
‘Don't you know?
I was sure you must, that Jonas would have told you.
I have my own antiques business.’
‘Antiques!’
There was an odd quality to the tone he used that sent her rushing in to speech.
‘Don't jump to conclusions, Travis.
I don't deal in jade.
That's a different market.
I prefer artwork, although I specialise in fine china and porcelain.
That's how I met your grandfather, at a sale.
We discovered a mutual interest, and, as I'm my own boss, I offered to catalogue some of his collection, and do some shopping in very pleasant surroundings.
I have a reputation for honesty and fair trading — and it's well known that I don't have any truck with shady deals,’ she informed him bluntly.
Travis eyed her calmly.
‘Did I accuse you of anything?’
Paige thinned her lips.
‘Your tone implied it.’
‘Perhaps it did, because I was wondering why you'd never vouchsafed that interesting titbit of information before,’ he mused.
Her teeth snapped together.
‘Why didn't you ask your grandfather?
Silly question!
You had me pegged down as a full-time thief.’
That bull-headedness again!
Travis's eyes narrowed.
‘If your business is legit then there's no need to be defensive.
On the other hand, antiques makes a pretty good cover.’
‘For a thief?’ she queried sourly, wishing she'd kept quiet about it.
He wasn't listening.
‘Where better to off-load the goods?’ he muttered to himself.
Irritated, she crossed her arms.
‘I can give you the name of a good London-based detective agency if you want it,’ she offered, and he looked up.
‘What was that?’
‘Never mind, you'd probably accuse them of collusion!’
Travis focused on her angry face.
‘What's wrong?’
‘If I came along and accused you of sharp practice, you'd be righteously indignant.
Why am I not allowed to feel the same about something that means a great deal to me?’ she retorted fiercely.
‘I didn't say you couldn't,’ he corrected.
‘I'm just having a hard time indentifying you with a business legendary for its ‘wise old men’.
You don't look like any antiques dealer I've ever met.’
Her eyes flashed.
‘Oh, I see.
It's an English exercise.
Antiques dealers are men.
Paige Emerson is not a man.
Therefore Paige Emerson is not an antiques dealer!
Very clever.
However, apparently you have no trouble seeing me as a thief!’
‘Now you're twisting things.
You don't look like a thief either,’ Travis growled.
‘Well, thank heaven for small mercies!’
‘Calm down, Paige,’ he warned.
She stood up.
‘I will not calm down!
You throw insults at me left, right and centre, and seem to think I should say thank you.’
Angry tears flooded her eyes and clogged her throat.
‘I am not a thief.
I don't handle stolen property, and damn you for suggesting I do!
I'm tired of it!
Tired of bashing my head against a brick wall!
How much do you think I can take?’
It was too much.
The tears overflowed and she turned away, pressing a hand over trembling lips.
When two firm hands descended on her shoulders she tensed.
‘Paige, I'm sorry,’ he apologised huskily.
She dashed the tears away and swung round.
‘No, you're not.
You've always wanted to see me broken.
You've said it to my face!’
His face was bleak.
‘Maybe I did, but not any more.
It would give me no satisfaction.’
Confused by this apparent about-face, she blinked at him.
‘I don't know what you want of me,’ she choked out.
A mask seemed to fall away from his face, and she saw the torment in his eyes.
‘I want you to be somebody else!’
Her heart twisted.
Someone he could want without feeling he was betraying all he believed in.
Paige swallowed hard.
‘I can't help you.
I can only be me,’ she whispered.
Travis closed his eyes in pain for a second, and then almost as if he couldn't help himself he reached out a hand and pulled her to him, pressing a kiss on her hair.
The air seemed to thicken with barely suppressed emotions.
‘Only you,’ he repeated huskily.
‘God help us, we can only be us, and that's the pity of it.’
Taking a deep breath, he stepped back.
‘It's getting late.
We ought to go in before it starts to get cold.’
After struggling with her composure for a moment, Paige began gathering up the odd assortment of utensils they had used.
‘Leave them,’ Travis ordered, stilling her hands.
‘I'll do them in a moment.’
Moving her to one side, he manoeuvred the table back into the hut.
Then he picked up the washing-up.
‘I'm going back to the river to bathe.
You may as well get ready for bed.
Don't wait up for me, I'll probably be a while.’
Paige stood in the doorway and watched his retreating figure until it was no more than a deeper patch of dark in the gathering gloom.
Going back inside, she shut the door behind her.
She felt on edge, upset by all the emotional ups and downs.
She knew if she went to bed she wouldn't sleep.
Not until Travis returned.
Travis.
He was in as much turmoil as she.
She wanted to help him, but how could she when she was the problem?
It was impossible.
She surveyed the hut morosely.
The interior was only lit by the golden glow of the fire, and, despite the small dimensions, the corners of the room were still shrouded in shadow.
It was warm, almost uncomfortably so after their nights out under the stars, and Paige felt the stickiness of it on her skin.
She would have liked a bath herself, but, failing that, she could have a strip wash.
There was plenty of water now, and she could even heat some.
From what Travis had said, he would be in no hurry to return.
By the time the water had heated she had spread out the sleeping-bag before the fire, laid out a fresh shirt, and found something to use as a wash-cloth.
Carefully stripping off her clothes so as not to jar her ankle, she sat before the fire, softly humming to herself as she savoured the delight of clean skin.
The sudden rush of cooler air as the door was thrust open took her completely by surprise.
Her head shot round, her shocked gasp mingling with the audible hiss of sharply indrawn breath.
For a split-second they both froze.
Long enough for Paige to be aware of Travis's still wet hair, and that his only covering was his jeans.
Shoes, shirt and utensils dropped to the floor as he slammed the door shut.
‘What the hell…?’
The question was choked out of him.
Hastily Paige drew her legs up to her chest, anchoring them with her arms.
‘You said you'd be gone some time!’ she charged in self-defence, totally unaware, unlike Travis, that the firelight made a glorious halo of her hair.
He seemed to have difficulty forming his words.
‘I…changed my mind,’ he said dazedly, and they both became vitally aware of the electric charge in the air.
Paige closed her eyes, oh, so conscious of her body flowering in a way she'd never experienced before.
‘If you…turn around…
I'll get some clothes on.’
There was a fraught silence, and then, ‘I think I prefer you like this.
Glowing in the firelight like some magical creature.’
Blue eyes locked with brown.
‘Travis!’
His name was a strangled breath.
Barefoot, he padded to her side, kneeling down unbearably close.
‘I like the way you say my name, too,’ he murmured thickly, his gaze a shockingly sensual caress.
Her eyes were enormous wells of emotion.
‘Don't toy with me, Travis.
If this is another trick then stop,’ she pleaded, her defences laid waste.
Slowly he shook his head.
‘I couldn't even if I wanted to, and I don't want to.
A man can only fight fate and himself so long.’
His fingers drew strands of hair out to glitter in the firelight.
‘I never thought I could feel this way about any woman.
I can no longer convince myself this is wrong.
It's right .
Here, like this, it's never been more right.
Just us — a man and a woman.
There's no past, no future.
Just here and now.’
He leant forward, burying his face in the silken tresses.
Breathing her in, as if to keep the essence of her forever.
‘I want to make love to you.
To know you so completely that ever after you will be me, and I you.’
She trembled at the passion in his voice, her whole being coming alive just for him.
This she had waited for all her life.
There was not one single atom in her that could have said no to his declaration.
‘Yes,’ she breathed, and felt him shudder.
He drew back, burning brown eyes meeting slumbrous blue.
‘If I touch you it will be too late, so, if you're not sure, tell me now.’
Paige looked down, knowing that whatever decision she made he would abide by.
His word was his bond.
But this was no longer a time for words.
She had never done anything like this before, but she wasn't lacking in courage.
Reaching out, she took his right hand and placed it very gently on her breast.
Only then did she raise her head, meeting his eyes and holding them.
‘Make love to me, Travis, please.’
He swore softly, and closed his eyes for a second, swallowing hard.
He moved then, gathering her into his arms.
His hand shook as he cupped her face.
‘Your generosity is incredible.
Forgive me if I hurt you, but I want you so much that I don't know if I can hold back.’
‘I'm not afraid.
Just love me,’ she answered him simply.
With a groan he lowered her to the quilt and brought his head down.
At first his kiss was strangely tentative, as if he was afraid of hurting her with his need.
But when her lips opened under his, welcoming his invasion, he could no longer hold back, and his kiss became urgent, demanding a response she was ready to give.
With a muffled sigh she slid a hand behind his head to sink her fingers into his thick hair, while they exchanged a kiss that started a fire to rival the one that warmed them.
Paige ran her palm over the muscles of Travis's shoulders, delighting in their silken strength, then delicately traced the indentations of his spine until he shuddered in delicious response to her touch.
Seconds later it was her turn as Travis's large hand echoed her own movement, gliding silkily down the undulating length of her back, hip and thigh, sending frissons of pleasure dancing along her nerve-ends.
Yet his passion was not to be feared.
There was a gentleness even in his urgency, tenderness in his strength.
With mind-blowing slowness Paige felt the same hand move upwards again to close over her breast with a possessiveness that seemed to encompass every atom of her being.
Travis abandoned his exploration of her satiny neck to look down into her smoky eyes.
Paige sensed he was looking at her, but her mind was centred totally on the pleasure his fingers were creating.
His thumb circled and rubbed the hardened peak, sending waves of sensation through her, starting up a deep throb of desire.
Yet he didn't stop there, but bent his head again, trailing hot kisses down the arch of her throat to the scented valley of her breasts.
Slowly his tongue traced a contour up the golden slope to the peak, sucking it into the moist warmth of his mouth.
His teeth bit gently.
Paige felt the shooting pleasure so keenly that her hand clutched frantically at his hair.
Without volition her body arched against his to prolong the pleasure.
When he moved to inflict the same beautiful torture on the twin globe she cried out, drowning in a riot of sensation.
Yet, although each new caress was a discovery, it wasn't enough.
She wanted to be closer still.
To experience the feel of flesh against flesh.
To match his hardness to her softness and know they complimented one another perfectly.
Travis had the same idea, for he moved away from her to remove the last of his clothes before turning to her again, his body moving over her, his legs gliding between hers so there was scarcely an inch of their two bodies that was not touching, and she was made vitally aware of his arousal.
As she clasped her arms tightly about him they remained like that, savouring the delight of skin on skin, then Travis raised his head to look at her.
‘Sweet heaven, you're so incredibly beautiful,’ he muttered hoarsely, before lowering his head to kiss her passionately.
Everything then became a kaleidoscopic array of sounds and feelings as they slipped over the edge of control.
Limbs became locked as they strained together.
Firelight glinted off satiny flesh as they moved, their bodies like molten gold, fluid and changing as they sought the ultimate fusion.
Time became meaningless, all was sensation, until finally Travis made them one with the firm thrust of his body.
Paige scarcely registered the momentary pain of his possession before spiralling waves of indescribable pleasure took her.
They moved together to the edge of fulfilment — and beyond, crying out as the climactic explosion burst upon them.
Travis's sweat-soaked body lay heavily on hers as she drifted back to earth.
Slowly her heartbeat returned to normal, but her limbs remained heavy with satiation.
Nothing could have prepared her for the beauty they had just shared, and she knew that for as long as she lived she would never regret giving herself to this man.
Her heart was full.
Contentment such as she had never known enveloped her.
Then Travis moved on to his back, drawing her with him to rest her head in the angle of his shoulder.
Carefully he pulled the cover over them, in protection against the cooling air.
Too full to speak, Paige slid her arm about his waist and let the hovering waves of sleep drift over her.
CHAPTER EIGHT
It was dawn when Paige awoke.
A beam of sunlight streaming through the crack in the door hit her closed eyes.
Flinching, she stirred and awoke.
All was silent.
Too silent.
She knew, without turning, that she was alone in the hut.
Last night…
Painfully sweet memories assailed her.
Last night had been a glorious voyage of discovery to a new land, revealing wonders never dreamt of.
Who would have guessed, looking at that stern Capricorn exterior, that such a passionate man lurked inside?
Travis had made her initiation into the mystery of sensuality at once incredibly tender and shockingly passionate.
But last night they had broken their own rules.
Travis knew it as well as she did.
Why else had he not remained beside her?
He had been right when he'd said there was no future — because the past would always exist.
From this moment on she was Paige Emerson — suspected thief.
Nothing she had said or done had altered his rigid beliefs, and she couldn't prove her innocence without betraying Lori.
It had been a mistake to think anything could change.
All it had done was make her position more intolerable.
She had lain down with her love — the enemy — and now she didn't know what was to become of her.
Her head turned as the door was pushed open.
A freshly washed Travis halted in the doorway when he realised she was awake.
For the briefest instant there was a look of self-reproach in his eyes.
Then it was gone and he was saying, ‘I thought you might sleep in this morning.
I was awake early, so I went for a swim.
Are you ready for some coffee?’
He walked round to the fire and squatted down to rekindle the flames.
She didn't need to see that stiff back to know all was not well.
Hadn't she expected as much?
‘You're regretting it, aren't you?’ she said flatly.
He seemed to hesitate before turning.
‘Last night was special.
How could I regret it?’
‘But you do,’ she repeated solemnly.
‘Not at the time, nor with your body, but with your brain.
In the cold light of day, you're forced to see me as I am — the woman you believe stole your grandfather's jade.
How can you reconcile that with your conscience?’
A nerve ticked in his jaw.
‘That's my problem.
I'll deal with it in my own way.’
Holding the blanket over her breasts, she sat up.
If he thought she wanted a noble gesture he was mistaken.
She had known what she was doing last night.
She wasn't a child.
She told him so.
‘But you were a virgin — that much was true,’ Travis countered hardily.
‘I don't shrink from my responsibilities.’
That cold statement froze her heart.
‘I'm not your responsibility, just because you were my first lover.
Nothing has changed.
Nothing ever will.
I think we should agree to pretend last night never happened.’
‘My memory isn't that convenient,’ he argued shortly.
‘Last night did happen, and —’ He stopped mid-sentence, every sense concentrated.
‘What's that?’ he queried sharply, stilling her move to form a question with his hand raised.
‘Listen!’
Almost at the same moment Paige heard it too.
A droning sound.
Some way off still, but coming closer.
‘Is it a plane?’
Paige asked, watching him jump to his feet, hurrying to the door and throwing it open.
‘No, by God, it's a helicopter!’ he cried, disappearing outside.
As Paige hastened into her shirt the drone changed to the recognisable beat of helicopter blades.
Still fastening buttons, she hobbled to the door in time to see Travis down the beach, waving his hands to attract its attention.
Successfully, for the whirlybird changed direction, heading straight for them, and Travis backed off, returning to the hut in time to shield her from the cloud of sand the machine whipped up as it landed.
As they watched a uniformed man, complete with helmet, jumped to the ground and loped his way over to them.
‘Mr McKenna?’ he shouted over the noise of the engine, and at Travis's nod, made a signal to the pilot to cut the engine.
Removing his helmet, he held out his hand, first to Travis then to Paige.
‘Lieutenant Ramos,’ he introduced himself in a marked American accent.
‘We found the plane yesterday, and your message.
You were very lucky, sir.
The search and rescue team have been out looking for you.
We were deployed to follow the river.
You made very good time to get here.
Do I take it you are both unhurt?’
His inspection discovered Paige's bandaged ankle.
‘Miss Emerson sprained her ankle two days ago.
Other than that, only bruises,’ Travis explained.
‘As I said, sir, you were very lucky.
All the same, you will be taken to hospital in Panama City, purely as a precaution,’ their rescuer advised.
‘If you give us a moment to collect our things, we'll be with you,’ Travis responded.
‘Very good, sir.
I'll see that the authorities are informed of your safety.’
With a salute he returned to his machine.
Inside the hut, Paige surveyed the signs of their occupancy.
‘I never thought I'd be sad to leave this place.’
It would always hold memories.
Not all of them bad.
Travis looked up from his packing.
‘I know, but just think of a long soak in a hot bath and a large soft bed to sleep on.
Now you'd better get dressed.
I think our lieutenant was enjoying the view too much.’
Paige sought his eyes.
‘Travis?
What about us?’
As far as she was concerned, nothing had been decided.
His mouth firmed.
‘We'll talk later.
There isn't time now.
We'll have to get the formalities over with first,’ he said, and she had to be satisfied with that.
The formalities, as it turned out, were only a small part of what they had to face.
Lieutenant Ramos gave them some warning as the helicopter approached their destination some time later.
‘You've got a reception committee, I'm afraid, Mr McKenna.
As soon as it became known who was missing, the media had a field-day,’ he explained.
The cameras started clicking the second they stepped out of the helicopter, and their progress to the main airfield building was comparable to running the gauntlet.
After days of near-solitude Paige found the barrage of questions bewildering and not a little alarming.
It was easy to obey the lieutenant's command to keep her head down and say nothing, but her heart was thundering by the time they reached the relative safety of the airfield's terminal building.
There they were shown into a room, leaving the press-hounds baying outside.
Inside, a man turned from the window to greet them.
Paige had never seen him before, but Travis's face broke into a smile as he recognised the young man.
‘Drew!’
They clasped hands and slapped each other on the back.
Then the man called Drew backed off a step.
‘Hell, Travis, you gave us a scare.
I thought I'd never see you again.’
‘You weren't the only one!’
Travis laughed, and turned to where Paige had hung back.
‘Come and meet my brother Andrew.
Drew, this is Paige Emerson,’ he introduced them.
‘Pleased to meet you, Paige,’ Drew McKenna greeted with a smile, shaking hands.
Unlike his brother, he had grey eyes and fair hair.
‘You aren't very alike,’ she said, voicing her thoughts.
‘That's because Travis favours our father, while the rest of us take after our mother,’ Drew explained.
‘Does Mother know we're safe yet?’
Travis queried, sobering.
‘I phoned her an hour ago, and Grandfather.
Everyone sends their love, and Mum says you've got to come straight home because she won't really believe it till she sees you,’ his brother enlarged.
‘I've also taken the liberty of informing your family, Paige.
I thought you'd want them to know as soon as possible.’
‘That was very kind of you, thank you,’ she said gratefully.
She'd phone them at the very first opportunity, knowing how they would have worried.
‘Now listen,’ Drew suddenly became all businesslike.
‘The authorities have only allowed me a little time with you.
Here's what's been arranged.
Someone in authority will visit both of you, once the hospital has given you the once over.
But first there's the Press.
I had to promise them a press conference, and I thought you'd rather do it now, old son.
You're news whether you like it or not, and this will get them off your back.’
Travis grimaced.
‘Hell, I suppose so.
OK, but let's leave Paige out of this.
I'll do the Press; you get her to the hospital and get her ankle seen to,’ he ordered grimly.
‘Oh, but —’ Paige began to protest, only to be cut off.
‘Don't argue.
This isn't going to be a picnic, if I know the press.
I'll be happier knowing you're out of it.’
He turned to his brother.
‘Have you booked us into the same hotel, Drew?
Good.
Then I'll call for you for dinner at eight-thirty, Paige.’
There was a knock on the door, and Drew answered it.
‘You're wanted, Travis,’ he said after a brief conversation.
Travis gave her a long meaningful look.
‘Remember, eight-thirty for dinner.
Look after her, Drew,’ he commanded his brother, and left with a brief wave of his hand.
Paige frowned at the closed door.
In a few words Travis had blocked her line of retreat.
‘You'll get used to it,’ Drew declared in wry amusement.
‘That is, I'm assuming there's a reason you should want to.’
Travis had deliberately given the impression their relationship was a warm one, but she couldn't take her anger out on his brother.
She smiled.
‘You're fishing.
Come on, you'd better do as he says and look after me, or you'll end up in trouble.
Your brother has a very keen protective streak!’
Too keen by half.
‘Plus a habit of getting what he wants,’ Drew remarked, peeping out to check the coast was clear, and beckoning her forward.
‘He's also too damn big to fight.’
Paige laughed, liking this friendly young man.
‘Ah, but there are other ways of winning than fighting.’
‘You've been talking to my wife.
I swear there's a universal female conspiracy against men!’ he complained, tongue-in-cheek, and led her away.
By eight o'clock that evening Paige was sitting at the dressing-table in her luxurious hotel room busily putting the finishing touches to her make-up.
She looked pale to her own eyes, and she knew that was from tension.
She hadn't seen Travis since leaving the airport.
She had thought he might have called, but there hadn't even been a message left for her.
So much had still to be said.
She wouldn't be a burden just because he was having a pang of conscience.
She'd rather he continued seeing her as a thief than that.
All of which had had to be bottled up during a frustrating day.
Drew had gone with her to the hospital, where she had undergone a full medical check.
Her ankle had been properly bandaged and she had been given pain-killers and ordered to keep off her foot as much as possible.
The ‘man from the ministry’ who had taken her statement about the crash and their escape had been kindness itself, but the effects had begun to creep up on her.
By the time Drew had ushered her into her room she had been very nearly out on her feet.
She had shrugged off her clothes, crawled under the sheets, and slept for hours.
When she had awoken she had felt wonderfully refreshed.
A long, hot soak in the bath-tub with lashings of her favourite bath oil had helped, too.
Then, over a light lunch, which had set her mistreated tastebuds drooling, she had planned her strategy.
The hotel had its own high-class shopping area, and it took only one telephone call to arrange for an assortment of clothes to be sent up.
By the end of the afternoon she had replaced her wardrobe from top to tail, had acquired an evening dress that was out of this world, and had had her hair freshly washed and styled.
Her hair now fell in a glossy blonde swath about her ears, feathering back delicately from her face.
Make-up she applied with care, using plenty of moisturiser on her abused skin.
A deft blend of brown and pink shadows brought out the blue of her eyes.
Delicate pink blusher enhanced the flush on her cheeks and a deeper shade of lipstick accentuated the perfect bow of her lips.
Glancing at the clock, Paige saw it was now well past the hour.
Reaching for her favourite Givenchy perfume, she liberally sprayed the pulse spots, adding a dash at her elbows and knees.
Then she slipped out of her robe, revealing a black lace teddy, before stepping into her dress.
It was a version of the classic little black dress.
Knee-length, it clung to her figure lovingly.
The long sleeves ended in generous lace cuffs at the wrists.
The stand-up collar was lace, too, as was the diamond-shaped inset that plunged to the V of her breasts.
In it she knew she looked sophisticated and elegant, and very, very feminine.
She was just slipping her feet into a pair of low black court shoes when the knock came on the door, and her heart leapt into her throat.
With a last glance in the mirror she went to answer it.
For a moment they simply stood and stared at each other, then Paige stepped back.
‘You're punctual.
Come in a moment.
I just have to get my bag,’ she invited diffidently.
With a slight shake of his head Travis walked inside, turning to keep her in view as she closed the door again.
‘You're looking very beautiful tonight.’
The unexpected compliment startled her.
She met his eyes, and there was a fire burning there.
Something elemental shimmered in the air between them.
‘Thank you.
You're looking very handsome yourself.’
The sight of him in a dinner suit had her senses rioting.
His broad shoulders and powerful legs were set off to perfection by the excellent cut, while a snow-white silk shirt emphasised his tanned, rugged face.
Paige found just looking at him a very heady experience.
Travis held out his hand.
‘Come here,’ he ordered softly.
She clasped her hands nervously in front of her.
He was acting as if they had a settled relationship, but they hadn't.
One night spent together didn't make a relationship out of open warfare.
He might want her, but he didn't love her.
He certainly didn't trust her, and that left no foundation for anything.
‘Travis, stop playing games.
We're not lovers!
We had one night.
Those few hours can't have altered your opinion of me.’
His hand fell and he slipped both hands into his trouser pockets.
‘Allow me to decide whether that is important or not,’ he growled.
She took a step forward.
‘But it is!
It's the basis for your whole way of life!’ she exhorted, hand outstretched.
It was a mistake.
He moved swiftly, catching her and spinning her into his arms.
‘Is it?’ he challenged.
‘You think you know me that well?’
His head lowered, kissing her with a passion that took her breath away and left her trembling.
When he raised his head his eyes burnt brightly.
‘This is a basis real enough for any man!’
Paige pushed herself free.
It would be so easy to believe, but she knew better.
It wasn't his way.
He was lying to himself.
He needed to trust her, and, whatever he said now, one day that need would be stronger than his passion or nobility.
Somehow she had to convince him.
He must have seen her marshalling her arguments, for he gave her no time to use them.
Catching sight of her bag on the end of the bed, he picked it up and handed it to her.
‘I booked a table at the Moonlight Restaurant here.
Right now I don't want to have to walk anywhere!’ he finished drily.
Paige gave up.
She was getting nowhere now.
But it was only a temporary submission.
She was determined to try again later.
The Moonlight Restaurant was aptly named.
It occupied the top floor of the hotel and allowed spectacular views of the city.
They were seated by one of the windows, and Paige was glad she had a head for heights.
She left Travis to order for her.
After their diet of the last few days, anything would taste like ambrosia.
Travis ordered champagne with their exquisitely cooked fish.
Paige found her appetite quickly satisfied, and knew that it would be some time before they would be eating normally again.
Finally she sat back, savouring the delicate bouquet of the sparkling wine.
Rested and fed, she was ready to do battle again.
‘What are we celebrating?’ she asked, as Travis, too, had to push his plate away.
He raised his glass.
‘Our safe return — which was by no means certain — and us.’
‘Us?’
She liked the sound of that.
Very much.
A feeling that stiffened her resolve.
‘There is no ‘us’.’
Travis smiled at her over his glass.
‘I rang home this afternoon.
Mother would like to meet you.’
Angrily Paige leant forward over the table.
‘Damn it, you're not listening to me!’
He set his glass down.
‘Oh, I'm listening, you just haven't said anything to change my mind.’
She looked away.
It was ludicrous.
So funny that it hurt.
She loved this man, and he seemed determined, because of some misplaced sense of responsibility, to keep them together, yet she was trying to make him see that it just couldn't be — for his own sake.
She rallied.
‘OK, answer me this; do you, or do you not, still consider me to be a thief?’
Travis stared at her for a second or two, then reached for the champagne bottle.
‘Let me top up your glass.’
Her hand shot out to cover it.
‘You see!
You won't lie, so you still believe it!
If I accepted this relationship you seem to want, you'd come to hate me for making you live a lie.
Nothing we feel could ever overcome that.
You want me; you don't love me or trust me.’
The admission brought the sparkle of tears to her eyes.
‘What you're suggesting is degrading to me.
I won't become your charity case because you discovered for once that I wasn't lying.
I have my pride too, you know!’
Until then she had managed to keep the tears from falling, but now they overflowed, and, unable to sit there a moment longer, she jumped up, stifling her sobs in her hand as she rushed from the room.
The lift was thankfully free and she stepped blindly into it, blinking so that she could find the right button to push.
As the doors closed she had a glimpse of Travis standing by their table, staring after her.
No one saw her distressed figure letting herself into her room.
The corridor had been thankfully empty.
Crossing to the dressing-table, she sat down, staring at her reflection glumly.
However much it hurt, she had done the right thing.
Without trust, they had nothing.
He'd come to see that.
Her Libran philosophy of accepting what couldn't be changed helped dry her tears.
It would take much more to heal the wounds to her heart.
Disposing of her clothes, she cleansed off her make-up and showered.
Dry once more, she slipped into a breath of silky nightdress, with lace inserts up the sides and across her breasts, snapped off all lights save the one beside her bed, and clambered under the sheets.
Listlessly she tossed about, unable to sleep, her mind reliving all that had been said tonight.
Time ticked by.
Once she glanced at her watch and, with a despairing sigh, realised it wasn't even midnight yet.
It was going to be a long night.
She wondered where Travis was.
He —
An alien noise stopped her thoughts mid-flow, and she tensed, straining her ears to recapture the sound.
There was a familiarity to it, but — Paige turned her head on the pillow as a band of light, growing wider, spread over the carpet.
Her hand was already reaching for the telephone when a large shape loomed in what now became recognisable as a doorway.
It was a shape she knew well, and her hand fell to the covers.
‘Travis!’
Her voice sounded unnaturally loud in her surprise.
‘Shush!
Do you want to wake everyone?’ his familiar voice warned as he slipped into the room, closing the door behind him.
She came up on her elbow.
‘What are you doing?
How did you…?’
Her whisper tailed off as he approached the bed.
The thigh-length silk robe he wore, his bare legs and still wet hair told her he had showered, and that very likely he wore nothing beneath that covering but his skin.
‘I used the connecting door.’
Connecting door!
Of course, she had known it was there, but apart from testing that it was locked she had taken scant notice of it.
Travis sat on the edge of the bed and gently caressed her fair hair away from her face with a hand that was ever so slightly unsteady.
‘I'm sorry if I frightened you.’
His eyes searched her face for what seemed like aeons.
His hand drifted down to her cheek, one tanned finger running lazily over her lips, setting them tingling.
‘I came to apologise for upsetting you.’
How on earth, when her heart was thumping and her body drowning in a wave of heat, could she stay angry at him?
All the reasons why she shouldn't be allowing this faded into insignificance.
‘I forgive you.’
His eyes closed briefly.
‘Hell, I knew I shouldn't have come,’ he groaned.
‘Why did you, then?’ she whispered.
He looked at her, jaw tense.
‘Because I couldn't stay away.’
Honest with herself, she knew she had wanted him to come.
Wanted it because tomorrow she would be gone.
The decision had hardly needed to be made.
But she had longed to be with him one more time.
To experience the joy only he could bring her.
Paige raised her hand to run it over his cheek and into the thick mass of hair at his temple, feeling the pulse beating rapidly there.
‘You don't have to go,’ she invited softly.
Travis stared deeply into her eyes before bending down to bury his head in the sweet scented curve of her shoulder.
Slowly he feathered kisses up along her delicate skin to her ear, sending frissons of pleasure through her veins.
‘How can you be so generous?’
Paige's arms slid around his neck, one hand running sensually through the thick mat of hair at his nape, the other gliding beneath his robe to caress the muscled strength of his shoulders.
She felt intoxicated by the male scent and taste of him, aroused by just the pressure of his body so close to hers.
‘I can't help myself, any more than you can.
The night is ours, Travis, but it's so short.
Don't waste a moment.’
Travis moved then, standing up to shrug out of his robe.
Returning to the bed, he pulled the sheet away, and Paige held out her arms to him.
Kneeling beside her, he took her hands and placed them on his chest, tracing the graceful line of her arms with his fingers.
Then he gently eased her arms down, and with infinite patience began to stroke her nightdress from her body.
As his hands moved slowly from her ankles along the planes of her calves to the rounded contours of her thighs Paige's heart beat faster at every inch he revealed.
Her eyes were locked on his face, seeing the sensuality in every line as he concentrated on their mutual pleasure.
As his movements exposed her hips and the flatness of her stomach she moved restlessly, clenching her hands into fists as her breathing became constricted.
The slow discovery of her body sent waves of longing coursing through her until she had to close her eyes and bite her lip.
On he went, hands sliding sinuously round the curve of her waist and up, grazing the sides of her breasts.
Automatically she lifted her head and arms as he finally removed the flimsy barrier and she lay open to his gaze.
His hands returned to her waist, spanning her ribs just below her breasts.
‘Open your eyes,’ he commanded huskily, and when she did so the look on his face set her blood racing.
‘You're the most beautiful woman I've ever seen.
No, lie still!’
This as she made to touch him.
He moved, and his hands closed about her aching breasts.
Paige arched into that possessive caress, then watched helplessly as he lowered his head and the moist warmth of his mouth closed over one thrusting peak, tongue teasing the nipple into a hard nub that he suckled until she cried out.
He was worshipping her with his body, and she lay devastated, unable to move, only to feel.
Darts of fire shot down through her and Travis's mouth followed, trailing kisses across the flat planes of her quivering stomach, and yet further, kissing and caressing until her body convulsed and she cried out.
Travis came down beside her then, his body half resting over her, hands framing her face.
‘That was for you; this is for us,’ he murmured indistinctly and took her mouth, exploring it with a passion that Paige returned twofold, arousing a mutual need for satisfaction.
They moved together in a dance as old as time until finally Travis slid between her parted thighs, hands going to her hips to hold her tightly against him and feel his desire.
Paige writhed beneath him in mute appeal for the release they both craved.
She welcomed the deep thrust of his possession, matching her rhythm to his, sobs gasping from her arched throat as the spiralling coil of tension rose in them.
They both cried out as they reached and went beyond that white-hot explosion, holding tight as they crested the wave and slowly drifted back to reality.
A long time later she stirred, and Travis shifted his weight, drawing her into the warm curve of his body.
Paige looked up, seeing how the lines of his face were softening as sleep overcame him.
She lay back down.
Tonight had been beautiful.
She would remember it all the days of her life.
Whatever the years brought her, she would never regret these hours they had shared.
CHAPTER NINE
Travis glanced at his watch and sighed, rising from the table in Paige's room where they had just enjoyed a long, leisurely breakfast.
‘I've got to go.
One of the American networks wants to do a television interview.
They've taken over one of the conference-rooms downstairs.
I said I'd meet with them at eleven o'clock to arrange the details.’
Paige looked up with a frown.
‘Will they want me, too?’
‘I'm afraid so.
But look at it this way; if we give them the exclusive we only have to go on the merry-go-round once.
With any luck we'll become another nine days’ wonder.’
She hadn't counted on that.
It would mean delaying her own departure, when she wanted the break to be swift and clean.
Reluctantly she agreed.
‘I suppose so.’
‘Half a day, and it will all be over,’ he threw over his shoulder as he disappeared into his own room.
Paige sat back.
He didn't know how prophetic those words were.
Nothing had changed.
In fact, the wonderful night they had just shared only made her more determined than ever to go.
He wouldn't be expecting it, and that would give her the head start she needed.
To vanish and give herself the chance to rebuild her life.
To allow Travis to see his mistake.
Having made up her mind, she rose and went to shower and change.
But as often happened, fate dealt out a different hand.
She had just finished dressing when the telephone rang.
Sitting on the edge of the bed, she lifted the receiver.
‘Hello?’
‘Hi, Paige; guess who?’
Surprise kept her silent for a moment while her fingers tightened on the receiver.
‘Lori?’
Her mind had been so full of Travis that she'd forgotten all about her cousin and the jade figurine, and the recall now was an unpleasant shock.
A familiar laugh echoed down the line.
‘Who else?
When I read about you in the papers, and then heard you'd been found, I just had to come.
After all, I am your cousin.’
Paige raised her eyebrows.
That was a first.
Generally Lori distanced herself from the relationship.
‘Where are you?’ she demanded wrathfully.
‘Here, of course.’
‘In Panama City?’
‘No, in the hotel, silly,’ Lori corrected with another laugh.
Silently Paige fumed.
Of all the unmitigated gall!
‘I want to talk to you,’ she stated grimly.
‘Hmn, I thought you might.
Shall we say fifteen minutes?’
Lori purred.
‘Let's say five,’ Paige amended drily.
‘What room are you in?’
‘Not a room, a suite,’ her cousin declared, giving the number.
‘See you in five minutes, then.’
‘I'm looking forward to it!’
Paige returned with heavy irony, and dropped the receiver back on its rest in an aura of disbelief.
Only Lori could act as if she were meeting a bosom friend for tea and a chat, when the reality was something light-years removed.
‘Who was that?’
Paige very nearly shot out of her skin at the sound of Travis's voice.
She spun round, hand to her chest.
He stood in the doorway adjusting his tie, looking immaculate in a charcoal-grey suit.
‘You scared the life out of me!’
Crossing to her dressing-table, he checked the knot in the mirror.
‘Sorry.
Who was it — Drew?’
Her heart sank as she tried to negotiate her way between the truth and a lie.
‘Actually, it was my cousin.
She — er — heard the news, and — er — because she was in the area my aunt and uncle asked her to come and visit me.
I said I'd pop along to see her.
You don't need me right away, do you?’
He shook his head slowly, eyes fixed on her face via the mirror.
‘Not for half an hour, I suppose,’ he admitted.
‘You didn't sound too happy about the meeting,’ he added casually.
Too casually.
She sensed his suspicion, and it only highlighted what she'd known.
He had a right to be suspicious this time, but he hadn't known that; it had been an automatic reaction to her receiving a call.
She wondered just how much he had heard, and shrugged awkwardly.
‘Well, we don't always see eye to eye about things.
You know how it is.’
He turned now, expression bland.
‘Do you want me with you?’ he offered.
‘No!’
Paige said quickly, heart thumping at the very idea.
‘No, it will be all right.
We never start throwing things right away,’ she joked lamely.
Travis studied his shoes.
‘I'm sure she can't be that bad.
You'd better invite her to lunch.’
Not surprisingly her nerves jangled.
‘She may not be able to stay long.
She — er — has a busy schedule.’
She didn't want these two to meet.
He glanced up, one eyebrow raised.
‘You're beginning to make me wonder why I shouldn't see her,’ he said blandly.
Paige caught her breath, backtracking swiftly.
‘I'll ask her, but I can't promise.’
‘Do your best.
I'll see you in half an hour, then,’ Travis said, and left.
Paige released a shaky breath.
That had been too close for comfort.
She hated lying to Travis, but the whole truth was impossible.
She glanced at her watch.
The five minutes were almost up, and she wouldn't put it past Lori to leave if she was so much as a second late.
She dragged a comb through her hair, grabbed her bag and headed for the lift.
Lori's suite was several floors above, but the express lift whisked her upwards, so that in no time at all she was knocking on the door.
It opened almost at once, much to her surprise, but she didn't recognise the muscle-bound hunk who waved her inside.
Her cousin was seated on one of a pair of large couches.
‘Chuck, leave us alone for a while.
Paige and I have a lot to catch up on,’ she dismissed her ‘friend’, who merely shrugged, nodded silently to Paige, and just as silently departed.
Chuck?
Clearly Marty was a back number now; Lori seemed to go through men like a knife through butter.
But she wasn't here to speculate on her cousin's love-life.
She moved across the carpet, positioning herself a foot or two away.
‘All right, where is it?’
Lori pouted.
‘Where is it?
Not even a hello, how are you, my, how well you're looking?’
‘I don't have time for games, Lori.
You've had your fun at my expense.
You have something that doesn't belong to you, and I want it.’
Paige held on to her temper, knowing her cousin would love her to lose it.
‘Really?
And why should I give it to you?’
‘You stole the jade.
That's a serious crime, Lori, not a game.’
Her cousin inspected her excellently manicured nails.
‘Stole?
If I did, why didn't you have me arrested?’
Paige compressed her lips.
‘Because you're my cousin, and because I feel sorry that you still have the need to carry out these childish tricks.’
Lori jackknifed to the edge of the seat, eyes flashing.
‘Sorry!
I don't need your pity, Miss Goody-two-shoes!’
Paige closed her eyes wearily.
‘Just hand over the jade, and I'll get out of your life.
I'm not your rival; I never was.
Why can't you just be happy with your life?
Why do we have to fight like this?’
‘Because!’
Lori snapped, shooting to her feet and crossing to the window, fingers tapping the glass agitatedly.
‘God, why must you always be so reasonable?
I hate it!’
‘Isn't it enough for you that I nearly died?’
Paige asked despairingly, and Lori spun round with a laugh.
‘Only you could come out of a plane crash with a handsome millionaire for company!
What happened out there in the woods, hmn?
I'll bet it got kind of cosy at night!
They say it gets cold at those altitudes.
Just how did you two keep warm?’
Paige winced in distaste, knowing that it was the kind of speculation in more than one mind.
‘It was his grandfather's jade you stole.
The man thought I was a thief, Lori,’ she said shortly.
‘But not for long, hmn?
How did you persuade him to change his mind?’
Lori jeered nastily.
Lord, how she hated these confrontations.
They achieved nothing, except to make her feel ill.
‘I won't exchange insults with you.
All I want is the jade.
Give it to me, Lori, or so help me I will go to the police and let you stew in your own juice.’
This time her cousin's laugh was confident.
‘No, you won't.
You wouldn't do anything to upset Mum and Dad.
You even took the blame so they wouldn't get hurt.’
‘Perhaps I was wrong.
I should have let you take responsibility for your actions instead of trying to protect you.
These games don't really hurt me, only yourself.
Oh, Lori, was it really so hard to share your parents with me?’
Paige asked sadly.
Lori seemed to fight some inner battle with herself.
‘You took what was mine.’
‘Their love?
You're so wrong.
Love expands to take in more things.
It isn't a finite amount that makes your share smaller the more individuals added.
You've always had all their love as their daughter .’
‘Did I?
But I could never compare with you, could I?
You were always better at everything.
How I hated you for that.’
‘It wasn't a competition, Lori,’ Paige pointed out in distress.
‘To me it was, and it still is.
Only this time I'm the winner,’ Lori gloated.
Paige gave up; there was just no getting through to her.
‘All right, you win.
I concede defeat, if that's what you want.
Just give me the jade and call it quits.’
Lori smiled.
‘Quits?
Oh, I don't think I'm ready for that yet.
What would you do if I gave you the jade?
Give it back to your millionaire?’
Paige caught hold of her temper.
‘I intend to return it to its rightful owner,’ she said grittily.
‘I see.
Not the millionaire.’
She smiled a slow smile.
‘He doesn't know about me, does he?
Poor Paige, loyal to the last, eh?
You know, I think I'd like to meet him.’
Horrified at the thought, Paige tried to put her off.
‘No.
That would not be wise.’
Lori's face became hard and tight.
‘No?
Well, I disagree.
I want to meet him, and if you want the jade you'll arrange it.’
‘What do you mean?’
Paige frowned at this new tack.
‘Just this, dear coz.
If you want the jade, I get to meet him.
That's the prerequisite for any deal,’ Lori elaborated mockingly.
Paige dragged a hand through her hair in desperation, but she was caught and they both knew it.
‘OK,’ she said at last.
‘Lunch.
We'll meet in the restaurant at one o'clock.’
Lori laughed.
‘I like it when you see sense.
I'll be there.
I wouldn't miss it for the world.’
She crossed to the door and held it open.
‘One o'clock.
I'll look forward to it.’
Paige stepped out into the corridor, seething with angry frustration.
She should have known it wouldn't be easy.
Nothing was with Lori.
She heard the door close behind her, but not before the sound of laughter had followed her down towards the lift.
As she stepped into the lift-cage Paige glanced at her watch.
She had gone well over the half-hour.
Travis was probably looking for her already.
But she couldn't go to a television interview like this, without make-up.
So she stopped off at her floor and hurried along to her room.
The maid had been in, for the bed was made and the breakfast things cleared away.
One glance in the dressing-table mirror as she sat down showed she looked as fraught as she felt.
Make-up could work wonders, though, and she was just putting the finishing touches to her lipstick when Travis came through the connecting door.
‘Hi, how did it go?’
Had he been waiting there for her to return?
‘About the same as usual.
She's meeting us for lunch, by the way.’
She said it casually, as if there weren't any danger attached to the meeting.
‘Fine.
I'm looking forward to meeting your family.’
He urged her to her feet with the pressure of his hands.
‘I'm sure I'll like her, so there's nothing to worry about, is there?’
She bit her lip, suspecting a double meaning in his tone.
She sensed disaster hovering, but knew no way of avoiding it.
There was everything to worry about where Lori was concerned.
Heaven only knew what her cousin would say or do.
She was unpredictable, and unprincipled where Paige was involved.
Still, over the next hour she had very little time to think about the forthcoming meeting.
The interviewer had those universal plastic good looks, and a general lack of concern for individual privacy.
Tact was not his long suit.
However, she had to admire Travis's handling of him, so that when the interview was finally over the network man went away convinced he had a good story, while they had kept their private lives intact.
Travis's eyes were gleaming with mischief, though his face was grave when he looked at Paige.
‘Lunch.
I bet you're just about ready for some good home cookin',’ he mimicked the interviewer's style, making Paige choke on a laugh.
‘Shush, he might hear you!’ she warned hastily as the man walked by.
Travis took her hand in his.
‘Remind me not to take sugar in my coffee.
I've had my ration of syrup for one day.’
‘He was awful,’ she agreed, keeping pace easily as Travis strode off.
‘They come much worse than him, believe me.
Given the choice, I'd pick sugary over downright salacious any day of the week.’
They reached the bank of lifts and stepped into an empty one.
Travis pressed a button.
She had to agree with that.
‘At least he didn't ask us if we'd slept together.’
Travis grinned.
‘Perhaps that was because I'd already warned him I'd bop him on the nose if he tried it.
It's a very handsome nose, you probably noticed.
Must have cost him a few thousand to have it done.’
‘That's wicked!’ she reproved.
‘But true,’ he rejoined smoothly.
‘It's probably simpler to count who hasn't had cosmetic surgery than who has in the States.
Ah, here we are.’
The lift doors opened, depositing them in the restaurant.
‘It's gone one.
Is your cousin here?’
Paige, suddenly finding the dread moment upon her, glanced round the half-full tables, easily picking out Lori's blonde head.
‘She's over there,’ she pointed out, knowing it was too late to back out.
Lori spotted them as they weaved their way through the tables, and waved.
When they reached her she shot Paige a narrow-eyed look.
‘I thought you'd changed your mind.’
‘The interview went on longer than expected,’ Travis explained, not missing the underlying message, and casting a curious look from one to the other before holding out his hand.
‘Travis McKenna, and you are Paige's cousin.’
Her cousin shook hands with an arch smile.
‘Guilty.
Lori Templeton — very pleased to meet you.’
Paige felt Travis's sudden alertness, even if Lori failed to be aware of it.
She darted him a glance.
The look in his eyes was chilling.
Her heart lurched.
‘Let's sit down, shall we?
I'm starving.’
It was an outright lie.
Her appetite had fled.
No sooner were they seated than Travis turned to her cousin with a faintly puzzled smile.
‘Laurie?
Surely that's a man's name?’
Paige closed her eyes as her cousin laughed.
She wouldn't be laughing if she knew how close she was to disaster.
‘Oh, everyone makes that mistake.
It sounds the same but you spell it L-o-r-i.’
‘That's very interesting.
Don't you think so, Paige?’
The look he sent her across the table was a direct challenge.
Somehow she managed to smile.
‘You're forgetting, I've always known how to spell her name,’ she said, and realised at once she had made matters worse.
Travis looked grim for a moment.
‘Naturally, you would always have known how to spell the name,’ he concurred, laying stress on the word ominously.
Lori glanced from one to the other in surprise.
‘Have I missed something?’
Travis was quick to deny it with one of his charming smiles.
‘Nothing important, Lori.
Paige loves to play games, and sometimes I'm not as sharp as I ought to be.
So, tell me, are you in the antiques trade too?’
‘Heavens, no!’
Lori denied, not a whit thrown by the question.
‘I'm a model, or I used to be until I married.
Hasn't Paige told you anything about me?’
The glance she sent her cousin was slyly mocking.
Travis intercepted it and smiled grimly.
‘Not a thing.
Why don't you tell me all about yourself?’ he invited.
Lori sent him one of her most seductive smiles that made Paige long to warn her to be careful.
‘That could take all afternoon.’
He shrugged.
‘I've got nothing but time,’ he smiled into her eyes.
Delighted at having gained his complete attention, Lori squirmed in her seat.
‘Oh, well, in that case, who am I to deny a man anything?’ she laughed, and Travis joined in.
Paige watched them, a sick lump in her stomach.
This was just what she hadn't wanted to happen.
Now that Travis had got hold of the scent he would be like a bloodhound, and there was no knowing what Lori would inadvertently reveal.
She contributed very little to the conversation as they ate their meal.
Not that it mattered.
Lori dominated the table and Travis urged her on with a few well-chosen words.
Paige could only pick at her meal, forcing down a mouthful or two.
Her nerves were very nearly shredded by the time they ordered coffee.
Not that Lori had said anything incriminating, but the sheer tension of waiting for it started her head thumping.
At last it was over and Lori was getting up.
Paige would have risen, too, only Travis's hand on her wrist exerted enough force to keep her where she was.
She shot him a baleful look, which Lori intercepted with sly malice.
‘Oh, dear, have I upset you, Paige?
I didn't mean to monopolise Travis so much,’ she cooed.
‘I'm not upset at all.
But I do have a headache,’ Paige responded stolidly.
‘I'm not surprised,’ Travis put in casually, ‘you're as tense as a bow-string.’
Lori laughed.
‘She was always the same.
She's probably been worrying what family secrets I'd let out of the bag.
She ought to know I wouldn't do that.
I won't tell if she won't tell,’ she finished archly.
‘Well, I must dash.
Chuck's waiting for me.
Perhaps we four could meet up for dinner?’
‘Sounds like a good idea.
Eight-thirty,’ Travis agreed without consulting Paige.
‘We could go on to a nightclub afterwards.’
‘Great, I just love dancing.
Bye for now, then.’
Lori waggled her fingers and sauntered off, obviously in no hurry to meet the patiently waiting Chuck.
Silence fell, hanging over them for several minutes before Travis broke it with a casual observation.
‘So, Lori's a woman, not a man, and your cousin, not a friend.’
His reflection drew her wary eyes to his.
‘Why the secrecy?’
Paige racked her mind for a suitable excuse.
Anything so that he didn't connect Lori with the jade.
‘I didn't want you to meet her.’
Travis released her hand finally.
‘That much was always obvious,’ he said with heavy irony.
‘And begs the question, why not?’
She rubbed at her abused flesh, desperately grasping at the first straw to float into her mind.
‘You saw the way she acted.
It's not the first time she's tried to take someone from me.’
That did surprise him, and his brows lifted.
‘You're saying you were afraid I'd find her more attractive?’
There was more than a thread of incredulity in his tone.
‘As I said, it's happened before.
I know my cousin better than you do.’
‘Now that I won't argue with,’ he replied sardonically.
‘That could very well be the truth.’
It was a statement to make the blood run cold.
‘What do you mean?’
His eyes narrowed.
‘Lori said it herself.
Just what secrets could she reveal, Paige?
Does she know what you are?
Could she reveal the truth?
Is that the real reason you tried so hard to keep us apart?’ he barked the questions at her in a harsh undertone.
Paige was glad, then, that she'd never allowed herself to believe they had a future.
Everything she had foreseen had come true.
She needn't have worried about Lori being unmasked.
He hadn't even seen her!
‘You mustn't believe all Lori says.
She says a lot of things just for effect.
We have no family skeletons.’
‘So if I went to see her…?’ he probed.
‘You'd be wasting your time.
All Lori will tell you is that she knows nothing about the jade,’ Paige advised him steadily.
His smile was mocking.
‘She's that loyal, is she?
Did you prime her with what to say?
Would she tell me that her cousin is no thief?’
Paige pressed her lips together tightly, knowing Lori was more inclined to say she was.
‘Leave Lori alone.’
His head went back.
‘Is that a threat?’
‘Take it how you like,’ she responded hardily.
Travis laughed grimly.
‘Something tells me it's going to be a very interesting evening.’
She could well believe it, and it wasn't a comfortable thought.
‘Can we go now?’ she asked coldly.
Travis glanced at his watch.
‘I've got to make a move anyway.
There are some phone calls I have to make, then Drew has some papers for me to see,’ he allowed, rising.
Hand on her arm, he escorted her right to her door.
Once in her own room Paige wiped a shaky hand over her brow.
She never wanted to spend an hour like that again.
Later she would agonise over all the might have beens, but now she had other things on her mind, things that wouldn't wait.
Hovering by the connecting door, she waited until she could hear Travis speaking on the telephone then quickly let herself out again.
It didn't take long to get to Lori's suite, but this time her knock took longer to be answered.
It was Lori herself who let her in, clad in a satin robe and nothing else.
Clearly she had been otherwise engaged.
‘Oh, it's you,’ she said, jerking her head as an invitation to enter.
Paige took half a dozen steps and turned.
‘All right, you had lunch and met Travis.
I kept my part of the bargain.
Now I want the jade.’
‘I'm sure you do, but perhaps I'm not ready to hand it over.
You know, for the first time you're really under my control, aren't you?
I'd like to know why it's so important to you, and I've been doing some thinking.
It's not just the jade, is it?
It's Travis too.
You've fallen in love with him, haven't you?’
Dull revealing colour swept into Paige's cheeks and there was no way to hide it.
‘That has nothing to do with it.’
Lori laughed harshly.
‘Au contraire , I think it has everything to do with it.
Somehow you've convinced Travis you didn't steal the jade, but how are you going to return it without him finding out?’
‘That's my problem, not yours,’ Paige said shortly, not bothering to put her cousin right.
Lori sat herself down.
‘But I find it fascinating!
Here's Paige, in love at last, but does he love you?
You've slept with him anyway, haven't you?
Do you think that was wise?’
Paige took a deep breath.
‘I think we should end this conversation right now.’
‘Because you know I'm right,’ her cousin jeered, rising to go to the sideboard, where her handbag lay.
She reached inside and turned to Paige.
‘Here, take it.
I don't need it any more,’ she declared, and tossed the jade over.
Paige caught it, heart in her mouth, clutching it tight.
She had no idea how fragile it was, and it was typical of Lori not to care.
‘Thank you,’ she said shortly.
Lori crossed her arms indifferently.
‘Don't thank me, just take it.
I'd be careful if I were you — don't even let him guess you've got it.
Because you'd lose him for sure then.
You wouldn't be able to save yourself, and that's where we differ.
I'd shop you in a second, but you'd remain loyal to the last.
Bye-bye, coz; good luck.’
This time Paige let herself out, feeling decidedly sickened by such open contempt and animosity.
The jade lay concealed in her bag, and she was aware of it as if it were a ton weight on her shoulders.
She didn't feel safe until she was once more in her room, and even then, with Travis possibly so close, it was a very precarious form of safety.
She went to the door and listened, but there was no sound from the other side.
He must have gone out.
Breathing easier, she took the weight off her trembling legs by sitting on the end of the bed.
Only then did she take the jade from her bag, studying it solemnly.
It was such a small thing to have caused so much trouble, and still to have the power to destroy.
Stupidly she hadn't looked further than the retrieving of it and returning it to Jonas Hamilton.
A week ago her plan had been to give Travis the slip and catch the first flight out.
Now it wasn't that simple.
‘You're back, then.’
The shock of those soft words made her jump so badly that the room swayed, and with a gasp she felt the jade fly from her hand.
It fell to the floor, cushioned by the carpet, and bounced once, twice, then lay there — a visible condemnation.
CHAPTER TEN
Paige stared at the accusing jade in horror, then, white-faced, raised her eyes to where Travis stood in the doorway between their rooms.
He was always impressive, but now, even in his shirt-sleeves and tieless, he grew imposingly.
Slowly he paced towards her until his foot was mere inches from the figurine.
‘I looked in to see if you were all right, and found the room empty.
Which surprised me, because you implied you had a headache.
So I listened out for your return.’
His tone was matter-of-fact, unrevealing, his face like a granite block.
Hunkering down, he picked up the jade and weighed it in his palm.
‘I didn't mean to surprise you like that.’
Eyes, unfathomable, lifted to hers.
Her heart took up a sickening thud.
She would have expected anger, not this — nothingness.
‘I…had to go out,’ she whispered helplessly.
His lip curved.
‘Obviously.
This, of course, is the jade you swore you knew nothing about.’
The gentle irony was a stake in her heart.
‘Travis…’
‘Yes?’ he prompted when she broke off.
Slowly, almost wearily, he straightened, taking her gaze with him.
‘You lied about Lori, and you lied about this.
What else have you lied about?’
There was something awesome in his quietness.
She would have felt more able to respond if only he'd exploded in a burst of anger.
She didn't know how to answer him — how to justify actions that were unjustifiable.
As her silence lengthened a muscle flexed in his jaw and she saw a flicker of murderous rage in his eye for one instant.
‘OK, let's try an easier question.
We both know you didn't have this on you, so where did you get it?’
The simplest answer was to tell the truth, but, as Lori had known, she couldn't do it.
She shook her head.
‘I can't tell you.’
‘Can't or won't?’ he snapped.
‘Does it matter?’ she countered defeatedly.
The sharp ring of the telephone in the other room distracted them momentarily, then Paige heard Drew answer it.
A second later he was in the doorway, glancing from one to the other in concern.
‘That's the call you've been waiting for, Travis,’ he said awkwardly, aware of the atmosphere.
Travis hadn't looked round, nor did he now.
‘Take it for me, Drew.’
‘But Travis…’
His hands clenched.
‘Damn it, I said take it!’ he repeated harshly.
Drew frowned at the unexpected savagery, but complied.
‘OK, OK, as you like.’
He disappeared from view.
Travis returned his attention to her.
‘You're right, it doesn't matter.
You knew where the jade was all the time.’
To remain seated was impossible.
Abruptly she stood up and crossed to the window.
‘I must have done, mustn't I?’
Within seconds Travis was behind her, swinging her round with a grip that made her wince.
‘Look at me, damn you!
I want to see your face.
Tell me something; were you always prepared to sleep with me to get the jade, or was that a ploy to throw me off the scent when I was getting too close?’
Her gasp mirrored the shock of pain in her eyes.
‘I slept with you because —’ She broke off, realising what she had been about to say.
His lips curled.
‘Oh, come, now, honey, don't stop there.
Because what?’
How she hated that mockery.
How she wanted to wipe it from his face!
‘Because I love you!’ she cried, and had her satisfaction.
Travis paled.
‘Love me?’
‘Why should that be so hard to believe?
I can love you if I want to,’ she shot back.
He shook his head as if to clear it.
‘OK, you say you love me.
If you do then tell me the truth.
Did you take the jade?’
Oh, he was clever, and it hurt unbearably to know that now, of all times, she had to lie to him.
Squaring her shoulders, she nodded.
‘It wouldn't be here if I didn't.
Of course I stole it; who else could have?’
Releasing her, Travis took a step away.
‘Who else indeed?
Yet I remember a woman who, only a few days ago, swore just as vehemently that she hadn't stolen it.’
Pink tinged her cheeks.
‘I lied.
Haven't I just proven to you that I lie?’
Silently Travis stared at her, then he turned and paced away, standing with head bowed, thinking.
When he faced her again, that wall was back, and it was impossible to read what was going on in his head.
His voice, when he spoke, held an odd inflexion.
‘Yes, you've proved to me that you can lie.
I've been a fool, haven't I?
Right up to this minute you were unshakeable in your innocence, no matter what I said or did.
Now this.
I have to ask myself, why?
Why now?
Do you want to know what I think?
I think you're doing it to protect someone.
The jade is the key.
I want to know how important the jade is to you.
I'm giving you a choice.
You see, I've just realised I love you, too.
So the choice is this.
The jade — or me.
You can't have both of us.
If you choose me then you have to tell me the whole truth — who your accomplice is.
We'll never mention the jade again.
Choose the jade and you'll never hear from me again.
It's up to you.’
His deduction made her heart stop, and his choices made her feel as if she was being torn apart.
It was a way out, but she couldn't take it.
‘I can't invent people just to get you, Travis,’ she said huskily.
‘There is no accomplice to tell you about.
So, if those are the only two choices, I must take the jade.’
Travis looked down at the jade.
‘I see.’
Crossing to the dresser, he put the figurine down gently.
‘As you wish, then, Paige.
The jade is yours, to do with as you please.’
When he passed through the doorway and closed the door behind him Paige could scarcely credit what had happened.
The audible locking of the door brought it home, though.
She had lost him.
She had protected Lori, but at what cost to herself?
She felt dazed, still in shock from the suddenness of it all.
She picked up the jade.
She had never liked it anyway!
Suddenly that seemed riotously funny, and she laughed.
Laughed until the tears came, choking her, staggering to the bed to collapse on to it, crying her heart out.
Why couldn't he have given her a different choice, one that didn't involve old loyalties?
He had boxed her into a corner there had been no other way out of.
Not for her anyway.
Eventually the tears dried up, but still she didn't move, lying there listlessly, feeling so brittle that it seemed the smallest of movements would scatter her into a thousand pieces.
Dinnertime passed, but she found the thought of food nauseating.
Wearily she got up and went to the bathroom.
She showered, but instead of getting ready for bed she dressed in her new shirt and jeans.
There were decisions to be made, and foremost was the need to get rid of the jade.
She never wanted to see it again.
Coming to a decision, she reached for the telephone.
‘Hello, desk?
This is Miss Emerson, room 342.
Would you prepare my bill, please, and send someone for my bags?
And I'll need a taxi to take me to the airport.
Thank you.’
Several hours later Paige sat back in her window-seat on the small jet and tried to relax.
She had packed and checked out of the hotel without seeing either of the two brothers or her cousin.
Nor had she seen anyone she knew at the airport while she'd waited for her flight.
There was no direct flight that day; she had to take one that involved changes and stopovers.
It had taken every ounce of courage she possessed to board the aircraft after her last experience.
Her hands had been clammy and her breathing irregular, but a small brandy had helped to settle her nerves.
It would be a long time before she boarded any plane with equanimity.
She closed her eyes.
So much had happened in so short a time; it was like a bad dream.
Only one she wouldn't wake from.
Travis had told her he loved her, and she had…
Desperately she swallowed back a tide of emotion.
No use thinking that she would never see Travis again.
Dear lord, but it hurt.
There seemed to be this immense gaping hole inside her, and she didn't know how to fill it.
All she dared think of to do was return the jade and go home to England.
Bury herself in her work.
It was the universal panacea for a broken heart.
That and finding herself another man.
Something she could never do.
There simply was no replacement for Travis.
Which was not a thought to keep emotional tears at bay.
She asked the stewardess for a magazine and religiously read every word until they reached their first destination.
She had to change planes there, and spent the stopover walking the concourse, inventing an interest in everything and anything so as not to think.
There were two more changes before she finally boarded for the last leg.
The next plane was smaller still, which gave her a qualm or two, but the journey was correspondingly shorter, and in next to no time she was disembarking at Grand Cayman's airport.
It felt as if she had been travelling for days instead of only one, on and off, and she arrived as dusk was falling.
She hadn't eaten since yesterday, except for cups of coffee, but food was the least of her worries.
Returning the jade to Jonas was her main thought.
From their brief acquaintance, she knew that he kept late hours, seeming to need very little sleep, so she had no qualms about giving the taxi driver directions to the Hamilton house.
Just as she had expected, there were lights still ablaze as they drew up before the house.
Paying off the driver, she rang the bell and stood with her small amount of luggage at her feet, quite unaware of how totally lost and alone she seemed.
But Jonas Hamilton saw it immediately as he opened the door to her.
His strong face, lined by age and illness, framed a pair of kindly eyes that softened at the sight of her.
‘Paige, my dear child, come in, come in,’ he invited warmly, sounding almost as if he was expecting her.
However, Paige, suddenly overwhelmed by too much emotion, wouldn't budge a step until she had told him why she was there.
She wouldn't take advantage of his friendliness.
‘Hello, Jonas, I've brought your jade back,’ she told him thickly.
One brow raised, but he smiled.
‘Of course you have.
Why else would you be here?
Come in, my dear, and tell me all about it,’ he urged, and for the second time in just over twenty-four hours Paige burst into tears.
‘Sorry,’ she managed to mumble incoherently.
Jonas's expression hardened to a remarkable likeness of his grandson's.
Taking her arm, he called for Betty, his housekeeper, and led her, unprotesting, into the cheery warmth of his library.
By the time he had pressed her into a seat she had herself under more control, and was suffering acute embarrassment at her outburst.
‘I'm sorry, Jonas.
I didn't mean to get so emotional.
It's just been such an awful couple of days.’
Jonas poured them both a small measure of brandy, handed one to Paige, then made himself comfortable again, eyes watchful.
‘Really?
When I spoke to Travis the other day I understood he'd had a change of heart.’
She bit her lip, steadying herself.
‘That was before Lori rang and Travis saw the jade, and everything fell apart!
So I came here to return the jade to you before going home.’
The older man gave a deep sigh and eyed her bent head fondly.
‘A wise move.
Tell me, have you eaten?’
‘Not since yesterday.
I don't feel like eating.’
‘Now that won't do, Paige; you'll make yourself ill if you don't eat,’ he reproved.
‘What do I care?
It's all over — don't you understand?’ she shot back, and regretted it immediately.
Her eyes revealed her remorse.
He patted her knee.
‘Things always seem blacker at night.
Daylight adds perspective.
Now, I insist you join me for supper.
Nothing heavy.
And while we eat you can tell me about the jade.’
She looked away.
‘There's nothing to tell.’
Belatedly she took the figurine from her shoulder-bag and placed it on the table that stood between them.
‘Travis thinks I stole it.’
Jonas frowned and pursed his lips.
‘So I gather.
But why?
We both know you didn't.
It isn't in your nature.’
Paige twisted her glass in her hands, touched by his instinctive faith.
‘Because I told him I did.’
‘Again, why?’
Decisively she set the glass down and stood up.
‘I had my reasons.
I can't…won't say more.
You have the jade, as I promised myself you would, but if it offends you to have me here then I'll go.
I didn't intend to stay, anyway.’
Jonas tutted.
‘My, but you can jump, girl!
I'm not offended, and I thank you for the jade.
I'll admit I'd like to have your confidence in this but it isn't an obstacle to our friendship.
If you feel you can't tell me, well enough.
We'll say no more.
As to going, stuff and nonsense!
You'll stay and be right welcome.
I could do with the company.
Now, just you sit down again, and set yourself at ease.’
Paige subsided, smiling mistily.
‘Oh, Jonas, you're too kind.’
‘Rubbish, I just like getting my own way.
You stay just as long as you like and don't worry about a thing.’
Paige sipped at a cup of coffee and glanced across at Jonas.
Dressed in tropical white, with a panama on his head and a pair of glasses perched on the end of his nose, he was reading.
A rather racy novel, if the cover was anything to go by.
They were seated, as was their custom, in the summer-house, where they had just finished a light lunch.
She had been here four days now, and, true to his word, Jonas had said nothing about Travis or the jade, which now stood in its rightful place in the display cabinet.
She sensed his waiting for her confidence, but knew he would never pressure her into saying anything she would rather not.
All she had been urged to do was relax and recover her health and spirits after what had been a very traumatic experience.
Exhausted, she had slept almost the clock round that first night, and often found herself dozing during the day.
Her appetite had improved little.
Food still held no appeal.
She ate simply to keep up her strength.
Usually she managed to keep the looming black cloud of misery at bay, but there were times when her thoughts would drift away and her eyes would mist.
Then the ever-watchful Jonas would come to the rescue, gently introducing a new topic so that she would shake off her mood with a diffident smile.
But it seemed to Paige now that he was doing all the giving and she was taking without returning anything.
Which made her feel guilty, because Travis was his relative, not she.
For the first time in days she felt a stirring of life inside her.
‘I should be doing something,’ she declared, setting her cup down.
Jonas eyed her over his glasses.
‘You are doing something — you're keeping me company.’
Paige allowed her gaze to drift out to sea.
From here there were marvellous views of the bay.
‘I know, but…
I feel I'm taking advantage.
Travis…’
‘Isn't here, and you are.
You're depriving him of nothing.
Believe me, whatever happened between you, he wouldn't begrudge your being here.
He cares for you, you know,’ he said with gentle insistence.
Her smile was sad, resigned.
‘No, he doesn't.
He wouldn't allow himself to.
Not after…what I did.’
‘Without knowing the facts, I cannot judge that.
I can only say that in your own experience you must know it's not that easy to stop loving someone.
If it were you wouldn't be hurting and breaking your heart over him.’
Her lip trembled.
‘Is it that obvious?
Yet why not?
I've made such a mess of things.’
‘I don't doubt you had help.
You shouldn't take all the blame.
My grandson isn't a saint.
Besides, I have great faith in the power of love to move mountains.
Things will turn out for the best,’ he added cryptically.
She just had to smile at his optimism, even if she didn't share it.
‘You sound like Candide.’
‘My dear Paige, at my age, nothing seems as hopeless as it does to you.
I've survived a world war and several smaller ones.
I've seen miracles emerge where only destruction abounded.
So I know whereof I speak.
Life can take many strange twists,’ Jonas told her in all seriousness, then softened the whole with a laugh.
‘End of lecture.
Now, what is it you would like to do if I can't persuade you to keep an old man company?’
‘I don't know.
I suppose I could carry on with the cataloguing,’ she suggested.
Jonas nodded enthusiastically.
‘By all means, but remember it's not a chore.
I won't have you burying yourself in there,’ he added warningly.
‘I don't want to have to come and winkle you out.’
Smiling, she rose to her feet and dropped a kiss on his weathered cheek.
‘I promise not to do too much, but I think it will be good for me to keep busy,’ she said, and left him to his book.
It felt good to be back in harness again.
Even the few hours she put in gave her life some purpose.
She was as happy as she could be, surrounded by the undemanding beauty of his collection.
It helped to get her mind organised.
Very soon she would have to make the decision to leave.
Her own business needed her attention, but she'd been in touch with her manager, and everything was under control.
For a while longer she could let the world drift by.
Two afternoons later, just as she was tidying up, Jonas came into the study.
He held his glasses in one hand and was rhythmically tapping a sheet of paper held in the other.
‘Ah, Paige, my dear, you're just the person I need.
I've been arranging a little get-together.
A small party for some friends and relatives, and I wondered if you wouldn't mind giving Betty a hand with the arrangements.’
She looked round with a ready smile.
‘Of course I wouldn't mind.
I'd be only too happy to help.
Er — you did say relatives?’ she probed, fearing the worst.
Jonas gave her an old-fashioned look.
‘Never take up poker as a way of life — you'd starve.
You're far too transparent.
But let me set your mind at rest.
I haven't invited Travis, who, by the way, is only one of numerous relatives.’
Paige felt ashamed of herself.
‘I'm sorry.
It's not my place to tell you whom you should or shouldn't invite.
Tell me how I can help, and when the party is to be.’
Jonas came across and slipped an arm about her shoulders.
‘Take your orders from Betty — I always do,’ he said, eyes dancing.
‘The party is for the day after tomorrow — that's why it's all hands to the pumps.’
‘Oh, yes?
And what will you be doing?’ she queried in amusement.
‘What I do best — supervising!’
The next two days were a flurry of activity.
Extra staff were brought in to dust and polish, while Paige helped Betty prepare the rooms for those who would be staying over.
When that was done there was the silver to clean and glass to wash.
The cooking, which couldn't be done before the day of the party, looked like an insurmountable mountain to Paige when she presented herself in the kitchen to help.
However, the housekeeper was wonderfully organised, and her jovial personality made the kitchen buzz with chatter and laughter which in no way stopped the work from being done.
On the contrary, by late afternoon order prevailed.
All that was left to be done was the last-minute cooking.
Paige, released from her duties, stepped out of the house into the oppressive humidity of a looming tropical storm.
Stretching to ease tired muscles, she debated whether to go for a swim in the pool or opt for a long soak in a warm scented bath.
It was getting late.
Guests had been arriving for some time, for they had heard cars coming and going, but she hadn't met any yet.
Not that she minded.
She knew Jonas expected her to be present, but, in the circumstances, she felt it might be best to keep a low profile and retire early.
Glancing up at the sky, she saw the storm clouds gathering on the horizon.
It would be good to clear the air, but she hoped it would hold off until after the party.
It would be stifling indoors, which made her decide to have a swim after all.
Turning to head for the pool, she gasped and staggered as a figure loomed before her
Two strong hands shot out to steady her.
‘Easy!’
Her colour fluctuated wildly, and so did her heart.
‘Travis?’
One eyebrow quirked.
‘Who else were you expecting?’
Her wits went begging at his totally unexpected appearance.
‘N-nobody!
Not you!’
Her voice choked off.
‘You said I'd never see you again!’
Travis's smile was mocking.
‘I know.
I took a leaf out of your book.
I lied.’
Her stomach twisted into a knot.
‘What are you doing here?
Jonas told me he hadn't invited you.’
Releasing her shoulders, he took a firm grip on her arm and began steering her towards the steps down to the lawn.
‘I didn't need an invitation.
It's my party.’
That piece of information shook her so much that she put up no resistance to being led off, except to say, ‘Where are we going?’
‘Grandfather is expecting us for tea in the summer-house.’
She summoned up a little fight then.
‘I don't want tea!’
Travis wasn't a whit put out.
‘Naturally, but you're too well mannered to cause a scene.’
Which was true, but with each step she took the shock grew less and her spirit rallied.
‘I don't know what this is all about, but you can't bully me into saying anything!’
Travis merely laughed.
‘Tell me about it!’
At the steps to the summer-house, she rounded on him.
‘I don't know what you're up to!’
‘You'll find out,’ he informed her, urging her up the steps to where an amused Jonas was an interested spectator.
‘I won't stay to find out!’
Pushing her down into a chair, Travis produced her passport from his pocket.
‘Without this, you're going nowhere,’ he said and put it away again.
Paige stared at him in growing wrath, then turned to Jonas.
‘Are you going to let him get away with this?’ she demanded to know.
‘Well, my dear, Travis is pretty much a law unto himself,’ Jonas pacified, watching his grandson make himself comfortable on the top step.
‘And I generally get what I want, one way or another,’ Travis added confidingly.
Paige didn't deign to answer.
She was kicking herself for forgetting the most basic Capricorn trait of allowing nothing to stand in the way of their goal.
Well, he might have succeeded in getting her where she couldn't run away, but getting her to talk was something else.
Librans could be determinedly stubborn, as he was about to find out.
Jonas handed out the cups of tea and she accepted hers with a tight smile, not yet ready to forgive him his duplicity.
Travis she studiously ignored — or at least pretended to.
Surreptitiously she eyed him from beneath her lashes.
He looked tired and a little drawn, and she could swear he had lost weight, too.
But it would be a mistake to put that down to missing her.
After all, he had forced the choice on her.
‘Cooee!’
The call brought all three heads round, both men grinned, and Travis climbed to his feet as a young and visibly pregnant redhead came into view.
‘Hi!
Is there any tea for me?
Gee, but it's a hot one today!’
She returned Travis's kiss warmly, then bent as well as she could to hug Jonas.
‘Hello, Gramps.’
She straightened, holding the small of her back and her bulge at the same time.
‘Junior doesn't like this weather one bit,’ she joked.
Paige nimbly rose to her feet.
‘Here, take my seat,’ she offered, and the young woman took it with a grateful smile.
‘Thanks.
You must be Paige.
Travis told us how lovely you were.
He waxed quite lyrical.
Now I've made him blush!’ she laughed.
‘As nobody seems about to introduce me, I'll introduce myself.
I'm Karen, Drew's wife.’
They shook hands and Paige handed her a cup of tea which she accepted gratefully.
‘I met Drew in Panama and liked him a lot.
Isn't he with you?’
Karen shot a quick look at Travis before answering.
‘Oh, he'll be along later.
I've been staying with Rose, Drew's mother, since we heard about the crash.
I came down with her today.
It's just as well we used the company jet.
They'd never have allowed me on a scheduled flight, and this is one party I wouldn't miss.
Eh, Travis?’
The teasing remark brought another tinge of colour to his cheeks, which Paige found intriguing.
All the same, he laughed.
‘If you were any smaller, Red, you'd pay for that!’ he threatened.
Karen patted her stomach.
‘Pregnancy has its advantages.
Not many at this stage.
It's the last few weeks that will really drag by.
Are you planning to have children, Paige?’
The disarming question brought a wash of colour to Paige's cheeks.
Resolutely she kept her eyes from Travis, although she could sense his watching her.
‘One day, perhaps,’ she mumbled, while inside a belated thought occurred to her.
Could she already be carrying Travis's child?
They had taken no precautions.
The possibility made her feel very odd indeed — a strange mixture of alarm and pleasure.
Still feeling fluttery inside, she set her cup back on the table.
‘I think I'll go and take a bath, if you'll excuse me.’
‘Good idea,’ Karen agreed, levering herself up.
‘I'll go with you.
You can help me decide what to wear so I don't look like a blob on legs.’
‘A very charming blob,’ Paige corrected, offering her arm.
‘Pregnancy suits you,’ she added as they made their way slowly back to the house.
Karen smiled a secretively knowing smile.
‘Hmn, Drew thinks so too,’ she confessed, and chuckled.
‘Men, bless them!
They're only big kids themselves, really.
But what would we do without them?’
‘What indeed?’
Paige muttered drily, and held the back door open for Karen to pass through.
At seven-thirty Paige descended the grand sweeping staircase to the hall.
Noise was already filtering through from the lounge and the veranda, where the house guests had gathered.
Those coming locally weren't expected until eight o'clock.
She had lingered in her room as long as she'd dared, knowing in her bones that any failure to appear would bring Travis hotfoot to her door.
She had used make-up sparingly due to the heat, and had chosen a blouson dress with thin straps, made of numerous tiny pleats that fanned out as she walked showing off the pastel rainbow hues of the silky material.
Now that her ankle was fully recovered she could wear a higher pair of fragile silver sandals.
As she had dressed she'd kept on asking herself why he had come.
He was acting so strangely, as if he never had suspected her of being a thief, nor followed her doggedly.
as if all they had ever been was lovers.
Only once had he said he loved her, and that had been in extreme circumstances.
She hadn't believed, not really.
Yet he had looked at her today — Lord, she was so confused.
As she reached the last step Travis appeared through a door to her left.
She halted, left a trifle breathless as usual by the sight of him in a dress suit.
He paused, too, when he saw her there, a flame flickering to life in the backs of his eyes.
‘I was just coming to look for you,’ he said, advancing, gaze roaming over her caressingly.
‘You look lovely.’
She remained transfixed, mesmerised by the waves of warmth and love emanating from him.
‘Thank you.’
Travis held out his hand.
‘Come along, there's someone I want you to meet.’
Paige placed her hand in his, knowing it was hopeless to keep fighting her feelings when he smiled and had that certain look in his eye.
They didn't enter the room he had come from, but Travis led her down to one she had rarely used.
Jonas called it the family-room, where there were plenty of comfortable chairs and couches and it didn't matter if you put your feet up.
Empty, it had a lingering ambience of warmth, and as she went inside it was even more noticeable now that there were people in it.
Jonas sat on one of the couches beside an elegant older woman whose chestnut hair was attractively swept by wings of grey at the temples.
It was to this woman, who watched them with a smile, that Travis now led her.
‘Paige, I would like you to meet my mother.
Mother, this is Paige.’
The simple introduction brought a light to eyes remarkably like her son's.
‘Paige, how lovely to meet you at last,’ Rose McKenna pronounced warmly, holding out her hands so that Paige had to place hers in them, and was drawn down to have a kiss pressed to either cheek.
Disarmed and confused, Paige returned the greeting.
‘How do you do, Mrs McKenna?
Please excuse me, but I wasn't expecting…’
Travis's touch on her arm cut off her attempt to make sense of what was happening.
‘And, of course, you know Mr and Mrs Templeton,’ he went on smoothly.
Paige swung round in surprise and delight.
‘Aunt Lucy!
Uncle Tom!’
She was across the room in seconds, hugging them both, emotional tears making her eyes shine.
‘Oh, it's lovely to see you, but what are you doing here?’
Her aunt smiled.
‘Travis invited us.
He even sent his own plane!
Your uncle and I were very impressed.
He wouldn't take no for an answer.’
Paige pressed her hands to her cheeks and turned, catching sight of Karen before meeting Travis's bland expression.
‘No,’ she agreed, ‘he never does!
Won't somebody please tell me what's going on?’ she demanded.
However, before anyone could utter so much as a syllable, the air was rent by the beating sound of an approaching helicopter.
Immediately Travis came to her side.
‘That will be Drew now,’ he told her, voice raised over the noise.
From the volume, Paige guessed the machine must have landed on the lawn.
The noise died, picked up again, then rapidly faded away.
There were footsteps outside the door, and a trilling laugh that Paige recognised the merest instant before the door was thrust open and Drew came in, a giggling Lori attached to his arm.
The giggle stopped abruptly as Lori discovered who was in the room.
Incredulity at seeing her parents changed to anger when she saw Paige and Travis side by side.
As Drew closed the door she turned on him.
‘What's going on?
Why have you brought me here?
What kind of trick is this?’
Her eyes spanned the room, once, twice, and seemed to find something threatening in the silence.
‘I'm not staying here!
You had no right to do this!’
Travis laid a warning hand on Paige's arm.
‘What have we done, Lori?’ he asked mildly.
Lori shook her head, laughing harshly, wrapping her arms about her defensively.
‘Oh, you know!
It's her!’ she accused, pointing a shaking finger at Paige.
‘She's been telling tales behind my back!
Well, I won't stand for it, see!
Whatever she's told you, it's a lie.
She stole the jade but she's trying to put the blame on me.
She was always jealous of me, always.
She stole it, I tell you, not me!’
CHAPTER ELEVEN
The silence that followed Lori's outburst seemed to reverberate around the room.
Paige felt her heart thudding wildly in her chest, but it was her aunt who spoke first.
‘Oh, Lori!’
Lucy Templeton groaned aloud, tears springing to her eyes.
Travis was by her in two strides, helping her to the nearest chair.
‘Drew, pour Mrs Templeton a brandy,’ he ordered, and his brother complied swiftly.
‘Travis, do you want us to leave?’ his mother asked in some concern.
‘No, Mother, I think it's important we should all hear this.’
Straightening, he turned to Lori, who had gone as white as a sheet, and had backed up to the door like an animal at bay.
‘You were wrong, Lori; Paige never said a word to any of us.
Only four people knew the jade had gone, and only two, you and Paige, knew who had taken it.
Unlike you, Paige is a very loyal person — she wouldn't betray you, even to save herself.
She risked losing me, however unhappy it made her, to keep your name clear.
More than that, she nearly died to save you from the results of your own jealousy and spite.
She didn't tell us, and she never would.
You condemned yourself.’
Lucy Templeton observed her only child sadly.
‘I thought you'd grown out of it, darling.
When you were a child there was some excuse for you, but not now.
This time you went too far.
Heaven only knows what else you've done that Paige has covered up for.
I feel so ashamed!’ she declared.
Rose McKenna came across to the other woman, sitting on the arm of the chair, holding her hand.
‘Travis?’ she asked quietly.
He responded at once.
‘Please, Mrs Templeton, don't distress yourself.
I didn't bring you here to upset you.
But I felt that Lori had to be stopped.
Too much had been hidden too long.
If I hurt you I'm sorry.
My only excuse is that I love Paige very much, and I always protect those I love.
I very much hope that both you and your husband will stay on for the wedding.
And you, too, Lori.
Though I'm giving you fair warning that I won't stand for any more of your spiteful tricks.
Now, I think you owe Paige and my grandfather an apology.’
For a moment it seemed as if Lori wasn't going to say anything at all.
It was her father who brought colour to her cheeks by saying simply, ‘Lori, don't you think it's time you grew up?
Be adult enough to take responsibility for what you've done.
Don't make me ashamed of you.’
Lori seemed to shudder right through to her very bones; then it was as if she had shaken off a darkness that had possessed her for too long.
Her hands covered her face.
‘Oh, God, I'm sorry!’
She was trembling violently, but with a momentous effort of will she stopped.
Her hands dropped and she surveyed the company, who, without exception, showed concern not condemnation.
Lastly she looked at Paige.
‘Have you ever seen yourself doing something you know is wrong, and yet been unable to stop?
That's…not an attempt to excuse myself, but the truth.’
With a deep breath she drew herself up, giving a glimpse of the person she could be, in time.
‘I never meant to put you in danger when I took…it.
I would never have forgiven myself if you'd died.
It used to be a joke, but it's not funny any more, is it?
I'm sorry I hurt you, Paige, and you, Mum and Dad.
Mostly I'm sorry that I hurt myself.
You were right, Paige, I see that now.
Travis, remind me not to get on the wrong side of you again.
Mr Hamilton, I hope I didn't damage the jade.’
Jonas rose to his feet with a deep sigh.
‘My dear, that was very graciously said.
I admire a person who's not afraid to admit their short-comings.
As for the jade, come see for yourself.
I've a fancy these two young people want to be alone.’
He winked at Travis and the silent Paige.
A much subdued Lori took the arm Jonas offered.
Rose and Uncle Tom helped Aunt Lucy to her feet.
‘I'll take Lucy with me, Travis,’ his mother said.
‘We could both do with some tea while the three of us are talking over what plans need to be made.
Don't be too long joining the party — after all, my dears, it is for you.’
‘We'll be there presently,’ Travis promised, and turned to his brother, who was belatedly greeting his wife.
‘Drew, thanks for helping out, and you, Red.
Would you and Karen mind standing in for me for a while?’
Karen sent him a sweet smile.
‘I'd only loan him out for someone like you, Travis.
We'll bail you out again .
Don't do anything I wouldn't do!’ she warned as she was led away.
In seconds, so it seemed, they had the room to themselves.
Paige, who had remained in a shocked silence as revelation had poured on revelation, rediscovered her voice.
‘What wedding?’
That seemed the most crucial question.
Travis turned to face her, eyes wary, body tense.
‘Ours.’
She felt a powerful urge to murder, mixed with a delicious glow.
For the moment the former won.
‘Where was I when you asked me if I wanted to marry a devious man like you?’
Brown eyes gleamed in a straight face as he shrugged.
‘I give up.
Where were you?’
‘Don't you dare laugh at me!’
Immediately he was contrite.
‘You're right, I shouldn't joke about it.
You see, I'm nervous.
I know I owe you an apology.’
‘You, nervous!’ she scoffed, and didn't resist when he took her in his arms, cradling her close to his heart.
‘I don't believe it!’
‘Believe it.
This is the hardest thing I've ever done.
To come to you and ask your forgiveness,’ he admitted huskily.
‘Really?
You seemed to be taking it for granted,’ she pointed out.
‘Purely a defence mechanism.
You can't know how much I hate myself for not believing you.
The things I said to you!
Half of them in self-defence because I found myself so attracted to you.
I can't believe how long it took me to realise you really were innocent!’
Paige eased away so that she could look up.
‘When did you?’
He rolled his eyes.
‘I'll never forget the moment.
You'd just told me you loved me, and I realised I loved you, too.
Then you lied.
It was so clear that I knew I'd been blind.
All along you were covering up.
Everything made sense once I knew that.
But I couldn't help you unless you admitted it.
You were so stubborn, but I loved you for it.’
A slow smile spread over his face and he raised both hands to frame her face.
‘I do love you,’ he avowed, with such a depth of feeling that her heart turned over.
‘Oh, Travis!’ she sighed and lifted her lips to his in a kiss that sealed their fate — forever joined together.
She knew she might never hear the words again, but they would be there in every look, every word, every gesture.
With this man words truly were unnecessary.
He was love.
When they drew apart at last Travis carried her to the nearest armchair, cradling her across his lap.
Paige threaded her fingers through his and sighed.
‘I should be angry with you for what you did.’
‘You mean Lori?
But if you wouldn't tell me I had to find out the only way I could,’ Travis explained, tightening his arms about her.
‘How did you find out?’
Curiosity got the better of her.
‘With logic and a slice of luck.
I knew you were protecting someone, but I couldn't be sure who.
I gave you that ultimatum because I wanted you to confide in me.
You've no idea how let down I felt when you wouldn't.’
How like him to want to slay her dragons, not realising he had been one himself.
‘I promise not to do it again,’ Paige declared handsomely.
‘Go on.’
‘Thank you,’ he responded drily.
‘Anyway, I didn't realise it was Lori you were protecting, which only goes to show how mixed up you'd got me, until the note arrived telling me you had the jade.
As I'd already discovered that for myself, I started thinking.
Once I'd discounted the story you gave me about Lori's reasons for being there, I realised the note could only have come from her, and therefore she must have taken the jade.’
‘The jade you'd already given to me,’ she pointed out.
‘Knowing you'd take it back to Jonas,’ Travis countered.
Paige sighed.
‘I suppose Jonas was expecting me when I arrived — that's why he didn't seem surprised.’
Travis tipped her head and kissed her.
‘Never mind, sweetheart.
We had your best interests at heart.
Now, where was I?’
‘Lori.’
‘Ah, yes.
I admire your loyalty, Paige, darling, but not when someone makes outrageous demands.
However, I knew you wouldn't do it, so I had to get Lori to own up.
So I had Drew use his charm on her to get her away from Chuck and bring her here today.’
‘And Karen agreed to this?’
Travis grinned unrepentantly.
‘Naturally, when I asked her.’
She sent him an old-fashioned look.
‘Oh, naturally!
You always get your own way, don't you?’
He laughed.
‘Somehow I've a feeling that that's going to change,’ he said without regret.
‘Meanwhile —’
‘Meanwhile,’ Paige interrupted, ‘you were busy organising everybody's lives, including mine.
OK, so I admit you were right about Lori, but it was rather cruel.’
‘Sometimes you have to be cruel to be kind.
But I meant what I said; providing she stops attacking you, she'll always be welcome with us,’ Travis reiterated his promise.
‘So, now that I've explained everything, do you think you'll marry me?’
‘I suppose so,’ she admitted reluctantly, eyes carrying a teasing glint as she lifted them to his.
‘But only because I might be pregnant.
No other reason.’
‘Mm, I saw the thought strike you,’ he murmured, nuzzling her neck.
‘Would it be so bad if you were?’
A cat-like smiled curved her lips.
‘Actually I think I'd rather like it.
Besides, we can't leave it too late, because you're not getting any younger, you know.’
‘Hey!
I like that!
You know how to strike a man where it hurts!’
Untangling their fingers, Paige scrambled to her feet.
‘But I know how to make it better, too.
I love you, Travis McKenna, for my sins, and I wouldn't marry you for any other reason.’
Laughing, she dodged his attempts to catch her and ran to the door.
‘Well, what are you waiting for?
Hadn't we better go and tell everyone what they already know?’
Unhurriedly Travis came to join her.
‘You'll pay for this later,’ he promised.
Reaching on tiptoe, she brushed her lips over his.
‘I know, and we'll both enjoy it.
Well, McKenna, you dreamt of finding adventure, but you found me.
Do you think it's a fair exchange?’
His hand on the door stopped her from opening it.
‘Ask me again in forty years.
By then I might be thinking straight.’
Paige laughed, eyes flirting outrageously.
‘If you think that, you don't know me!’ she declared, and subsided into his arms.