

Con men trick elderly sisters
ALTON police are appealing for witnesses to a crime in the Kings/Queens Road area of the town on Election day afternoon last week.
Two men talked their way into the home of two elderly sisters, pretending that they had come on behalf of neighbours to cut down trees in the garden.
They left with two handbags, £600 and a few ‘bits and pieces’.
‘The most disturbing part was that one of the bags contained two pairs of glasses belonging to one of the sisters who is recovering from cataract operations and can barely see without them,’ said a police spokesman.
‘We would make a plea for the person responsible to at least return the glasses,’ he added.
The incident took place at around 4.30 on Thursday afternoon, and it is thought that one of the men could be middle aged and the other younger.
This is the second time that the sisters have been deceived in this way.
A  similar incident occurred some two years ago, under almost identical circumstances, and police believe that the cases could be related.
Anyone able to help in any way should contact Alton Police on 0420 82244.
Tory triumph for Gerry Malone
EXPRESSIONS of triumph were tinged with a feeling of relief from Winchester and Alton Conservatives as their candidate Gerry Malone swept to victory in last week's general election with a majority of over 8,000 over the Liberal Democrats.
The results, announced at 2.30 a.m. on Friday morning at Winchester's Riverpark Leisure Centre, were as follows: Gerald Malone (Conservative party candidate) 33,113, Tony Barron (Liberal Democrat) 24,992, Peter Jenks (Labour) 4,917, John Browne (Conservative) 3,095.
This meant that John Browne, MP for the constituency for the past 13 years and deselected by his party after failing to declare business interests, lost his deposit.
The turn-out was 83.5 percent.
The Liberal Democrats, hoping to build upon their recent local election results, and for a larger split in the Conservative vote, arrived for the count in  buoyant mood.
But disappointment began to set in by the time the ballot boxes had been emptied, and when the second stage of the count began, at 12.45 a.m., it soon became clear that it would be a two-horse race.
In his victory speech, Mr. Malone spoke of the effort his team had made ‘to not only consolidate our work in this constituency, but to improve it.
We are in a position again to make sure Winchester's voice is heard in the corridors of power.
‘It is a great honour to represent this historic constituency.’
He thanked his opponents in what had been ‘a clean campaign throughout the country — something good for democracy.
‘I intend to represent this constituency in a non-partisan way, and will be at the call of everyone here no matter what their political persuasions.
That job starts tomorrow.’
Mr. Barron said: ‘We lost because the country was afraid.
We maintained our position in Winchester.’
He said that his party had bucked the national trend by ‘putting our position in a straightforward way’.
The large group of Lib-Dem supporters present gave their candidate by far the longest ovation of the evening, holding up Peter Jenks's message.
The Labour candidate, who  managed to keep his deposit, pointed out that his party had improved their position in the constituency by some 900 votes.
In his speech, Mr Browne referred to a ‘robust fight’ ending in a ‘good victory’for the Conservatives, and wished his successor ‘sincere good luck’for the future.
‘What a pleasure it has been, and an honour to have been MP for Winchester for 13 years,’ he said, thanking those who had supported him in the past year.
For the record, John Browne's polled 32,195 votes for the Tories in 1987, Alliance candidate Jock Macdonald took 24,716 votes, Labour 4,028 and the Green party 565.
•See page two for East Hampshire election story.
Steam line faces cash crisis
ALTON'S nostalgic days of steam could be numbered as the future of the famous Watercress Line is hanging in the balance.
A disastrous Christmas period — which cost Mid Hants Railway tens of thousands of pounds — plunged the company into a cash crisis.
Despite volunteers raising £55,000 to overcome the immediate financial nightmare, attempts are now having to be made to ensure the line's long-term security.
Mid Hants Railway are making an  impassioned plea to the public to support the steam attraction over  the Easter.
‘Ultimately, if we cannot improve our profitability, the future looks bleak,’ said the company's managing director Ian Dean.
‘It would be extremely sad to see this railway go to the wall, after so many volunteers have put in so much time and money to keep steam travel alive in Hampshire.’
The cash crisis has been blamed on the recession and a breakdown in negotiations with the county council.
Attendances on the Watercress Line's 1991 Santa Specials flopped.
That meant Christmas profits, which usually see the railway through the lean spell to April, were not available.
The company turned to the council asking for a £100,000 loan.
However, that money didn't materialise and the county confirmed this week that the request for a loan has been refused.
A county spokesman did point out that the authority had given a £10,000 grant to the railway last year which went towards a footbridge at Medstead station.
And some £35,000 was also paid to the Watercress Line by the council for a piece of land.
But Mr. Dean said: ‘Like many businesses in the leisure industry, we have been hit by the recession.
Our long term plans had been affected by reduced income over Christmas and escalating costs.
‘We had been working together with the county council for some months and the failure of this appeal was extremely disappointing.
‘It would have been a tragedy for Hampshire if the Watercress Line had to close,’ Mr. Dean continued.
‘But now we have secured the immediate future of the railway and the 1992 operation.
CRIMINAL ‘ENTERPRISE’ ENDS IN COURT
A SOLDIER who supplied transport for two younger youths intent on burglary, and kept watch for  them as they carried out a theft, was fined over £300 by Alton magistrates on Tuesday.
The court heard how 21-year-old Nigel Hinkin of Lipscombe Rise, Alton, had helped Jonathan Plumb and Daniel Sayers, both 17, of Beavers Close and Alder Close respectively, to steal cigarettes, sweets and cash worth £900 from the Paperweight Newsagents in Raven Square, Alton, in March.
Plumb and Sayers were also charged with breaking into Ransomes cycle shop in Victoria Road, Alton, at an earlier date and stealing £1,600 of goods including clothing, cycles parts, pumps and sunglasses.
All three pleaded guilty to the charges.
Defending Hinkin and Plumb, solicitor Bob Booker told the court that the offences had all taken place within a fortnight in early March.
Hinkin and another youth had gone to Alton railway station and made a ‘half-hearted attempt’ to break into the automatic machines there to obtain cash.
There they had met Plumb and Sayers.
‘There is no evidence that it was a planned meeting, but it turned into a joint enterprise,’ Mr. Booker said.
That evening one of the kiosks at the station had been broken into and cigarettes and confectionery stolen.
At a later meeting, Hinkin was asked by the others, as he had a motor vehicle, to go out with them and commit burglaries.
They made several unsuccessful attempts before managing to enter Paperweight and take the items, most of which were later recovered.
Extended role for the careers service
THE Alton Careers Advisory Service are dramatically reorganising their activities as part of a nationwide campaign to attract a more diverse range of clients.
‘Traditionally the Careers Advisory Service have catered for young people up to the age of 19,’ explained senior advisor, Paul Barnes, ‘but now we plan to extend our information and advisory service to adult clients.’
The Alton office, based in Paper Mill Lane, have seen a marked increase over the past six months in the number of adults looking to change careers, either as a result of job loss, reduction in promotion prospects, or a desire to retrain in a different field.
‘We have seen a steady rise with figures just over three times what they were in September for adults seeking advice,’ Mr. Barnes added.
Continued on page 4
Continued from page 1
Besides offering help with careers and providing educational information which can extend to working overseas and in the voluntary sector, the centre provides a job placement service.
This, however, is mainly restricted to school and college leavers, the adults being catered for  by the Job Centres.
And the service have increased their opening hours.
The Alton office is now open in the morning from 9.30 to 12.30 from Monday to Friday, and from 1.30 to 4 p.m. on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
The eleven staff, headed by principal advisor, Debbie Dean, also provide a service for the surrounding community.
They visit Winson House, High Street, Petersfield, from 1.30 to 4 p.m. on Mondays; Barbados House, Bordon, from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. on Thursdays, and the Forest Community Centre also in Bordon from 10 a.m. to 12.30 on Tuesdays.
‘The message we want to get across is that we are here, so please come and see us,’ said Mr. Barnes.
For further information, ring 0420 83966.
Stepping up the pace at Alton Careers Advisory Service are from the left: Principal advisor, Debbie Dean, senior advisor Paul Barnes, advisor Jackie Lewis and senior assistant advisor Glynis Bravery.
The agony and the achievement
LOCAL runners did Alton proud in the gruelling London Marathon on Sunday.
Despite sore feet and blisters, they completed the 26 and  a bit miles to raise thousands of pounds for charity.
The pain, agony and exhaustion were replaced by an enormous sense of achievement and relief as they crossed the finishing line.
Among the bank of local runners was Alresford man Mark Thwaites who completed the course in just a fraction over three hours.
‘The first two miles were dead slow because of the huge crowd of runners,’ he said.
‘But the last four miles were beautiful.
All those people cheering us on made so much difference.’
Twenty-one-year-old Mark was running in aid of Tusk Force — a charity to protect the future of the elephant — and raised between £700 and £800.
He had wanted to make the £1,000 target but hopes that he can raise the balance when he runs in the Luton and Brussels half marathons — and possibly the New York marathon — later this year.
Alton runner Arthur Balsdon wasn't far behind Mark — he finished in three hours and 19 minutes.
‘I lost toe nails, and my legs felt like they had been welded together — but at least I'm still breathing,’ said 40-year-old Arthur.
Not only did he enjoy the occasion he also raised around £750 for Leukaemia and Kidney Research.
Another runner who suffered injury during the big event was Martin Pritchard.
‘I got round — but it was painful,’ Martin told the Herald on Monday.
The 33-year-old proprietor of Alton Electrical was resting at home at Lime Grove, Alton, when we caught up with him.
The reason for his agonising experience was an injured knee which kept his time down to a modest four hours 32 seconds.
‘I spent a lot of time attending to it, but I ran all the way, which is good enough,’ he said.
‘But it was ten times more difficult than I expected.
I'll never do anything like that again.’
Continued on page 4
Continued from page 1
Martin's pain, though, has brought fruit in the form of about £550 promised sponsorship money for the Alton Cardiac Rehabilitation Unit.
He chose to support them as they have helped two members of his family recover from heart disease in recent years.
Amanda Robson,(31), whose parents live at Chawton and who plays hockey for Alton ladies, completed the distance in five hours 14 minutes and, according to her mother ‘looked remarkably well at the end’.
A physiotherapist at Winchester's Sarum Road Hospital, she hopes to have raised over £1,000 for the Juvenile Diabetes Foundation.
Amanda, who praised her hospital colleagues for their ‘wonderful support’, was also sponsored by local businesses.
These included Porters Bookshop, Bell House Studios and Hair of Alton, and Flair Carpets and Bell House Interiors of Alresford.
David Bowden of Complins, Holybourne, who was running for the Multiple Sclerosis Society, recorded a rather faster time of two hours 56 minutes — but he was running in his seventh marathon.
It was his second try at the London event, where he first ran in 1981, and he was pleased with his performance.
‘It really felt good, apart from the blisters on the soles of my feet,’ he said.
‘The crowd were very encouraging.’
The fact that he wore a hat with a daffodil in it helped in this respect, he felt.
He hopes to be there again next year ‘although I always say ‘never again’ straight afterwards and then a few months later remember how much I enjoyed it.’
As yet Mr. Bowden does not know how much money he has raised, but expects the final total to be well over £250.
Amanda Robson, one of Alton's many marathon successes.
Houses burgled
A SPATE of burglaries hit houses in the Greenfields Estate area of Alton on Sunday night.
A purse and its contents, valued at £500, was taken from a house in Kellynch Close, between 1 and 7 a.m.
Cash and credit cards worth £520 were stolen from a house in Alder Close, between midnight and 6.30 a.m., and in Thorpe Gardens £20 worth of cash and credit cards were taken from a house sometime between 1.30 and 7.30 a.m.
Generator stolen
A MASE generator, a Honda lawnmower and a can of fuel, together valued at almost £1,500, were stolen from a garage in Vicarage Road, Ropley, on Tuesday.
The thief struck sometime between 8.30 a.m. and 6 p.m.
Vehicle burgled
A GOODMANS stereo cassette player was stolen from a vehicle parked in Cromwells Car Park, Anstey Park, Alton, between 7.30 and 10.30 on Monday evening.
Theft from house
A BLACK and Decker bench grinder, worth £120 and a Triumph radio/cassette player, valued at £140, were stolen from a house in Abbey Road, Medstead between 5 p.m. on Sunday and 7.45 a.m. on Monday.
Over 400 Holybourne residents have signed a petition urging the authorities to take measures to protect villagers from the dangers of speeding traffic along the old London Road.
The protest followed a front-page article in the Herald three weeks ago, which reported villagers' concern, and reinforces views and suggestions put in a letter sent to the East Hampshire Road Safety Council last month.
Copies were available for signing in Holybourne Post Office and Stores for a week, and in the evenings petition organiser Alexis Gilmour canvassed around the village.
Story-teller Rob Parkinson, and poet Paula Claire (right), visited Eggar's, Alton, last week as part of the school's ninth annual poetry and literary festival.
On Thursday, the first and second years were entertained by strange and magical tales from Mr. Parkinson, who also used exotic musical instruments from all over the world.
Later he organised two workshops which involved the pupils creating and performing some of their own stories.
On Friday, Paula, whose writing emphasises the sound of language, demonstrated how she uses electronic technology to project and enhance her voice during the performance of her work.
The pupils were then given the opportunity to create and experiment with her voice synthesiser as they performed some group poems of their own.
Mr. Parkinson returned to Eggar's to give an evening  performance of his Tales on Tales on Canterbury Tales, as part of the school's 350th anniversary celebrations.
Heads it's Spring…a lovely display of Easter bonnets from just a few of the 25 children who took part in a magnificent parade at the Sally Ann Playgroup, Amery Street, Alton on Friday morning.
Target — helping sports clubs
THE Hampshire Playing Fields Association have just launched a £250,000 public appeal to enable them to respond to the ever-increasing demands for support of sport and recreational projects throughout the county.
The appeal follows the announcement of loans and grants totalling nearly £21,000 to parish councils, sports clubs and voluntary bodies.
Local projects to benefit include the Alton Sports and Social Club who will receive £1,000 towards extensions to the Harry Baker pavilion; Medstead Parish Council, who have been awarded £1,500 towards extensions to the village sports pavilion; and Old Alresford Cricket Club, who have been given £100 to upgrade windows in their pavilion.
An independent charity, the association say they can only hope to continue this level of help to sporting organisations with the public's support.
Donations to the appeal can be made directly to the Treasurer, The Hampshire Playing Fields Association,.
Pile-up
FOUR vehicles were involved in a pile-up in Liss on Saturday morning but everyone escaped unhurt.
The accident happened at the junction of Forest Road and Pine Walk around 8.35 a.m.
When democracy took to the forest
CHANGE OF VENUE FOR VOTERS
STARTLED voters from the parish of Binsted found their polling station had been switched to an open sided shed, which is normally used for storing Christmas trees in the middle of Alice Holt Forest.
Rowledge First School is usually used as the polling station for Bucks Horn Oak voters, but the venue was changed for the first time this year to the Forestry Commission's offices in Christmas Tree Yard.
Fortunately for everyone concerned, Thursday last week turned out to be one of the finest days this year…making the Bucks Horn Oak polling station one of the most idyllic in Britain.
However, a resident of the area, who  preferred to remain anonymous, told the Herald: ‘It was ridiculous.
I've never seen anything like it in 30 years of voting!
‘The polling station was 400 yards down a forest track, about half a mile away from the nearest house.
It was difficult to find, and if it had rained we would all have had to have worn our wellies.
If it had been windy our votes would have been blown all over the forest.’
Sandy Phillips who lives in Forest Edge, Blacknest, was equally furious.
She described the polling station as ‘a badly lit cow shed’.
‘It was so dark I could hardly see where to put my cross on the voting slip — and then I couldn't get to the ballot box which was situated in a poky little office.
Finally I handed my vote to the presiding officer who put my vote into the ballot box himself.
Surely that can't be the proper way to run an election.’
Ann Upton the returning officer for the East Hampshire constituency told the Herald on Thursday that the ballot box had been taken out of the small office and made freely accessible to voters — meanwhile our photographer discovered that it had been simply relocated in the forest.
Mrs. Upton explained that the polling station was changed this year to the Forestry Commission's office in Alice Holt Forest, so that it would be more centrally located for Bucks Horn Oak voters, and not situated in a school which would then have to be closed for the day.
She said that she had visited the Forestry Commission's premises earlier in the year, and had found them ‘completely acceptable’ as a polling station.
Probably the most idyllic polling station in Britain, the Bucks Horn Oak voting centre was in the middle of Alice Holt Forest.
Increased majority for Michael Mates
EAST Hampshire MP Michael Mates swept to victory in the General Election last week and increased his majority by 4,500 votes.
The high turn-out — 79 percent of the 93,367 electorate — meant the count took longer than expected and the result was not declared until just before 3 a.m. on Friday.
Mr. Mates polled 47,541 votes (51 percent) compared to the Liberal Democrats' Sue Baring on 18,376 (20 percent) and Labour's Jim Phillips on 6,840 (7 percent).
The two other candidates were the Liphook potter, Ian Foster (Green Party), who got 1,113 votes (1.2 percent) and a retired railwayman from Buriton, Stan Hale, who obtained 165 votes as a Revolutionary Christian Communist candidate.
The result was a blow for the Liberal Democrats, who polled nearly 1,000 votes less than in the 1987 election.
Their campaign, while never likely to overhaul the incumbent, was affected by the withdrawal of Richard Denton-White — the new candidate was only chosen in February and this, the party felt, did not leave her enough time to build up a significant level of ‘voter-familiarity’.
In his acceptance speech, Mr. Mates thanked all the East Hampshire District Council staff who had taken part in the count and to all those who had manned the 51 polling stations.
He also thanked his wife Rosalyn, his campaign agent, party workers and the police.
Mr Mates said: ‘I would like to thank you all for continuing to have faith in me and I will continue to represent you and do my best for all my constituents, whether or not they voted for me.’
Sue Baring, finding it difficult to conceal her disappointment, thanked a similar list of people before ending: ‘I do think the result is uncomfortable for many sections of this society and I hope I will be free to fight for all those who may well lose out as a result of this election.’
Mr. Phillips, who boosted the Labour share of the pool with an extra 2,400 votes on 1987, thanked his agent and campaign workers and added simply: ‘Thank you and good night.’
But Mr. Foster, who lost his deposit after failing to gain the required 5 percent, said: ‘You can rest assured that the Green Party will remain active in East Hampshire.
We need a Green representative in parliament when we face the most uncertain decade that mankind has ever faced.’
The result echoed two straw polls which were conducted by the Herald earlier in the month.
Both showed Mr. Mates well ahead of his main challenger with Labour in a clear third but they also showed that over a quarter of the electorate were undecided.
What appears to have happened in the last week of the campaign is that a large proportion of the ‘Don't Knows’ plumped for the Conservatives, possibly in fear of rumoured Labour tax rises.
•After serving 18 months in the wilderness as punishment for running Michael Heseltine's leadership challenge, East Hampshire MP Michael Mates was welcomed in from the cold this week when he was given a ministerial post by the Prime Minister.
Mr. Mates, aged 57, was appointed as one of the two ministers of state for Northern Ireland under the former Attorney General, Sir Patrick Mayhew.
He will take up the £51,000 a year job as soon as possible and is expected to have to give up his chairmanship of the all-party defence select committee.
Mr. Mates, who was already a potential target for the IRA because of his long-standing connections with the military, is likely to come under a heightened level of security as a result of the appointment.
Since the murder of Sussex MP Ian Gow in July 1990 — he was a prominent supporter of the Loyalist cause in Northern Ireland and the Home Office has mentioned a list of likely targets and Mr. Mates' name will undoubtedly go on that list.
A former Lieutenant-Colonel in the Queen's Dragoon Guards, Mr. Mates had been tipped as a future defence secretary but his ill-fated decision to campaign for Mr. Heseltine put paid to that.
New move to block lorry ‘invasion’
ANGRY Oakhanger residents have ‘declared war’ on the Selborne Brick Company.
And they are seeking the assistance of naturalist Sir David Attenborough in their fight.
Infuriated by the recent lorry invasion thundering through the village to tip rubble, locals have banded together to fight the company.
The result is the resurrection of the Oakhanger Preservation Society, and a protest petition already signed by 100 people.
Feelings are running high about the brick company's attempts to change their existing tipping permission for inert waste to allow the dumping of domestic and non-hazardous commercial refuse.
Apart from the view that the narrow roads around Oakhanger are inadequate to take a frequent pounding from dustcarts, villagers fear damage to the environment from pollution.
After the society's first revival meeting last week, more than 60 letters have now been sent out to individuals and organisations thought capable of helping the group in their battle.
County council officers and members have been petitioned and communications issued to MP Michael Mates and naturalist Sir David Attenborough.
Peaceful environment
In a policy statement, an OPS spokesman said: ‘The purpose of the society is to represent the interests and well-being of the Oakhanger villagers.
To protect the village from the dangers of commercial and other development and prevent damage to the local peaceful environment.
‘To this end the society have decided to fight against the problems, both current and future, occasioned to the local residents by the Selborne Brick Company's waste tips.
‘The society therefore will be doing all in our power to oppose the current planning application by the company to intend tipping on the site to include domestic and non-hazardous chemical waste.’
The spokesman continued: ‘It is felt that this application is in no way connected with the rural brick works industry and is an entirely separate and commercial venture.
‘It is feared that such dumping will lead to considerable problems with pollution, disease, vermin, noise levels and methane gas, and will threaten the safety and well-being of the community.
‘In addition, the society feel that a considerable increase in traffic will occur by way of council dustcarts and other heavy lorries delivering such waste on a daily basis on a totally inadequate road network.
‘The society are supportive of the continuation of the local brick-making industry and the employment it provides.
All we ask is the site managed in the spirit of the existing licence and that the pits are backfilled with inert waste and returned to agricultural use as soon as possible, as was originally intended.’
He concluded: ‘The present position at the site is one of desecration — trees and  hedgerows uprooted, ditches filled and meadows flooded.
There is no evidence of any effort to eradicate the damage occasioned.
‘It is also felt that the Hampshire County Council officials concerned have failed in their duties in allowing this to happen and, perhaps more importantly, in taking no action to ensure reinstatement is made.
‘The inert waste from the Sainsbury's site in Alton, delivered some five weeks ago, is still standing in nine feet-plus piles some 50 yards from the tip instead of being dumped into the pit on the day of delivery.’
Now the OPS are expecting the county council to conduct a site inspection before determining the brick company's application to change the terms of their tipping licence.
And they have requested that one of their representatives will be allowed to be present in order to put their case.
OPS chairman Peter Duckworth made the ‘statement of war’ declaration at last week's annual Selborne parish council meeting.
He was present to request Selborne's continued support, adding: ‘We are fighting this tipping application very seriously.’
Parish council chairman Sarah Broke responded they were ‘very pleased to hear it’ and vowed the OPS would have Selborne's backing in their fight.
The Herald Junior Club
Weird and wonderful — all kinds of animals will be there…
THE PET SHOW
IF YOU like animals you will enjoy The Pet Show at Earls Court, London, on the May Day bank holiday weekend, the first time it's ever been held.
The show, which is held in association with Pedigree Petfoods, covers five main categories of pets: dogs, cats, fish, birds and small animals.
You can talk directly to the experts on their stands.
Have you ever fancied snuggling up to a snake, lounging with a lizard, or swinging with a monkey?…
Well now is your chance.
Marwell Zoological Park are hosting the Pet Corner where you can meet face to face those animals that do NOT make the perfect pets.
Birdworld of Farnham are bringing their incubation unit which is recognised as being the best in the country.
Match your vocal chords to the best singing bird in the world, the Water Slagger.
The National Council of Aviculture are bringing this special talent along with an assortment of their birds — everything from canaries to spectacular birds of prey.
But it fish be your fancy, then delve into the depths of three fresh water ponds and view their recreated natural habitats, a once in a lifetime opportunity.
Discover that fishkeeping can be more than just owning a goldfish — how about a pet foot eel, or a mysterious seahorse?
Tickets for the Pet Show, which is from May 2nd–4th, are available — call the Earls Court box office on 071 373 8141.
An MoT for your bicycle
2 TESTING THOSE BRAKES
BRAKES should be checked every time before you ride.
Stand by the bicycle, apply the front brake and try to push the bicycle forwards.
If the front wheel turns then the brake is not working properly.
Do the test again with the rear brake.
When sitting on the saddle you must be able to operate the brake levers without taking your hands  off the handlebars.
Look at the brake blocks.
They should grip the side of the wheel rim exactly when the brake levers are applied.
If the brake blocks are worn down they must be replaced.
lastly check that the cables are not frayed.
Quick quiz
A man stranded on a desert island builds a rowing boat and sets out for the nearest land.
During the day he rows 30 miles.
But at night when he sleeps, he drifts back 20 miles.
If the nearest land is 300 miles away, how many days does he take to reach it?
Odd One Out
Which of the following is the Odd One Out?
ANSWERS
Odd One Out:
The odd one out is Hare — all the others are names of animals spelt backwards.
Quick Quiz:
28 days.
Most people say 30 days because the man travels at 10 miles a day.
But after 27 days he has travelled 270 miles and on the 28th day he travels the remaining 30 miles and reaches land before he goes to sleep.
THE HELP SQUAD!
TWO Alton cousins, Christian Browning and Tom Marks are on their way to Romania with a convoy of aid workers, who are to help with orphanage in Gaesti.
They are part of a 50-strong bank of volunteers from Hampshire, Surrey, Kent and Yorkshire, who are driving the 2,000 miles across Eastern Europe, to the home for up to 150 children aged between three and 16.
It is the first time a party from the south have joined the team, headed by Keith Taylor, area organiser for the charity, Aid to Romanian Orphans.
Twenty two-year-old Christian and Tom (24) answered  an advertisement in the Alton Herald, asking for qualified plumbers and electricians to  offer help to Romania.
Both self-employed, and having the required skills, the two set about raising the £150 they would each need to pay for the journey as well as the tools and materials they would need.
‘They both have trades that are drastically needed and felt that it was something they could offer to help these children,’ explained Mark's girlfriend, Sarah Howe.
That, despite the recession and the fact that they would have to  forfeit two weeks work.
The convoy, who met up at Dover, consisted of a number of large vehicles, carrying essential supplies such as food, building, plumbing and electrical equipment for the orphanage.
Once in Gaesti, the small army of volunteers, who also include two Alder Valley bus drivers, a nurse and the landlord of a public house, will set about supplying, renewing and repairing drainage, water supplies, electricity and carrying out general and essential maintenance at the home.
Meanwhile, back in Alton, Flowercraft, in Market Street, are running a window competition to help raise money for the next trip in September, which Christian and Mark both intend joining.
Competitors are invited to ‘name the bunnies’ in the centre of the Easter display.
Christian's girlfriend Nina will be delighted to note your suggestion…for a small donation!
All the money will go to Aid to Romanian Orphans, launched some two and a half years ago, following Anneke Rice's televised visit to Romania.
If you would like to help in any way, or would like to go along on the next trip in September, contact Keith Taylor on 1252 29806.
Alton cousins, Tom Marks and Christian Browning (right) ready to help Romanian orphans.
Promotion for the Police chief
ALTON man Giles Stogdon will become the new police chief for Winchester next week.
The 38-year-old superintendent is married with two young children, and takes up his new post on Monday.
Mr. Stogdon, who plays cricket for Ropley in the Hampshire League, said: ‘I am looking forward to working on the Winchester sub-division which offers a fresh challenge and a new dimension to my career.
‘I have lived in the district for a long time and regard myself as a ‘local’.’ 
Mr. Stogdon was born in Alton and educated at Harrow School and Reading University.
He joined the police force in 1975 and was at  one-time an Inspector at the Alton station.
On promotion to Chief Inspector in 1988, he moved to Fratton and two years later he was appointed second-in-command of the community relations department at police headquarters in Winchester.
Part of that role — as deputy to the Superintendent — has been to promote a multi-agency approach to crime prevention and community safety, forging close contacts with district councils as well as other statutory and voluntary groups within Hampshire.
Action against AIDS
A conference on AIDS has attracted a good response from businessmen in the Alton area.
But the organisers hope many more will enrol for the half-day event at Basingstoke District Hospital on Thursday, April 23rd.
Experts will address the conference on every aspect of the killer disease, from testing for the HIV infection to safety in the workplace.
The rights of employees suffering from AIDS will also be discussed.
It is hoped that the businessmen will relay the information to their employees.
The conference is being organised by Dr. Tony Aronstam, consultant haematologist-HIV-coordinator at the hospital, and Tricia Vaughan, administrative assistant.
Dr. Aronstam believes that businessmen have an important role to play in the fight against AIDS.
‘Businessmen are in daily contact with large groups of people in their factories and offices,’ he said.
‘They are therefore in an excellent position to pass on the advice given by speakers at the conference.’
He stressed the importance of the public being told how they can help to prevent the spread of the disease.
‘There is no room for complacency,’ said Dr. Aronstam.
‘The need to be vigilant is as great now as it ever was.’
Community information scheme gathers momentum
THE Alton Voluntary Service (AVS) could be in business before the end of the summer.
The incident started on March 12th at around 8 p.m. when Peter Nicholas Bradley of Aldershot, went into Oddbins and selected a four-can pack of beer, the court was told.
He took it to the shop counter, then told the sales assistant that he had changed his mind and wanted lager.
He then went to the cool cabinet at the rear of the shop, took out a can of lager and put it in his pocket.
When told he had to pay for it, he said he was ‘just warming it up’.
Asked again to pay for it, he opened the can and started to drink the lager.
The police were called, after which Bradley started to tear up the paper bags which were on the counter.
He then walked out of the shop, despite the efforts of staff to block his path.
He was stopped by the police outside the Bakers Arms pub.
When they tried to question him they received unintelligible replies and realised he was drunk.
He was then arrested.
Bradley apologised for his behaviour.
The magistrates were told that he had three previous convictions for alcohol-related offences.
Probation officer Sylvia Jones told the bench that Bradley was an ‘intelligent skilled man who doesn't have the motivation to stay off the drink.’
Arts week promises lots of action
THIS year's Alton May Arts Week is to be opened by ITV newsreader Alastair Stewart.
The Market Square ceremony, which  begins 11 a.m. on Saturday, May 9th, will be  preceded by a procession from Alton Community Centre, led by Vic Ellis' One-Man Band, and to include the costumed cast of Nicholas Nickleby.
After the launch, there will be entertainment in the square, including the pride of Wessex Punch and Judy Show and music from Amery Hill School, and the Eggar's School Jazz Band.
Organised by the Alton and District Arts Council, the week promises to be better than ever.
On Monday, the Assembly Rooms will open its doors on arts exhibition which is said to be the biggest ever promoted locally.
Artists have been hurrying to display their work, which should be deposited at the hall on Friday, May 8th from 7 to 9.30 p.m. or the next day from 9.30 a.m. to 12.30 p.m.
Also on Monday, the Alton College Forum will provide the venue for a performance by the newly formed Alton Area Orchestra, conducted by martin Read.
The programme which begins at 8 p.m., will include modern perspectives on Rossini's music, in the  Soireé Musicales, and on English folk songs, in a work by Vaughan-Williams.
The orchestra will be joined by the Alton Chamber Choir for a concert performance of Haydn's Little Organ mass.
Tuesday, May 12th, will see the first of a series of two-part performances of the Charles Dickens' classic, Nicholas Nickleby, dramatised by David Edgar and directed by Mollie Guilfoyle.
With a cast of 30 local actors and actresses, this professionally directed drama is the biggest project yet to be undertaken by ADAC.
Described by chairman Morris Hopkins as ‘a real community effort’.
It will feature colourful costumes, elaborate staging and quality lighting.
Like the production of the Canterbury Tales two years ago, the action will take place in a marquee in St. Lawrence churchyard.
Also on Tuesday, the Allen Gallery will be the venue for a literary evening, starting 8 p.m., when the guest speaker will be poet, playwright and broadcaster, Sean Street.
And on the Thursday, jazz fans will be treated to a comedy cabaret show at the Alton House Hotel, courtesy of Otis B. Driftwood.
During the week, those keen on photography will be attracted to Henry Adlam Cafe in the Market Square, where the Alton Camera Club will be exhibiting a selection of photographs entitled Best of the Season.
Tickets for all the May Arts Week event are available now from the box offices at Kennett Music in Lenten Street (Alton 86767) and The Curtis Museum (Alton 82802).
Theft of motorcycle
A MOTORCYCLE was stolen from Turk Street, Alton on Wednesday night last week.
The red Yamaha 125 has the registration number H982 LBP, and is worth £2,500.
Car vandalised
THE rear window of a VW Polo parked in Orchard Lane, Alton on Saturday night was smashed by vandals.
Property burgled
CASH, and a Sanyo music centre, were stolen in a burglary during the early hours of Sunday morning at Birch Close, Bordon.
New hospital welcomes the first in-patients
ALTON's brand new community hospital opened its doors last week to welcome in-patient and staff transferring from Alton General.
First across the threshold was longest serving resident 78-year-old Nellie Everett who has spent the past 16 years at Kingsley Ward.
She received a bouquet from operational manager Ann Meacock.
She, and her fellow patients, were then shown to Anstey Ward, which will accommodate 24 elderly men and women on a long term rehabilitation basis.
On the first floor is the 24-bed Inwood Ward for elderly rehabilitation and G.P. patients.
Both wards are carpeted throughout and there are modern, wood furnishings, specially equipped bathrooms, and big, picture windows which let in the light to enhance the bright internal decor.
The ground floor also accommodates a large, attractive unit, which will deal with day care services and associated physiotherapy and occupational therapy for up to ten outpatients a day.
Included in each ward are modern, purpose-designed kitchen, with comfortable sitting and dining rooms, overlooking a large, paved internal courtyard, ‘which should prove a wonderful sun-trap,’ pointed out Ann Meacock.
She is delighted with the new building.
‘It is super to have a purpose-built unit for the elderly and, indeed, to be opening a new hospital at all.
We have got a lot more space here than we had at Alton General.’
Sister Linda Buckland, who has been at the General for the past ten years, expressed mixed emotions.
‘I'm going to miss the old hospital.
It had such a lovely atmosphere, which I hope will continue here.
‘This hospital is important for the local community.
It is something to be proud of,’ she said.
Mrs. Nellie Everett, receives a bouquet as the first inpatient at Alton's new Community Hospital.
Making the presentation are operational manager (right) age care, Ann Meacock, and Sister Linda Buckland.
Toddlers from the Beech under five playgroup learn how to make Hot Cross buns at the Oven Door in Westbrooke Walk, Alton.
Showing them the way is bakery manager, Steve Bennett.
The group meet at Beech Village Hall where a Mother and Toddler organisation gather on Monday afternoon from 1.30 to 3.30.
Improving the village
WORK is planned to start in June on landscaping the triangle of land at Lymington Bottom, Four Marks.
The parish council heard details of the arrangement agreed with Hampshire County Council about the future of the plot, at their meeting on Tuesday last week.
The county council are to fence and grass the area in June, leaving the planting of trees until the autumn.
The land will then be leased to the parish council at a peppercorn rent of 99 years, and from the next spring they will be responsible for its maintenance.
Its use will be confined to that of a village public open space, with parking of vehicles absolutely prohibited.
BLUES BEST FOR JOHN
John Pearson, who appears at the Wine Garden, Alton, on Tuesday, of of the 1960s decade of British blues musicians, acknowledged to be coming of age in the 1990s — their mature talents now best equipped for the task of bringing that conviction to their music that only age and experience can provide.
He is a talent honed through years of playing at clubs, in the past sharing the bill with all-time greats such as Sonny Terry and Brownie McGhee, Alexis Korner and  Rory Gallagher, but emerging in his own right.
He has recently appeared at festivals such as the Edinburgh Folk Festival, Burnley Blues Festival and the Wirral International Guitar Festival.
Live sets on ‘Paul Jones’ Rhythm and Blues show on Radio 2 and The Happening on Sky TV have helped spread his fame further afield.
His guitar technique, described as ‘dazzling’ and ‘subtle as it is compelling’, and distinctive relaxed voice can be heard at the Market Square venue from 9 p.m.
Gardeners stage colourful spring show
FROYLE Village Hall was ablaze with colour on Friday when the Gardening Club held their annual spring show.
The 21 classes were judged by Mr. J. L. Ray, from Basingstoke.
Primarily a national vegetable judge, he was more than happy to cast his expert eye over the quality field of spring flowers and he commented on the high standard achieved by the village.
He awarded the trophy for the best exhibit in the show to Marian Cresswell for an orange clivia pot plant.
The coveted prize, a Caithness glass paper weight, was presented by Brig.
Pollock, who also presented the three other prizes awarded for most points in the show.
These prizes, donated by Phostrogen, went to 1 Ann Figgins, 2 Geoff Hawkins, 3 J. Bootle-Wilbraham.
Plants that please
ALTON Assembly Rooms were full of fragrance on Thursday last week when Alton Horticultural Society held their spring show.
The judge was Peter Collett of Tangmeres, who also demonstrated how exhibits should be staged to their best advantage.
The Summers Challenge Cup for the best exhibit in the show, a beautiful arrangement of spring flowers in a basket, was won by Mrs. J. Ayling.
The Phostrogen prize for the most points in the show was shared between Mr. W. Howarth and Mrs. J. Lee.
New sequence for the camera club
A CHANGE of programme resulted in an audio-visual show by Edward Mallory of Guildford being presented at Alton Camera Club on Friday.
Mr. Mallory is a consultant in electronics and audio visual equipment and had made some of the slide changing and fading equipment himself.
The presentation featured short sequences grouped into continuous units lasting about 15 minutes each.
The subject content of each group was varied and was, as Mr. Mallory said, his own choice.
The first sequence, with a musical accompaniment, showed flowers in the grounds of Guildford Castle and made use of appropriately shaped masks to obtain a dynamic visual impression.
Other subjects used the first part of the show included the Dart Valley railway, the Red Arrows and computer graphics.
Several of the sequences used shapes, and one was based on the many arrangements which can be made using the pieces of the Chinese tangram puzzle.
Images had also been made using arrows of many shapes and sizes, cut-out circles to form ‘suns’ and assorted sizes of paper stars.
The use of a ‘twinkle’ facility created an impression of movement in some sequences.
Garden seat stolen
THIEVES stole a garden seat, worth £100, from a property at Grenehurst Way in Petersfield between Saturday and Sunday night.
Roads campaign takes a step forward
A LIGHT emerged at the end of the tunnel for Greatham road safety campaigners last week.
County planning and transport officers are setting up a public consultation exercise in the village to discuss proposals designed ultimately to rid Greatham of through traffic.
Progress is being made on plans to upgrade the Woolmer Road.
This will allow it to be used as a link between the Petersfield-Liphook bypass currently under construction and the A325 north of Greatham.
The existing Woolmer Road belongs to the military.
The possibility of using it as a bypass to the village was discussed with the Ministry of Defence in 1985.
However, at that time they were not prepared to make the road available.
Consultation exercise
That position changed last year.
Now on the agenda are proposals to widen and realign the Woolmer Road, together with an improved junction where it joins the A325 north of the village.
The public consultation exercise, to be held as soon as practicable, was approved by Hampshire County Council's planning and transport committee on Monday.
A full detailed design has not yet been prepared, but proposals on display at the meeting included a new roundabout at the junction of the A325, Woolmer Road and Benhams Lane.
Also proposed is a new ten metre carriageway for Woolmer Road to accommodate predicted traffic flows for the year 2010.
This extra width would also allow for right hand turning lanes to be incorporated at the junctions on to adjacent military land.
Costings at November 1991 prices suggest that the scheme will cost in the region of £1.3 million.
On the traffic management front, the county say that the consideration of local traffic needs will have to cover two situations.
The first is following the opening of the bypass, but prior to the improvement of Woolmer Road.
The present standard of Woolmer Road, the county say, is inadequate to accommodate safely the traffic volumes likely to result from directing two-way traffic on to the route.
For this reason phasing of the works is not practicable.
However, it may be possible to direct southbound traffic only on to Woolmer Road, while maintaining northbound traffic on the existing A325.
The second consideration follows the completion of the Woolmer Road improvement.
The county add that new direction signing on the A3 and A325 should direct through traffic on the Woolmer Road link away from the existing A325 through Greatham.
Existing route
The existing route should then be reclassified and traffic management measures considered to reinforce the diversion.
Management on Longmoor Road and signing of B3006 traffic to and from Selborne should also be considered to encourage vehicles to join the A3 at the Ham Barn interchange.
Such measures are thought to make it possible to eliminate through traffic from Greatham apart from a maximum of six days a year the MoD would still require the closure of Woolmer Road.
The consultation exercise proposed for Greatham is in order to appraise the public of the current situation, and to check whether there is a need to change the proposals.
A public exhibition is envisaged showing those proposals within the overall context of the A3 Petersfield-Liphook bypass.
The job search goes on
MORE than one in five of the 2,329 young people seeking jobs and training in Hampshire have been out of work for more than six months.
The current total, made up of 1,491 young men and 838 young women, is a drop of less than 1 percent from the figure of 2,348 for the previous month.
For comparison, there were 1,948 young people out of work in March 1991 and 2,759 in March 1986.
Of the 2,329 youngsters registered with Hampshire County Council Careers Service, 21 percent have been unemployed for six months or more.
A further 40 percent of young people have been registered for jobs and training at careers offices for between two and six months.
Nearly half of those registered are in the jobs market for the first time.
During the four weeks to March 12th, there were 439 new registrations for jobs and training at careers offices compared with 553 in the previous month.
Hampshire employers notified county careers offices of 117 job vacancies for young people in the month to March 12th, more than in the previous month when 105 jobs were offered but fewer than in March last year when there were 166 vacancies for young people.
Careers offices now hold a stock of 197 unfilled vacancies, compared with the 160 jobs on offer in February.
In March 1991 there were 267 vacancies available.
During the month, staff in careers offices helped 34 young people into employment, fewer than in February when 53 youngsters were placed.
CRIMEWATCH JOINS HUNT
SEARCH FOR THE HIPPY GIRL
THE hunt for a missing Essex teenager who disappeared after visiting a three-day pop festival at Bramshott Common last year is to go nationwide in an attempt to find her.
The BBC TV programme Crimewatch UK is to join in the search for 18-year-old student Dinah McNicol, who was last seen in August, by showing a reconstruction of her last known movements.
The programme will go out on May 14th.
The intervention of the TV programme follows months of investigation by Detective-Sergeant Derek Nickol and a thorough search of the common by 100 police officers and tracker dogs earlier this year — all of which revealed nothing as to Dinah's disappearance.
The ‘petite and bubbly’ student was last seen by friends on Sunday, August 4th, at about 7 p.m.
She was with a stranger and told friends that she intended to stay at the site as long as possible and then possibly go to Portsmouth.
The man she was with — and who has never been traced — is described as aged between 20 and 25, with dark hair and a tanned complexion.
Unlike the majority of the festival-goers, he was not a hippy.
Speaking at Bramshott Common, while the TV crew were filming the reconstruction, Sergeant Nickol said: ‘I am hoping this programme will bring forward something which we can positively work on.’
Sergeant Nickol hopes that when the programme is shown, it will help to produce new clues to find the teenager.
He believes Dinah has either been murdered or is the prisoner of a religious sect.
Since the hunt for Dinah began, police investigations have revealed the existence in Britain of almost 2,000 religious organisations, any number of whom could have had representatives or followers at the three-day pop festival.
Another reason for police believing there to be ‘something very wrong’ about the disappearance, is the way in which after Dinah went missing, money began being withdrawn from her building society account —— something which has convinced police that ‘something serious has happened to her.’
As a student, Dinah was careful with money, and had even got a lift to the festival from her history teacher, to save money.
Despite a £2,700 legacy from her mother, who was killed in a car crash, she was determined not to waste it.
It was strange, said Sergeant Nickol, that just four days after her disappearance, large amounts of money — totalling nearly £2,000 — began disappearing from her account.
Playing the part of Dinah in the reconstruction is actress Sally Node, who was chosen for her babyish face and physical resemblance to the student.
The reconstruction's producer, Jayne Topping, said: ‘Normally these generate a huge response, somewhere between 100 to 300 calls from the public.
We are hoping this will provide some new information about Dinah.’
Manager to leave The Kingsley Centre
THE contract of Kingsley Centre's warden/manager Damian Duggan which expires at the end of June, is not being renewed.
The Herald understands that the centre organisation is being reviewed and could be different in  them while 
Mr. Duggan will still be tutoring in French from Kingsley Centre and one of his plans could be to set up a shop for Christian books, publications and cards in the Alton area.
He and his wife, Janet, the daughter of Phil and Vi Knight of Kingsley, want to remain living in Alton.
They have a 19 month old daughter Ruth.
Mr. Duggan's feelings on being told his contract won't be renewed have been ‘rather divided’.
A former Roman Catholic priest who had spent eight years as a missionary in Africa and then seven years in England and Scotland, he arrived in Kingsley four years ago at the start of the project to breathe new life into the empty village school.
The idea was to provide both community facilities for local residents along with a centre for training and employing young adults with physical disabilities.
Having ‘given his best’ to the centre for four years and taken a major role in setting it up, he obviously felt ‘very disappointed’he wouldn't be part of its new phase.
But sometimes change was good at such a time.
Chainreaction (as the Herald reported last week) would be moving into the newly built extension, the cottage was being completely renovated and the centre was being used to nearly 90 percent of capacity.
Local people were making increasing use of the facilities and Kingsley Centre was now a feature of the area.
Its ‘struggling’ phase to get optimum use was now largely behind it.
Mr. Duggan said that he had enjoyed the last four years.
‘There had been a good relationship on the whole between the management and myself and it has been supportive on both sides.’
He paid special tribute to chairman Pelham Ravenscroft with whom he had ‘a very positive’ working relationship.
The progress of the past four years had been an ‘extraordinary’ achievement by volunteers, staff and management and Mr. Duggan's own highlights have included the formation of the successful Kingsley Theatre Club and the occasional meals with visiting chefs.
This has allowed local people to enjoy a pleasant evening out at their local Kingsley ‘restaurant’.
He's also pleased that the centre is now the base for several local groups including the Women's Institute, the WRVS lunch club, a mother and toddler group, and the ‘hobby horse’ club for eight to twelves which attracts over 20 on a Friday evening for folk songs and dance.
The ‘superb’ yoga group, who met on Thursday evenings, had some spare capacity still and attracted people  from a wide area.
Kingsley Centre also had the Post Office run by Maureen Florence and was looking to extend the shop which, like a planned coffee shop, would also be run by Chainreaction.
Kingsley Parish Council meet at the centre.
Mr. Duggan has helped to nurture many of these activities.
‘It's beautiful to see something coming alive gradually, with a gentle growth.
I feel that people are becoming more and more comfortable with using the centre's facilities,’ he said.
Church boost
WHITEHILL Town Council gave a grant of £75 this week to St. Matthew's Church, at Blackmoor, towards the upkeep of the graveyard.
Paddle power!
Hospital to benefit from canoe marathon
TWO local firemen are taking to the water to raise cash for the Royal Surrey County Hospital at Guildford.
Thirty four-year-old Alan Mercer from Lindford and Brian Rudman (23) from Whitehill are paddling all the way from Devizes to Westminster in a 125-mile canoe race.
The race starts today (Good Friday) and the two intrepid firefighters intend to leave Devizes at midday.
They will be canoeing along the Kennett and Avon canal, joining the Thames at Reading.
The race finishes just past Westminster Bridge.
Alan and Brian will be canoeing throughout the night and will be negotiating 76 locks during the course of the race.
They hope to reach Westminster tomorrow evening.
The two men are trying to raise as much money as possible towards buying a baby alarm for the Royal surrey, the machines, which cost £435 each, are lent to parents who have lost a child through cot death syndrome, on the birth of their new baby.
The machine monitors the baby's heart beat, and if the heart should stop sets off an alarm to alert the parents.
Anyone wishing to make a contribution to help buy a baby alarm can send donations to the Royal Surrey Hospital.
Cheques should be made payable to the Nebulizer and Apneoa Loan Fund, and the trust number, 89240, must be quoted.
Children at Selborne School took the time last week to make some splendid Easter bonnets.
Leisure Herald
The need for music
THE Waverley Art For All exhibition, to be held at Farnham Maltings until April 25th and Cranleigh Arts Centre, April 28th–May 8th, is a community event directed towards those with special needs.
It will feature the first ever public demonstration of playing classical music on the piano ‘with no hands’.
This features a technique pioneered in Guildford which enables music to be produced without the need actually to touch a keyboard nor, in consequence, to be able to play a piano physically.
The system uses new but readily available technology developed for the pop music industry.
It does not need a piano as such and, given time, can produce results comparable with good conventional performances, provided the operator is musically minded and can move at least one part of the body at will.
As well as providing background music, the stand will include an ongoing workshop demonstrating the process of producing new pieces.
For more piano information, contact Sid O'Connell on 0483 810446.
Retribution rules in the world of Jacobean mobsters
HIS betrothed vilely poisoned by the Duke, his father dead of discontent while in the same nobleman's employment, his virtuous sister threatened with seduction by the same man's son — 'tis little wonder Vindice  feels a  trifle miffed.
And in the true spirit of Jacobean tragedy — supplanted in this production by that of the Hollywood mafia gangster mode, he seeks retribution.
The result, a nine-high pile of corpses in a farcically macabre ‘who's going to kill who first’ final scene.
The Cambridge Theatre Company's production of The Revengers Tragedy — a work believed by some to have been written by Thomas Middleton, others by Cyril Tourneur — opened this week at the Yvonne Arnaud Theatre, Guildford where it runs until tomorrow (Saturday) before transferring on its tour to the Theatre Royal, Winchester from Tuesday to Saturday next week.
Silver scaffolding
On a set of black traversed with silver scaffolding — which makes good use of spotlighting and puffs of smoke to evoke a sinister underworld — Mike Alfred's production explores an interesting parallel between the motivation and morals of two distinct types of drama some three centuries apart.
Setting the action in the 1940s New York causes more of a linguistic than cultural problem.
The parallels of hierarchical power structures, strict Roman Catholicism and the sanctity of womanhood (as applied to the mother or the sister figure), contrasted by the blood thirsty vengeance motive and low regard for the truth, run remarkably strongly through both genres.
Yet some of the richness and wit of the Jacobean dialogue is threatened by its being spoken in thick Italian/New York accents — mastered better by some actors than others — and snatches of more modern speech, while essential for credibility, draw attention to the time warp.
I personally missed the colour of the medieval setting, although there can be no complaint about the dramatic effects of black and white being used to their utmost.
The action is slow to build up, but once midway through the first act the melodrama is unleashed layer upon layer, with liberal use of corpses and skeletons — the worms of decomposition having done an admirably speedy job in some cases.
This mafia have the best of all worlds when it comes to the macabre — from guns to  medieval poisons, manifestations of the latter used in a superb makeup job for the death of the Duke.
Whether or not the time transposition works is a matter of individual decision — what  is not in doubt is that the true  nature of the work is preserved and well put over.
It concludes with a darkly satisfactory meeting of ends in the circle of doom —‘there is nothing sure in mortality but mortality,’ Vindice concludes.
And, having disposed of all your enemies, life must  thereafter lose its usefulness.
Jacky Billington
Here comes Chubby
ROY ‘Chubby’ Brown will be returning to Guildford Civic Hall on Wednesday, April 29th, for what is now almost an annual event.
Chubby is something of a  phenomena , being one of the few stand up comedians able to sell out theatres up and down the country having had very little television exposure.
In fact, Chubby has only appeared in TV on Opportunity Knocks, New Faces, Starburst and an episode of Play for Today.
He is a cult figure and dressed in his familiar patchwork suit, Biggles hat and flying goggles, he delivers his notoriously outrageous humour with forthright bluntness.
Chubb does not apologise for the material he uses but always performs with the warning: ‘If easily offended, please stay away!’
Says Chubby: ‘One reporter said I made Bernard Manning look like Andy Pandy.
I've always regarded that as a compliment, at least he was listening.’
Charlie the champion
A MUSICAL LOOK AT CHAPLIN'S LIFE
THE long, eventful life of the greatest of all film comedians, Charlie Chaplin, is given pulsating, vibrant treatment in a new musical which is having its world premiere at the Haymarket Theatre, Basingstoke this month.
Little Tramp, an affectionate tribute to an artistic genius, is written by New Yorker David Pomeranz, who is also composer of the powerful musical treatment that runs through the show.
That it should be Hampshire's good fortune to see this show first was due to good friends of the Horseshoe Theatre Company who had heard there was such a musical and the linkage with the Horseshoe's artistic director, Adrian Reynolds was made.
The musical follows Chaplin's career from the time, when little more than a child, he appeared on the stage at an Aldershot theatre in 1894 when his mother — a music hall artist — lost her voice, until in 1972 the film industry recognised his tremendous creative work with the presentation of a Special Academy Award.
The boy, brought up in poverty and amid the cruelty of London's East End in the nineties, could have had no greater reward.
The task of David Pomeranz in writing, and Adrian Reynolds in presentation, was to get this story into a two and a half hours' stage show and to make it entertaining.
Judging from the reception at every performance so far they have succeeded.
But there are reservations.
Perhaps the first half concentrates too long on Charlie, his half brother, Syd, and their mother in the struggling days to the detriment of more detailed excerpts from the early days of film-making in what was to become Hollywood.
Keystone Cops
The Keystone Cops brief sequence was great and Chaplin's struggle to create his Little Tramp — the curled up, ill-fitting shoes, the baggy trousers, the tight dress jacket, the bowler and the cane.
He wanted to make a person people would love — a little man of courage and kindness, a ‘gent’ down on his luck — and the character became loved all over the world, as well as making all the world laugh.
When one-time Blue Peter TV presenter Peter Duncan, who plays Chaplin so admirably, completed this transformation and turned round on his audience — complete as the little tramp — the applause was spontaneous.
Probably the best moment of the show.
The 80 years of Chaplin are presented in an ever-changing scene.
The revolve is used constantly, and there is never a break in the continuity.
In fact the scenes passed by so rapidly that it is difficult to keep up with them.
It is a pity that a news flash device could not be used to denote the settings — much of the effect of some of the scenes is lost because you don't really know where you are.
It is a show that progresses at a terrific pace, none of the performers, from Duncan downwards, spare themselves.
They act with vigour, sing with great effect, and the small, but rather loud orchestra, sweep them all along.
Too loud at times; but there are also one or two moments of pathos — just like a Chaplin movie.
The second act rather concentrates on Chaplin's ‘non American’ activities (nothing worse than having Socialist views and an interest in Russia) but it was enough to drive him out of the country.
We might have expected to see something of the great movies, Gold Rush, Modern Times, Limelight…
There was a glimpse of the shoe-eating scene from The Gold Rush; but there were other comic classic moments that might have been used.
There was not a lot of laughter in the second act, but it is true there was not a lot in Chaplin's later life.
Peter Duncan has a background in acrobatics and he certainly needed it with his interpretation of the little tramp.
He also had to be the grey-haired, elderly, exhausted Chaplin, which he conveyed with much sympathy.
As his last, and most understanding wife, Jacinta Mulcahy, looked neat and supportive and sang with tremendous conviction as Oona.
Forceful performance
One of the triumphs of the show is the remarkable performance of young Carl Ferguson as the youthful Charlie — tremendous attack with singing ability to match his forceful performance.
He keeps on appearing, a kind of ghost encouraging Chaplin to greater effort.
Also giving powerful performances are John Altman as Tippy Gray, Jacquie Toye as Chaplin's mother and Emlyn Harris as the grown-up Syd Chaplin.
The rest of the cast play a variety of roles, and have constant costume changes, but they give cameo performances of famous personalities including Chaplin's earlier wives, H. G. Wells, Mac Sennett, Samuel Goldwyn, the Prince of Wales, Lord Mountbatten and Anna Pavlova.
Costumes provide a dress parade of the decades.
The performers are: Susannah Jupp, Cliff Brayshow, Lee Broom, Don Cotter, Morgan Deare, Cassandra Holliday, Patrick Jamieson, David Peyton-Bruhl, Paul Tomany and Andrea Turner.
Designer of the exciting set is Elroy Ashmore with Graham Walne responsible for lighting, and Julian Beech, sound.
Steven David Horwich was co-librettist and Mark Stevens musical director and leader of the orchestra.
Little Tramp continues until April 25th.
Comedy is so important to Patricia Routledge
THE chemistry and comedy between teacher and pupil, played by Patricia Routledge and her young co-star Brendan O'Hea, will be the main attraction of Emlyn Williams' play The Corn is Green, coming soon to the Yvonne Arnaud Theatre, Guildford.
The Corn is Green is a kind of ‘thirties Educating Rita, but set in the Welsh coalfields and without the frivolous distractions of student life.
The Herald spoke to Patricia Routledge and found her to be keen to return to the Yvonne Arnaud, where the audiences recently warmed to her in Alan Bennett's Talking Heads.
You may recall, also from 1991, her television role as the hysterically snobby Hyacinth Bucket (pronounced ‘Bouquet’) in the BBC's Keeping Up Appearances.
She admits she is attracted to comic roles.
‘As Gielgud used to say, if you can play comedy you can do everything.
It is the stuff of life,’ she said.
Well, The Corn is Green is comedy, but it is not broad comedy.
She said that she can identify with Miss Moffat, the energetic teacher who battles to get her protégé to Oxford University.
‘The play is a celebration of mentors.
Miss Moffat has a passion for learning and a passion for life.
I wanted to be a teacher myself,’ Patricia continued.
She has praise for the ‘wonderful cast’ and particularly Brendan O'Hea who plays Evans.
‘I think he is a remarkable talent.
He was at the Bristol Vic Theatre School where I went too, and we both get on tremendously.’
Patricia's long career embraces musicals, straight acting, television and radio performances.
Her first professional appearance at the Liverpool Playhouse in A Midsummer Night's Dream — reflecting her classical training.
She remembers Guildford with affection — since she trained there as a young actress in the 1950s.
‘I used to play with a company in Guildford in the old theatre in North Street.
The director of that theatre, Eric Langworth, came to see me in Talking Heads.
No doubt she will be hoping that The Corn is Green will draw more of her friends to the Yvonne Arnaud Theatre, when it opens for two weeks on Monday, April 27th.
Sarah Spencer of the Rue Conti Jazz Band is one of many musicians who'll be appearing at the Farnham Maltings All-Day Jazz Festival on Sunday, May 10th.
Ticket details from the box office on 0252 726234.
Off the Record
On the track of local bands
ONCE more we've been overwhelmed by demo tapes from local bands so this week, Off the Record's Steve Hack and Andrew Hartley turn up the office music system and review the latest in local sounds.
Three Tracks — Fates (cassette)
This new Alton band provide lots of variety on their debut release without going overboard.
From the burbling, low key rock of Passing Place to the jangling keyboards of Visionary Days, the group avoid conforming to a set style.
Look out in particular for Lightning Sky, an excellent track which sounds like something Four Fifteen might do.
Firefly EP — Overspill (cassette).
The current resurgence of local music has produced some great songs and Overspill, another group from Alton, continue the good work on their latest grunge injected collection.
Miss You and the haunting Leisure and the particular highlights while Wanting reminded me a little of the Beatles Helter Skelter (though I don't remember it first time round, of course) with its screaming guitars and music style.
The title track delivers the most catchy moments and it was a good ploy by the group to place it at the end of the tape.
An essential release for grungers everywhere.
Talking of grunge…
Block Out the Sun — Slug (cassette).
Those sub-pop noise boys — Slug — have been riding high in the local artists chart with their brand new demo.
Drawing on influences from across the Atlantic as well as from fellow grungers back home, the trio have put out some convincingly fresh material, never lacking originality in any of the seven tracks.
Outstanding tunes are Fisted, Some and Giant Drag.
The latter at more than eight minutes long could easily have become one but for the hypnotic strains and pumping rhythm.
Tower, with its guitar twanging fifties style intro, brings the demo to a close with a suitably nineties style meltdown of screaming grunge.
See the band live with Trousershock BC at the West End Centre on April 25th.
The Cloudwatchers (cassette).
One of Farnham's more promising bands, the Cloudwatchers, are in mellow mode for their latest demo.
The contagious A Little Love sets the scene with a biting chorus, while Lonesome Cavalier and Bridge of Dreams wouldn't be out of place in the charts.
The detailed slower numbers work well, but I can't help feeling that the group would love to break into a stomping rocker more often.
Spare a Thought — Study in Scarlet (cassette).
With a friendly mix of pleasant pop moments, this demo is outstanding to listen to.
The title track highlights a good keyboard backdrop and Time is Running Out is an agreeable accompaniment.
It's not hard to see why they're currently top of the Local Artists Chart.
TRIED and Tested, Giant Arc, Flowers of Sacrifice and Flavour are among the bands taking part in the second local music extravaganza at Lakeside Country Club, Frimley Green, tonight (Friday) and tomorrow (Saturday).
Joanne and Keith Powell of the George, Ash Vale are behind the event and they say that there's been a lot of interest so far.
Call Joanne on 0252 543500 for more details.
THE Big Wednesday are currently putting the final touches to their new demo, which was recorded earlier this week.
Group spokesman Mark Austin says that they're pleased with the results and it should be out by the end of the month.
SINGLES sales are at their lowest ebb for 20 years, according to latest industry figures, but with the material record companies are turning out, they've only got themselves to blame.
Most of the chart is taken up by tired old album tracks, reissues, remixes — hardly value for money.
In fact, Shakespeare's Sister, who recently spent eight weeks at number one, have only sold 500,000 copies of Stay.
Ten years ago they would have sold twice as many at the very least.
Perhaps the answer is to release the usually new B side song as the lead track (which would mean a brand new single every time) or to ban record companies from releasing four or more songs from an album at a time.
The singles chart needs to be treated as a separate entity, and not as a cheap promotions gimmick for greedy businessmen.
WE'VE got CD singles by the Levellers, the Mission and Elton John to give away courtesy of Ben's Collectors Records, Farnham.
To enter simply answer the question relevant to the CD you'd most like to win.
1.
Which Reading venue will the Levellers be playing at on May 11th? 2.
Which of the following Mission singles charted highest — Wasteland, Tower of Strength or Butterfly on a Wheel? 3.
Who did Elton John team up with for last year's chart smash Don't Let the Sun Go Down on Me?
Send your answer to Steve Hack, Off the Record, 114 West Street, Farnham, GU9 7HL to reach us by next Friday.
Puppets in Wonderland play like a dream
THANK goodness that the Nintendo and Euro Disney generation still thrill to an old fashioned puppet show such as the Parasol Children's Theatre production of Alice in Wonderland at the Redgrave Theatre, Farnham this week until Saturday.
But then what is Wonderland if not a celebration of special effects from white roses being painted red to Cheshire Cats dismantling before your eyes?
And apart from the giggles from the party frocked section of the audience, there was little background buzz from the children as they became enticed by the bizarre tale.
The show is a mix of puppets and a human Alice when she's the normal size and a puppet Alice when she's shrunk by the potion.
The puppeteers, dressed as gardeners, are often visible to the audience, but become irrelevant as they bring the string, hand and rod puppets — portraying anything from a flunky haddock to the infamous loopy hatter — to life.
‘Is the lady who plays Alice a child or a teenager?’ asked my six-year-old.
You could forgive Debby Cumming for being a not-so-youthful Alice as she stomped and skipped like the naughtiest girl in the class.
When her arms and legs grow so long that she wears the rabbit's house like a wooden dress, her performance is magic.
The puppets are modelled on the famous illustrations by Tenniel — but Spitting Images must have influenced the formidable duchess and Tebbit-like cook and they stirred their pepper soup and sneezed.
The bright pink baby turns into a bonny pig as the scene become surreal slapstick with baby tossed into the air with the pans.
Roald Dahl has nothing on Lewis Carroll when it comes to the grotesque.
The fidget factor increased slightly in the second half in the Queen's croquet garden.
But here the puppets come into their own with hedgehogs as croquet balls and  flamingos as mallets — try doing that with a live actor.
The Queen of Hearts tirades: ‘Execution first, trial after.’
The subtleties of justice are lost on the young audience who prefer the funny white rabbit and the sweet  dormouse to this tyrant.
But the play moves at perfect pace and — most importantly — is not too long.
Soon Alice has woken from her strange sleep and the frenzy that was becoming quite frightening.
Parasol have been pioneering work with puppets for 25 years, originally as part of the Polka Children's Theatre in Wimbledon.
This is a vivid and funny production and their expertise makes the intricate puppetry go like a dream.
Jenny Browning
Theatre cash boost
THE Redgrave Theatre, Farnham, is being given a grant of £17,000 for 1992–93 by Hampshire County Council.
Hampshire are making grants of nearly £900,000 this year, including major support for the Bournemouth Orchestras, the Welsh National Opera and the Glyndebourne Touring Opera, who tour regularly in the country.
Discover the secret of Kevin Brown
AS part of their ongoing series of welcoming solo blues artists, The Pit, Crondall, play host to one of Britain's best kept secrets — Kevin Brown, on Friday, April 24th.
He's got a rare understanding of the blues, both on acoustic and electric, but it's his slide guitar playing that's really earned the praise.
Kevin played to 50,000 at Glastonbury, stole the show at the Cambridge but somehow his name never quite stuck.
He's played the US from New York to Nashville, but despite being ‘discovered’ at least once a year he's still no household name.
He has just emerged from the studio after recording his third album; there will be many musical surprises in store.
After the concert at The Pit, a three-course dinner will be served.
Phone 081 883 2124 or 0252 850789 for ticket details.
Film and video
PAUL MERRILL REPORTS
HOOK (U) ****
ROBIN Williams plays a middle-aged lawyer from New York, who has forgotten that, years ago, he was Peter Pan.
He has also forgotten the importance of taking an interest in his children — until they are snatched away by the evil Captain Hook to Never Never Land.
Seeking retribution — an unwilling Williams sets off to get them back — but must first prove to The Lost Boys (who now ride skateboards!) and to himself, that he is Peter Pan.
He soon regains the old knack — and before you can say angel-dust, he's flying and sword-fighting like never before.
As with all Steven Spielberg productions — visually it's a stunner.
An excellent cast include the wonderfully charming rogue — Captain Hook, played by Dustin Hoffman and the cheery Smee (Bob Hoskins).
Unfortunately, the plot doesn't bear close examination.
It's a world away from J. M. Barrie's classic story — and you can't help feeling it could have been better if it had followed that more closely.
With the Easter holidays upon us it's bound to be a popular choice among children everywhere — and those, who like me, never want to grow up.
Driving Me Crazy (PG) *
‘IF you liked Planes, Trains and Automobiles — you'll love this,’ says the cover of what has to be the most banal video of the month.
Unfortunately, the comic capabilities of its two main characters, Doyle — the spoilt rich-kid (Ethan Randall), and his mother's latest bungling boyfriend — builder Dutch Dooley (Ed O'Neill), are not a patch on John Candy and Steve Martin.
The plot is basically the same — two opposites forced to share confined spaces while travelling across several US states to get home for Thanksgiving.
On the way, there are supposedly many opportunities for us to laugh at the pretentious antics of the cheeky Doyle, and howl at the gormless prattlings of his elder travelling companion.
But it doesn't work — what few gags there are get lost in dull and lifeless acting.
And too many of them are deliberate re-runs of those seen in the aforementioned film.
‘This is a trip we won't soon forget,’ proclaims Dutch at the start of the film.
I'm afraid I already have.
Top Cajun Band The Flatville Aces are just one of the host of outfits on parade at the Farnham Folk on April 26th.
The venue is The Maltings and others taking part include The Kathryn Tickell Band, Dick Gaughan, Sid Kipper, Ron Kavana, Fallen Angels and Thomas Lynch.
An adaptation of Jane Austen's Mansfield Park opens at The Redgrave Theatre, on May 6th, and this week the cast took a break from rehearsals to visit the author's home at Chawton.
Pictured looking at a first edition of Mansfield Park are, back row:
Peeps into the Past
PLEASED TO WELCOME OUR FRIENDS FROM HAREN FOR
A week of Dutch treats
ALLIES in the war who had become ‘friends in peace’ were welcomed in Farnham on Easter Monday 1950.
They were a group of 130 citizens, headed by their Burgomaster from the small Dutch town of Haren, who were received in Church House before being taken to the homes of their local hosts.
In the special souvenir programme of their visit chairman of Farnham Urban District Council W. H. Emery waxed lyrical about the glories of England in April: ‘They will find the countryside awakening to the call of spring with the first green buds bursting into life and on their return to their native land they will carry with them happy memories of Farnham — in April,’ and inevitably he went on to quote Robert Browning on the subject of being in England, ‘Now that April's there…‘
The Haren guests were treated to a round of events which may sound rather unexciting and unsophisticated to us in 1992 in the week that Euro Disney opens, but were good wholesome fun in a post war Britain still on rationing.
They were shown round Farnham Castle and the nearby villages, and were invited to a succession of matches in tennis, football and badminton and other sporting activities.
Dutch youngsters sang their native songs round the scouts’ and guides' campfires.
Highlights of the week included a tour of Frensham and Hindhead in Comfy Coaches and a concert featuring the choir of Haren, organised by Farnham and Bourne Music Society.
60 YEARS AGO
V.I.P. INSPECTION…
The Earl of Cavan, Colonel-in-Chief of the 2nd Beds. and Herts Regt. inspected the battalion on the Brigade Square at St. Lucia Barracks, Bordon.
He then visited Quebec Barracks and saw the new brick buildings there which had only just replaced the old South African war huts.
50 YEARS AGO
MEGA-TON DELIVERY…
Weighing 60 tons, a new transformer for South Electricity Board's sub-station in Hindhead, was the biggest load ever to be brought into the district by road.
Drawn by a six-cylinder diesel tractor, it was mounted on a low-loading trailer for the trip from a Walthamstow factory at a top speed of five miles per hour!
It was installed to step down the 33,000 volts supply received at Hindhead from the national grid, to 11,000 for local distribution.
ORANGES-HOORAY…
It was announced that supplies of oranges would be available from local shops from April 24th and be reserved for a period of five days at the rate of one lb. per head to children only.
Any oranges left after the five days could be sold to other customers.
40 YEARS AGO
GUINEA FUND…
While carrying out repairs to the main London-Portsmouth road at Petersfield, a county council workman dug up a shiny yellow object which turned out to be gold crown guinea, dated 1759, and used during the reign of King George II.
30 YEARS AGO
TEACHER SHORTAGE…
Surrey County Council's education department appealed to married women to return to teaching to fill the gaps for both part-time and full-time teachers.
Short summer courses were arranged to prepare teachers for a return to the service.
THE FRENCH CONNECTION…
Some of the equipment used in a sea bed survey of the English Channel in relation to a proposed tunnel between England and France, was made and tested at Crondall.
A fibreglass dinghy filled with delicate sounding equipment towed back and forth across the Channel was built at The Moorings, Mill Lane, the home of Mr. H. F. Mallett, a director of the marine survey firm Underseas Ltd.
20 YEARS AGO
FACTORY FIRES…
For the second time in as many weeks, Alton firemen were called out to a night-time factory blaze to deal with a fire at Vessa Ltd in Paper Mill Lane.
In the previous week they had dealt with a fire in another factory on the industrial estate in nearby Mill Lane.
Vessa, makers of  artificial limbs and wheelchairs, suffered little damage from the fire, which was quickly brought under control.
10 YEARS AGO
OFF TO WAR…
A former 3rd Farnham scout was heading off with the Falklands-bound Navy task force as one of the mechanics servicing the Harrier  jump-jets aboard HMS Hermes.
Eighteen-year-old Chris Bolton, who lived in Folly Hill, had come to the end of his two years training with the Fleet Air Arm at Yeovilton.
Oh no, don't stop the carnival…
ARE Alton girls shy?
That was the question that the Alton Carnival Committee were beginning to ask themselves, when they found that no girls had come forward to enter the 1962 Carnival Queen contest.
In previous years the selection of the carnival queen had been organised by elimination contests in the town and surrounding villages, but 30 years ago the committee asked that young ladies should send in a copy of a recent photograph.
From these the finalists were to be selected to appear before the panel of judges at a social evening in Alton.
‘We are anxious to have as many entrants as possible,’ said a member of the organising committee.
‘We don't mind if the girls have just left school, or are still in school, whether they live outside the town or whether they are married,’ said the committee member.
Apart from the queen herself, attendants were also desperately needed to complete the line-up.
Of sheep and ships…
The top of Sheep Street, 25 The Square, Petersfield.
This house for many years remembered as an old-fashioned bookshop is now part of a modern solicitor's office.
The name Sheep Street is somewhat misleading.
It was probably Ship Street originally — the ship being the one that ‘sailed’ there until the 19th century, The Royal George public house!
Thanks to the Petersfield Society for the photo and Sean Street, author of Petersfield a Pictorial Past.
Ensign Publications.
Ever photogenic, Castle Street in Farnham in the days when it was possible to capture the scene without any parked cars.
Ransoms grocery is on the left and on the right is the ironmongers Tily and Brown, now Robert Dyas.
Thanks to Mr. J. Pratt of Dorking for the loan of the photograph.
Taking a break, the workmen of Chuters the builders of Millbridge, Frensham.
The photograph was lent by a member of Frensham and Dockenfield Local History Society, who told us that the picture was taken around 1916.
Chuters had lost part of their workforce to the war — the man in the apron had bad feet — but there was not so much work around for those who remained.
Wilde times at The Maltings
THREE of Oscar Wilde's most charming fairy tales can be seen today (Friday) at Farnham Maltings in Wilde Tales, a dramatic adaptation by Show of Hands theatre company.
Show of Hands integrate hearing and non-hearing actors and use a combination of movement, sound, mime and sign language to retell the stories of The Happy Prince, The Nightingale and The rose and The Fisherman and His Soul.
Director Michael Dray says: ‘The name of the company reflects my belief that sign language is a fascinating form of communication.
In theatre, it can be very visual and dramatic form of expression, and I founded the company in 1989 with the aim of encouraging deaf and hearing actors to work together.’
This show promises a memorable evening's entertainment — as The Stage & Television Today said: ‘Both amusing and poignant, Wilde Tales leaves the viewer quite dazzled.’
The performance is part of Waverley's Art for All year.
The borough council are also organising an exhibition of visual arts in The  Maltings Johnson Wax Kiln Gallery, to include artwork by mentally and physically handicapped people.
The show starts at 7.30 p.m.
Ensemble play for charity
A TOP amateur guitar ensemble, The Mozart Guitar Players, would like to raise funds for a Farnham based charity.
The ensemble were formed in Farnham eight years ago by Myer Rosen, to give amateur guitar players the kind of experience that is available to wind and string players in local orchestral societies.
Today the ensemble are well established and perform a wide and varied repertoire ranging from renaissance to contemporary music.
Currently the players, who all come from Surrey and Hampshire, are preparing a summer concert which will include four Vivaldi concertos as well as works by Mozart, Tchaikovsky and Debussy.
The Mozart Guitar Players would like to hear from any charity who can organise a suitable venue for this concert.
Proceeds will be given to that charity.
Anyone interested can contact the ensemble by writing to ‘Mozart Players’, c/o Farnham Herald, 114 West Street, Farnham, Surrey GU9 7HL.
Just jazz
BARBARA Thompson, one of the leading ladies of British jazz, visits the Theatre Royal, Winchester on Tuesday, April 28th with her band Paraphernalia.
Direct from her European tour, she'll make a one night stop in Winchester to play old favourites and compositions from here latest work including tracks from the new album Breathless.
She has worked extensively at Ronnie Scotts in London and Birmingham.
Her other current projects include featured soloist on Manfred Mann's latest album Plains Music, composing a new work for three saxophones and a chamber orchestra and concerts and workshops in Britain and abroad.
Breathing life into the feel good factor
UP and coming Farnham band Feel could soon be spearheading a wave of fresh talent intent on reviving a staid top forty.
Their soul driven dance mix has packed out venues everywhere and got them airplay on top dance station Kiss FM.
The group's first vinyl release, Feel so Fine, was largely responsible for this success.
It spent four weeks at the top of Off the Record's local artists chart last summer and after a recent re-release, sales topped 1000.
‘We recorded it because it was the first song we'd written,’ says Mike, founder member of the band.
‘It had quite an effect because only the other day a London record store asked if it was going to be released again.’
Feel, originally known as Direct Heat, were formed in the autumn of 1989 and consists of Mike, vocalist Louise Mullinger and a core of musicians, who at the moment includes Tina Turner's ex-saxophone player.
The group make use of Farnham's musical facilities, including the Warehouse, which they say is a great place to rehearse in.
Over the last three years they've built up a steady following, which is hardly surprising, since their stage show is one of the most acclaimed in local music.
‘We try and make our gigs a laid back, enjoyable affair,’ Mike told us.
‘That's one of the reasons why we changed our name — a fan told us that our music is something to feel good about.’
Their new single, Family, includes all these elements and could be the one that breaks them into the big time.
The group are confident that it will be a success, not least because of the preparation put into it.
Mike added: ‘Feel so Fine taught us a lot about how the music business works which we've now put into practice — like having a good distributor for the single.
There may be some record company interest too, because Big Life have been showing interest in the group.’
Dance act
Another ongoing project is the Surrey Dance Conglomerate, a collaboration between Feel and fellow local dance act Salt Tank.
This involves the two groups plus a host of other musicians pooling their talents and putting out their releases.
‘Salt Tank are a brilliant group.
Every song they release sounds so different.
We'd like to release Family as a joint effort with them, if we don't get signed up to a record company first!’
Mike continued.
What do Feel think of the dance craze which is currently dominating the singles charts?
It's good, but it's not a reflection of what people are listening to, unlike the album chart, which represents the rock and pop and other elements of people's tastes.
There's nothing wrong with the music, but the record industry have got to sort out the singles market before sales fall further.’
Local music is an altogether healthier picture, according to the group, who see it as a friendly club where bands from all divisions of music can work together without competition.
As for the future, Mike says that Feel would like to release a cassette single solely for their local fans, and, of course, score a success with a record company.
Judging by the hard work they've put into their music over the last three years, that success could just be round the corner.
New season of boating for handicapped people
BOATING for disabled people is again available next month.
The Boats for the Handicapped Association are operating the ‘Mildred Stocks’ for the summer boating season, from Colt Hill, Odiham, on the Basingstoke Canal.
There are no steps to get on and off the ‘Mildred Stocks’; wheelchairs can be wheeled straight on board on a special ramp and people with sticks or walking aids will have no problems.
This day boat is specially designed to carry up to eleven passengers, six of whom could be in wheelchairs.
At least two of her passengers must be able bodied to look after mooring and positioning of the gangway.
This ‘Drive it yourself’ boat can be controlled by handicapped or able bodied passengers, and is available for hire for full or half days, seven days a week.
Booking enquiries should be made to Fleet 621501.
Or write to the association enclosing a stamped-addressed envelope to:.
There is a telephone answering machine if required, on 0252 313810.
Information and leaflets can also be obtained from the association secretary, Judith Gerry, on 0252 622520.
Also owned by The Boats for the Handicapped Association and available on the Basingstoke Canal is a special twin hull single or double seat rowing skiff, and a special stable canoe.
These are proving particularly popular with younger disabled people, and a special hoist is available to lift people from wheelchair into boat if needed.
They are based at the North East Hampshire Water Activity Centre in Fleet, and the telephone number for more information or to make bookings is Trix Davey on 0252 621381.
Boats for the Handicapped are currently fundraising to get a holiday boat on the Basingstoke Canal, and any help or donations would be most gratefully received.
Donations should be sent to:
New regional arts board launched
SOUTH East Arts become the Regional Arts Board for Kent, East Sussex, West Sussex and Surrey this week having undergone a complete re-structuring process in relation to staffing and funding procedures.
Christopher Cooper, the board's chief executive, said ‘The development of the new board means we now have clear objectives for the future of South East Arts and the way they fund, encourage and promote the art in our region.
We aim to take an active role in setting up projects which will set standards of excellence and make the arts more accessible by developing a wide ranging programme of arts activities for everyone in the South East.’
Brian Nicholson, chairman of the board, said: ‘Our geographical location lends itself to strong links with the European arts infrastructure and I am confident that we will develop exciting initiatives in all areas of activity.’
The new South East Arts Board is having a new logo and a leaflet highlighting areas of activities and endeavours.
Petersfield band the Pridenjoy release their new single Don't Let Twyford Down this week.
Band members are angry at the M.3 extension being built through Twyford Down, near Winchester.
The group are currently on tour and their last release Tracks in the Snow recently became the biggest local seller of the year so far.
Joseph and the Dreamcoat — a lively, teamwork success
FOR two performances last week, Headley Holme School wowed audiences with their lively presentation of Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat.
An unexpected message of good luck from Phillip Schofield, star of the London production, spurred on the cast to give their all.
And what first-class entertainment it was — a tribute to the hard work and team effort put in by staff and children from the top four classes.
Behind the scenes pupils assisted with scene shifting, props, makeup or designing the attractive wall displays and posters.
Rostra on different levels denoted the central acting area, with massed choirs on one side.
From the other Charles Biggs, Daniel Boden, Frank Bradshaw and Terry Martin took turns to narrate the potted version of Andrew Lloyd Webber's popular musical.
Lesley Burt did a grand job as Joseph whose gift of the many-coloured coat arouses the envy of his brothers, played by Kelly Turner, Shelley Black, Kimberley Curran, Alex Green, Leighton Girling, Sally Waine, David Roberts, Richard Bryant, Nicola Dyer, Donna Kemp and Becky Woodger.
Most of the adult roles were taken by staff and friends of the school.
Marian Davey was an amusingly sultry wife to Potiphar, played by the caretaker, Keith Fellon.
The curate, Bruce Nicole, appeared as a butler and Ann Sawers and Jane Hewitt took other parts.
The audience toe-tapped along with the lively rhythms and welcomed the chance to join in with the cha cha cha number.
One More Angel in Heaven and the rousing finale with its two-part harmony were musical highlights.
But the songs featuring the dancers provided the spectacle.
Potiphar with its slick routines from six girls in 1920s' costumes was superb.
So too were the verses sung by Louise Parfect and Gemma McCartney.
For Song of the King, an imposing Pharaoh (James Roberts) mimed to the tape while a dancing group performed a stylish rock ‘n roll hand jive.
Helping hands
Four members of staff shared the honours for the show's success.
Alison Evans taught the music and provided piano accompaniment, Jean Brown and Liz Robinson were responsible for choreography and production, and Helena Carter was stage manager.
As well as the choirs, the following also appeared in the cast: Pharaoh's backing singers .
Joseph in his much envied coat of many colours, with his brothers, while Pharaoh and the guards look on.
It was an eggstra party
THE children of Headley Playgroup were treated to a fancy dress Easter party on Friday of last week.
More than 40 children aged between three and five turned up as their favourite nursery rhyme or story book characters.
A handful of Little Bo Peeps were joined by Little Miss Muffet, Wee Willie Winkie, Noddy and Puff the Magic Dragon, to name but a few.
With eleven children leaving to go to ‘big school’ there are still a few places available for next term.
Headley Playgroup meets at Headley Village Hall every weekday morning from 9.30 to 12.30.
St. Francis Church review their year
AT the annual meeting of St. Francis Church, Headley Down, parishioners welcomed the arrival during the year of the Rev. Bruce Nicole and his wife Jane.
Secretary Jackie Onstenk commented that it made ‘an enormous difference’ to have them living on the Down.
Thanking everyone for their support and encouragement, Mr. Nicole said they were finding in the parish ‘a diversity of experience’ which they knew would help them grow as Christians and as ministers.
The rector, the Rev. Dick Woodger, chaired Sunday's meeting.
Reports came from all sections of the church.
The worship group had continued to hold informal meetings and a weekly newssheet and coffee had been introduced.
The junior church, who had been instrumental in all the Christmas activities, were now looking for teachers.
And a leader for Headley Down guides was also urgently sought.
For the future a holiday group is planned in conjunction with the playscheme already operating in the parish.
Officers and committee were re-elected with Mel Salmon the only new member.
HEADLEY DOWN ASSOCIATION
Road issues dominate
AT the recent annual meeting of the Headley Down Association, the chairman, Sir Edward Ashmore, welcomed country councillor Brian Blacker, district councillor Carole Burns and Headley Parish Council planning chairman, Anthony Williams.
Tribute was paid to Wally Heath, a long-serving member of the committee who had died during the year.
In his report Sir Edward said that planning matters and roads had been the association's major considerations.
They were in favour of the A3 eastern bypass and in any future discussions would support ‘what is right for Grayshott’.
Unmade roads
Concern was expressed over the failure of Cala Homes to make up the roads to serve their new houses.
Many residents with frontages onto unmade roads had already contributed 50 percent of the cost of the work.
Others had not yet paid and the chairman stressed that the longer the delay, the more money would be needed.
Brian Blacker pointed out that council funds are severely restricted at present.
Available money had gone into large road improvement schemes which had rather overwhelmed the rest of the programme.
Although many favoured a speed limit on the B3002, the difficulties over enforcement were emphasised.
Mr. Blacker said that council officers who had met the committee were aware of problems in the area.
In the routine maintenance revenue account the resurfacing of Beech Hill and the construction of a footpath were being treated as priorities.
Regarding the regular use of Eddey's Lane as a short cut for through traffic, Anthony Williams said the matter comes up frequently at parish council meetings.
It appeared that most people would like to see sleeping policemen installed there.
In Carlton Road two-thirds of those who completed a questionnaire favoured the same solution and the removal of the present rumble strips.
The association reported one item of progress, welcoming the recent closure order for the eastern end of Fairview Road.
Householders with properties facing or adjoining the Ludshott Common boundary had been worried about possible fire hazards.
Having liaised with the National Trust, Anthony Daykin was able to reassure residents that wider firebreak swathes were being cut through the common.
In addition current path clearance should further reduce potential problems.
Questioning the present position at Bowleswood Farm, John White asked whether the association had made any progress since the last general meeting.
Vice-chairman Geoffrey White said that the showmen's vans on the western end of the site should be cleared by April next year.
Bowleswood Farm
For his stone-crushing operation on the middle section, Mr. Swoish was entitled to put machinery on the land for up to 28 days a year.
The district council were monitoring the situation and they hoped to see a satisfactory solution in the near future.
Mr. Blacker reported that the Dial-a-Ride was proving a successful venture and they would appreciate feedback from residents.
All the officers were re-elected.
Sir Edward said he considered the association helpful to Headley Down residents in that it acted as a safety valve in times of crisis.
A grand run for charity
SPECIAL Constable John Casey of the Metropolitan Police ran for charity all the way from Guildford to Grayshott.
The 20 mile course followed the A3 to the finish at the Cenacle, Grayshott.
The Cenacle is a convent/retreat house run by catholic sisters and as a charitable organisation, relies on events such as these to raise funds.
John's gruelling run started at 2 p.m. and along the course he was joined by several of his colleagues from the Metropolitan Police in Enfield.
At the finish he was greeted home by two members of Hampshire Constabulary who were there to verify the completion of the run.
So far in sponsorship, John has raised over £1,000.
The Cenacle welcomes people from all over the country and holds courses and seminars which cover a wide range of denominations.
After the run John commented ‘Next time I think I'll run the other way.
At least it will be all downhill!’
John Casey on his 20 mile run for the Cenacle
They were ready for Gulf casualties
TWENTY-seven members and guests of the Headley and District Branch of the Royal British Legion recently enjoyed their branch supper at the Passfield Oak Hotel.
The meeting at the Passfield Working Men's Club last week was addressed by Dr. Chris Winfield, consultant physician at the Cambridge Military Hospital, Aldershot.
During the Gulf War Dr. Winfield was required to establish a forward field hospital to cope with an expected flood of casualties which, happily, did not materialise.
The branch are taking part in a car boot sale on the village green on May 2nd.
Anyone offering articles to sell should contact John Atkinson (Headley Down 713895).
There will be a cheese and wine party at the Church Centre on May 16th.
The usual monthly branch meeting will be on May 5th.
David Sulman (Headley Down 714167) and Peter Bull (Headley Down 714342) will undertake a sponsored Poppy Walk on May 10th.
Anyone wishing to sponsor either should phone them.
Forms for sponsorship will be available at the next branch meeting.
Spring show produces joint cup winners
AT the Grayshott Horticultural Society's Spring Show there was a tie for the Whitehouse Cup, the winners being Mrs. Pat Stiles and Mr. and Mrs. Stutchbury.
The show was judged by Miss J. Worsfield.
There were 91 entries, 16 fewer than last year.
The show results were:
Let's hear from the fun runners
HEADLEY'S Fun Run is on course again this year for Monday, May 14th.
The carnival committee will be checking in the competitors at the village hall from 9.30 a.m.
The entry fee for seniors (16 to 35 years) and veterans (over 35) will be, with juniors (under 16) paying £1.25.
Medals will be awarded to the first three home in each category.
Carnival Queen Lisa Stevens will be starting the race at 10.30 a.m.
The course which runs over road and commonland is approximately five miles long.
Contestants in fancy dress will be judged at 10.20 with a prize offered for the best outfit.
Any child below the age of ten taking part in the fun run must be accompanied by an adult.
After the success of last year's mini run, this age group are again invited to race around two circuits of the village green.
The entry fee for this will be 25p with a prize for the winner.
As in previous years the organisers welcome competitors running for a charity of their choice.
Sponsor forms are available from the Tonard Motor Company.
For further details contact Ann Moore on Headley Down 713822.
While parents visited stalls at the Easter fayre, children of Headley Nursery Club played on equipment at the Church Centre.
Enjoying themselves on the slide and climbing frame are Laura Munday, Hannah Sullivan, Michelle Thorne, James Shrubb, Jason Jackson and Libby Stokes.
Cakes, Easter gifts and toys contributed £75 to club funds, while the Traidcraft stall was making money for communities in the Third World.
The Nursery Club meets each Tuesday morning at Headley Church Centre from 10.30 a.m. to midday.
Help — this disease is a killer!
LOCAL charity workers are joining a nationwide drive to raise public awareness of Motor Neurone Disease (MND)— muscle-wasting condition for which there is no treatment or cure.
‘MND Week’ runs from April 25th to May 3rd and will be launched in London.
It will be the first of hundreds of fund raising events across the UK.
Money raised during MND Week will go towards the development of  special aids for disabled people.
Prof Heinz Wolff, of Brunei University, is working on the development of aids to make everyday living easier and more comfortable for people with MND.
MND Week will end on Sunday, May 3rd, with a nationwide phone-in.
Anyone can call a special number 0345 626262 — for information or advice on the disease or details of the local branch.
Lines will be open from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
MND is a muscle wasting condition which kills three people in the UK each day: there is, currently, no treatment or cure and is always fatal.
It paralyses the body but leaves the mind completely unaffected.
David Niven, the film actor, and Don Revie, the former England football manager, died from the disease.
One group in the area welcome enquiries on 0252 318171.
On the scent of success…
NASTY smells from Alton's sewage works could almost become a thing of the past.
Thames Water Authority are in the process of carrying out a general refurbishment programme at the plant.
All the sewage is now stored within enclosed containers rather than in open beds and the company also intend enclosing the plant inlet.
The improvements will not completely bring an end to unpleasant odours from the works, but should still prove good news for the residents of Alton.
A spokesman for the company said: ‘You can't get away from sewage smells at a sewage plant but we do various things to help reduce the nuisance.’
The work earmarked for the Alton plant also includes creating additional treatment capacity to cope with the waste from households in the out-lying villages who are now being placed on main drainage.
Levelling work ‘too expensive’
DETERRED by a quotation of £3,000 for the work, Four Marks Parish Council have decided not to get the mound of earth and builders' rubble which has accumulated at the village centre levelled.
Instead they have opted to have the area cleared of rubbish, fencing and undergrowth and then decide whether it should be landscaped.
Even this amount of work will cost them £420 but, if nothing is done, chairman Peter Hobbs warned ‘The mound will become a bigger and bigger eyesore.’
Concern over contractors
THE drainage contractors who are currently digging up large parts of Four Marks have pledged to clear up after them.
But will they tidy up the roads where they have not actually been working, and where their vehicles have caused ‘disruption’?
This concern was raised in public question time to Four Marks Parish Council by Burton Mills.
He quoted Brislands Lane and Gravel Lane as two locations where the works had caused ‘a huge amount of traffic’.
The council are to draw the attention of the contractors to the matter.
Plan goes to appeal
AN appeal has been lodged against East Hampshire District Council's refusal to allow the erection of a house with garage on land adjacent to Wexcombe, in Lymington Bottom, Four Marks.
The council have objected to the proposed replacement dwelling because they feel it to be ‘disproportionate’ in size to the original building.
The excessive bulk, they say, would be ‘detrimental’ to the character and visual amenities of the locality.
Applicant Mr. I. Kennedy has now taken his case to the Department of the Environment.
Written representations should be sent to the Secretary of State for the Environment at Room 1203B, Tollgate House, Houlton Street, Bristol, BS2 9DJ, to arrive no later than April 30th.
More power to the College
LORD Mayor Treloar College, Froyle, are to benefit from a battery powered device which  helps relieve pain.
The TNS machine is a gift from Southern Electric, and is part of the company's continuing policy to support community youth activities in Hampshire.
Manager of Southern Electric Test Division, Brian Walker, said that his company were ‘delighted’ with the opportunity to help the Treloar youngsters in their bid to overcome disabilities and gain independence.
Southern Electric, he added, aimed to continue  to develop this kind of support for community based activities, in order to strengthen links with the communities they serve and from which the company drew their staff.
The presentation to Treloar is the second such initiative this month to benefit young people in Hampshire.
Southern Electric recently backed the Calleva Life Saving Club by replacing their training boat.
This ensured the future of its annual life saving patrols that take place each summer.
The club draws their membership from both the guide and scout associations in North Hampshire and have taught more than 500 young people basic to advanced life saving skills over the past 21 years.
They are the only club of their kind who are registered with the Royal Life Saving Society.
Council react to pavilion doubts
CONCERN as to whether the parish council were seen to be fully behind the scheme to build a replacement sports pavilion at Four Marks recreation ground were expressed at the council's meeting on Tuesday last week.
The doubts were raised by councillor Brian Timms, who said he had read a press report stating that the council had not yet decided whether to support the scheme.
‘It is essential that it is backed by community leaders in order to raise funds,’ he said.
Chairman Peter Hobbs said it was a ‘question of interpretation.
The parish council acknowledge the need to replace the present structure but have not yet considered the details.’
They had not yet given their opinion to the present proposal — given outline permission by East Hampshire District council's northern area planning sub-committee on March 24th — because the plans had at that stage only been submitted in outline.
When detailed plans reach the parish council, they will comment, he added.
Councillors were known to have had reservations about an earlier plan which included a staff flat on a second storey because, although it was felt this was desirable from a security point of view, it contravened various planning guidelines.
The planning officers' report considered by the district council's northern area planning subcommittee on March 24th stated: ‘Initial comments indicate the council have not considered the current proposal in detail and have not therefore as yet decided to support the scheme, indeed some of the council have strong reservations’.
It also referred to a local resident objecting to the scheme.
Hoping to improve the recreation ground
ROPLEY Parish Church have agreed in principal to the provision of a new hard surface drive, to serve the recreation ground.
Having consulted with the user clubs, it was decided to draw up plans for submission to the planning authority, although further discussions with all concerned would need to be undertaken before giving the final go-ahead.
Councillors also expressed their support for proposed improvements to the tennis club facilities.
The plan to build a practice wall, flood lighting and paved patio for sitting out would, they felt, ‘enhance the area’, although the containing eight-foot fence was ‘too high’.
It will make it look a bit too urban,’ said Hazel Wilson.
Concern was also expressed about smoke from the barbecue  interfering with other sporting fixtures, and it was agreed that plans for the proposed verandah should be viewed by the parish council before going to the district.
Sundial stolen
A 30-INCH sundial, valued at £500, was stolen from a garden in Upper Froyle on Friday night.
THANKS, ANNA…
AFTER 25 years on night duty as a nursing auxiliary caring for the elderly patients at Alton General Hospital, Anna Graham retired last week.
Although she will in fact serve her last few shifts at the new community  hospital at Treloar's, it was her wish to hold her retirement party at Alton General Hospital before it closed.
Anna, who lives in Alton, was given a rousing send-off by friends and colleagues, with a party also attended by her five  children and the oldest and youngest of her grandchildren.
Among the gifts they gave her was a sun-lounger and garden table, flowers, pictures, an immaculately iced cake and taped of Irish music to remind her of her homeland.
A bouquet for Anna Graham, presented by care group manager Sue Price.
Cycle stolen
A MULTI-coloured Apollo Snapper child's bicycle, valued at £100, was stolen from the rear of a building in Alton High Street between 7 p.m. on Saturday and 10 a.m. on Sunday.
‘Want to help with the court cuppas?’
WINIFRED Rooney, who has run the tea bar at Alton magistrates' court for 14 years, is retiring and the local branch of the Women's Royal Voluntary Service are looking for a replacement.
‘She has done a wonderful job,’ district organiser Barbara Noakes said.
‘Now she feels the time has come to hand over to someone else.
Is there anyone in the area who might consider joining us and taking on this position?’
There is no date set for the retirement, and Mrs. Rooney is happy to stay on to help her successor learn the ropes.
The WRVS aim to run their tea bar whenever the court is sitting, usually three times a week, but provided the rota is working well (‘which it does’, Mrs. Rooney said) the organiser needs only to call in once a week.
‘Ideally it needs someone from Alton.
I live at Four Marks, which makes it a ten-mile round trip,’ she added.
A member of the WRVS for over 30 years, previously working on a hospital tea bar in Woolwich, she became involved with the court operation when she and her husband first moved to Hampshire.
The WRVS are also looking for additional meals on wheels drivers, for just a couple of hours once or twice a month.
Anybody who is interested in helping them in either capacity should phone Mrs. Noakes on Petersfield 263749.
Mrs. Rooney can be contacted on Alton 63456.
LETTERS
It's OK — death is fairly quick
Sir,— I write in reply to the letter, ‘Fox Control’.
I wonder if ‘name and address supplied’ would volunteer to be chased five miles by an angry mob being happy in the knowledge that when caught he or she would not be beaten up but dispatched humanely?
The mob volunteers, if forth coming, would I'm sure enjoy the chase.
Unfortunately it would not be possible to ask the victim if he or she enjoyed it.
By the way the letter writer forgot to mention snaring.
Name and address supplied
Neil Sherlock ‘thank-you’
Sir,— Can I thank the 20,033 people who voted for me last week.
It was the highest ever vote for our party and the modest swing to us reflected great credit on the many people who helped the Liberal Democrat campaign in South West Surrey.
My congratulations are of course extended to Virginia Bottomley on her personal triumph and her weekend elevation to the Cabinet.
Neil Sherlock Liberal Club South Street, Farnham
National symbol or thorny topic?
Sir,— Now that the election is over, and Mr. Kinnock has retired, could we please have our red rose back for St. Georges day next week?
Edgar Pallant Spinneycot, 39A Bridgefield, Farnham
PS…
With apologies to some of your more regular political contributors.
Inequalities and injustice point to the urgent need for real change
Sir,— Now that the dust has finally settled on this election we may pause to reflect on what has undoubtedly been one of the dirtiest, and most depressing of exercises in political chicanery.
What makes it so is not so much the iniquitous voting system which put in power a government that commands the support of only 42 percent of the electorate (significantly less, taking into account abstentions and spoiled votes)).
Nor even the many thousands disenfranchised by the crime of poverty.
No, it was, above all, the very conduct of the campaign itself that made it such a sickening mockery of anything approximating democracy.
We live in a society that is, to all intents, totalitarian.
Money values permeate every aspect of our existence.
They intrude into our personal relationships, govern our patterns of consumption, inform our very notion of human worth.
And, as we have all too clearly seen, they utterly dominate our democratic process, reducing it to a cynical exercise in mass manipulation.
Between them, the three main political parties spent a small fortune on this election.
Between them, they monopolised the media to the virtual exclusion of any other viewpoint.
We seem to have been steadily moving away, in spirit and in the letter, from the findings of the famous Beveridge report on Broadcasting in 1949 which concluded that ‘minorities must have the chance, by persuasion to turn themselves into majorities’(para 259) and should not be denied access to the media because of their size.
A famous 19th century thinker once observed that ‘the class which has the means of material production at its disposal has control at the same time over the means of mental production’.
By that he meant the rich, using their wealth, are able to manipulate the flow of information and images to their own advantage.
We have seen this all  too clearly in this election.
In Britain we live in a society of massive and growing inequality over which the Tories (and Labour before them) presided.
According to the government's own statistics, the richest one percent of the population own three times as much as the poorest 50 percent put together.
When Mr. Major professes on the one hand to stand for something he calls a ‘classless society’ and, on the other, whinges on behalf of the wealthy, purportedly faced with the unbearable prospect under Labour of parting with their other BMW, we can detect the unmistakable stench of humbug.
When the workers who produce the wealth of society demand an increase  in their pay to match the rise in prices they are rebuked for being ‘greedy’.
Yet when the rich who largely live off the proceeds of other people's labour are marginally threatened we are supposed to feel concern at the loss of ‘incentive’ this might entail.
Just as the ‘means of material production’ is largely held by the few so, too, is the ‘means of mental production’.
In Britain three-quarters of all daily newspapers are owned by just three companies.
For the most part these are Tory newspapers and this enormous concentration of social power was tellingly used — most particularly by the gutterpress — to bring about the re-election of a Tory government.
To that end it employed a mixture of bribery, smear and downright deceit, climaxing in a crescendo of scaremongering hysteria.
I have no sympathy for Labour — as ever, it will sell its grandmother and any principle it ever had to get a foot into Number Ten — but it is hard to disagree with the view that they were hard done by.
And if they were hard done by, how much more so the rest of us.
If the gutterpress was to be believed, this election was about which leader was ‘fit’ to govern Britain.
We were invited to contemplate their respective personalities, their little foibles, their dress sense, their wives and even such physical features (supposedly indicative of their state of mind) as the colour of their eyes.
This is a style of propaganda more reminiscent of Nazi Germany or the Stalinist era, albeit refined by the sugar-coating of modern advertising.
It is an insult to our intelligence.
If democracy is about government by the people for the people, then it cannot be about giving a bunch of politicians a blank cheque to govern us every five years.
For it to become a reality, it must take root in our workplaces, in our schools, in our communities.
It must entail a massive shift in power from the centre to the periphery, from so called representative to direct democracy.
It must be about ordinary people taking control of our own lives.
For the high and mighty only appear so because we are on our knees.
It is time we voted for ourselves for a change.
Let it be a real change.
Robin Everett, The Mount, Lower St., Haslemere
Unemployment the key issue
Sir,— As one of the many people who have appreciated and valued the past work of South West Surrey MP Virginia Bottomley, I am delighted to learn that her efforts have been justly rewarded by the Prime Minister.
However, I was disappointed at the reply she gave to my questions at a public open meeting held on April 7th, when I suggested that following many and varied discussions in different regions of the country, there was extreme concern in the non-action by the government in the matter of the vast difference in the value of imports from different countries, in particular Japan, as against the value of the imports they take from this country.
In so far as Japan was concerned, it was apparent that all profits made from their ‘British’ made products went back to Japan to boost their economy and to further their influence into the European markets.
The reply given by Mrs. Bottomley centred around trade barriers not being acceptable and the answer appeared to me to contradict the action taken by America where President Bush has stated that Japanese imports are to be restricted.
To continue the excess of import value over export value is bad housekeeping, no different to the wife who continually spends more than her husband earns, with the obvious results, which on a national scale will increase unemployment not reduce it.
I would suggest that the major item which the government has to give priority to is unemployment, especially if they wish to continue in office after three years, which I forecast could be the timing of the next general election if all goes well.
B. Butler, 10 Vale Close, Lower Bourne
About the priorities of justice and fairness in society…
Sir,— So the old expression, ‘A country  gets the government it deserves,’ isn't quite true after all.
The old, the poor, the sick, the homeless and the animals certainly don't deserve another five years of Tory rule, but the I'm all right Jacks have made sure they are getting it.
Like many others, I am saddened almost to the point of despair at the result of this general election, and am vividly reminded of the  moving words once spoken by that truly good man, Michael Foot.
He said —‘We are not here in this world to find elegant solutions, pregnant with initiative, or to serve the ways and modes of profitable progress.
We are here to provide for all those who are weaker and hungrier, more battered and crippled than ourselves.
That is the only certain good and great purpose on earth.’
Mary Faramus, Parsley Cottage, Upper South View, Farnham.
Polls must go!
Sir,— What an incredible confidence trick the election polls have turned out to be.
The cost of 1,000 sample poll is around £50,000 which is eventually paid by readers of national newspapers.
Not money well spent, and reflects badly on the credibility of their political coverage and on market research as a whole.
Having been a mathematician in the years gone by, I was amazed at the audacity of the polling companies to state that a sample of 1,000 voters was representative plus or minus three percent of a total electorate of some 43½ million.
As an example, the NOP (Mail on Sunday) poll on April 5th, gave Labour a lead of six percent, whereas the actual result of total votes cast gave the Conservatives a lead of 7.7 percent.
So much for trying to make a science out of commonsense!
With the pollsters having completely lost credibility, I believe there is a strong case for banning all polls from the time an election (or by-election) is called, to when voting actually takes place.
TV and national newspapers turned the election into another soap opera.
A complete illusion.
J. M. Cook New Horizon, Pine Grove, Farnham.
And what a cost!
Sir,— Once again people have to suffer another five years of Tory misery.
I refer to the ordinary working people of Britain.
John Major stood outside No. 10 and stated that the ‘have nots’ were wrong — the have nots who, through no fault of their own, lost their homes; and people who, through Tory mismanagement and selfishness, lost their businesses.
I suspect some have forgotten what Chris Patten said —‘It was well worth the cost,’ just so the Tories could get inflation down.
How disgraceful!
How anybody can think the Tories are caring party is beyond me.
Elizabeth Trigwell, 1 Rackfield, Haslemere
Victory in spite of Tory Central Office
Sir,— Although Conservative Central Office euphoria at the election result may be understandable, it nevertheless needs to recognise that this was achieved in spite of its lack lustre contribution to the electoral campaign.
During the first two weeks, it was left to Labour to make the running with its castigation of the ‘Tories’ 13 wasted years’, and without being challenged on its own appalling record, when last in office.
Indeed, one could almost sympathise with Neil Kinnock's strenuous efforts to obliterate, if not to remedy, the worst features of  labour's socialist past.
Even so, if he had succeeded in this endeavour, to the point of winning the election, then the ensuing chaos in both the health and educational fields would have been fearful to behold, quite apart from the flight from sterling, and the loss of foreign investment.
It follows that, whatever sympathy one may have over Chris Patten's defeat at Bath, it nevertheless set the seal on Central Office's performance.
Therefore, to whom belongs the credit for this near miraculous escape from falling victim yet again to socialist ideology and dogma, which is in decline and disrepute everywhere, except for a few Third World countries?
Firstly it belongs to John Major himself, for taking to the hustings, and restoring, a cutting edge to the party dialogue — and thus taking the Central Office by the scruff of the neck and lifting it out of the doldrums into which it had sunk.
Secondly, to the instinctive political sense of the electorate, which, all too well aware of what was at stake, itself took charge of the situation, regardless of underlying allegiances, and saved the day, also leaving Labour in a state of profound shock.
The campaign also revealed ‘Paddy’ not only as ‘too cocky by half’, but whose political judgement, as an officer with one-time ‘unilateralist’leanings, is suspect.
Finally, with the government now reinstalled, all that remains is to overhaul Central Office, and give it a thorough spring cleaning.
John Milman, Flat C, Cossington House, 7 Weston Road, Petersfield
Grim reality of bankruptcy and what to do
Sir,— I am the General Secretary of The Bankruptcy Association of Great Britain and Ireland and I am writing to express my continuing concern over the catastrophic numbers of people going bankrupt in business — many of them businesses of long standing.
The combination of recession, falling property values, rent and rate increases have proved fatal to the nation's business community.
In addition, many of those who have had their homes repossessed are now being chased by building societies and banks for the short-falls arising after the sale of their homes, many of which are being sold for less than the mortgage owing on them.
A whole new tragic category of bankrupts are in the making.
Many people, too, are in terrible financial trouble because of being caught in leasing agreements for property and other items that are ruining thousands of people.
And general commercial malpractice causes the ruination of thousands more people.
In our nine-year history we have never seen anything like the current tragedy that is overtaking our society and destroying lives and families.
We have now published our first book entitled: Bankruptcy — The Reality and the Law.
This explains bankruptcy law in every country of the United Kingdom and is available from us.
Our association can help anyone with debt problems with advice and support.
We have a daytime telephone number to ring for further details.
This is 0652 33434.
In an evening callers can ring 0524 64305.
Or people can write to us for further information.
John McQueen, The Bankruptcy Association, 4 Johnson Close, Abraham Heights, Lancaster, Lancashire, LA1 5EU.
Environmental strategy
Sir,— Thank you for your article in last week's Bordon Herald —‘Too little action on environmental strategy’, which was a fair summation of the discussion at the recent environmental committee.
However, there was one small but significant error.
If the proposals which I put forward on behalf of the Conservative group had been adopted, £15,000 not £1,500 would have been available for practical environmental issues this year.
This sum of money could have resulted in a further 12 bottle banks being introduced into the district and the extension of the composting trial in urban areas to another 200 dwellings.
G. G. Whittle,(District Councillor, Headley), Corners, The Boreen, Headley Down
Foxhunting
Long may it go on — for the sake of the fox!
Sir,— Tedious though I find it, I cannot allow Bill Eames' recent vitriolic and abusive tirade against foxhunting to go unchallenged.
He hates us for our dress and our bloodlust.
Dress
— The scarlet coat started as a uniform for the hunt staff (paid professionals) in the eighteenth century to distinguish them from the gentlemen riders who wore coats of all colours then.
Now most followers wear black coats and scarlet may be worn by permission of the masters.
Hunt coats are made of a heavy cloth called Melton which is almost waterproof, and very warm.
You can wear a tweed coat if you like but you risk being cold and wet.
Boots are worn to protect your shins against the rub of the stirrup leather and iron.
You won't last long trying to gallop a horse across country wearing jeans and trainers.
Breeches go with boots: there is no point in wearing slacks over them, they will soon be ruined.
Bloodlust.
— In common with the majority of hunt followers I don't care whether the fox is killed or not: we hunt for the incomparable experience of galloping a horse across country behind the ‘sweet cry of hounds’.
Not many people succeed in remaining with hounds in a fast run.
it requires skill, a good horse and a dash of courage.
Mr. Eames will no doubt be pleased to hear that a few foxhunters are killed every year in falls.
I enjoy the actual hunt in the same way that a fisherman enjoys casting his fly or bait near a fish that he has seen in the hope of catching it.
It is an atavistic feeling common to most men.
The only members of the hunt dedicated to the actual kill are of course the hounds, the huntsman whose job it is to train them to hunt, possibly a farmer whose stock has been damaged by foxes, and possibly the masters who are interested in controlling the fox population.
Tearing to pieces
— The favourite phrase of the so-called animal lover.
The last minute of a hunt is an unequal struggle and quite rightly so.
The foxhound is a much bigger and stronger animal than a fox: the leading hound or couple bowl the fox over and kill him.
This takes twenty seconds or less.
The huntsman who is right up with hounds, dismounts and removes the brush and sometimes the mask after an exceptionally good run; he then throws the carcase to the hounds who squabble over it and eat it.
This is when those photographs are taken and published with their phoney captions which not unnaturally wring the hearts of the uninitiated.
I wish to emphasise that the fox is dead when this happens.
Incidentally the majority of the field (followers) do not see the kill; they are not right up with hounds, nor are they supposed to be, and it happens too quickly.
The fox population.
— Mr. Eames seems to imagine that the fox population will regulate its numbers naturally and painlessly if hunting stops.
Nature's way of regulating overpopulation as many third world countries know is by famine and disease, a slow and agonising process.
What worries me is the fate of the fox if hunting stops.
I fear that from becoming perhaps a local nuisance he will become a pest.
Every man's hand will be against him and gassing, snaring and poisoning will be the order of the day, with perhaps a bounty on his brush and he will be at the mercy of every council official, cowboy and yobbo in the country.
If I were a fox I would prefer to take the chance of a twenty second chop by hounds.
Incidentally the odds on the hunted fox being killed are about evens.
Many escape and it is not unusual to have a blank day out hunting, when no fox is hunted mostly because of poor scenting conditions.
Cruelty
— Cruelty to animals takes two forms: the method of killing it and what you do with a live animal which is in your power.
An extreme form of the first is the fur trapper in the Russian and Canadian Arctic who lays a line of traps across country which he visits once a fortnight collecting the victims who have died a slow and agonising death with one or two legs caught in a gin trap.
(Illegal in this country thank God).
An extreme form of the second is the Spanish fighting bull which undergoes considerable pain before being despatched by the matador, even if this is skilfully done, and often it isn't.
There are many other forms of cruelty, e.g. the catching and export of monkeys for medical and other experiments when they should be purpose bred in zoos.
I could go on but there isn't space.
Shooting is often proposed as a method of controlling the fox population.
Since foxes are basically nocturnal animals it takes a great deal of time and patience to shoot a fox, and also a good shot at close range.
Foxes have thick pelts and many a fox has died from gangrene caused by shotgun pellets; again a slow and agonising death.
For those who are knowledgeable and have thought about the subject,(I do not include politicians of any party in this category, unless they are foxhunters) foxhunting is not a cruel way of killing foxes; long may it flourish, for the sake of the fox.
Major H. E. R. Martin, Bayford House, Rowledge
‘Animal tests do play crucial role’
Sir,— I am responding to the views expressed by Clare Lothian from the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection.
The issue of animal experimentation is an emotive subject with strong views held on both sides.
However, Clare Lothian's letter is attempting to mislead your readers on this subject.
No-one is suggesting that animal experiments are the only method of medical research.
However, the small proportion of research that involves has been, and will continue to be, essential for medical progress.
In the past, most major medical advances have depended crucially on animal studies — vaccines, antibiotics, insulin for diabetes and kidney  transplants are just a few examples.
Animals are not perfect models for human beings, but they are still the best we have.
They are only used in research when absolutely necessary, and experiments are carried out carefully and humanely.
The alternatives — studying people, tissue culture, computer modelling etc. — are actually used much more than animal studies.
But it is wishful thinking to believe that these complementary methods could instantly and completely replace the use of animals.
It would be impossible, for instance, to measure in a test tube the effects on blood pressure of a potential new drug, or to develop new intensive care techniques using a computer.
With present day technology, and even in the foreseeable future, this is simply not possible.
The general public should regard statements from animal rights groups with caution.
There is no doubt that if such organisations achieve their objective of eliminating all laboratory animal use in medical research, the chances of finding treatments for diseases like multiple sclerosis, muscular dystrophy, cystic fibrosis, cancer, Aids etc. would be significantly reduced.
The lesson of history is quite simple: animal experimentation has played a crucial role in many major medical advances and it is reasonable to expect that it will continue to do so.
Dr. J. H. Botting, Scientific Officer, Research Defence Society, 58 Great Marlborough Street, London W1V 1DD
It's thumbs down to the environment!
Sir — Both the government and the opposition parties have been given one clear ringing message by the voters in the election: that environmental issues are of little or no concern to them.
During the entire campaign, almost all the really crucial issues facing us were intentionally avoided by the main parties and the media.
Struggling to be heard, the lone voice of the Green Party tirelessly battled to bring up vital issues such as the ozone layer, global warming, over-development, pollution, Third World Debt, global poverty, animal abuse, population, deforestation, soil erosion, nuclear energy, and so on.
The other parties resolutely ignored them, and continued their shameful campaigns based on personally politics, mud-slinging, and appealing to the electorate's baser instincts of greed and selfishness.
And it worked!
At least the claims made by the main parties that they have ‘gone green’ have proven to be totally false.
Time spent discussing the environment during the campaign amounted to less than .1 percent!
The Green Party fielded 256 candidates, and averaged 1.3 percent of the vote.
They lost every deposit, and so contributed £128,000 towards the election, but received almost no coverage in the national press, TV or radio in return.
All that money was painstakingly raised by the local parties, through car boot and jumble sales, etc., and personal contributions from members and supporters.
The Greens put everything into this election, believing that people had finally realised the seriousness and urgency of the issues they campaign on.
What happened to all those people concerned about the continuing destruction of our countryside, the increasing level of traffic, noise, pollution.
Has nobody seen the alarming reports on the state of the ozone layer, or the water shortage in Southern England?
And so on and so on.
The one thing politicians care about more than anything else is the ballot box.
Threaten their votes and they sit up and listen.
That's why the large green vote in the Euro-elections of 1989 did more to put green issues on the agenda than decades of pressure group campaigning.
That's why the Green Party exists.
The general election was an opportunity for voters to say that they do care about the future.
An opportunity they wasted.
The election result has left Green Party members confused, dismayed and dejected.
They believed at least 5 percent of the people would vote for a cleaner, safer and kinder future.
This would at least have saved their deposit and left them something to carry on with.
Greens never give up — they can't, because they know that failure spells disaster, not just for them, but for every living thing on the planet.
But this is a severe setback, which may result in many local Green Parties folding.
They are the only moral voice left in British politics — their presence is essential, fighting local and national elections if green issues are to be taken seriously again.
You failed them in the election, will you help to keep them afloat now?
Please get in touch, or send a donation to: The Green Party, at the address below.
Lindy Barnett
Water: the facts — and now the action?
Sir,— The article on the Alton Herald's front page last week deals with two entirely separate and different problems.
As an employee of Thames Water Authority and afterwards as a pensioner who has kept in touch, I think I know more about the matter than Mr. Blackham.
From the formation of the authority until after 1970 the cleanliness of the River Thames was steadily being improved.
Then, until privatisation, the authority was kept progressively shorter of money.
When privatised, the new plc was required to improve the river and the water supply as it had been hoping to do and had been prevented from doing.
This required much investment and also profit had to be provided to the shareholders, some of them French.
There was no alternative but to raise prices.
To stop pumping at the Wey springs would require more pumping at Lasham and Winchmill Hill, and there would be no permanent gain in the water table.
The only solution is to reduce very greatly the use of water, and every individual is involved.
In India and Africa, a very large proportion of the villagers must walk often several miles for all their water and even then it is usually polluted.
WaterAid provides ‘know-how’ to construct tube-wells and latrines: the villagers provide all the labour and are taught maintenance.
A group of us were able to provide almost all the funding to set up a pump and latrines for one particular village in India.
Nearly four in five of these people are landless and can hardly scratch a bare living.
They are most grateful for a pump within yards of their homes, instead of having to walk a long way to a dirty water-hole.
I hope that Mr. Blackham will remember them when he turns on a tap in his own kitchen.
E. Dawson, 12 Goodwood Close, Alton.
Vital control of foxes
Sir,— When the local fox hunts are just a memory who will be there to control the ever-increasing fox population?
After nights of fox predation on my small flock of sheep, I wonder if the anti-hunt protesters would like to hear the cries of my bereft ewes who have lost their lambs?
Perhaps they could use some of their undoubted energy in joining a night shotgun vigil after a hard day's work?
Brigid Kirsch, Easterbridge House, Crondall.
‘Thanks for your help — we've a fine new MP’
Sir,— May I offer my sincere thanks to the many voters who so successfully supported the candidacy of Gerald Malone in Alton, Holybourne, Chawton and Beech.
My committee were greatly encouraged, during the campaign, by the courtesy and enthusiasm we met on the doorsteps and by the many volunteers, of all age groups and areas of the town, eager to offer unstinting help.
In our new MP we have a young man of ability and enthusiasm, whose sole wish is to defend or further the interest of the entire constituency.
David Bullock, Chairman, Alton Conservative Assn.
‘Fight is on to save our River Wey’
Sir,— I agree with Mr. A. Blackham's comments to Mid-Southern Water with reference to the Flood Meadows and ‘Charity beginning at home’.
My husband and I were very angry to receive from M.S.W. to contribute to Africa and Asia to assist their water flow, when just down the road from our house the same company had caused the flood meadows to dry up.
I wonder if the company have any idea how much wildlife has been killed by the lack of water.
I do not suppose they are worried that the frogs and toads hatched in the ponds previous years, all returned to lay and spawn and found no water into which to produce the next generation.
No doubt several of these poor creatures died.
The area now looks a total mess, as does the River Wey (or should I say the dry bed of the River Wey) that runs through the town.
Does this mean that King's Pond will be the next to go?
I feel that the water company should do something constructive to solve the problem they have engineered, and perhaps other readers feel the same way as we do.
Let us all fight and get our River Wey flowing again.
Jenny Winder, 94 Greenfields Avenue, Alton.
Doctors, nurses in animal test protest
Sir,— In a letter defending experiments on animals, Dr. Botting requested evidence to show the growing distrust of animal research expressed by the medical profession.
There are now two active groups of doctors and a group for nurses which were set up specifically to oppose the use of animals in medical research on the grounds that it is unscientific.
One of the organisations, Ligue Internationale Medicins pour L'Abolition de la Vivisection, have over 750 doctor members from 43 different countries.
Furthermore, in a survey carried out last year, over 88 percent of British doctors agreed that animal experiments can be misleading because of anatomical and physiological differences between humans and animals.
The medical advances cited by Dr. Botting were not developed as a result of animal research, but clinical investigations based on human studies were far more crucial to their development.
For example, the discovery and development of anaesthesia did not involve animals at any stage.
Concerning investigation into the conditions endured by animals in laboratories, the facts speak for themselves.
Photographic evidence, film and documents have shown the appalling suffering routinely inflicted on over three million animals every year in Britain alone.
Undercover workers have witnessed gentle beagle dogs living in barren concrete pens deprived of any bedding, toys, social contact or external stimulation of any kind.
The animals' food often contains toxic test substances or they may be forced to swallow huge capsules or have toxic creams rubbed into their raw skin.
In another case investigators filmed a rabbit regaining consciousness during experimental surgery due to inadequate anaesthetic being administered.
These are not isolated examples.
The lesson in history is simple.
Experimenting on animals causes suffering and distress.
Animal research has proved of little value in the past and will continue to hinder medical progress in the future.
Clare Lothian, BUAV, 16a Crane Grove, London N7 8LB.
The diary
WELCOME TO THE COLLEGE
TWENTY-NINE students and staff from the Lycée Victor Grignard in Cherbourg have taken part in the third annual exchange with Alton College.
The French students visited Alton, Winchester and London during their week's stay, and attended classes with their hosts.
The return visit will take place in September, when students will visit classes and undertake research for AS and A level projects.
The French students commented on the relaxed and friendly atmosphere in the college and were envious of what seemed to them to be very small classes.
They also liked the spacious layout and the fact that there were no tall buildings on the campus.
RELAY TEAMS NEEDED
THE Spastics Society are looking for teams of 10 to 14 runners to take part in their Rugged Rugby Relay Race along the South Downs Way on Sunday, June 7th.
The South Downs Way runs from Queen Elizabeth Country Park, near Petersfield, to Alfriston in East Sussex and the first team will start at 6.30 a.m.
The society are hoping companies, groups or clubs will get together and raise money to help people with cerebral palsy.
A reception will be held for the runners and their supporters at the English Wine Centre.
For further details contact Anne Halifax on 1273 600235 or Janet Blann on 0329 825336.
AIMING TO BEAT DIABETES
ALTON Lions are to play their part in a worldwide campaign to help diabetics — they are offering a screening test at this year's Alton Carnival.
With help from the Red Cross and backing from the Health Centre, the Lions will be manning the screening unit at Anstey Park on May 25th.
FAMILY TICKETS FOR SURREY SHOW
MANY families and groups are paying more than they need to get into the Surrey County Agricultural Show — the UK's largest one day — on Bank Holiday Monday, May 25th.
Families can save £4 on the standard admission charge for two adults and two children by buying a £15 family ticket in advance.
These are now available by mail or to personal callers at the show society's Godalming office.
Once the offices move to the Guildford Stoke Park showground in the three  weeks prior to the day of the show, tickets may be bought from her right up until 4 p.m. on the day before.
The Agricultural Society are particularly keen to hear from cycling organisations this year as part of their campaign to encourage more visitors to cycle to the showground.
Further information from Juliet Lance 
‘LET'S GO FOR A WALK’
THE programme of guided summer walks arranged each year by Hampshire County Council gets into its stride on May 1st.
There is a choice of over 260 walks exploring 85 different areas throughout the country.
They vary from two-mile rambles to 12-miles hikes, and led by volunteer guides from parish councils, local history societies, The Ramblers Association, and county council staff.
The walks have been arranged to cater for all age groups, with a few designed for those with limited walking ability, and some have been planned to link with bus routes.
In addition to the normal walking events this summer there is a section giving details of guided mountain bike rides.
With the increasing popularity of this hobby it is important that users know where they can legally ride, say the county council.
OPEN AIR POOL OPENING
THE stall to raise funds for the Petersfield open air pool, which pitched outside Lloyds Bank recently, made.
The organisers than those who provided and bought cakes.
The pool will be opened on Sunday and there will be an Easter egg hung at 2.30 p.m.
A DAY OUT ON THE BYPASS!
THE opening of the Petersfield bypass is expected to be cause for celebration but two charities have already swung into action by arranging a joint fund-raising day before the road opens.
The Petersfield Road Show is to be staged on Sunday, May 31st, at the Petersfield Business Park (Bedford Road industrial estate).
Joint organisers the Spastics Society and the Cancer Research Campaign promise a day of fun for the family when people of all ages will be challenged to travel 12 kilometres of the unopened bypass using any form of non-motorised travel, the crazier the better.
Money raised will be shared between the two charities.
If you wish to take part contact Bridget West on Petersfield 61402 or Simone Enefer on 0293 533322.
BREAKTHROUGH NEED YOUR HELP
BINSTED resident Judith Stephens, who recently launched a One Hundred Club to raise money for Breakthrough, is appealing for more support.
Breakthrough are a new charity set up after the death of Daily Express woman's editor Jean Rook to provide funds for research into breast cancer in women.
The devastating effect of the cancer on friends and their families persuaded Mrs. Stephens to support Breakthrough, who are seeking to find 15,000 people who will each raise £1,000.
Her way of doing this is to organise a monthly lottery.
She already has 70 people will to pay just £2 per month for ten months, half of which will go to Breakthrough, and the rest to provide prizes, and she needs just 30 more to make the One Hundred Club work.
‘It seems a shame to have got so far and to be stuck on the last few,’ said Judith, who can be contacted on 0420 22108.
MEN WANTED FOR DRAMA GROUP
NO sooner has the curtain fallen on Winton Players' production of Arsenic and Old Lace than plans are already underway for their next production to be staged at the Festival Hall, Petersfield, in October.
This will be the powerful American drama All My Sons by Arthur Miller.
In common with most amateur drama groups Winton Players suffers from a lack of male actors within the mid-20 to mid-30-year-old range.
They would like to hear from any men who are in, or can portray this age group.
They are also happy to teach the skills of set design, construction and painting.
Tony Farnell, producer, On Liss 893980 or 894693, or Heather Maybury, secretary, on 0428 607909 can provide more information.
POPULAR THEATRE OPEN DAY
THE recent Open Day at the Kings — the Southsea playhouse — attracted over 450 people.
After a welcome and introductory talk by Sylvia Townson, the theatre's public relations officer, visitors were able to wander all over the Edwardian building with most grabbing the chance to stand behind the footlights for a thespians'  eye view of the ornate auditorium.
The energetic were encouraged to climb to the gallery and take advantage of seeing the six-sided tower room from where they had views of the whole of Portsea Island and beyond.
A donation of £260 from the proceeds of the tombola stall and refreshment/poster sales has been handed to the theatre by the Friends who have already made plans for a repeat performance in the autumn.
FIND THOSE OLD SPECS
HELP the Aged and Boots Opticians are asking you to look out for your old spectacles.
They could change the life of an elderly person in a developing country where failing eyesight is a serious problem made acute by disease, poverty and limited healthcare.
Elderly people are particularly prone to eyesight problems.
Take them into your local Boots Opticians.
Each pair handed in before June 13th entitles you to a £20 voucher against any purchases of £60 or more on a new pair form Boots.
Want to help wildlife?
NEW helpers are needed to protect a Hampshire Wildlife Trust reserve between Selborne and East Tisted.
Noar Hill is an area of downland and disused chalkpits and its flowers, butterflies and birds attract many visitors.
During the summer weekends and bank holidays a locally organised ‘voluntary wardening scheme’ comes into action.
A member of that group, Lynn Fomison, told the Herald: ‘No special skills or knowledge are required.
Just a willingness to be available for a few hours to suit you — within an agreed rota — to walk around the reserve helping people enjoy their visit and also avoiding problems of pressure on sensitive reserve areas.’
A special event is being staged on Friday, April 24th for nature lovers and potential helpers.
There will be a walk around the reserve at 6.45 p.m., starting at the bottom of the northerly track, followed by slides and a talk at Selborne Village Hall.
Anyone interested in finding out more about helping the voluntary wardening are invited to pop along next week or phone Lynn on 0962 772251.
Introducing Samuel James Dobson, first child of former Deadwater Valley Trust warden Nora and her husband Martin.
Samuel, weighing in at 8lbs 2ozs, was born at the Louise Margaret Hospital, in Aldershot on April 2nd.
The family live in Bordon.
Basingstoke and North Hampshire Medical Trust have hosted a special reception evening launching phase two of the keyhole surgery appeal.
Pictured are consultants Myrddin Rees and Colin Jardine Brown, trustee Lady Fraser and keyhole patient Gordon Stockham cutting a cake celebrating ten years of fundraising achievements and the genesis of the new project.
Over the past decade the trust have raised more than £1.5 million, which has bought new equipment for the health service ranging from a tumour locating device and an ultrasound baby scanner to a cataract surgery laser and the CT Scanner.
Married recently at Alton Register Office were Lisa Elaine White, eldest daughter of Mr. and Mrs. E. White of Anstey Lane, Alton and Stephen Robert Christmas, eldest son of Mr. and Mrs. P. Christmas of Beech.
Following a reception for 80 guests at All Saints' Hall, Alton the couple left for their honeymoon in Margate.
THE SOUND OF SUCCESS
Top award for talented young Emma
EMMA Gordon, aged 15, of Netherfield Close, Alton has won a national music prize through her Grade VII piano exam.
Her achievement of 144 points out of a possible 150 tied with those of a boy from the choir school at Durham as the highest marks recorded at the grade in the Associated Board of the Royal Schools of Music's most recent examining period.
Emma, who has been studying piano with Teresa Ardagh Walters at Holybourne Vicarage for about 18 months, also plays the cello and is a member of the Hampshire county string training orchestra.
She started piano lessons at about the age of six, although in her early years her musical interests were more in the direction of ballet.
A fourth-year pupil at Amery Hill School, Alton, she also enjoys writing.
As yet undecided in which direction she wishes to make her future career, Emma is now studying for her Grade VIII piano exam — the highest level in the series.
The prize, one of the Sheila Mossman awards for piano, is given in each examining period to the highest achievers at the top three grades.
Sheila Mossman, who as part of the lifetime career in the service of music was an examiner with the board, died in 1971.
Emma Gordon, practising hard for her next piano exam, with her teacher Teresa Ardagh Walters.
Exploring the emotions of immortality
IT was the idea that he could offer comfort to others in bereavement which inspired John Johnson, of Winchester Road, Four Marks, to have his collection of prose and poetry published.
As one with a consuming interest in spiritual matters for most of his 74 years, and with a great deal of experience of communicating with those who have ‘passed over’, he presents an optimistic view which, he hopes, will appeal to the general public.
The death of Margot, his wife of 42 years, in October 1990 inspired him to put forward his writings for publication, and the collection The Touch of Immortality, is about to go on sale.
In fact the writings span a period of many years.
‘I remember the very first piece I wrote I sent to a friend during the war,’ Mr. Johnson told the Herald.
‘He lost it, and all I can remember was that it was about a star.’
When he started ‘writing in earnest’, after the war when he also joined a club for the hard of hearing which had a great effect on his life, he at first concentrated on prose, turning to the medium of poetry about 20 years later.
This is now the form he prefers —‘you can say a lot in a poem with a very few words’— and he writes ‘whenever I feel in the mood’.
The work explores, sometimes very poignantly, an investigation of the emotions of one who has been progressively deaf from the age of four, and who lost his mother at the age of two.
His spiritualist interest began in late teens, and colours much of the work — notably an interesting poetic story about how he made a promise with a friend that whichever of them was first to the ‘other side’ would attempt to communicate to the other — and how it happened.
This experience, Mr. Johnson said, was ‘wonderful — not only because he communicated with me, but because he kept his promise.’
The Touch of Immortality, by John B. Johnson, is published by Excalibur Press and is available through bookshops, price £5.95.
The Doctor column…
WE are taking a break from the usual weekly notes provided by the Herald's doctor and from next week will introduce rather less frequent information under the heading of Family Health.
CHURCH SERVICES
Friday Focus
Why we call it GOOD Friday
WHICH IS THE FIRST day of the week?
Increasingly people will tell you it is Monday, and most diaries and calendars would confirm that assumption by relegating Saturday and Sunday to the ‘weekend’.
But for Christians Sunday has been the first day of the week ever since the faith came into being.
Long before there was a day called Sunday (named by the Romans after the sun) the ancient Israelites numbered their days one to six, rounded off by the rest day (Sabbath).
It was on Day six, before the Sabbath, that Jesus was executed.
Much later in European history that day was named after the Scandinavian goddess Freya.
I am often asked why Christians name that black day of Jesus' death ‘GOOD’ Friday.
The answer is partly because of how Jesus behaved on the cross.
Unlike the average victim of the worst death the Romans could devise, he died with prayer and forgiveness on his lips rather than curses and hatred.
Although Good Friday is not the general holiday it used to be, it remains the most emotive day of the Christian calendar, and is celebrated by walks of witness and solemn services.
But the other way this particular Friday can be called ‘good’ is by reading back into it the astounding outcome on the day after the Sabbath — the 1st day of the new week.
Much against their natural inclinations, Jesus's earthly followers were gradually persuaded that far from the Friday being the disastrous and final demise of their hero, by some inexplicable divine miracle he had dealt death itself a death-blow, and had risen from the grave to a new and everlasting life-form.
So convinced were they of this ultimate victory, that ever since Christians have laid down their own lives on the line rather than renounce this hard-won faith.
So the first day of the week was dubbed the Day of Resurrection, the Day of the Lord — and the first Christians gathered for worship on that day.
Eventually the day consecrated by the Romans to the sun was identified with the Jewish first day, and given a Christian interpretation where Christ was referred to as the ‘Sun of Righteousness’.
Not until the 4th Century AD was the concept of rest-day transferred by the church from the Jewish seventh day (Sabbath) to the Christian first day.
Of course it is the thought, not the calculation, that counts.
First day or Last Day, Rest Day or Resurrection Day, the abiding Christian belief is that within three days the worst that humans could do to a man was transformed by the power of divine love into the greatest news story of history: ‘Jesus lives!’
Have a Good Friday, and a glorious Day of Resurrection this week end!
Dennis Webster
Survivors of sex abuse tell their stories, shed their burdens
Rosemary, at forty, told me: I've never been a child
‘I WAS never a child — always an adult.
I want help to discover the real me after all these years.’
A woman in her forties told me this.
It's typical.
The statement is one that many thousands of adults, mostly women, have asked themselves over and again.
They're people whose lives have been shattered by the incest or other sexual abuse that engulfed their childhood and darkened their lives thereafter.
It's not easy to fully understand.
But consider someone whose home has been abused by burglars.
He or she can feel a very real, very deep sense of nausea at the intrusion, and often find that they can no longer regard their house as home.
Imagine, then, if you can, the dark emotions that fill those whose bodies have been the subject of sexual abuse.
The woman in her forties is Rosemary.
‘I've never been a child,’ she told me.
‘Each abuse reminded me that I was worthless and throughout my life events have told me that this was so.’
For Rosemary, the insult on top of all the cruelty is in the fact that forty years had to pass before she was able to find the courage to lift the lid on the private hell that she's bottled up all those years.
For her it had been from the tender age of five, when her own brother and male ‘friends’ of a single-parent family abused her.
Her mother at one time took in a lodger — and she was later to be raped by the man.
At the tender age of six or seven, she was then involved in court action that saw the man go to prison — with Rosemary being taken away to a place of safety, a children's home.
‘I can clearly remember the court and the circumstances.
Young as I was it made a very big impression.
But I didn't know if I'd done something wrong when I was taken away from my mother.’
When eventually the court decided that mother and daughter could be reunited, Rosemary was subsequently staying with friends of her mother, people she came to know as ‘auntie’ and ‘uncle’.
But uncle was to creep down in the night and abuse the little girl he was giving shelter to.
‘I had been threatened by my older brother years before not to tell anyone when he was ‘experimenting’ with me.
He said I would be taken away.
I was four years younger.
What could I say?
Who would have believed me?
And I didn't know if it was bad what he was doing or if it was normal.
‘I kept all the abuses bottled up.
When my mother's landlord, who was having an affair with her, abused me, I said nothing.
Just bottled it up with the other terrible things — blocked it out of my life and my mind.
‘But over all the years, I went on with the pretence — putting on a face, or faces, pretending that life was ‘normal’.
I came to believe that I had been responsible for those terrible things, that I was to blame, that I must be very bad.
‘And I became worthless in my own eyes.
Utterly worthless.’
Sally-Ann, unlike Rosemary, finds it a struggle and bitterly hurtful to dredge up her dreadful past — like Rosemary she has believed herself to be a doormat in society; like Rosemary she has not known a childhood.
At about 30, Sally-Ann is a shattered human being whose innocence evaporated at a very early age.
A broken, abused child and raped teenager, subsequent experiences with drink, drugs and prison plus a broken marriage, have left her a shattered adult with no belief in herself and no real will to do more than exist.
Sally-Ann's father was strict.
What physical relationship he had with her two brothers and a sister she couldn't be sure, but for her, the sexual abuse started at seven.
‘It went on until I was thirteen — and a neighbour was also abusing me when I was a young girl.
I used to run away from home — couldn't tell anyone what was happening and never did.’
Little Sally-Ann's life was pure hell.
She constantly felt the need to get out of the house and go somewhere, anywhere…but always she would return to be punished, because there was nowhere.
Her cruel circumstances conspired to put her into a remand home at 14 — and from there she went to an adolescent unit, until the age of 17.
Jenny found it very painful to recall the detail of her own dreadful childhood, and like all the others mentioned, her real name has not been revealed.
For Jenny, and most other women who have seen themselves as only ‘victims’, first disclosures to other people — strangers like me — of the black torment they have kept grimly to themselves, makes them begin to recognise that they are actually ‘survivors’.
It's in fact a step forward.
If the mental torture is always there, the physical hurt and threat is, for most, behind them.
With the right help the struggle to self-dignity and a life with some real personal quality can take shape.
Having confidence in any  proffered help is the key.
Trained and experienced counsellors are the people the emerging survivor most urgently needs.
Doctors, maybe?
Psychiatrists?
‘No,’ the women have all said.
‘They may be sympathetic and may want to try to help, but we know that they treat the symptoms and not the cause.’
Some more personal stories, told hesitantly to me…
Jean is right now making a go of a job that is about caring for others and often in emergency situations.
it has career potential.
All of which adds up to an absorbing daily life and one in which any time that she spends on her own, when she often dwells on her sad past, is kept to a minimum.
Like so many survivors, Jean has been suicidal (calls to The Samaritans are no rarity).
And that today Jean still resorts to cutting herself, reflects her basic lack of self-esteem, as well as her need to try to ‘reach’ someone who will be able to give her the help she so desperately needs.
‘There were seven of us children.
I was abused for the first time at three years old.
My stepfather was strict and didn't let us have friends in the house; he physically abused me but not sexually.
That was my grandfather.’
Not only him, but also her stepbrother.
‘The abuse happened so often that I thought it was normal.
It was only when I was in secondary school and took notice of the relationship of children of my age were with their parents and families, that I realised how other people behaved.
I can remember my confusion.
I had kept all the abuse that had been happening to me very much to myself — it seemed to me that I must have been very bad.
I hadn't known how to explain what had been happening  even if I'd dared to.
Who would believe me?
What would they think?’
Jean went quiet.
Rosemary spoke her thoughts.
‘You felt you were shit.’
Jean nodded.
Rosemary: ‘You can keep the lid on so tightly.
It's the only way you feel you can survive as a child.’
Jean left home at 16 and went to live with a friend.
But the damage that she had suffered and lack of any measure of a consistently decent upbringing saw Jean turn to drink and drugs.
Penny's story was equally bravely told.
She referred to the bestial man who fathered her as ‘him’ and never ‘father’.
The man had a tough upbringing and, she believes, had almost certainly been abused himself.
Saying that she hated most of her childhood memories, Penny, now in her late 30s, referred to the five children in the house — including three girls.
‘We all had a pecking order — there wasn't just sexual abuse but physical and emotional too.
‘His job was a working class one that anyone could have done, and when he couldn't cope with any area of his life, he would take his frustrations out on us.
‘Each of my sisters — one of them without realising it — were used as emotional weapons against me to get what he wanted in the way of sex.
‘He chose to favour us one at a time and the others were left out in the cold.
So we grew up always competing for attention, no matter what that attention was going to be.’
Their mother was unable to do more than feed the girls and keep them clean; her affection was reserved for the boys, it seems.
Penny left home at 15 and married at 18, having a baby quickly — and after what she says was a fairly happy period of her life, she began to go downhill fast.
A few years ago she was admitted to a mental hospital and drugs kept her in a repressed state.
Jean's innate strength of character saw her fight the condition that she knew to be taking over her life.
Going through life ‘putting on a face’ was no answer, as all survivors recognise.
Penny asked for help but couldn't bring herself to explain the cause of her depression.
The awful truth of Penny's childhood and young womanhood is that the abuse never ended — and someone with the right counselling skills has to help her to unburden herself.
Even after her father had been taken to court for the abuses his family suffered, he quickly began to turn his attention to the girls, including Penny — by then married and seven months pregnant.
‘He asked me to let him have his way with me.
He said that as I was pregnant, what did it matter?’
All of the  women who have told their stories so bravely are now meeting as ‘survivors’.
Some are finding it easier to talk about their past as each weekly get together follows the last.
Others, for any of many reasons, have been unable to say much.
Sharing hell can make the recognition of it that little bit more bearable, but it is still hell, and the loneliness and despair, the darkness and confusion, are never far from the surface.
The good news has to be the fact that the subject is at last being discussed openly.
People are becoming with the word incest — although who would guess that an estimated one in four families are believed to have experience of this?
Children's helplines — like the hugely successful NSPCC child protection line, awaken the public to the continuing horror — and to the fact that child victims are tomorrow's adult survivors, whose darkly tormenting secrets have been dangerously suppressed.
Further good news is that more and more survivors are regularly meeting together, often to unburden themselves, sometimes to experience at least the psychological satisfaction of knowing that they're not alone.
For some of these adults, aged from their twenties to forties, expert counselling on a one to one basis is helping them to go a great deal further.
Maybe to lift guilt from bowed shoulders; to put light and hope where there was deep-seated despair; or to so simply and yet so vitally make them know that like any other human being, they are entitled to ‘choice’— and actually have it.
The survivors group meet in Farnham and anyone who identifies with them is urged to get in touch.
Ring Rosemary on Farnham 733855.
Next week, more memories and thoughts from survivors, and further positive news about help that is available.
But if anyone can offer further advice and help, perhaps with details of specialist counselling that's available, please make contact.
Robin Radley
A survivor says:
‘We need people to talk to, people who will listen to us and understand our real needs — and that's not just pills and psychiatric treatment, they only deal with the depression.
‘We need understanding help.
It's so hard when you feel so mixed up — lonely and angry and dirty.
When you feel worthless, useless — and do things often without knowing at the time why you have.
‘We need help to try to become whole people, and to learn to start liking something about ourselves.’
Sally-Ann.
Research to help illness
MEMBERS and guests of Liphook Royal British Legion women's section met on April 7th to hear informative talk on leukaemia by Mr. G. Elsen.
He spoke of the different types and causes of this illness and of the painstaking work of the research team trying to find new ways of treatment.
He also spoke about the Leukaemia Research Fund, founded in 1960, with how the fund was spent internationally and the low cost of administration, mainly due to voluntary help.
In lighter tone the Mad Hatters Tea Party was a great success, raising £88.86 for the national RBLWS birthday scheme.
During the business session a report of the group meeting at Alton was read, with preliminary arrangements for the county fete to be held at Brockenhurst College in August.
The competition for a knitted Easter bunny was won by Mrs. Coyte, second was Mrs. E. Budd, and third Mrs. Jackson.
The next meeting on Tuesday, May 5th, will be an open meeting when Haslemere Youth Band will entertain.
HOMES WILL BE READY IN AUGUST
AFFORDABLE homes in Liphook will be ready for occupation in August.
Walkers using the Portsmouth road will have seen the progress by Downland Housing Association at the Larch Cottage site to provide new homes for rent or at affordable prices for local people.
Contractors are working hard to make certain all the homes will be ready for occupation as soon as possible.
Each property will have two bedrooms and 20 new homes will be provided by the housing scheme.
Of the 14 flats on offer, seven will be on a shared ownership basis and seven will be for rent.
The remaining six properties will be houses, three of which will be shared ownership and three will be rented.
Recently East Hampshire District Council have been making some preliminary interviews of local applicants.
Downland Housing Association will be making their selection interviews during the first week in May.
CAB offer the helping hand in village
LIPHOOK'S CAB want people to be aware of a new disability allowance.
For many, having the facilities of a Citizens' Advice Bureau in the village means there is someone who will listen to their problems and offer confidential and expert advice.
Twice weekly the bureau, which uses the parish office at Bohunt on Tuesday from 10 a.m. — 1 p.m. and Wednesday afternoon from 1 p.m. — 4 p.m., is open to anyone who needs their help.
So many people have benefited from its help that this year the parish council have made a grant of nearly £2,000 to see that its work continues in the village.
In the present recession the bureau have helped villagers solve problems with unemployment, homelessness and debt.
They have interpreted new and complex legislation to help families claim additional benefits.
At the beginning of this month a new allowance was introduced and the CAB are anxious local people should be aware of the benefits.
Three conditions
The Disability Working Allowance is intended to help people with an illness or disability who are either already working or starting work.
The amount they will receive will depend on their income or in the case of a couple the income of the partner and the size of the family.
Three conditions apply: the claimant must be in paid working employment for 16 hours or more a week, suffer from an illness or disability which leaves them disadvantaged when applying for a job and must have recently been getting benefit such as income support, housing or community charge benefit.
If you think you could qualify for this allowance or need more information of help in filling in the forms, contact the bureau.
They are certain there must be a number of people who could benefit.
Either visit them at the Bohunt Centre or phone Liphook 725001 or Petersfield 0730 64887.
Protests over entrance to nursing home
THIS month's planning committee meeting was briefly adjourned so that members could hear the comments of Candleford Gate Residents' Association and also members of the public.
Spokesman Mr. Robinson said they were at the meeting to voice their objections to an application by Greenbanks Nursing Home to enlarge its premises.
They told chairman Michael Croucher that it was only by accident they had heard of the proposals and they were concerned that no-one had told them.
‘We bought our homes on Barratt's Candleford Estate because we wanted to retire to a quiet cul-de-sac in peaceful surroundings’ said a resident.
‘This will change everything.
We do not want the additional noise, traffic and use of our access road.
‘Our objective is to make certain you know we strongly object to this development.
It will create more noise.
The additional traffic will travel over our private property causing increased expense, because we will be responsible for the upkeep and maintenance of the access road.
‘The road is narrow and refrigerated lorries already servicing the nursing home have to reverse down it because of its lack of turning space.’
Another objection was that parking spaces at the home are inadequate, visitors can be seen using our parking spaces or parking in Tower Close, another narrow road.
Additional buildings will mean our light will be considerably curtailed.’
One woman said her property adjoined the nursing home on London Road and she understood the plans included using part of her garden.
She had not been consulted and had no wish to part with any of her land.
Nor did she want a 6′ fence at the side of her house.
Mr. Croucher replied that under the present law it was up to the applicant to notify other people of their intention in writing.
Anyone can make a planning application on any land even if they do not own the land.
Heavy traffic
Thanking the residents for their comments he told them they should write to East Hampshire District Council with their objections and to send a copy to the parish council.
At the reconvened meeting councillors discussed the matter.
Peggy Greaves wanted to know why an entrance from London Road could not be made after the A3 bypass was opened.
Bohunt by a whisker
Close-fought quiz
BOHUNT and Mill Chase pupils vied with each other in a closely-fought end-of-term contest to win a place in the final of a quiz sponsored by Hampshire Racial Equality Council and the county education authority.
Last week a team of four pupils from Mill Chase — Simon Waddell, Elsa Donovan, Elaine Eddey and Georgina Matthews — accompanied by teacher Chris Waller, visited Bohunt for the quiz.
They were welcomed by teacher Mark O'Callaghan and pupils David Lloyd, Claire Linney, Sarah Curry and Jay Kaminski for what turned out to be an even contest with everything depending on the final question.
Bohunt school gave the correct answer and won the contest with the score: Bohunt 28, Mill Chase 24.
The pupils were questioned on their knowledge of the culture and traditions of many countries.
Mr. O'Callaghan said it had been a good contest and the closeness in the result showed how evenly the teams were matched.
Mr. Waller said the aim of the quiz was to promote an awareness of other countries, their traditions, values and culture and that he was sure the pupils had all gained from the event.
The final will be at Cantell School, Southampton.
Bohunt's team will enjoy an evening of entertainment which will include tasting food and listening to the music of many countries.
They will meet Chris Peacock, who will be the celebrity host for the evening.
Winners of the quiz will receive a trophy and prizes, including one for their school.
Contestants line up for the quiz.
Heading for Westminster by canoe!
TWO assistant scout leaders will spend Easter paddling a canoe from Devizes to Westminster in aid of scouts and the Tommy Campaign.
Ralph Buckingham, of Shackleton troop, will be making his first attempt in the marathon 125 mile non-stop race.
Partner Philip Evans, Scott troop, will be trying to improve on his last year's time of 35 hours.
The pair, who are entered in the two-man kayak race, have set themselves a time of 28 hours and should arrive at Westminster at 7.30 p.m. on Saturday.
Liphook scouts have a reputation for competing in this gruelling international race which not only tests canoeing skills, but also endurance.
As well as paddling, they must carry their canoe over locks and re-launch without help from bystanders.
If they get into difficulty they will have the support of two road crews who check on their progress.
The van the teams will be using is provided by Broxhead motors.
Ralph and Philip are looking for local sponsors to donate money to their twin charities.
Ralph can be contacted on Liphook 722891 and Philip on 722212.
The Tommy Campaign aims to raise £3million this year, it is based at St. Thomas's Hospital, London, and its objectives are to help babies to be born healthy and to promote the value of parenthood.
DOROTHY STANDS DOWN
AT THE annual general meeting of Liphook Civil Service Retirement Fellowship, Dorothy Vaughan stepped down from the chair.
Dorothy was a popular chairman who put in much hard work during her six years.
Altogether she had served on the committee for 11 years.
A presentation was made by Dr. Alan Wilson, who succeeds her as chairman.
Dorothy saw wartime service in the Woman's Land Army, first in the timer corps and then as a tractor driver.
In 1948 she joined the Department of Employment in the Ministry of Labour.
Then Dorothy became head of office staff training managing and tutoring on interview techniques and management skills.
She took early retirement in 1980.
Dorothy Vaughan had other local interests.
She has been a member of the Bramshott and Liphook community Care Group since it started and is now on the executive committee.
A look back at village history
FLORA Thompson enthusiasts might like to know about a reprint of a 56-page guide of Liphook written by her and which is certain to become a collector's item.
Bramshott and Liphook Preservation Society have broken new ground with their latest publication reproducing a copy of the 1925 Guide to Liphook and its outlying villages.
In 1925 Flora was living in the village with her postmaster-husband and wrote all the text of the guide for local publisher F. Williams.
Apart from his name nothing more is known about the publisher other than he lived in the village and the preservation society are hoping local people reading the re-print will be able to give more details.
At the time of writing the guide Flora's knowledge and love of Liphook's countryside and footpaths was well-known.
The publisher refers to her ‘splendid descriptions of this charming part of England’.
Her descriptions tell of a village changing slowly to a motorcar age, and perhaps forecasts the future in references that smithies have been replaced by garages and advertisements for petrol from the ‘golden pump’.
Shopkeepers
In reprinting the guide in full, the preservation society have included the 14 original photographs and the 46 adverts, a fascinating reminder of traders and shopkeepers.
There were grocery shops who blended tea, sold afternoon tea dainties and made daily deliveries.
Of all the shops and businesses in the guide only WA Coytes is still trading.
The society have made just one addition to the guide.
For modern reference it has included centre pages which give useful notes which enables 1992 readers to pin point the location of the original advertiser.
Anyone wanting to buy a copy, only 100 were printed and of these twenty were sold on the day of publication.
Copies can be obtained from Sesame Health Shop in The Square, Liphook and Homecrafts in Station Road, price £3.
THE ROLLS BROKE DOWN!
PARENT AND VINTAGE CAR SAVE NIGHT
WHAT could have been a disastrous start for fifth-year pupils at Bohunt School to the social event of the school year was averted by quick-thinking and the help of a parent.
The pupils, Andrew Pickett, Zammo Collins, Helen Pawsey and Spencer Windebank, had promised their friends that they would arrive in style for the end-of-term prom and decided on a cream Rolls-Royce.
On the evening of the prom the Rolls broke down.
But to make certain no one 's evening was spoilt, Peter Windebank, Spencer's father, chauffeured the young people to the prom in a 1923 bull-nosed Morris Oxford.
This was the third annual school prom the pupil-elected school committee have organised.
And as in previous years the evening was a great success.
Neil Ewing, chairman of the school committee and one of the organisers of the evening gave his own account of the evening.
He said in glowing praise:
‘On Saturday Bohunt School held its annual fifth year ball.
This is the social event of the school year.
It is a dinner to celebrate the end of our five years at Bohunt.
‘The school's multi-purpose hall was turned into a crêpe paper circus tent for the night.
This was entered through a balloon and paper archway.
We settled down to dinner at 8 p.m. and at 10 p.m.
Neil Ewing, the principal organiser, thanked Mr. Foster and the prom committee who organised the evening.
‘We then danced until 11 p.m. when 500 balloons descended onto the dance floor.
The ladies looked resplendent in ballgowns and cocktail dresses.
All the men wore dinner jackets and black ties to complement the style of the night.
‘It was an amazing event organised by Bohunt School Prom Committee.
They are Neil Newing, Nicola Motley, Tamsin Seymour, Peter Mewitt, Anna Hawkins, Catherine Earnshaw, Jamie Hall and Stewart Smith.
‘It was a highly successful and enjoyable evening’ wrote one of the twelve fifth year tutors who were invited.
‘All of the 130 pupils thought that it was a great way to end our five years at Bohunt.’
Andrew Pickett, Zammo Collings, Helen Pawsey and Spencer Windebank get to the prom on time, thanks to help from parent Peter Windebank.
Beware the cowboys
LIPHOOK Civil Service Retirement Fellowship met on election day at the village hall as their usual venue at Liphook Church Centre was being used as a polling station.
Chairman Dr. Alan Wilson warned of the ‘tarmac cowboys,’ contractors who knock at doors and offer to tarmac drives.
They often claim to be working for the council and sometimes have ‘road maintenance’ painted on the side of their lorries.
Recently they have tried to ‘con’ local people, particularly the elderly.
Often the drive surface is just skimmed with tarmac which breaks up in a few weeks.
The speaker at the meeting was Mr. H. Ward, who gave a talk on Wild Flowers Abroad.
The talk was illustrated by slides which showed both wild flowers and their romantic settings.
These included the vineyards of Burgundy, the coast of Amalfi, the slopes of Vesuvius and the classical ruins of the Acropolis.
Jim Bamford gave the vote of thanks on behalf of the fellowship.
The true art of Jenny
BRAMSHOTT and Liphook Arts & Crafts Society again enjoyed a demonstration by Jenny Kennish, of the Royal Society of Miniature Painters, Sculptors and Gravers.
Although she has had no formal training, Jenny does have a great talent.
She has been sculpting flowers, birds and animals for about 12 years.
Jenny took the society through all the processes before and after firing at high temperatures fine porcelain clay.
Each piece is then hand-painted.
Her  tools are basic, comprising a piece of boxwood stick and dental instruments.
She works on commissions to sell at demonstrations and craft fayres.
Anyone interested can see her at work at Wellington Country Park craft fayre at Easter.
The next meeting on Thursday, May 7th at 8 p.m. at Bohunt will be a demonstration of Seascape in Pastels by Roger Dellar.
Visitors are always welcome.
40 very special years for the Bach Society
THIS year the Tilford Bach Society celebrates their 40th anniversary, no mean achievement when music societies throughout the country are faced with increases costs and massive competition from alternative forms of entertainment.
In 1952 Denys Darlow, then organist of All Saints church, Tilford, Barbara Gregory, a member of the church choir, and a group of local enthusiasts had the idea of combining a church with ideal acoustics, with an organist-conductor with a passion for Bach and access to young professional and semi-professional musicians.
Since then many singers now internationally well-known have sung at Tilford.
Older members speak with awe of Janet Baker singing in Bach's B minor mass in 1956, whilst more recently audiences have watched Emma Kirkby and Gillian Fisher progressing from choir, to solo, to international status.
Any list of success stories is bound to omit some favourite voice.
Why not mention Roger Corey-Crump, Ian Partridge, John Shirley-Quirk?
With Denys Darlow's proven ability as a spotter of potential stars one of the pleasures of Tilford is the real possibility that an unknown name on the programme will prove in five or ten years to be very well known.
Perhaps the greatest change in the Tilford Bach Festival occurred some years ago when Denys Darlow realised his aim of producing the sound most familiar to Bach himself, by introducing the London Handel Orchestra which specialises in baroque music played on authentic reproductions of baroque instruments.
Familiar faces from the Tilford Bach Orchestra — Mary Murdoch (oboe), Mary Ryan (flute) and Trevor Williams (violin), were particularly popular, and were followed by new musicians Paul Nicholson harpsichord and Roy Goodman violin, who soon became familiar friends.
This year the London Handel Orchestra have been invited to play at the festival in Hesse — Handel's birthplace.
The Tilford Bach Choir of semi-professional singers from London who gave enormous pleasure at early festivals have now been followed by the smaller and fully-professional choir of St. George's, Hanover Square, where Denys Darlow is director of music.
The first concert of this year's festival on May 14th is given by members of the London Handel Orchestra, and includes works by Vivaldi, and Telemann, and a group of Handel songs setting texts in English, French, German, Italian and Spanish.
Mona Julsrud, the soprano soloist, is well known locally after appearing at Tilford Church, Farnham Maltings and in Godalming, and is returning from her home in Norway for two festival concerts.
Paul Nicholson, harpsichord, is a familiar face in Tilford Church, last seen recently on television as a continuo player with the Choir of 16 in a broadcast from Dublin to celebrate the 200th anniversary of the first performance of Handel's Messiah.
On May 15th Noel Rainbird is soloist with the London Handel Orchestra (conductor Denys Darlow) in a concerto for bassoon and orchestra by Johann Fasch.
Mona Julsrud will sing Bach's cantata No. 84 Ich bin ein guter Hirt, and the concert starts and ends with overtures by Handel and Telemann.
The final day of the festival, May 16th, celebrates 40 years of music in Tilford Church when the programme includes the sonatina to Bach's cantata No. 106 Gottes zeit ist die  allrbeste Zeit, and the Brandenburg Concerto No. 6.
Both these works were played during the first Tilford Bach Festival after which William Mann reviewing the concert in the Times wrote ‘such a Festival in such a place does Bach signal homage’.
One unfortunate and totally false legend which has attached itself to the Tilford Bach Festival is the idea that the choir consists of local people.
This has never been the case.
No village however beautiful its river, village green and pub, could hope to produce 16 professional singers of the calibre demanded by Denys Darlow and the composers whose works are performed.
The idea also remains that ‘you can never get tickets for Tilford’.
In the pioneering days of the festival this was undoubtedly true but in 1992 the quantity and quality of available music has increased enormously and amateurs and professionals vie with one another for audiences.
Pavarotti, on compact disc by the fireside, can sometimes seem more attractive than Farnham Maltings or Tilford Church, but lacks the frisson of seeing a flautist trilling amongst the tombstones or drinking ones interval wine elbow to elbow with a charming soprano.
The Tilford Bach Festival continues to pay homage to J.S. Bach and his contemporaries in a church ideally suited to Baroque music, and a village little changed in appearance since Barbara Gregory and Denys Darlow had their inspired vision 40 years ago.
Tickets for the Tilford Bach Festival, priced £8 and £5.50, are available from Helen Malyon 02518 2167, the New Ashgate Gallery, Waggon Yard, Farnham or, if available, at the church door before each concert.
Village cool on the bypass scheme
PLANS for a Selborne bypass have been quashed.
Villagers attending the annual parish meeting last week made it clear they were heavily against such a proposal.
Feeling was dead set against the idea of a new road cutting a swathe through the countryside.
The possibility of a bypass was first mooted back in the 1930s, but the notion was recently resurrected as a solution to the picturesque village's traffic problems.
Those problems were somewhat alleviated by the banning of heavy lorries, but residents are sill plagued by the volume of cars following the natural route from the east to such centres as Basingstoke and Reading.
A recent survey showed that at peak times as many as 600 vehicles an hour passed through Selborne.
And it is generally felt that traffic will get heavier when the new A3 Petersfield bypass opens.
Residents not only object to the volume of traffic, but also the speed at which motorists drive through the village.
The defeated bypass proposal was unveiled by parish councillor Edward Lucas.
He saw it as the only realistic long term solution to Selborne's dilemma.
And he believed it was necessary to sacrifice some of the countryside to preserve the rest of the environment.
But after failing to sway villagers attending the annual meeting, he allowed himself to comment: ‘Well, all I can say is good luck to you and your children.’
Second option
A second option to ease Selborne's traffic nightmare is the introduction  of pinch points at either end of the village, with road humps in between to slow drivers down.
This was the idea that found favour with the villagers present and will now be pursued by the parish council with the county roads authority.
The scheme had been put forward by the Selborne Association pressure group who acknowledge, however, that it does have drawbacks.
Although slowing the traffic down it is unlikely to reduce the volume, and the pinch points will result in the tailback of vehicles waiting to get through.
However, there is the possibility that if motorists are sufficiently inconvenienced by the traffic-calming measures, they will seek a quicker alternative route.
And a member of the Selborne Association commented that those measures were the only practical step forward.
Describing a bypass as ‘pie in the sky’ the spokesman said it would take years to achieve while action was needed now.
‘Let's at least try to solve the immediate problem with a practical step that has been proven in other parts of the country,’ he said.
And another resident was in favour of any proposal that would slow the traffic down.
‘If we could just cross the street safely I don't care what we do.
‘At the moment it's very dangerous, you can't see traffic approaching because of the bend.
You can only listen, step out into the road and take your chances.’
Mr. I Jones and Miss P. Welford
MARRIED recently at All Saints Church, Alton, were Paula Louise Welford, youngest daughter of Beryl Osborn and the late David Welford and Eric Osborn (stepfather), of Kings Road, Alton, and Ian Andrew Jones, youngest son of Arnold and Rosemary Jones of Birmingham.
The Rev. Malcolm Surman conducted the service.
The bride, who was given away by her step-father, wore a full-length satin and lace dress with train, embroidered with pearls and sequins, and lace edged veil held in place with pearl headdress.
She carried a bouquet of red roses, gold freesias, gypsophila and cream carnations.
The attendants were Martina Fosbury, chief bridesmaid; Claire Jones, niece of the bridegroom; Jason Osborn and Mark Higginbottom, nephews of the bride.
The bridesmaids wore white satin dresses trimmed with pearls and sequins with Alice band flower trimmed head-dressed.
Martina carried a posy and Claire a basket of similar flowers to the bride.
The pages wore morning suits.
The best man was Keith Stephen Jones, brother of the bridegroom.
After a reception at The Swan Hotel, Alton, the couple left for their honeymoon in Florida, the bride wearing a floral dress with gold jacket and flower from the veil in her hair.
Ian is a consultant for a computer company and Paula is in the accounts department of another computer company.
Their hobbies are badminton and walking.
The couple will be making their home in Fleet.
Thieves strike at caravan park
BURGLARS targeted the Broadway Caravan Park at Petersfield last week.
A shed was broken into some time between Thursday night and Friday morning and electrical tools worth £100 were stolen.
On Saturday the owner of another shed at the caravan park discovered that it had been entered and a fishing rod and other fishing equipment, worth £120, was taken.
The Pinewood Youth Club youth committee pictured at a meeting on Monday with youth workers Sue Hornsby and Kevin Howpett (left and second right) and Val Bethell (third left).
Club secretary Barry Dumycz is fourth right with (left to right) Gary Sturge, Lewis Whitworth and Karen Sturge.
The new venture opens after Easter at Bordon's Barbados House and Mrs. Bethell is chairman of the management committee.
The club will meet weekly on Mondays from 7.30 p.m. to 9 p.m. at Bordon's community arts centre until the new village hall off the A325 is built, probably in the autumn.
It's for young people aged 12 to 17 years, and isn't necessarily for Pinewood Village residents — anyone interested from the whole locality would be welcome.
The youth committee include about half from Pinewood Village and half from the rest of Bordon.
Mrs. Bethell said it was up to the youth committee to decide what they wanted.
But those just wanting a quiet chat and a cup of coffee will be catered for as well as those wanting to take part in activities.
Rehearsals begin in earnest for the Holybourne Players' production of Bang, Bang, Beirut — a farce by Ray Cooney and Tony Hilton, which opens on Friday, May 1st and continues on Saturday 2nd, Friday 8th and Saturday 9th May, beginning at 7.45 p.m.
Tickets are available from the box office at Alton Community Centre.
News from Alresford
Generosity, team effort and sheer  perseverance 
The Soke opened after years of hard work
THE unveiling of a plaque by the Mayor of Winchester, Captain Richard Bates, at the area close to Alresford Pond known as The Soke, on Saturday, marked the end of 15 years' endeavour by the Alresford Society.
Society chairman Col. David Hanson paid tribute to Roy Robins who had been the driving force behind the environmental improvement.
Without his generous donation, his determination, and his enthusiasm, which had kept everyone working, it is unlikely, said Col. Hanson, that the project would ever have been completed.
Protests
The story began in 1977, when an application was made by the brewery owning The Globe Inn, to demolish the derelict Pond View Cottages attached to the pub, to provide a car park.
The Alresford Society made strong protests, and the application was refused.
There was nothing that the parish council could do, as at the time much of the area was within Old Alresford.
An appeal against refusal to demolish was also rejected after evidence given by members of the society.
In 1979, a further appeal to the Department of the Environment was also refused.
For the next four years the society put pressure on the brewery to save the cottages and improve the frontages.
At the same time a case was made to the Boundary Commission to bring the area wholly into New Alresford.
Plans to incorporate the cottages into The Globe were made by the brewery in 1983, but were eventually abandoned in 1987.
Meanwhile, Raymond Elliott of the Alresford Society had prepared a draft improvement scheme and consultation had taken place with the town trustees and the parish council.
Pressure was then put on both Winchester City Council and Hampshire County Council for improvement of the area, and protection of the cottages, pending repair.
The cottages were sold to a developer who renovated them, but did not include the frontages.
At this stage the society acknowledged they would have to undertake any work themselves.
Architect Chris Butt and engineer Tony Ward were approached and a meeting set up in 1988 included them as well as city council and county council officers.
The society's scheme, the cost of which was estimated at £15,000, was eventually accepted and the town trustees and the parish council both agreed to give financial support of £500.
Hampshire County Council gave a grant of £1,500 and the city council of £4,900.
A most generous contribution was made by the society's first chairman of 26 years ago, Peter Lyndon-Skeggs, and other donations were made by members and those whose properties fronted The Soke, bringing contributions to more than £16,000.
The main work began in November, 1990 being the cobbled surface in front of the cottages and a greatly improved walkway to the pond, beginning on the opposite side of the road.
This was completed last spring.
The area close to the pond was owned by county councillor Peter Constable Maxwell and the Maxwell Family Trust, but the family generously not only made the land available at no charge, but also paid for the landscaping closest to the pond.
At the ceremony on Saturday, the Winchester city and county council officers who had been involved in the project were present with New Alresford parish councillors, the chairman of Old Alresford Parish Council, members of the Maxwell family, and of the Alresford Society.
In congratulating them on their achievement, the mayor said how good it was to hear city and county councillors being thanked for their part in a job.
He then paid tribute to the Alresford Society, pointing out that when they started pushing for environmental improvements in the 1970s, it was before conservation had come into fashion.
He warmly congratulated them on their foresight.
With this successful venture now under their belts, the Alresford Society are turning their attention the pond itself, and considering the possible replacement of the ‘shettles’, the ancient and now dilapidated sluices that control water flow from the pond.
This, of course, will require much planning, talking, the involvement of local authorities, water authorities, conservation groups and local people, and yet more Alresford sheer  perseverance from the Alresford Society.
Steering the super-bed through town
THE smart navy uniform of the Alresford  Quadrilateral Division of St. John Ambulance were exchanged last Saturday for clown costumes and brilliant wigs for the third annual bed-push to raise funds.
The bed was specially constructed by member Graham Curtis, who used an old bedframe mounted on mini-sized bicycle wheels, with the added touch of luxury — a means of steering.
Since the bed was built, it has been used not only by the division, but also by other charities, and to date it has helped in raising £700.
The clown costumes were made by Marion Linington.
The group of officers, cadets and badgers set off from Broad Street pushing their bed with 16-year-old Glyn Matthews inside dressed in bonnet and nappy.
They called at the station car park and they then did a circular of Alresford, raising around £62.
Field trip fossils on display
ALMOST every member of the Wessex Lapidary Society was present at their April meeting in the annexe of Old Alresford Place on Tuesday evening last week.
Fossils from the club's recent field trip to the Isle of Wight were on display, and secretary Frank Rhodes was thanked for his help in arranging this enjoyable outing.
John Harper then gave a talk on the various lead minerals, showing several examples, some of which he had collected in Cumbria.
Society members are drawn from all over the region, some travelling many miles for the monthly meeting at Old Alresford Place, where the facilities have helped the society re-launch in the Alresford area.
ACORN AWARD FOR BARRY
ONE of the highest decorations in scouting, the Silver Acorn, was awarded last week to Barry Ockenden, Alresford assistant district commissioner (leader training).
The presentation was made at the Four Marks scout headquarters, by the Hampshire county commissioner, Capt. Michael Everitt.
Mr. Ockenden lives in Thorn Lane, Four Marks and his presentation was attended by scouters from all the groups in the district, the district chairman Derek Drew, and members of the executive committee.
Alresford district commissioner David Harvey spoke of Barry's life in scouting since 1949.
Since then he has held a number of positions both in this country and abroad while serving with the RAF.
As a result of the award, Mr. Ockenden will be attending the St. George's Day parade and service at Windsor this year, in the presence of the Queen.
During the evening the county commissioner also presented the wood badge to Jill Corbett, assistant district commissioner (beavers) and Sonia Barber, assistant cub scout leader, Four Marks.
Wild flowers in close up detail
TAKE a magnifying glass when going on walks, said Harold Wakeford, the welcome return guest of the Alresford and District Horticultural Society, at their April meeting in the John Pearson Hall.
This way, he said, they could examine the smallest of blooms — even chickweed.
A gardener for 62 years, Mr. Wakeford on this occasion turned his enthusiasm to wild flowers.
Only a few thousand of the 250,000 different varieties of wild flowers have been named, he explained.
There are 20,000 varieties of wild daisy alone.
He showed some incredible coloured slides giving close-up detail of petal formation and patterns not often seen by the naked eye.
Flowers such as the ox-eyed daisy, poppies, lords and ladies, stitchwort, speedwell, herb Robert, white yarrow and blackberry toad flax were shown along with pictures of dew-laden spiders' webs draped on flowers.
All these pictures were accompanied by Mr. Wakeford's natural wit, which combined with his obvious joy over his discovery of wild flowers.
Planning and research to maintain village stream
THE Restoration and maintenance of the village green and its stream had been a major project for the year, it was noted at the Old Alresford Parish Council's recent annual general meeting in the Christy Hall.
A considerable amount of planning and research had gone on, and help had been received from Green Space, a group sponsored by Hampshire County Council.
With the help of village resident Air.
Commodore G. Paul, plans of the drainage under the green had been made for future reference.
It was reported that signs about dog fouling, and notes for motorists who park on the green pointing out that the car park should be used, are now available.
It is hoped that once building work at Manor Farm has been completed, there will be a considerable reduction in the amount of traffic along the Brook.
Newsletter
Early in the year, flooding of the road at the northern end of the village had been a grave problem, but after a great deal of pressure on the authorities, the matter had been successfully resolved.
The village Neighbourhood Watch scheme is now fully operational, thanks to Clifford Watts who has taken on overall responsibility.
He also produces the village newsletter which is funded by the parish council.
A cheese and wine party had been held for the voluntary emergency wardens, whose services will be required in the event of prolonged power cuts or other major crises.
The helpful advice received from the Electricity Board, had been passed on to them.
Both the Winchester Housing Trust and the St. Mary Church Association had had their plans for low cost housing in the village refused.
St. Mary's are appealing against the decision but it is understood the housing trust are considering an alternative site.
The new sewage plant in Kiln Lane, with which residents had ‘not been overjoyed’, was now working more efficiently and has been landscaped with fencing, shrubs and ivy.
Application had been made for a Winchester city grant to be spent on improving heating in the village hall.
Footpaths
Chairman Mrs. Williams thanked her fellow councillors for their work and support.
Earlier she had welcomed Philip Tickner, who had been elected last summer to the vacancy left by Suzannah Hardman.
Joyce Shearman, the clerk, then presented the accounts.
The usual monthly council meeting followed, and Jill Francis said that a village footpath walking weekend had been arranged for July 4th to 5th.
Philip Tickner reported on planning applications, saying that the request to convert a barn at Pingleston into part living accommodation had been refused, and that application has been made to replace a bungalow at Godsfield, with a four bedroomed house.
 A report of the recent hall management of committee was given by John Barratt who presented the committee's accounts for the year.
Councillors said they were unhappy with the way the village green had been cut by Winchester City Council.
It was agreed to put the complaint in writing to the city council, particularly as the parish are charged £17 an hour for the work.
A request had been received to have bus tokens supplied by the city council in the village, each week, instead of having to travel to New Alresford or Winchester.
 It was agreed to request this facility, in line with other villages, for either a Tuesday or Thursday morning.
School's moving concert to welcome spring
THE pupils of Sun Hill Junior School, Alresford gave a spring concert on two evenings last week before an audience of parents and friends.
The presentation was divided into three sections, the first being instrumental.
The school orchestra played Trip Dance, Portsmouth, An English Country Garden.
The recorder group played a polka and the orchestra returned with The Vienna Waltz.
Then 54 of the older pupils who recently took part in a five-day visit to Ironbridge, Shropshire, described all that they had learned, with readings, slides and models.
The third and final section of the evening was choral.
A parent, Keith Cark, had rehearsed the Easter music, Jerusalem Joy, with the school choir.
Head teacher John Sweeney conducted this on the first evening, and Mr. Cark conducted on the second.
The story of the Lord's Passion was told in the songs Jesus Road a Donkey into Town, Get out of God's House, Isn't it wonderful Eating with Jesus, Tell us Jesus, and the tumultuous He is Risen, in a magnificent and moving performance.
The narrative was sensitively read by Jonathan Shannon.
FOUR MARKS
MODEL ENDEAVOUR
YOUNGSTERS at Four Marks Primary School took to the cat walk last week to raise £208 for new playground equipment.
The fashion show, courtesy of New Look of the High Street, Alton, was split into two sections, displaying formal and casual wear.
Over 50 models, some from the school, and two confined to wheelchairs, enjoyed the experience, showing clothes designed for teenagers through to middle age, and ‘all at affordable prices,’ reports 15 year old, Sarita Creese-Smith.
New Look, who have 110 stores in southern England and Wales, also have four shops in France and are hoping to expand yet further into Europe by the end of 1992.
ROPLEY
PLAYGROUND DILEMMA
ROPLEY Parish Council have reached ‘a crossroads’ in their attempts to provide the village with a well-stocked playground.
Much of the existing equipment no longer meets the new British Standard.
The 40-foot slide, for example, is too high and favourites such as the Burmah Bridge and The Rocking Rockett, although virtually new, need adaptation.
Councillors at last week's meeting of Ropley Parish Council were almost in despair.
‘It no longer seems cost effective to provide all this,’ said clerk, Norman Miles.
It was decided to enlist the help of East Hampshire District Council in an attempt to assess how best to tackle the problem.
BUS SHELTER PLAN
ROPLEY residents could soon benefit from a new bus shelter on the A31 at Darvill Road.
Following a request at the annual parish meeting, councillors have agreed to look into the cost of providing a shelter to be sited on an existing area of hard standing.
Another matter raised by the public highlighted the problem of double parking outside the coffee room by the church.
It was hoped that, with more publicity, people would leave their cars at the village hall instead and walk.
Fish and chips are OFF!
Too noisy, too smelly and too busy
ALRESFORD'S hopes for a fish and chip chop in Mitford Road have been dashed.
At a New Alresford Parish Council meeting last week, it was announced that Winchester city planners have turned down the application for change of use on the grounds of noise, odours and increased vehicle movement in a largely residential area.
A meeting with the area planning officer, about the changing hut on the Stratton Bates recreation ground has resulted in him recommending that the hut be replaced with a building of similar size and in the same location.
However, he says that it should be built of brick and slate, access from Rosebery Road should be considered, and there should be 24 parking spaces.
Landscaping should also be an integral part of the planning.
As no car parking exists at present, councillors expressed surprise over the stipulation as the new building would simply be a replacement.
Alresford's recently formed rugby club, who have successfully completed their inaugural season using facilities at Perin's School, have asked the parish council to consider creating a rugby pitch at Arlebury Park.
June Rogers reported that she had had a meeting with parents interested in improving the play area at the Sun Hill recreation ground.
They are prepared to fund raise to provide new equipment.
A letter had been received from Perin's Community School asking the council's reaction to the possible building of a small swimming pool, approximately 8 by 12 metres, which would serve both the school and the local population.
Councillors said that the cost of such a project would be prohibitive, but it was agreed that the chairman, Roy Downham, should attend a meeting with the school.
June Rogers suggested that a roof on the Sun Hill School pool may be the answer to providing an all-year round swimming facility.
The Peaceful Home public house in East Street are offering coffee bar and music facilities to young people at a charge of £40 a night or £60 for three nights, with £15 rental of a juke box and the first month free of charge.
The matter is to be discussed at the next inter-church committee meeting, but meanwhile the meeting felt that a reasonable contribution towards costs could be forthcoming from the council.
Letters of thanks are to be sent to those residents and organisations who helped with the national Spring Clean day, when areas of the town were cleared of rubbish.
Theft from car
A RUCKSACK, containing a personal stereo and other belongings, together valued at £90, was stolen from a car parked in Medstead overnight on Friday.
Legal spokesman fears for the future of magistrate
THE Law and its administration have seen changes in recent years and there are more to come.
For most people their only experience of the law in action is likely to be the local magistrates court.
Changes have already occurred in the administration of the local courts, for example magistrates at Petersfield and Alton have been amalgamated and J.P.s can find themselves working in either court or at Aldershot.
Further changes could close courts.
The regional public relations officer for the Hampshire incorporated Law Society Richard Newson, has fears about the future of the magistrates' courts.
‘We all know about criminal cases and traffic offences, but there are many aspects of the work of the Magistrates Court which do not see the light of day as far as the general public are concerned, for example juvenile and matrimonial cases.
I believe this work and that with which we are familiar are in jeopardy.
Mr. Newman said that he felt that the threatened closure of magistrates courts would mean there is no longer going to be a system of local justice in the country.
‘I feel local justice has been dispensed very successfully over the centuries but we are now increasingly facing the prospect, due entirely in my view to financial pressures, of seeing the closure of many local courts and everything being centralised elsewhere.
‘Administratively matters in Petersfield Magistrates’ Court were dealt with in Alton but from the end of March this work has passed to Aldershot.
The courts will continue to sit at Petersfield and Alton.
We do not know what further centralisation there might be in the future.
‘There must be risks that there could be moves afoot in the not too distant future for the closure of the Petersfield Court.
If that is so I wonder how members of the public who have to go to the magistrates court are going to be able to travel to either Alton or Aldershot to have their cases heard?
Mr. Newman concluded: ‘Imagine perhaps a deserted wife with two children, living on income support.
It is not practical for her to travel to Alton for the hearing of her case, and I believe that genuine hardship is going to result.’
A DASH OF DISNEY
SHOPPERS at Bordon's new Somerfield store were in for a surprise on Saturday, when the supermarket staged a Disney fancy dress competition.
Nichola Mace, aged six, of Weyford Infants School won the final prize for her imaginative Little Mermaid costume.
And Sarah-Jane Hartley and Andrew Harris, both aged seven, were awarded joint second places for their Snow White and Peter Pan outfits.
Store manager David Waring commented: ‘With EuroDisney opening at the weekend it was nice that some of the local children could share in the fun here in Bordon.’
The prizes should keep the winners happily occupied during the Easter break.
Nichola from Bordon received Nintendo Game Boy set and her mother won Somerfield shopping vouchers to the value of £100 for her help with the fancy dress.
And second prizes of Nintendo games were awarded to Andrew of Lindford and Sarah-Jane from Bordon.
Shopping vouchers of £50 were given to their mothers.
Disney comes to Bordon — fancy dress prizewinners Nichola Mace, Sarah-Jane Hartley and Andrew Harris with Somerfield store manager David Waring.
Motorcyclist injured
A CAR and a motorcycle were involved in a collision on the A325 outside Forest Lodge Garden Centre, Holt Pound, at 4.20 p.m. on Wednesday last week.
The motorcyclist, Ian Clague, of Bentley, suffered a broken collar bone.
The car, a Citroen DX, was driven by Leonard Cutler, also of Bentley.
The varied world in a courtroom
MAGISTRATES' Courts have been in existence for hundreds of years, presided over by lay Justices of the Peace (magistrates), that is people who have no legal qualification.
However, magistrates always have the advice of their clerk who must be a qualified barrister or solicitor.
In some cases a Stipendiary Magistrate sits.
He or she is a qualified Solicitor or Barrister and is paid.
Every single criminal case in the country, trivial or serious, starts in the magistrates' court.
Some cases are so serious that they are transferred by the magistrates to the Crown Court.
Thus magistrates deal with what could be called the ‘true’ criminal matters such as murder, burglary, assault etc, and also the various road traffic offences such as speeding, driving without due care and attention, reckless driving etc.
Magistrates also sit as licensing committee dealing with licences granted to public houses, off-licences, restaurants etc. and related matters.
Much of the above work is reasonably well known because the Magistrates' Court is an open court.
This means that not only can members of the public attend the sittings but the press are also entitled to report the proceedings in the newspapers.
However, magistrates have a large amount of work relating to family matters which is heard in private in the Family Proceedings Court.
Magistrates who deal with family matters have been specially trained and are not allowed to sit in the Family Court until that training has been completed.
They do not deal with divorce but they have a very wide authority to deal with matters relating to children and maintenance claims arising from the breakdown of a marriage or relationship.
The Children's Act which came into force In October 1991 means that words like custody and access have gone to be replaced by residence and contact.
If there is a dispute between people as to where  children should live or who is to have contact with the children then magistrates can make the appropriate residence orders or contact orders.
Similarly magistrates can make maintenance orders often against the father for maintenance to be paid to the mother as well as the children.
Care proceedings are dealt with in the Magistrates' Court and can result in children either being taken into care or being released from care.
There are also sittings of the Magistrates' Courts dealing with juveniles.
These relate to criminal charges against those between the ages of ten and 16 years.
(From October 1st, 1992, the Juvenile Court will become known as the Youth Court and will encompass 17-year-olds).
Magistrates sitting in the Juvenile Court must have completed the special training for the Juvenile Panel.
Juvenile Court proceedings can be reported but under no circumstances may any child involved in the proceedings be identified.
There are also various other matters that are dealt with by the magistrates.
If for example the fire officer requires a company to introduce new fire precaution equipment in an office and the owners of the office consider the fire officer is being unreasonable, the owners can appeal to the magistrates to adjudicate on the matter.
Similarly prosecutions relating to water pollution and contravention of planning notices are dealt with in the Magistrates' Court.
There are many different bodies in the country who seek to recover levies from individuals or companies and these matters are invariably dealt with by the Magistrates' Court.
Perhaps the most common example of this is Local Authorities enforcing recovery of the Community Charge.
Motorist banned
A BORDON woman drove home from Four Marks after she had been drinking because she was anxious to get home to her child, Alton magistrates were told.
Twenty-four-year-old Alicia Smith, a single parent who lives at Foxglove Drive, had spent the evening with relatives in Four Marks after attending a funeral in the Slough area.
She had been expecting a lift which failed to materialise, defending solicitor Mark Blundell told the court.
She could not afford to hire a taxi, so decided to take the risk of driving herself home at about 10.30 p.m.
A policeman stopped her in Chawton, where the alcohol in her breath was found to be more than twice the legal limit.
The magistrates fined her £130 and disqualified her from driving for 19 months.
Star name for Dolmetsch Festival
JOHNNY Morris, the zoo man, is to open the 68th Dolmetsch Festival in Haslemere on Friday, July 10th.
This is the result of a joint religious broadcast on Radio 5 with Johnny Morris as narrator and the Dolmetsch Ensemble, led by Dr. Carl Dolmetsch, providing the music.
The programme was devised by a keen supporter of the festival, Canon Geoffrey Curtis, former vicar of Grayswood, the parish of the Dolmetsch family, and much involved in religious broadcasts.
In the Radio 5 broadcast, Johnny Morris was keen to learn more about early music-making and agreed to be guest of honour for this year's festival.
Another bond of interest between the broadcaster and the musicians was Dr. Carl's life-long interest in ornithology.
It is hoped another guest at the festival will be the Deputy Mayor of Le Mans, France, where Arnold Dolmetsch, the founder of early music-making in Haslemere, was born in 1858.
Because of the growing expense of the festival, this year's event is reduced to six days, opening traditionally on the Friday, but ending the following Wednesday.
There will be a family festival concert, and an evening of music and verse in Grayswood Church on Sunday evening, July 12th, with Martin Muncaster as reader.
Concern over the finances of the festival was voiced by treasurer of the Dolmetsch Foundation at the annual general meeting on Saturday.
He said that despite a substantial grant from Lloyds Bank, the event lost £2,000.
They could only hope, that with an improvement in the general financial situation, the position would improve in the coming year.
They had lost members and with them revenue both in this country and overseas.
With help from sympathetic resources they were hoping for a world-wide mailing of leaflets.
The meeting also agreed to increase membership subscription from £12 to £14 and family membership to £20.
In his annual report chairman Anthony Ramsden recalled the showing of the autumn meeting of the film made by local actor, Kieron Moore of The Dolmetsch Story 20 years ago.
There was interest in the film being transferred on to video and the John S. Cohen Foundation had agreed to meet the initial costs.
The film would then be available for members, but details of the costs are not yet known.
The chairman announced that one of the committee, Shelagh Godwin, of Godalming, and a former editor of the foundation's bulletin, has had to resign, but remains a member of the council.
Two new committee members are Elaine Mayer, of Godalming, and John Munro, the new representative of Waverley Borough Council.
He thanked the committee for their support, and especially Greta Matthews for her hard work organising the festival, along with the secretary Elaine Land and the treasurer.
After the business, and before refreshments, the Dolmetsch Ensemble provided members with a short concert, which included at least one item that will be heard at this year's festival.
Petrol stolen
A THIEF walked into Kerridge's service station, Butts Road, Alton last week and took two cans of petrol worth £5.89.
HISTORY OF COWDRAY PARK
Rogate authors Roger Chatterton-Newman and Derek Russell-Stoneham check the first page proofs of their book, Polo at Cowdray, with Steve Hotston (right), partner of Acorn Press, Midhurst.
The book, which traces the history of Cowdray Park Polo Club from 1910, is to be published this season by the Polo Information Bureau at £24.
A HOST OF GOLDEN DAFFODILS
Spring perfection.
A host of golden daffodils near Haslemere's Parish Church provide an oasis of colour in a week of otherwise grey weather.
Give a pet a new chance
PET PLAN, the animal insurance company are supporting the fourth British national pet week May 3rd–9th by giving away insurance policies worth £5,700 under their Adopt-a-Pet scheme.
First introduced in 1989, Adopt-a-Pet aims to highlight the plight of abandoned animals and encourage more responsible pet ownership.
It is being run in conjunction with three of the country's major animal rescue organisations — The National Canine Defence League (NCDL), Battersea Dogs Home and Wood Green Animal Shelters.
Adopt-a-Pet is being run through 28 rescue charity branches across the UK — where the essential work of finding suitable, caring owners is carried out.
Pet Plan, who currently insure over 325,000 animals, are giving away 100 Pet Value policies — which will be presented by the rescue charities to selected members of the public who adopt one of their animals during National Pet Week.
Each of the Pet Value policies — insuring a cat or dog — including one  year's cover for veterinary fees, both conventional treatment and complementary medicines — physiotherapy, acupuncture, herbal and homoeopathic medicine — up to £1,875.
For information, phone on Freefone 0800 282 099.
Britain is renowned for its love of animals — but rescue charities still face the major and heartbreaking problem of abandoned, stray and mistreated pets — on a daily basis.
The RSPCA estimate that the UK has about 500,000 stray dogs on the streets at any one time and that about 1,000 dogs are destroyed every day.
This does not necessarily mean sick animals — many are perfectly healthy, just unwanted.
The number of stray cats is harder to identify — and unknown — but the figure is likely to be of similar proportion.
Looking after Downs
THE new Sussex Downs Conservation Board, which will have responsibilities for 600 square miles of countryside in West and East Sussex, met for the first time last week and elected Baroness Cumberlege as chairman.
The board  have been set up by the Countryside Commission, West and East Sussex Country Councils and the 11 borough and district councils in the area.
They will take on responsibility for countryside management and access in the whole of the Sussex Downs Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty (AONB) between Harting in the west and Eastbourne in the east, and will be consulted on significant planning applications in the area.
Among the board are Mr. L. Clark (Countryside Commission) who lives at Godalming.
He was a member of the Council of the National Trust for 29 years and was nominated by the Youth Hostels Association.
He was chairman of the trust's southern regional committee from 1978 to 1986, and served on the trust's properties and executive committees.
Chairman of the Youth Hostels Trust, a member of the Council for National Parks and the Society of Sussex Downsmen, he was secretary of the Common Land Forum from 1983 to 1986.
Mr. Clark is currently a member of the Department of Transport's Landscape Advisory Committee.
Mrs. J. E. Duncton (Chichester District Council) was born and brought up in Petworth and Upperton.
On leaving school, she worked at the Connaught Theatre, Working, followed by drama school.
She is married to a local farmer and is the proprietor of Osiers Farm Golf Course.
She was elected to Petworth Rural District Council in 1970 and, as a member of Chichester District Council, has served as chairman of the Housing Development Control and Planning Committees.
She is the district council's representative on the National Housing and Town Planning Council and the Chichester and District Housing Association Ltd.
A former chairman of Petworth Parish Council, Mrs. Duncton is also a governor of local schools.
Mr. R. S. Kimmis (Countryside Commission) is a retired civil servant and certified accountant living at Farnham.
He is a member of the South East Council for Sport and Recreation and vice-chairman of the Federation of Sport and Recreation, South East Region.
He is a member of the Council's Executive Committee and Finance and Grant Aid Sub-Committee and his interests include walking, golf, recreation in general and financial administration.
Michael Holdsworth, county secretary of West Sussex, was appointed clerk to the board and Mervyn Hancock, county treasurer for East Sussex was appointed treasurer.
Applications will now be invited for the post of Sussex Downs Officer, who will be the board's principal adviser and executive officer.
Baroness Cumberlege, who lives near Lewes, is chairman of the South West Thames Regional Health Authority and a former chairman of Brighton Health Authority.
She was created a life peer in 1990.
Baroness Cumberlege said: ‘I am proud to be associated with this important new initiative to conserve a landscape which I have known and loved for much of my life.’
Plan goes to appeal
AN appeal has been made against East Hampshire District Council's decision to refuse permission for the conversion of a barn to a single storey dwelling at Janelands in Willis Lane, Four Marks.
The council felt that the domestication of the site could result in serious danger to any inhabitants because it is near high pressure petrol and gas pipelines.
The district planners also say that the proposed development is in an area of countryside where new dwellings are only allowed to fulfil proven agricultural need.
They say that no need has been proven or is ever likely to be.
The appeal will be determined by way of written representations, which must be made by May 1st.
They should be sent to the  Secretary of State for the Environment at Room 1203B, Tollgate House, Houlton Street, Bristol BS2 9DJ quoting reference APP/M1710/A/92/203052.
COUNCIL'S VIEW
AFTER considerable deliberation, Ropley Parish Council have decided to suggest the name ‘Dunsells View’ for the new village development, which should provide eight bungalows for rent by the end of November.
Birthday scheme gets a boost
THE monthly meeting of the Royal British Legion Women's Section, Chiddingfold Branch, was held in the club at 3 p.m. on Wednesday, March 25th, opening with the Exhortation and Silent Tribute.
There was a good number present and the main business of the day required the club to decide on the donations they should make to the women's section and other charities.
Members enthusiastically supported the retiring national chairman's Birthday Scheme to raise funds to give each of the widows and ex-servicemen £5 and a birthday card.
Anniversary
It was agreed that £240 be given in donations now, with the proviso that later in the year further sums would be sent, particularly to Headquarters Benevolent Fund, the Star and Garter Home and the Poppy Appeal.
Mrs. Price, chairman, reported on the visit to Cranleigh 40th anniversary party and the inaugural group meeting which had been held at Farnham.
Both were attended by herself and three members.
Mrs. Price then introduced Mrs. Kay Gunner, who made three flower arrangements with spring flowers and a great variety of garden foliage.
These she generously donated to the club's raffle, so adding more pleasure to the afternoon.
KEEP THEM ROLLING — IT'S THE BIG EASTER EGG SHOW
EGGS galore rolled across the playground at Camelsdale School last week when the children took part in a traditional Easter egg-rolling.
All of the eggs had been specially decorated for the occasion and many parents were there to watch the fun.
In our picture (left) are, clockwise from the top left, Nadia Wells (aged 6), Katherine Kormell (8), Cleo Quinn (10), Jonathan Mott (7), Simon Bailey (9) and Ham Harms (4).
And an egg-stravaganza of eggs made their appearance at Grayswood School last week when the pupils put on their thinking caps to make some weird and wonderful creations.
The winders of the competition, pictured right, with their entries, are James Brown (5), Helen Taylor (6), George Ridd (7) and Holly Durand (8).
Water: You have been warned
THE worst drought in Britain for 200 years could spell disaster for wildlife in some parts of the country, but locally, there is no cause for alarm — yet.
Mid Southern's head of operations Colin Nice told the Herald this week that water supply is the same as last year, but that if next winter is as dry as the last, there would be problems.
Southern England recorded its lowest January rainfall for 154 years and most rivers are well below normal levels.
The Royal Society for Nature Conservation this week launched a campaign to crack down on so-called ‘thirsty buildings’ to make more water available for rivers and wetlands.
A spokesman called for consumers to save water by turning off taps while brushing teeth, fixing drips and leaks, collecting rainfall for garden use and to water the garden only when the weather is cool.
However, Mr. Nice said there was no cause for concern.
‘It helped a lot that last summer wasn't a hot one so the demand was that much lower.’
Each person in Britain uses an average of 30 gallons of water a day, a figure which increases as the temperature rises.
Sprinkler bans are already being planned for many areas but not for Surrey.
HERALD SPORT
HASLEMERE HOSPITAL CUP: Final
Hospital Cup is a just reward for the Mill
HAMMER UTD 0, SHOTTERMILL 4
Shottermill ran out worthy winners of the 1992 Haslemere Hospital Cup after an entertaining and competitive final between these two old rivals at Fernhurst on Sunday.
This was always going to be a difficult match for Hammer to win, as they were up against a ‘Mill side eager to take the trophy for the first time since 1974.
‘Mill crushed Hammer with a three-goal blitz midway through the second half, and their was no way back for the gallant losers.
With the slope in their favour and the wind at their backs, Hammer pressed hard for an early goal to unsettle the favourites.
They forced several corners and looked for the height of Simon White and Steve Harris to open up the sometimes nervous ‘Mill defence.
However, with Peter Daynes and Andy Berry doing their work well in the centre of defence, ‘Mill held out well in the tense opening stages.
‘Keeper Steve Wilson looked comfortable at the last line of defence, making one brave save following a bad backpass from Renninson.
Having survived the opening 20 minutes, ‘Mill began to break out of their defensive shell and find space behind the Hammer defence.
Rob Madgwick dispossessed Wright and fired in a shot that was well saved by Stuart Burt.
The pace of Bob Daynes gave Crossley a nervous afternoon, but the quality of the final ball was wanting.
After 25 minutes, Hammer's chances were cruelly hit when Gordon Elliott, their experienced striker, limped off injured, to be replaced by the inexperienced but talented Justin Searle.
The loss of Elliott left Hammer very lightweight in attack and placed a heavy burden on regular strikers White and Harris.
Hammer caused problems with several accurate Barry Eames free-kicks, but again the ‘Mill defence was well organised.
‘Mill then launched several excellent moves to open up the Hammer defence.
Joe O'Shea and Bob Daynes were foiled by Burt's brave ‘keeping, while Wells’ powerful shot through a crowded goalmouth was smothered by the hard-pressed ‘keeper.
Shottermill made the all-important break in the 35th minute.
Hammer failed to clear their lines following a deep cross from the right and the ball fell invitingly to Rob Madgwick who volleyed home from eight yards.
Hammer quickly responded when Dave Pappa's long free-kick found Wright who headed straight into Wilson's arms.
With an interval lead, ‘Mill were in a strong position to dictate the pattern of play, but Hammer refused to submit easily in the second half.
However, ‘Mill's superiority in midfield began to show as Clarke, Hibberd and Madgwick worked tirelessly to penetrate the tiring Hammer defence.
After 65 minutes, Green mishit a backpass and could only stand horrified as Hibberd pounced on the mistake and coolly slotted the ball past the stranded Burt from 20 yards.
A superbly struck goal.
Burt made two more fine saves to deny Wells and Daynes, but there was nothing he could do to stop ‘Mill's third after 70 minutes.
Chris Renninson set Hibberd away down the right and his excellent control took him past two defenders and gave him the time and space to send over a pinpoint cross to O'Shea, who rose unchallenged to head home from close range.
Shottermill wrapped the game up in the 85th minute with another fine goal.
Again it was the industrious O'Shea who played in a precise, low cross and Nick Wells raced in to strike an unstoppable left-foot volley.
This was an excellent team performance by the ‘Mill and was just reward for their very hard work throughout the season.
Having missed out on the runners-up spot in the league by just one point, this cup final victory is a successful note on which to end the season.
Shottermill FC — emphatic winners of the Haslemere Hospital Cup
Punishing schedule tells on Alton in build-up to final
Nothing threatens the chances of Alton Bass finishing in touch with the top of Hampshire League division one more than a punishing programme of three matches a week they need to complete in order to catch up on their fixture backing.
Manager Bruce Menzies anticipates a tough task in team selection, with some players unavailable for early evening kickoffs through work commitments, but is glad to have a playing staff of three teams to be able to choose from.
In fact, it was an ‘A’ team player who helped them towards a good victory over highly placed Malshanger on Wednesday last week.
Steve Warwick scored the second goal and was brought down in the area, enabling Alton to get their third in a 3–1 home win.
The first goal was scored by Gordon Stephen, who picked up a ball flicked on by Mickey Street from Steve Baverstock's corner kick.
Street converted the penalty for the third, before Malshanger pulled one back towards the end.
On Saturday, however, Alton Bass lost 1–0 at Locks Heath, conceding a single late goal in an uneventful game spoilt by a worn narrow pitch.
The same mood continued after Monday night's 3–0 home defeat at the hands of third-placed Pirelli — meaning that even if Alton were to win all five of the games in hand they have over the Eastleigh side, they would still be three points behind them.
Alton played as a team on whom the schedule was taking its toll.
Although looking fit and ready to work, the edge seemed to be lacking on their mental agility.
The situation did not bode well for the rest of the week — a particularly difficult one in the gruelling programme.
On Wednesday, as the Herald went to press early for Easter, Alton had an away fixture at Fleetlands who have triumphed over them twice this season already.
Tomorrow (Sat) they take on league leaders Colden Common at the Bass Sports Ground, kick-off 3 p.m.
Although Common have been riding high on top of division one for the best part of the season, with luck they will not have forgotten their 3–0 home defeat by Alton Bass in October.
But whatever their position is by Wednesday, supporters hope to  see them put their disappointments behind them for the Aldershot Senior Cup final.
The game, against Cove from division three of the Diadora League, will be played at the Recreation Ground, Aldershot, on Wednesday (April 22nd), kick-off at 7.30 p.m.
DIADORA LEAGUE: DIV.
III
Last-minute agony for defiant United
HORSHAM 3, PETERSFIELD UTD. 1
Three second-half goals overturned United's barely deserved interval advantage and sent the sun-kissed Queen Street crowd wild.
But United, playing their penultimate away fixture of the season, were not discredited by their own performance and were ultimately undone by an excellent Hornet's display and an extra special goal.
In the first half, Petersfield had weathered a varied storm with a mixture of luck and determination.
Home striker Paul Crimmen let them off the hook on a number of occasions and Horsham had two goals disallowed.
In the 25th minute, Mark Dunk elbowed Mike Taylor before shooting home and in the 30th minute Stepney netted from an offside position.
United also had their chances.
Peter Tindal's 30 yard free-kick was well saved by Duncan Green and Tony Chinyou sliced two efforts wide.
But, in the 44th minute, United captain Tindal spotted a gilt-edged opportunity in the home penalty area and blasted the ball past Green to open the scoring.
Chinyou, who had been United's best player on the day, was booked in the first half and he limped off just after the break, and his departure was to prove a turning point.
On the hour, Horsham equalised with a fantastic goal.
Cliff Cant's immaculate pass down the right left a Petersfield defender off balance and sent Mark Stepney clear.
His cross was met with a perfectly angled header by Crimmen, leaving ‘keeper Taylor grasping at thin air.
That was the straw which broke the camel's back and in the following 16 minutes United's game fell apart.
In the 72nd minute, a defensive mix-up let in Wayne Wren and he slotted the ball home to put the home side ahead.
Four minutes later, Dunk and Phil Somers carved out an opening for Crimmen who finished the move off with alacrity to make it 3–1.
The game was all over as a spectacle until the last two minutes when United's corpse rose from the dead to give Horsham an awful fright.
In the 88th minute, Steve Parvin headed Tindal's cross just wide from three yards out.
Moments later, home defender Steve Breach slipped up in the box and allowed Parvin time to round the ‘keeper and cross to Tony Thurgood, but the Bordon man, less than a yard out, spooned the ball wide and sank to his knees in incredulity.
On Easter Saturday, United play host to East Enders, Clapton, in their penultimate Love Lane fixture of the season.
Geoff Chapple, the former Farnham Town and Alton Town player, had something to celebrate on Saturday when Woking, the club he manages, were presented with the Diadora League Premier Championship Cup.
SURREY INTER.
LEAGUE: PREMIER DIV.
I
Haslemere crush weak Hammer
HASLEMERE 5, HAMMER UTD. 1
Hammer fielded a largely reserve side to conserve the first-team men involved in the following day's Hospital Cup Final.
But a 5–1 beating at the hands of Haslemere would not have improved Hammer's morale for the cup task ahead.
Both sides have struggled in the league this year and Haslemere were grateful for the time and space they were allowed in this match.
Their good combination football made Hammer look static, particularly in the second half when the home team scored four times.
However, it was not all one-sided and Hammer gave a good account of themselves in the first half, restricting Haslemere to one goal and going close themselves with long-range shots.
Haslemere were the play-makers in the second half and the score could have been higher but for some excellent goalkeeping by Simon Fish.
Stuart Whiston scored twice for Haslemere and the other marksmen were ‘Click’ Clarke, Stuart Gordon and David Spear.
Hammer had the consolation of an excellent goal, Des O'Byrne hitting an unstoppable volley from Andy Powell's perfectly placed cross.
GUILDFORD LEAGUE: DIV.
I
Hindhead clinch third place
HINDHEAD 5, FRENSHAM 2
Hindhead concluded their season with a convincing victory over old rivals Frensham.
With the conditions perfect at Hindhead, both sides played the ball around nicely.
Hindhead should have taken the lead when Frampton's cross was misjudged by Wagstaff in front of a gaping goal.
But Frensham shook Hindhead when a quick break caught the home defence all at sea, giving the visitors the lead.
Hindhead raised their game after the interval, with Phil Leigh and Craig Stewart starting to dominate midfield.
Wagstaff got the equaliser after the Frensham offside trap had been sprung.
Then a powerful run through four tackles and a brave finish by Frampton gave Hindhead the lead.
The home side then indulged themselves in exhibition play and duly came unstuck when Frensham equalised from a rebound after Dunn had saved from close range.
This stung Hindhead into action and they blitzed Frensham with a three-goal burst in ten minutes.
Craig Stewart neatly tucked away the first and, before the visitors could recover, an Ord free-kick was hooked across the goal by Butcher for Stewart to again apply the finishing touch.
The last goal was the best of the game.
Phil Leigh set off on a mazy run, negotiating numerous tackles before crossing from the byeline to Wagstaff who found the net.
A good win for Hindhead to secure third place in division one.
ARMY FOOTBALL
Sappers equal record
For only the second time in the 103-year history of the Army Cup, a unit has won the coveted trophy for three years in succession.
The previous hat-trick was achieved 60 years ago by the 1st Btn.
Sherwood Foresters. last week at Aldershot, 28 Amphibious Engineer Regt., B.A.O.R. champions already for a third year, beat U.K champions 2 Infantry Division Signal Regt., York, 2–0 in this year's Army final to equal the record.
The Army F.A.
are now considering awarding them a permanent memento.
The Sappers achieved their triumph with two goals in the first half, by Lockwood (11 minutes) and Alex Nangle (31 minutes).
David Sargent, managing director of the competition's sponsors, Wilson Hogg Robinson, presented the trophies, which included the Bill Wilson Memorial award for ‘Man of the Match’, chosen by Alan Ball.
That went to Nangle, creating another hat-trick, as 28 A.E.R.
players had received it in the past two years as well, now four times overall since it was inaugurated in 1985.
A few days earlier, the Army lost 5–1 to a touring Guernsey team in Bordon.
HANTS & BORDER COUNTIES LEAGUE: U/13
Haslemere win through
HALE 1, HASLEMERE 3
Although missing a number of players, Haslemere fought off a spirited Hale side to secure an important win.
After a scrappy opening, Haslemere took the lead when James Simpson fired in a rebound.
Then Richard Atherley's shot was sliced by a defender into his own net.
However, Hale pulled one back on the stroke of half-time.
A rather ordinary second half was brought to life when Lee Clement chipped the ball in direct from a free-kick for Haslemere's third goal.
U/10
MANOR COLTS ‘A’ 3, LISS 0
Manor held the upper hand in this midweek game.
Sam Reed scored twice and then set up the third goal for Tom Cox.
MANOR COLTS ‘A’ 8, TONGHAM 0
Manor's defence was kept busy in the first half and the Alton side held a slender 1–0 lead at the interval.
But Manor ran away with the match in the second half, scoring seven more goals.
Scorers were Lee Fagan (3), Tom Cox (2), Sam Reed (2) and Ross Kelly.
•In the annual Hants & Border Counties five-a-side tournament, Haslemere won the Under-13 section by beating Vale in the final 1–0.
Two Camelsdale teams reached the U/14 semi-finals after finishing second in their groups.
The ‘B’ team lost 3–1 to Elstead ‘A’, but Camelsdale ‘A’defeated Alex.
Colts ‘B’ 2–1 to reach the final.
Elstead eventually won an exciting final 2–0.
Camelsdale scorers (both team); Kevin Rayson (2), Gareth Glazier (2), Michael Godfrey, William Davenport, Carl Thayre.
RES.
DIV. 1
Haslemere Res. earn safety
HASLEMERE RES. 2, MERROW RES. 1
With this win Haslemere Reserves earned first division football next season.
However, Merrow who had already been relegated, put up a spirited display and it was not until the second half that Haslemere gained any real control.
The home team started in determined style and deservedly went ahead after just ten minutes when a well-worked move ended with Simon Hibberd resting from close range.
However, Merrow were not beaten yet.
They equalised after half an hour and also went close on more than one occasion.
In the second half, Haslemere put the Merrow defence under pressure and scored what proved to be the winning goal after 20 minutes.
Darren Brine, who had a fine game, had a good run down the left and when the ball was worked into the midfield, ‘Click’ Clarke was on hand to hammer it home.
Haslemere had to endure some more scares, with ‘keeper Paul Jones having to pull off one particularly good one-handed save from a header.
In the end, they held on for the vital points, having gained five in their last three games to ensure safety.
FARNHAM SUNDAY LEAGUE: DIV.
III
Royal Oak ready for crunch game
ROYAL OAK 5, SHORTHEATH 1
Royal Oak (Hollywater) crushed a spirited Shortheath side with a five-goal blast in this top-of-the-table clash.
The home team began brightly and took the lead after 11 minutes.
Clinton Ford's sweetly struck free-kick came back off the post and Paul Read scrambled home the rebound.
Ford volleyed in the second goal on 20 minutes and, with the back four of Ryer, Norris, Curran and Carter in command, Shortheath were well in command.
At the start of the second half, Goldsmith saved brilliantly to deny Shortheath's Mike Taylor a goal.
Then a Hall corner-kick was headed goalwards by Read and Pullen applied the final touch to make it 3–0.
Taylor converted a penalty for Shortheath's goal, but there was no stopping the Hollywater side.
Cheered on by a large crowd, they added two more goals.
Mick Toal rose high to head in a Ford cross, and Ford himself completed the scoring with a low shot.
This week, Royal Oak travel to Waverley who are just one point ahead at the top of the Div.
III table.
Whoever wins the game will win the league and the trophy will be presented at the end.
SHAPCOTT CHARITY CUP
Bordon swamp Beaumont
BEAUMONT III 1, BORDON WMC 10
Bordon continued their run in the cup with a comprehensive win over Beaumont.
Edwin Keith gave Bordon a handy lead with two headed goals, but a rare lapse in defence enabled Beaumont to pull one back and it remained 2–1 at the interval.
Bordon came out for the second half in determined mood and soon Wilson made up for a number of misses by flicking in the third goal.
From the kick-off, Bordon forced a corner which was cleared only as far as Duffin who volleyed in from 15 yards.
The floodgates opened then and Bordon piled up six more goals.
Wilson scored four to take his tally to five, Keith got another and Beaumont also conceded an own goal.
HANTS LEAGUE: DIV.
III
Bennett plays vital role
ALTON TN.
BASS RESS. 2, ECCHINSWELL 1
Devoid of ideas beyond booting hopeful balls forward in the first half, Alton got their act together in the second, coming from behind to take the points through sheer hard graft.
Neither side had more than a couple of scoring chances in the first half, and Ecchinswell took advantage of the first of these, breaking through after dispossessing Martin Whiddett on the sideline and finding a vast opening in the Alton defence.
The home side gradually began to look interested, with the pace of Paul Bennett playing a vital part on the flank.
He set up Whiddett for a header just wide of the mark before being booked with Ecchinswell's Dean Nelson for retaliating after the latter had put in a late tackle.
Bennett himself had a couple of chances late in the half, but the visitors also threatened as Alton's defenders had to cope with the bright sun in their eyes.
‘Keeper Paddy Hefferman got his fingertips to the best effort and was glad to find Ian Jones on the line to hoof the ball away.
A minute into the second half, Alton made up the deficit when Paul Ventham intercepted a defender's pass to put Whiddett through for a clinical finish.
Alton increased the pressure and, after squandering several chances, took the lead on 60 minutes.
Bennett raced away down the right, cut inside and crossed to Ventham who managed to shoot home from a narrow angle.
Alton had further chances to increase their lead.
Bennett had a shot tipped against the upright and Gavin May and Whiddett both missed golden opportunities.
Alton Bass Reserves winning a midfield tussle.
RUSHMOOR SUNDAY LEAGUE; PREMIER DIV.
Sandrock take a grip
SANDROCK 3, SOUTHWOOD TN. 1
Sandrock lost a small number of key players this season because their commitment to Farnham Town F.C.
prevented them from playing Sunday football.
For once this handicap was counterbalanced as Troy Thomsett, Southwood's prolific goal scorer, has contracted to Camberley and is bound by similar restraints.
The upshot of all this was that, although Sandrock's defence allowed Southwood a number of good  chances , only one was taken.
Sandrock took the lead early in the game when Cox's long clearance was brilliantly touched on by McQuilken into the path of Nick Leishman, who volleyed home emphatically.
Southwood proceeded to squander a number of chances and Sandrock were indebted to the brave Gardner in goal.
They were also indebted to Southwood forward Steve Lynch who, having found himself through of goal, looked over his shoulder to see the linesman's flag raised and tapped the ball back to Gardner.
Had he looked further back he would have seen the referee waving play on, having overruled the linesman.
Lynch made amends before long and equalised from close range, but that was all the reward Southwood were to see for their efforts.
Leishman found an inch of space on the edge of the area and chipped his volley delightfully over the advancing ‘keeper.
At half-time Sandrock players were asking themselves, ‘Are we really winning?’
The second half was a different matter and Sandrock took a grip on the game.
Leishman came close to scoring his hat-trick with another fierce volley which went just wide and a header which was brilliantly saved by Gary Mitchell.
Patrick Field saw two rasping shots from the edge of the box go over the bar.
Powis and Tanner both had chances before Mitchell dropped a simple cross at Leishman's feet in the drying moments.
This time the hat-trick chance was taken and Sandrock emerged worthy winners.
INVIT.
CUP: Semi-Final
Semi-finalists
HASLEMERE III 2, MERROW III 2 (set)
A dour defensive match finally ended in a predictable draw.
The visitors took an early lead, but Haslemere quickly struck back, Terry Powell heading home from a corner.
The match then settled down to a midfield battle, with neither side risking any mistakes.
As the tie went into extra time, both sides struggled in the warm sunshine, but Powell made an extra effort and forced the ball home to put Haslemere in the lead.
Merrow's equaliser came with three minutes remaining, ensuring a replay at Guildford this Saturday.
RES.
DIV.
III
'Mill Reserves promoted
SHOTTERMILL RES. 4, ENGLEFIELD GN.
RES. 2
'Mill Reserves made it a weekend of double celebration for Shottermill Football Club by clinching runners-up spot, thus ensuring promotion to division two.
They have played some great football and it was not more than the team deserved, and was great reward for manager Doug Williams in his first year in charge.
Englefield had been fighting 'Mill for second spot.
The first half was a tale of missed opportunities for 'Mill.
A host of chances went begging and they had a cracking goal from John Hartless ruled out for offside.
Despite all this, 'Mill did go in at half-time one goal to the good after some great work on the left by youngster Matthew Hadden.
His cross found Carl Bloomfield who stuck the ball away.
The start of the second half was a disaster for 'Mill, with Englefield equalising straight away.
Shottermill put things straight, though.
Jeff Cox and Michael Charman combined well on the right to provide Ian Charman, Michael's brother, with a simple chance that he took well.
Another goal followed from Bloomfield, who seems destined to collect the club's top scorer award at the end of the season.
Englefield managed to claw a goal back, but 'Mill were not finished and Hadden completed the scoring with a cracking shot.
Aldershot public meeting
A public meeting to discuss the formation of a new club, Aldershot Town Football Club Ltd., is to be held at the Royal Officers Club, Aldershot on Wednesday (April 22), starting at 8 p.m.
Anyone interested is welcome to attend.
MEON VALLEY LEAGUE
Good Sports meet Dynamos in final
The Blunt Cup finalists are resolved.
Denmead went down fighting against Good Sports from division one.
Denmead opened the scoring through Chris King and they held on until the second half when Campbell Wilson equalised for Good Sports.
Jason Chandler made certain in the dying minutes of the game, Good Sports winning 2–1.
Their opponents will be Wickham Dynamos who beat Hunters Inn in extra time.
Hunters opened the scoring by unfortunately popping the ball into their own goal, but they later equalised.
In the first period of extra time, Alex Brown put Dynamos ahead and then Nick Crook made it 3–1 with just five minutes to go.
West Meon went down 2–4 to Timberland in division three.
Scorers for Timberland were Mike Travers, Ian Cain, Mark Scorey and Dave Evans-Turner who notched up his first ever goal.
Martin Norris and ‘Mack’ Edwards replied for West Meon who had to play the first 40 minutes with only ten men.
Froxfield lost 6–0 to high flying Southwick in division four.
In this run-in to their cup final, Southwick scored through Terry Liddington (2), Nick Snelling, the Clutterbrook brothers, John and Mark, and Warren Bailey.
Local rivals Heath End and Wrecclesham meet in the final of the Surrey Intermediate Kirkby Ford Reserves Challenge Cup at Camberley FC on Wednesday (April 22), kick-off at 7.30 p.m.
Churt score five more
Churt hit five goals for the third week running in the Surrey Intermediate Premier Division Two.
This time, they crushed visitors Knaphill 5–1.
Wrecclesham returned to form with a 4–0 win against Grayshott, but Chiddingfold lost 1–0 to Woking Park.
Cup finals at the Rec
Aldershot Recreation Ground might be a ghost stadium at the moment, but there will be plenty of football activity there over the next few weeks, with various Aldershot & District League finals taking place at the traditional venue.
The finals are as follows 
Surrey FA coaching
Continuing their season of Football Association coaching courses, the Surrey County F.A.
announce the second of their Preliminary Badge scheme.
The course will be held at the University of Surrey fields at Manor Farm, Guildford, just off the A3.
Commencing on Friday, May 1st, it will run at weekends and some weekday evenings until May 19th.
Places are allocated on a strictly first come first served basis, and are limited to a maximum of 16 places, some of which are already allocated.
Details from the coaching secretary (Woking 764521) or from the Surrey County F.A.
at Leatherhead.
Frensham keep cup
Frensham Athletic retained the Farnham Sunday League Challenge Cup when they defeated Prince of Wales (Whitehill) 1–0 in the final at Petersfield's Love Lane ground on Sunday.
The second-half winner was scored by Peter Hammond.
MOTOR CYCLING
Farnham sidecar pair launch big new machine
Farnham pair Mark Goddard and Roy Slingo are aiming to win the Southern Centre sidecar grasstrack championship this year, and they might well do it for they have secured lucrative support from two local firms.
Gould and Williams Engineering of Alton have supplied the mighty 1,000 cc four-cylinder Kawasaki engine for the immaculately prepared outfit and John Allaway Motor Cycles, of Wrecclesham, will provide oil, accessories and clothing.
Goddard and Slingo will launch the new outfit in Sunday's important ‘Salisbury Sizzler’ meeting which takes place at Upper Woodford, near Salisbury.
They will be trying hard, for the first prize is £250!
Jason Welland gave the best expert class performance in Sunday's Sunbeam Club organised Gordon Jackson Cup trial, which was contested on a superb 12-section course at Woolmer Farm, near Liphook.
Headley Down's Graham Hutcheson — a friend of Welland's since their schoolboy trials days — finished second.
Lindford veteran Norman Gray was best in the novice class and Crookham's Stuart Brown topped the intermediate class.
Mark Hancock/Peter Crockford and Roger Martin/Gordon Smith (all four from the Petersfield area) took the top two placings in the well supported expert sidecar class and Farnham pair Kevin Allaway and Marc Green, were the novice sidecar victors.
Up-and-coming Simon Hiscock of Farnham was victorious in Saturday's Surrey Schoolboy Club trial, which took place in Crondall Woods, Dogmersfield.
He was unpenalised all the way, but the blotted his copybook with a dab on the very last section.
Yet another local trials winner was Colin Allsop.
Aboard his recently acquired Aprilia, the Whitehall rider gave the best expert class performance in the Waterlooville Club trial, which was contested on a very difficult course at Budden's Bank, near Chalton on Saturday.
Sean Cook's brilliant motocross form continues.
On Sunday, the determined Four Marks ace scorched to a stunning hat-trick of ‘A’ group wins in the Southern Club meeting at Elvetham.
Tomorrow (Good Friday) the Hants Grand National motocross will take place on the Matchams Park circuit, near Ringwood, but, for the first time, it will be restricted to pre-1965 built machines and there will also be races for more modern twin shock-absorber machines.
Racing begins at noon.
Also on Friday, there is a Haslemere Club trial at Waverley, near Farnham (10.30 a.m.) and the North Hants Club's annual Gordon Farley Cup trial at Star Hill Plantation, Elvetham (10.30 a.m.).
On Saturday, there is a North Hants Club trial at Star Hill (noon).
Then, on Sunday, the ‘Salisbury Sizzler’ grass-track meeting takes place at Borland Farm, Upper Woodford, near Salisbury (1 p.m.).
There is also a Berkshire Club motocross at Upper Lambourn (11 a.m.) and the Waterlooville Club's Ashford Cup trial at Butser Hill Limeworks, near Petersfield (10.30 a.m.).
On Easter Monday, the first round of the British sidecar and four-stroke motocross championships will be contested on the Asham Woods circuit, near Frome (noon) and the Farnham Club's annual Mason Cup trial starts from Headley Park, Sleaford, near Bordon (11 a.m.).
TERRY WARREN
ATHLETICS
Alton Road Race
The ninth Alton Ten-Mile Road Race (sponsored by Broxhead Garage) will be held on Sunday, May 10th, starting at 1.30 p.m. from The Butts.
The race, organised by Alton Joggers, is limited to 1,000 runners.
Entry forms are available from: Deadline is April 25th.
GOLF
Hampshire man captures Salver in sudden-death
The ill wind that blew one of the pre-tournament favourites out of the Selborne Salver sent a breath of good fortune over Mark Treleaven at a sun-drenched Blackmoor Golf Club on Saturday.
Treleaven, from Hayling, only got in as a last-minute replacement when Michael Welch, on EGU duty in Spain, crushed his thumb in a door and had to scratch from the Salver and Sunday's Hampshire Hog at North Hants, where he should have been defending.
The 20-year-old, a Hampshire regular, seized his opportunity with both hands to take the trophy, winning a four-way play-off with a birdie three at the daunting 455-yard 10th, the first hole of sudden-death.
Earlier, Treleaven had broken Blackmoor's amateur record of 65, his round containing five birdies and only one dropped shot.
Sadly, the new mark won't count, preferred lies still being in operation.
He added a 72 to tie with England man, Andy Rogers (Ealing), Steve Barwick (East Berks) and Stuart Cage, who all had matching scores of 69, 68 for aggregates of 137, only one over the record for the event.
Barwick had earlier made a spectacular start to this day, opening up with three straight birdies.
But a night-marish six at the 164-yard 17th undid all the good work and it took a birdie at the last to rescue a par round.
All four hit fine drives under pressure on the first play-off hole.
First up, Treleaven then hit an imperious five-iron pin-high to set out his stall.
Cage and Barwick also found the short stuff, the former one of five scratch men and nine Yorkshire players from the mighty Sand Moor club in Leeds.
Only Rogers failed, leading his six-iron into the sand.
Last to putt, Treleaven sent his 14-footer into the cup to become the first Hampshire-born player to win the Salver and the first home county champion since Ian Gray in 1982.
Treleaven was until recently a pipe fitter.
But he quit to concentrate on his game and reaped an instant dividend.
He hits his irons particularly sweetly, a talent that serves him well at Hayling, Hampshire's only links, where still days are few and far between.
If he was expecting to be well in the clear at lunchtime, he was mistaken, Blackmoor's own Paul Tupper carding a marvellous 66, with seven birdies.
His score was later duplicated by Carl Watts (Hawkstone), who notched five birdies and got it back in 31.
Indeed, the morning returns were the best in Salver history, the spring sunshine and Steve Lowe's immaculately-prepared course no doubt assisting the compiling of ten scores under the scratch of 70.
Stephen Pullan and Iain Pyman both gave further evidence of the strength of Sand Moor by upstaging clubmate Cage with 68s, while Stephen Burnell (Brickendon Grange) and Stoneham's Alan Mew got in on the act by matching the exacting par of 69.
There were also half-a-dozen scores of 70: all still in the hunt were Simon Griffiths (Wentworth), Lee Westwood (Worksop), Adrian Carter (West Hill), Lee James (Broadstone), Jonathan Barnes (Brokenhurst Manor) and Ralph Hutt (Southport/Ainsdale).
First to post a target was Tupper, who pulled his own appreciation society around with him.
They were rewarded by seeing their man, a 2-handicapper in a scratch field, card a courageous 72 for 138.
But there was to be no happy ending, as first Barwick and then Treleaven beat his mark by a stroke, the latter even bogeying his last hole, the 18th, after his drive found the trees.
It was left to Rogers to try to forestall the play-off with a devilish 12-footer at the home green.
But the putt slid past and the gallery headed off to witness the Salver's first four-way decider and the emergence of a new force in Hants golf.
Watts's challenge ended when he triple-bogeyed the 3rd and 4th holes en route to a 75 after lunch, while Pullan struggled to a 74.
Pyman added a 73, James a 71 and Westwood compiled another 70.
Burnell toiled to a 75, while Hutt, who birdied two of the first three holes after lunch, then took seven at the 4th, including two penalty strokes from grounding his club in a water hazard.
Pick of the Hants players was Barnes, who holed nothing in his afternoon 71 for 141.
Mew found the fire had gone out and blew to 76 for 145.
Jonathan Wilshire (Hindhead), also failed to find a spark and finished ten shots back on 147 (71,75).
On a day of extraordinary scoring, it was fitting there should be an ace, Andrew Clark (Old Ford Manor) holing out at the 198-yard 15th.
The championship committee promptly diverted the unclaimed £150 prize for a one at the ninth into his appreciative hands.
Selborne Salver:
Steve Graham joined such luminaries as Sandy Lyle, Steve Richardson and Michael Bonallack on the North Hants honours boards when he lifted the Hampshire Hog on Sunday.
The Sussex county player from Ham Manor achieved his first major victory by dint of a brilliant afternoon round of 66 for a total of 137, one better than Stephen Pullan (Sand Moor), who carded a brace of 69s.
The Hampshire Salver for lowest four-round aggregate in the Selborne Salver and the Hog went to Stuart Cage, on 276, from Pullan (280), Steve Barwick (282), Graham (283) and Cox (284).
Blackmoor's Paul Tupper — on his way to a superb 66.
Liphook Ladies' Spring Meeting
Liphook Ladies' captain Dorothy Ling welcomed and congratulated all the players who had competed in the Spring Meeting morning medal and afternoon foursomes under very poor weather conditions.
She thanked everyone who had contributed to the success of the day.
Morning Medal results:
The hidden prize (best net score in the 30–36 handicap) was won by Lady Roxburgh.
The Blois Johnson Salver (best handicap in both divisions) went to Mrs J. Smith (net 72).
The Gale Cup — awarded for the best scratch score — was won by Mrs. C. Browse (86).
Mrs. Ling announced the winners of club trophies, as follows:
The results of the March Stableford were:
In the Famous  Crouse Coronation Foursomes Medal, Mrs. S. Meredith and Mrs. B. Halsey are through to the next round.
Runners-up were Mrs. B. Morgan and Mrs. J. Lang.
Farnham Ladies
Farnham Ladies held their Golden Medal Bowls competition on Tuesday, with the following results 
Hankley Common Ladies
Results of the April Extra Medal competition (Carver Cup and Windle Bowl): Mrs. G. Pope wins the Windle Bowl.
Bourne welcome old pal, Onny
Despite occasional April showers, the tennis season started off in great style at the Bourne Club last Sunday, with a very well attended Open Day.
Both members and visitors were attracted by a varied tennis programme, supported by the squash section who had arranged activities of their own.
The tennis events began with a welcome to Onny Parun who, by now, is an old friend at Bourne Club.
Having played Davis Cup for New Zealand for many seasons, and with scalps such as Connors and McEnroe, he is a player of immense experience.
This proved too much for Daniel Wilkinson, who nevertheless put up a sparkling display of shots and services.
This match, incidentally, was something of a warm-up for Daniel, since he immediately left to play in the final of the Surrey Postal Tournament, winning the under-18's in straight sets.
In addition, his brother Mark won the under-16's of the same tournament due to a defaulting opponent.
Meantime, back at the Bourne, the crowd were treated to a display of power tennis from Duncan Knight who had come down from the David Lloyd Centre with Onny Parun.
Duncan, at six feet eight inches, has a devastating service, and is now off to Texas to take up a tennis scholarship.
He is said to have one of the fastest services in Britain and his game proved too powerful for Tony Marti who had hurried back from a league match to play him.
Tony then joined men's captain David Havelock in a doubles and the Bourne paid managed to beat the Parun/Knight pairing in a lively and hard-fought match.
The tennis equipment specialists, Head, had brought some racquets and accessories along and had also set up a ‘speed-gun’ to record service speeds.
Duncan Knight, having set the target speed at 110 m.p.h., was closely followed by Tony Marti at 105 m.p.h., but Marcus Robinson also clocked up 105 m.p.h. so a ‘play-off’ was arranged.
Marti made 103 m.p.h. this time and Robinson just failed to beat it at 102 m.p.h., leaving the large crowd breathless!
Other events included a Surrey County short tennis session, a ‘challenge-the-pro’ competition and numerous other attractions involving junior and experienced players alike.
The L.T.A. were represented by Barbara Davis who had come along to supervise the ‘rating’ of players to enable them to qualify to compete in the V.W. series tournaments during the summer.
All in all, an excellent day of tennis of both quality and quantity, enabling the multi-sport Bourne Club to be seen at its best.
Onny Parun (second from left) and big-serving Duncan Knight (second from right) pictured with three leading players at Bourne Club,(from left) David Havelock (men's captain), Brian Barnet (club coach) and promising youngster Anthony Marti.
Good game son!
Onny Parun congratulates one of his more youthful opponents.
Daniel Wilkinson (left) found former Davis Cup player Onny Parun a little too hot to handle.
Duncan Knight — fastest serve in Britain?
CRICKET
Farnham resolve to build from within
Farnham must face up to life in the second division of the Surrey Championship without their two opening bowlers from last season.
Australian Mick Lee will not be returning to Farnham and James Barrow has moved on to division one club Cheam.
Barrow, the former Liphook all-rounder, wants to continue playing Minor Counties cricket for Berkshire and felt it was in his interests to join a division one side.
Farnham will miss the extra pace of Lee, but the club have resolved to do without overseas players.
They want to build from within the club and restore the atmosphere and team spirit that was perhaps missing last year.
‘We want to play with what we've got,’ said Chic Stedman who has been restored to the club captaincy.
‘There is a big opportunity for our young players to play regularly in the first eleven.
In the past it has been difficult for them to have long runs in the team.’
After a long slog in the 1980s to reach the top flight of the Championship, last season's relegation was nothing short of disastrous for the club and Stedman feels that it is an indictment of Farnham that promising young players in the area, whom the town club would hope to recruit, are instead going to Guildford, attracted by division one status.
‘It is still a very good standard in division two and I would hope that some come here,’ he said.
Farnham have one likely new recruit in Brian Cervi, the Churt fast bowlers who helped the village club become I'Anson Cup champions last season.
Cervi could be in line for a new ball slot with nobody else of obvious pace in the side.
Steve Perry is apparently not fully fit and, of the others, only Stedman and Alan Thorpe — the latter only occasionally — have opened the bowling.
Stedman hopes that young players such as Simon Robson, Richard Norman, Bob Brown and Brian Ray will claim regular first-team places.
Ideally, he would like a team made up of seven young players and four older hands.
Even with Malcolm Kirkland dropping down to captain the second team, left-arm spin is likely to play a vital part in the team's fortunes.
Nick Marsh is a prove, economical wicket-taker.
Simon Robson has long been regarded as first eleven material, while Stedman has bowled with some success in his slower mode.
A fully fit Rodney Warriner behind the stumps would be an obvious bonus.
And Farnham will rely on Alan Thorpe and Simon Bentley to score heavily in the top order.
Farnham's practice match takes place on Easter Saturday.
The following weekend, Farnham play a friendly game with Limpsfield, followed, on April 26th, with a match against Waterlooville in the national club championship.
Grayshott quiz double
Grayshott Youth made it a club double when they won the junior inter-club cricket quiz on Tuesday night.
They scored 28 points to beat Lindford ‘A’ into second place.
The cup was presented by its donor, Robin Dibdin, secretary of the Two Counties Youth League.
Broxhead strip laid
The artificial strip has now been laid at Linford Cricket Club's Broxhead ground and club members profess themselves very pleased with it.
Lindford CC and Lindford & Bordon Youth CC embarked on a major fund-raising campaign and most of the £5,400 has now been collected.
The clubs are planning a big official opening on Monday, May 4th.
HOCKEY
Ruffians up a level
EWSHOT 0, HASLEMERE IV 0
The Ruffians' (4th XI) season drew to a close on Saturday when they took on the third team's opposition at Aldershot.
Ewshot startled the game on the attack, using their fast and skilful wingers, but once again Thomson and Dilworth at full-back proved to be the twin rocks on which these attacks foundered.
The vocal Bradshaw in goal encouraged his defence and on more than one occasion pulled off a save to keep Ruffians in the game.
Gradually, Haslemere started to make inroads into the Ewshot half and good interplay between the forwards resulted in a short corner from which Hamilton was unlucky to see his well-struck shot hit the post.
Murphy, Mackenzie and Roberts took a tighter hold on midfield and wingers McMahon and Reeve, the younger, came more into the game, but the ball would not quite run for Sharman at centre-forward.
Ewshot fought back in the second half and Murphy, despite an injury to his nose, covered acres of ground in both attack and defence to keep them at bay.
A rare Haslemere attack saw Reeve, the elder, combining with Hamilton and Reeve, the younger, to put Sharman in with a chance, but his shot was cleared off the line.
A draw was a fair result to a hard-fought, sporting contest.
Reeve — of Reeve's Ruffians
In the world of hockey, fourth elevens tend to encapsulate competition tempered by good humour and, to a relatively high degree, good sportsmanship.
To captain such an eleven is an administrative trial — but also a privilege, some say, at least!
Haslemere's fourth eleven, in the season just ending, has, itself been privileged in having Mike Reeve as its captain.
Originally of rugby stock, but with a cricketer's eye for a ball, he underwent a sea-change to become an excellent hockey player with calm skills and battling determination.
At half-back and, latterly, full-back, he gave credibility to Petain's ‘Ils ne passeront pas’.
However, it has been as captain that he has excelled; as the record of his club's ‘Cinderella side’ demonstrates — 12 wins, seven draws and only seven losses (two of them against immeasurably senior opposition).
Shrewd, quietly spoken and a model of impeccable sportsmanship for young and not — so-young alike, he has created a chemistry which has made Haslemere 4th XI one of the most popular sides with its opponents and the happiest with itself.
He would probably say that his is a case of the unexcitable in pursuit of the unexciting, but the sound, and at times beautiful hockey which he has inspired (particularly in the second half of the season) gives the lie to such modesty.
Indeed, a very clubbable man.
Alton College hit jackpot
The Alton College mixed hockey team had a successful day at the Totton College mixed sevens tournament in Southampton last week.
Alton sent two teams to the competition, made up of first and second year students.
The 20 teams were put into four pools, with the top two from each going on to the quarter-finals.
Alton lost only one of their pool matches, beating Peter Symonds 2–0, Farnborough 2–1 and Totton 2–0, with first year student Matt Cook scoring five of the goals and Ben Southall the other.
They were two of five Winchester Club players in the nine-member Alton College squad, which also included five county players, and Cathy MacCormack who plays for the South of England under-18 team.
Four second year students, Claire Slaney, Graham Brown, Elaine Hendry and Ben Hall, took time off from their studies to play in the tournament.
It was Hall's goal that gave Alton College a 1–0 win over Barton Peveril in the quarter-finals.
The semi-finals produced a 3–0 win over Barton Peveril (B. Hall, Cook, South), to set up a final place against Basingstoke College of Technology.
Guidance and encouragement from Helen Blake (who organised the team and demonstrated her prowess as umpire), and some clever tactical substituting between Ben Southall and Patrick Hall resulted in a convincing victory in the final.
Roared on by considerable vocal support, Matt Cook took his goal tally to eight with two more goals, and then set up Becky Ashdown to round off a 3–0 win.
It was also a good day for goalkeeper Graham Brown, who kept five clean sheets.
Team captain Ben Hall collected the winners' shield and each member of the squad, and also Helen Blake, received a trophy to keep.
The triumphant Alton College mixed hockey team.
LADIES HOCKEY
Gregs 'keeper turns goal ace
CRANLEIGH 1, GREGARIANS 3
This was a glorious end to the season for Gregarians, revelling in the April sunshine and determined to make the most of their final appearance.
In preparation for likely positional changes next season, captain Liz Oehlers decided to make some interesting alterations to the side, effectively swapping the defence with the forwards.
The changes proved successful and Gregs won an early, though dubious, penalty stroke.
Vicky Whitemore, knowing the problems that 'keepers face in these situations, was delegated with the responsibility and let no-one down as she launched the ball safely into an unguarded part of the net.
The wings, relishing their new-found space and responsibilities, pounced on every loose ball, thundering bullet-like crosses through the Cranleigh ‘D’.
But, unused to being in front, the advancing whites were regularly caught offside and Whitemore's second goal was disallowed.
In the second half, Cranleigh were spurred into action and began to threaten Caroline Bush, making her debut in goal.
Despite spectacular off-the-line saves and good support from newcomer Naomi Lang, Cranleigh scored in the 40th minute.
Moments later, left back Nicky Whittet was creating a new attack, and Whitemore thumped in her second goal.
Victory was clinched when Lynn Marriner surged upfield and slipped a pass through to Oehlers who scored at the second attempt.
Petersfield Ladies II beat Alton Ladies II by 20.
RUGBY
Alton eventually find top gear
ALTON XV 27, RAF ODIHAM 4
For the first 15 minutes it seemed that Alton would be overrun by an RAF side which included four players who regularly turn out for Alton.
But Alton restricted the opposition to four points in that opening spell and then took control to score four good tries themselves.
Alton were pinned to their own line at the beginning, but steadily their forwards began to get the upper hand and it was from a good pack break that full-back Carl Knight joined the line to score.
Glynn White added the conversion to put Alton ahead.
RAF Odiham, marshalled by their stand-off who usually plays for Basingstoke, looked dangerous when their backs made a break, but good tackling and covering kept them out.
A White penalty made it 9–4 at the break.
Alton's back row combined to give club captain Dave Osborne — playing in the centre — a try and then Malcolm Osborne flipped an overhead pass to flanker Alan Purdon for him to go over between the posts.
Alton's fourth try came from Taff Evans after a series of swift handling moves completely opened up the RAF defence.
With White converting all the tries, Alton ran out comfortable winners after a terrible start.
Alresford come good in the end
ALRESFORD 25, BASINGSTOKE IV 18
Alresford finally triumphed in an open and sporting contest against Basingstoke fourths.
Basingstoke scored first from a penalty and further penalty exchanges brought the score to 6–6.
With new man Noel Hadden in fine form, Alresford were winning scrums with ease, though under pressure.
Following some near misses, Alresford scored when Dave Powell broke from a scrum and fed Richard Gander who drew the defence before returning the ball for Powell to touch down.
Alresford were winning possession, particularly through Raef Gregory at the lineout, but this was often slow.
Twice, Frank Crockford went close and then Alresford extended their lead with another Nigel Clarke penalty.
Then Chris Holmes broke a period of Basingstoke pressure with a long break from the 22.
Close support would have resulted in a try, but Alresford converted the penalty when the visitors were again guilty of kicking the ruck.
Basingstoke came back again and scored from a scrum.
Alresford lifted the siege when Clarke kicked a penalty from fully 40 metres, and they followed up with the decisive try.
Powell, taking a quick penalty, fed skipper Gander on the burst and he broke the first line of defence to surge clear.
As Basingstoke closed, Holmes was up in support to carry on and, with a three-man overlap, he dummied the full-back and outpaced the cover to race under the posts.
Basingstoke scored a consolation try at the end, but Alresford had won a game they made difficult by failing to capitalise on their superior backs and fitness.
Alresford scorers: tries — Powell, Holmes; penalties — Clarke 5; conversion — Clarke.
NETBALL — N. HANTS PREMIER LEAGUE: DIV.
I
Latest from the Ants
ANTS 37, MEON 58
Alton Ants (sponsored by Booker & Bolton Solicitors) have found improved form, but they could never master Meon's six foot-plus shooter.
Meon ran out winners of a fast and furious contest by 58–37.
BASINGSTOKE WINTER LEAGUE: DIV.
I
MARTELL 35, ANTS II 53
Ants took control after a shaky start.
Thorpe played a vital role in defence and with Cleverly and Colston keeping the score moving.
Ants had a seven-goal lead at half-time.
Shrewd passes from Spurdle underlined Ants' confidence as they progressed to a big win.
In division two, Ants III went down fighting in an exciting game with Brookvale, who finally won 28–24.
Ants U/16s continued their unbeaten run with a massive 42–0 victory over Bishop Challoner.
They followed up with a 63–8 annihilation of viables and then beat Tadley 41–33.
Ants U/14s displayed intelligent and confident netball to win the inter-sports centre competition involving Alton, Horndean, Petersfield, Bohunt and Mill Chase.
Ants went through the tournament undefeated.
Squad:
The Ants senior team finished third in their section.
BADMINTON
New winners of junior invitation
The Alton & District League's junior invitation tournament was held at Alton Sports Centre last Saturday.
There was a good entry of nine pairs for both senior ladies/junior men's, and senior men's/junior ladies sections.
An American tournament was played, with handicaps varying from -12 to + 8, with games to 15 points.
In the senior ladies/junior men's section, seeded with the hardest handicap of -10, Amanda Langridge and Andrew Oxton (Hammer/Eagles) overcame the large score difference at the beginning of most games, and went through the section unbeaten, to win the trophy for the first time.
Close on their heels were Jane Passingham/Graham White of Treloar, just two points adrift, having lost just two games 15–14.
The senior men's/junior ladies section was won, for the second time in three years, by Ashley Canning/Alison Parker of Grayshott (-12).
They were unbeaten all afternoon, despite six of their opponents having three serves, to their one!
Jon Tiplady and daughter Gale (+ 3), from Four Marks, lost just the one game (to the Tipladys) to take runners-up spot.
The tournament was once again sponsored by Batemans ( opticians ) Ltd.
League president Malcolm Ganner presented the trophies.
Volkswagen dealers White Rose, Petersfield are to sponsor the VW Ratings tournament at Petersfield Tennis Club, starting on May 1st.
POINT-TO-POINT
Speedy Boy to star in Easter showpiece
Point-to-point enthusiasts are in for an Easter treat this weekend with two meetings in the area — at Tweseldown on Saturday (first race 1.30) and Hackwood Park, near Basingstoke, on Monday (first race 2.00).
Some of the south's top-staying chasers will be in action at Tweseldown, lining up for the areas' longest race — the Field Seymour Parks four-mile mixed open.
Among the 15 entries are last year's winner, Eternal Credit, the 1989 winner Namoos and Precipice Lodge, recently successful over four miles at Larkhill.
However, if he goes to post, Speedy Boy (a stable companion of Namoos) will be the one to beat.
Unbeaten in three runs already this season, his victories include the four-mile Kent Grant National and the classic Lord Ashton of Hyde's Cup at Heythrop last week.
Hackwood Park stages its first meeting of the season on Bank Holiday Monday.
Emperor Charles bids to give Reading-based Chris Bennett his second successive win in the opening hunt race.
Last year, Bennett rode Fifth Avenue Lad to victory.
Golden Kit (third 12 months ago) may be the main danger.
Phelioff won the Ladies' Open at this meeting last Easter and is once again amongst the 15 entries.
His possible clash with Qannaas (who is trained by former royal jockey turned BBC TV commentator Bill Smith) should be one of the highlights on the six-race card.
So far this season, Phelioff and Qannaas have met twice at Tweseldown.
Each has won once, and there shouldn't be much between them this time.
Valibus won at Hackwood last year and is entered for both the Volvo Men's Open and the Confined Race.
After an impressive victory at Kingston Blount last Saturday, he could win either race.
A word of warning, if you are planning a trip to Hackwood, arrive early to get a good view.
CYCLING
McReynolds close to a personal best
Two Alton Cycling Club riders recently competed in the Southampton Wheelers 25-mile time trial on the undulating P132 course in the New Forest.
In chilly conditions, P. McReynolds came close to a personal best with a time of 1 hr. 6 mins. 31 secs.
S. Willis recorded 1–7–25, an improvement of two minutes from the previous week.
Last Sunday, the Border C.A. promoted a 15-mile time trial over sporting roads near Windsor.
P. Bowley, a second claim member of the Alton C.C., nearly upheld the club tradition of winning Border events with his time of 35 mins. 18 secs., finally losing first position by a mere 9 seconds to J. Wager of the Maidenhead & District C.C.
S. Willis recorded 38–46 for 11th place.
MOTOR RACING
Another high placing for Oates
David Oates, from Four Marks, scored another fine second place in round four of the British Group N. Saloon Car Championship, racing the Peugeot 309 GTI 16v.
The format of the meeting was two one-hour races, with a mandatory driver change in each hour.
Oates and team-mate Richard Longman finished second in class of an aggregated result at the end of the two legs.
BILLIARDS
FARNHAM LEAGUE
TABLE TENNIS
Central ‘A’ blow cup glory — but the ‘C’'s clinch Div.
II title
Frimley ‘E’ are the first Aldershot League knockout cup winners of the season after their anticipated victory in the Sub Division section over a valiant Solartron ‘B’.
Charlie Vane, Bob Taylor and John Page had a single win apiece, but it was not enough to stop Frimley who scored through Robert Brittain (3), Dick Culver (2) and Peter Glass to take the cup 6–3.
Pyestock ‘A’ and Pinewood ‘A’will contest the main Knockout Cup final.
Pyestock swept past R.A.E.
‘A’ with disdain as Graham Outrim (3) and John Millward (2) saw them home 5–0.
Pinewood are shock finalists after an excellent 5–4 victory at Farnham Central ‘A’.
The odds were heavily on Central, second in division one, beating Pinewood who have been fighting relegation all season.
Initially, things went Central's way, with wins from Barry Piercey and Cliff Keen.
Pinewood came back with a spurt as Paul Hudlass (2) and Paul Tyler put them 3–2 ahead.
Jill Green equalised for Central and Hudlass restored Pinewood's lead before Green made it all square again at 4–4.
The last set was a tremendous battle between Philip Lau of Pinewood and Piercey.
Lau took the first 21–18, and Piercey the second 22–20.
In a nail-biting last game, Lau just edged home in deuce 22–20 to put Pinewood into their first cup final.
In the league, R.A.E.
‘A’ moved up to second in division one after beating bottom team Farnborough Tech ‘C’.
Lou Palaczky won all three and Terry White and Terry Duffield two each for R.A.E., with Richard Penton (2) replying for the Tech.
R.A.E., though, have probably played too many games to stay second, as have their ‘B’ squad who, temporarily at least, moved out of the bottom two with a draw at two-man Pyestock ‘B’.
Roy Poynter and Derek Seager both won one, but went down to unbeaten Dave Stenning.
The tremendously exciting tussle for the division two title has finally ended with Farnham Central ‘C’ finishing up one point ahead of R.A.E.
‘C’ who are also promoted in second place.
As it happened, Central almost blew it at the end.
They just did enough to win 6–4 at lowly Ash ‘B’, with George Startup, Simon Peters and Jackie Rice all getting two, but losing to Peter Palmer.
Then they crashed 3–7 at home to third placed Marconi ‘A’ for whom Ian Cooper won all three and Graham Taylor and Simon Turner two each.
R.A.E.
had beaten Farnborough Tennis ‘A’, with Duncan Sibbick, Brian Clay and Dave Hewitt all winning two, and Graham Dickson taking a double for the tennis club.
In their final match, R.A.E.
were thwarted by the Central ‘B’ squad who forced a draw, with John Rose winning all three and Ali Matten two.
Duncan Sibbick scored two for R.A.E.
Division three champions Farnham Central ‘D’ had another easy win, disposing of two-man Ash ‘E’9–1, with Karim Lawji and Anthony Startup unbeaten.
To complete the Central club's joy, the ‘X’ squad are now certain to accompany the ‘D’'s into division two after defeating Ash ‘D’, Solartron ‘A’and Farnham Central ‘E’.
Peter Millard won nine out of nine and Mike Gunton six.
Alan Thompson (Solartron) and Doug Newell (Central ‘E’) both replied with doubles.
R.A.E.
‘E’ are confirmed as champions of division four.
They won 7–3 at Revenue ‘B’ and forced a draw at second placed I.O.F. who are themselves almost certain to be promoted.
Ricky Hensman and Nigel Goddard both won five out of six.
As well as the draw, I.O.F. whitewashed Mid Southern ‘A’.
In all, Kevin Tapp won five out of six and Tony Tapp four.
Farnham Central ‘G’ have clinched the division five title after beating Pyestock ‘K’, Marconi ‘C’and R.A.E.
‘G’, while going down to second placed Marconi ‘B’.
After this marathon series, John Boult won ten out of twelve, Elaine Blackburne eight and Allan Matten five.
Malcolm Read won all three for Marconi ‘C’, while Tim Ashdown won three and Tracy Ashdown two for Marconi ‘B’.
Marconi are also certain to go up after beating Pyestock ‘K’ and Ash ‘K’and drawing with Frimley ‘E’.
Tracy Ashdown won nine out of nine and Brian Huntsman five.
Pinewood ‘B’ are top of division six, but can still be overhauled by second placed Pyestock ‘L’.
Pinewood beat E.O.S., with Bert Buddle winning all three and Colin Fittall and Tristram Carey two each.
In the crunch match with Pyestock, though, it was the latter who gained the crucial victory as Mike Guess (3), Ian Guess (2) and Chris Guess outpointed Buddle (2) and Fittall.
RICHARD PENTON
ATHLETICS
AFD open days for youngsters
Aldershot, Farnham & District Athletic Club's open days for school athletes will be next week.
From 9.30 a.m. to 3.30 p.m. on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday (April 22nd to 24th), coaches from the club will be at the Military Stadium to instruct girls and boys aged nine to 16 in all track and field events.
The cost will be £2 plus 50p per event (maximum of three) to take part in a competition which will be held on the last day.
Athletes and coaches from other clubs will be welcome.
For more information, contact Sue Pocock (0252 28482) or Sheena Fitzmaurice (0344 778313).
There were good performances by some of A.F.D.'s youngsters in their national road relay championships which were held at Sutton Coldfield.
Running on the second leg in the boys' competition, Simon Pocock gained 38 places before handing over to Kevin Nash who passed another 16 teams to put his side into 12th.
Unfortunately, A.F.D. were missing Nick Benham who was injured at the end of the cross-country season during which he was the club's leading boy.
If he had run around the same time as Pocock (12 mins. 54) and Nash (12 mins. 59), A.F.D. would have progressed comfortably into the top ten.
Pocock's time was equal 18th quickest.
The club also finished 26th in the youths' event.
The middle stages were again the strongest.
Ian Tonkin clocked 12 mins. 58 to improve 16 positions and Owen Pettifor took a further ten with 12 mins. 59.
The colts were 44th, having been 39th at halfway, following a contribution of 14 mins. 31 from Oliver Holter who promoted them from 66th.
Liss Runners in the Marathon
Members of Liss Runners took part in the London Marathon on Sunday, hoping to raise over £8,000 for various charities.
They all finished in fine times, some beating their personal bests by several minutes.
Individual Liss times:
Anyone wishing to join the Liss club and perhaps start training now for next year's race should just turn up for training on Wednesday evenings (7 p.m.) and Sunday mornings (9.30 a.m.).
The sessions start from Newman Collard Playing Fields, Liss.
Young Harriers at Brighton
Thirteen young Waverley Harriers attended the first Brighton & Hove open meeting at Withdean Stadium on Saturday.
Toby Ewers put in another sterling performance in the youths mile, finishing a clear winner in 4 mins. 44.
Richard Hanna and Patrick Rivet were equal second (12.00 secs.) in the under-11 boys 75 metres.
Robin Dew equalled his personal best time of 15.4 secs. in the colts 100 metres, taking fourth place, and in the long jump he was also fourth in an excellent 4 metres 15, the BAF standard for this event and close to his personal best.
Philip Rivet, a newcomer to the track, was fifth in the colts 100m (15.5 secs.).
Conrad Allen came up trumps again, finishing fourth in the boys 800 metres in a personal best 2 mins. 22.
In the minor girls' 800m, Rachel Hall was third in a season's best of 2–41.6.
Other Waverley performances:
White sets the standard
Ian White of Farnham Triathlon Club had another successful outing in the Banana Leisure Burghfield 10½-mile road run.
Out of 300 good class competitors, he achieved a brilliant second place on a hilly route in 59 mins. 7 secs.
The winner's time was 58 mins. 54 secs.
The weather was wet and chilly and this run underlines the standard that White is setting in the club this year.
Stuart Trower rode in the East Grinstead T.C. hilly 25-mile cycle time trial.
In tough conditions, Trower did well to record 1 hr. 8 mins. 22 secs. against the winner's 1–3–54 and gain 18th place out of 52 starters.
A number of Farnham members rode in the Farnham to Winchester and back 53-mile reliability cycle ride.
Ken Wood of the B.T.A. regional committee, organised the event, setting a standard time of 2 hrs. 50 mins. to complete the route.
On a wet and windy day, the following members were successful:
Summer Double
Aldershot, Farnham & District AC promote the first Rushmoor Summer Double — two 10K road races at Rushmoor Arena, one on Wednesday, June 17th and the other on Wednesday, July 29th.
Many tempting prizes will be on offer, with £100 in vouchers for the men's winner, and £75 for the ladies winner.
Further information about the races and details of entry are available from —
‘Fair sex’ have edge in guile
Alton's rugby men were outnumbered, restricted, sin-binned and generally given a rough ride when a hand-picked side took on the club's ladies team in a fun game on Sunday morning.
And they had to admit that what the ‘fair sex’ lacked in muscle they made up for in guile as the ladies took a mid-game lead with a well-converted try.
But the game, referred with a scrupulous lack of bias by ladies' chairman Sue Hinkin, swung back in their favour and pride was restored as the men scraped to victory.
Smiles all round as Alton men thankfully take possession against the redoubtable ladies.
CYCLING
In-form man wins Farnham ‘10’
Bright sunshine welcomed the 20 riders that took part in Farnham Road Club's weekly ten-mile time trial.
Most expected better times and were not disappointed.
In-form Barry Robinson was quickest with a personal best 22 mins, 45 followed by the other six Farnham riders 
Alton Cycling Club fielded two members: Jeff McGill recorded 25–33 and Stuart Willis 25–50.
The people of Newbury saw a full field of 120 riders compete in the Jack Spencer Memorial ‘25’ on the H25/3 course.
A stiff breeze on the outward leg made it hard going over the longer half of the race, resulting in slower times.
Barry Robinson was, as expected, fastest of the five Farnham R.C. members, recording 1–01–01.
Alton C.C. only fielded two members.
Jeff McGill clocked 1–06–25 and Les Brill, in his first event this year, 1–14–28.
John Pritchard won the event with an incredibly fast 55–20.
N.E. HANTS YOUTH LEAGUE: U/12
Vital points for Manor
MANOR COLTS 4.
YORKTOWN 0
In a vital promotion match, Manor weathered the early Yorktown pressure and good saves were made by reserve goalkeeper Alan Baird.
To counter the strong-running Yorktown forwards, the Manor defence was re-organised, and with Neil Pink as sweeper, the back four of Michael Hefferman, Michael Larkin, Jamie Minto and Chris Payne took full control.
Manor took the lead midway through the first half with a well-taken goal by Sean Annells.
With the wind at their backs, Manor dominated the second half.
From a Neil Pink corner, the ball was cleared to outside the penalty area, where a strong shot from Minto flew over the defence into the net.
Lee Clutterbuck increased the lead with a strong volley, and clever headed goal by Jamal Griffith completed a fine win for Manor in one of their best games of the season.
U/15 FRIENDLY
Town's ten win through
FARNHAM TN. 3, WOKINGHAM TN. 2
Farnham played this entertaining friendly with only ten men, and they had to work hard to break down a useful Wokingham side.
The Farnham defence, with Nicky Martin outstanding, played well to contain Wokingham, but the visitors took the lead with a fine goal.
Farnham equalised just before the break, Neil Musgrove shaking off two challenges to lob the 'keeper.
Farnham took the lead just after the interval when Musgrove netted at the second attempt after a good save from the 'keeper.
Peter Pike and Davern Lambert had good efforts before Musgrove completed his hat-trick with a good shot on the turn.
Wokingham pulled a goal back near the end with a close-range header.
BOWLS
Haslemere welcome newcomers
Haslemere Bowls Club begin the 1992 season on Saturday, April 25th on the Recreation Ground in Old Haslemere Road (3 p.m.).
Members will be there to welcome any newcomers to give help and to lend woods, though there are some owned by the club for anyone's use.
The council-owned green is open to the public and the club can provide the necessary equipment for anyone to have a casual game.
DARTS
SUMMER LEAGUE
Teams wishing to take part in the Petersfield Town Summer Darts League should attend a meeting at the Green Dragon, Dragon Street on Monday (April 20), starting at 8 p.m.
Old and new teams are welcome.
Red squirrels benefit from green tourists
HABITATS of the red squirrel, otter, bog bush cricket, and a wealth of other  rare species and threatened landscapes, will benefit from the activities of over 5,000 environmentally aware tourists this summer.
The British Trust for Conservation Volunteers' new Natural Break brochure includes over 450 opportunities to escape to some of the country's most spectacular settings and make a real contribution to their survival.
This year's programme of conservation working holidays ranges from the challenge of drystone walling in the Lake District and the chance of medieval fencing in Richmond Park, to the repair of ancient earthworks on the Isles of Scilly and the restoration of footpaths in the Yorkshire Dales.
The Natural Break brochure, sponsored by British Gas, reveals a wealth of conservation opportunities around the country.
Many also include other pursuits such as canoeing or caving, environmental education for the family, archaeological exploration, or insights into the hidden lives of many species — badgers, long-eared bats, marsh harriers and natterjack toads.
The Natural Break experience has something for everyone — including the wildlife.
The  threatened wetlands of south Wales and the internationally important heathlands of the east Devon commons, are all striking but valuable habitats, just awaiting the protection of the ‘green tourist’.
A free copy of the brochure is available from 
‘Skip a lunch’ and save life!
Food and medicine paid for by public donations in response to last year's Skip lunch…save a life appeal meant that millions facing famine were helped.
This child was pictured by David Stewart-Smith at a Save the Children feeding centre in Mogadishu, Somalia.
In the midst of conflict, the charity run seven feeding centres for more than 5,000 severely malnourished children.
SKIP lunch…save a life.
That was the Save the Children slogan last year, and £5m. was raised and a great many lives were saved.
Surrey fund-raising manager Jacquie Dakin said: ‘If many thousands of people who responded last year can have raised that much, imagine what an even greater effort will achieve.’
It means — give up the price of a meal, or even a choc-bar snack, and give the money to SCF, whose life-saving work in Africa is again being targeted.
Princess Anne, president of the charity, will launch the appeal in London on April 27th and Jacquie Dakin and local supporters of SCF hope that Herald readers will respond in even greater numbers.
Donations can be made out to SCF and sent to Mrs. Dakin, at 54 High View Road, Guildford, Surrey GU2 5RT — or they may be directed to the charity through the Herald editor, at one of the newspaper's office.
Fundraising packs
Jacquie, who can be contacted on 0483 301831 for information — or for a fundraising pack that could be used by clubs, pubs and organisations — told the Herald: ‘Politics and now the general election have tended to dominate newspapers for a long time, squeezing out reports on stories about Africa — good as well as bad.
‘But the people there, and the problems, have not gone away.
Skip a lunch…is one way in which they can be remembered and helped.’
7 DAY TV GUIDE
PICK OF THE Films
Saturday
The ‘Burbs (1988), BBC1, 6.55pm.
Comedy of suburban paranoia starring Tom Hanks as a man who is determined to discover the truth about his neighbours, the Klopeks.
A first showing on British networks.
With Carrie Fisher and Bruce Fern.
The Presidio (1988), BBC1, 10.15pm .
Action-packed thriller receiving its first showing on British TV.
Two policemen are killed during a break-in at the Presidio (a San Francisco military base) and a former military policeman (Mark Harman) is assigned to work on the case with his former commanding officer (Sean Connery) who he hates.
The pair uncover a nasty conspiracy — while their animosity deepens.
Sunday
Ellis Island: The Movie (1984), LWT, 1.25pm.
Faye Dunaway and Richard Burton star in this drama about immigrants to the USA in 1907.
An ocean liner delivers to New York City another cargo of weary immigrants, who come ashore at Ellis Island.
Among them are a Russian Jew, who fled his native land after avenging the murder of his father, and the son of a poor Italian farmer.
Monday
Thunderball (1965), ITV, 8pm.
Regular Bond devotees will be delighted with this, his fourth film adventure.
There's not a single dull moment and Sean Connery is 007.
SPECTRE, the international crime syndicate, is planning its greatest financial coup.
Their plan is to hold the Western powers to ransom with the threat of using atomic bombs stolen during a NATO training mission — unless they receive £1million in diamonds.
With Claudine Auger and Adolfo Celi.
Tuesday
The Whistle Blower (1987) BBC1, 9.30pm.
Michael Caine, James Fox and Nigel Havers head the cast of this espionage thriller directed by Simon Langton.
With a security alert in operation at the GCHQ national security establishment, a suspected mole is mysteriously killed and linguist Bob Jones confides his misgivings about the intelligence business to his father Frank.
But Frank is not the only one listening to what Bob has to say.
Wednesday
Death Wish II (1981), Thames, TVS, 10.40pm Nothing succeeds like excess, it seems, as Charles Bronson reprises his thriller role as the vigilante architect caught up in the horror and violence of rape and murder.
In an attempt to build a new life for himself and his daughter, Paul Kersey takes a job managing a radio station in Chicago.
His daughter, however, is still finding it difficult to recover from her traumatic assault in New York.
Soon the bloody nightmare begins again.
Jill Ireland and Vincent Gardenia co-star.
The Deep (1977), ITV, 8pm.
While scuba diving during a romantic holiday in Bermuda, a young couple uncover both treasure and terror when they discover the wreck of a sunken ship, a World War Two freighter.
Nearby they find two oddly contrasting souvenirs, both keys to priceless treasures.
Lively, spirited and at times frightening adventure adapted for television.
Robert Shaw is suitable rugged, and Oscar nominee Nick Nolte Jacqueline Bisset and Eli Wallach also star.
Thursday
Spiderman Strikes Back (1978), BBC2, 6pm.
When three students steal a quantity of uranium, Spiderman finds himself called upon to sort out a sinister web of international arms dealing.
Nicholas Hammond plays student scientist Peter Parker who, after a laboratory accident is given amazing spider powers which he can summon to combat the forces of evil.
But the champion of good also has to dodge investigative reporter Gale Hoffman, who is determined to scoop an interview with the superhero.
Friday
Deadfall (1968), TVS, 10.40pm.
Michael Caine stars as cat burglar Henry Clarke, a master jewel thief who has himself committed to a sanatorium for alcoholics to gain the confidence of a multi-millionaire.
On the day he is told he has been cured, Henry receives a mysterious female visitor who introduces herself as a fellow thief.
She tells him she and her husband want to join Henry in a partnership.
Henry tries to shake her off, but his attraction for her and a meeting with her homosexual husband changes his mind.
Another look at the Lawrence legend
Sally Lowe's TELEVIEW
THE STORY of the legendary Lawrence of Arabia has fascinated the media for many years, not least director David Lean, who made it into a famous feature film with Peter O'Toole in 1962.
Since then it's been turned into at least five TV series varying in length from one to nine parts.
In the latest attempt, producer David Puttnam has brought his vision to the screen after a period of 11 years between idea and fact, and he feels viewers are going to like what they see.
In fact the two-hour film due to be shown on ITV on Saturday April 18 is an extraordinary study of a little known period of T.E.
Lawrence's life, that which followed the historic desert victory over the Turks and the capture of Damascus by the Arabs, led by Prince Feisal.
A Dangerous Man — Lawrence After Arabia looks at the maverick hero not on the battlefield but in London and Paris after World War I.
We find the British army officer struggling to help the Arabs achieve independence and freedom from colonial interference against fierce opposition by the superpowers, and having to face arrogance, smugness and suppressed venom from those allies who considered the indigenous races a minor detail.
Puttnam wanted to show how the decisions made at the Paris peace conference continue to affect the situation in the Middle East today.
Feisal, for instance, was not welcomed by the French in Syria and as a result was installed king of another emergent country — Iraq.
Leading Shakespearean actor Ralph Fiennes, nephew of the explorer Sir Ranulph Fiennes, favours the romantic Lean image of Lawrence as tall, diffident and spiritual, with sensitive eyes and a charismatic personality, but the mad neurotic quality has gone, leaving only a nervous giggle and an impish sense of humour.
A fan of the Lawrence story since boyhood, Ralph, 28, took lessons in Arabic to prepare for his role.
He will soon be seen in the TV police drama Prime Suspect and will also play the tempestuous Heathcliff in a new film of Wuthering Heights.
Although Lawrence's relationship with Feisal was close, the film does not portray its hero as homosexual, merely a little strange.
Ralph considers Lawrence was asexual.
‘He was at ease in the company of men but I believe that sex didn't interest him and was even repugnant to him.
He was illegitimate, one of five brothers, with an extremely dominant mother.
‘He was enormously complex and he had an almost inner pain about who he was sexually, what his role was, where he should be in life.
‘He was a medieval scholar and he loved physical activity, punishing himself like the medieval saints.
I think there was a driving need in him to push himself to the limits, and there was a purity in the desert and in the Arabs as a race which appealed to him.’
Prince Feisal is played by 26-year-old Siddig El Fadil, son of a Sudanese politician and a British mother and nephew of the actor Malcolm McDowell, in his first film role.
He is due to appear as a Palestinian architect in a Channel 4 drama series The Big Battalions.
He is anxious to improve the image of Arabs on television and show them as sophisticated, gentle and friendly.
‘The most important thing I wanted to show about Feisal was that he was a nice person.
There are no Arabs on television except terrorists, and I was desperate to show an Arab who viewers might be seduced by, in an exotic way, like a nice truffle, tasty at first.’
Stephanie gets hold of a gripping, star-studded drama
WHEN Stephanie Cole went to the read-through of the BBC2 film Memento Mori, there were so many famous names present that she felt she'd stumbled into Who's Who in the Theatre.
As well as herself, the adaptation of Muriel Spark's witty macabre novel stars Maggie Smith, Michael Hordern, Renee Asherson, Thora Hird, Maurice Denham, Muriel Pavlow and Cyril Cusack to name but seven.
The story hinges on a group of aged Londoners who start receiving anonymous phone calls announcing ‘Remember you must die’.
Stephanie, a mere stripling of 50, thought at first she wasn't old enough for her part, but two hours of make-up, a wig and plenty of padding soon solved that problem.
She plays the elderly Dame Lettie Colston, a committee lady and general busybody who starts what develops into a witchhunt when she finds herself the telephone caller's first target.
Lettie, a smart and tweedy battleaxe suddenly glimpsed in flannelette nightie and a hairnet, is a figure of fun who would be utterly loathsome if she really existed.
The fact that the 100-minute film screened on Sunday April 19 as part of the Screen Two season was directed by jack Clayton conveys something of its quality.
Clayton's acclaimed feature films include Room At The Top, The Pumpkin Eater, The Great Gatsby and The Lonely Passion of Judith Hearne.
After making her name as a prisoner of war in Tenko (in which she appeared with Renee Asherson), Stephanie has been busy with a second series of the TV comedy Waiting for God about a group of crumblies living in an old folks' home.
She has toured Driving Miss Daisy and is now starring in a Rodney Ackland play at Richmond called The Dark River, playing an elderly schoolteacher whose son was killed in the First World War.
Filming of a third series of Waiting for God begins on May 4 for transmission in the autumn.
Although she loved the script, she was amazed when the first series was a hit.
‘I thought, is Britain really going to be interested in two elderly people in a residential home?
It's been extraordinary because it's really taken off, and it does deal with a lot of issues that are very pertinent to elderly people's lives.’
Stephanie is regularly offered geriatric roles and thinks it is because she was brought up surrounded by archetypal elderly Englishwomen —‘I suppose it entered my bloodstream’.
But she isn't complaining.
Memento Mori in particular she considers a great blow for old age, full of vigorous famous actors aged over 70 and in some cases over 80.
Her parts often require her to be prim and snooty but she says she is nothing like that in reality.
‘I swear like a trooper and I'm virtually unshockable,’ she asserts.
Tuesday sees the first TV screening of the controversial film Jesus of Montreal — it's on Channel Four, starting at 10 p.m.
BUSINESS HERALD
Secretaries hit out at that bad office equipment
OFFICE equipment manufacturers have been criticised by Britain's secretaries and office staff for badly-designed desks, tables, chairs and other items which have led to expensive clothing being ruined.
This is revealed in a survey by Alfred Marks recruitment consultants, who quizzed 304 secretaries and other office staff on their attitudes towards clothing wear and tear in the workplace.
Almost three in four stated that for work purposes they bought good quality clothing to last, but almost half also said that they had completely ruined an item of clothing during working hours.
For women, two-thirds had ruined tights and stockings, almost half skirts, and a quarter blouses and shoes.
For men, the biggest threat was to their shirts, with over a third claiming to have had at least one ruined.
A quarter also said that they had had shoes spoiled.
Almost three in four women had ruined clothing or tights and stockings by ‘catching them’ on furniture, and two in five blamed badly-designed office equipment for the damage.
A further third blamed companies for not maintaining their equipment properly.
Desks were regarded as the biggest culprit for damage, followed by doors and their handles.
A third of respondents, however, blamed damage on their own clumsiness, and nine in ten admitted having spilled at least one or a combination of the following on themselves; coffee, tea, correction fluid, tea, copier toner, water, cold drinks and glue.
Over two-thirds agreed that if they had caused damage to their own clothes at work, the company should not be liable for repairs.
However, a similar number thought that if a colleague had caused the damage, the company should pay.
Almost half would be enthusiastic about the prospect of a stylish ‘mix and match’ uniform.
‘Buying clothes for work is an expensive business,’ says Lavina Perry, national operations director.
‘Most office staff want to project a smart, professional image for their companies, and a lot of effort goes into choosing good quality items that will last.
‘That effort and expense however is sometimes wasted through poor design and maintenance of office equipment and furniture, which is a pity as potentially this could lead to declining standards of dress in the office.’
TALK TO HELP BUILDING INDUSTRY
MORE than 60 delegates attended a seminar aimed at putting the Hampshire construction industry in better shape in 1995.
Held at Chilworth Manor, near Southampton, and organise by Hampshire Training and Enterprise Council, the one-day event examined the key issues which the industry are likely to face during the next three years.
It attracted representatives of leading building firms including John Laing, Warings Contractors and Brazier and Son, architectural and surveying practices, as well as those involved in the training of construction workers.
These ranged from the Construction Industry Training Board to Portsmouth Polytechnic, Southampton Institute of Higher Education, Southampton Technical College and the Department of Building and Engineering at Highbury College of Technology, Cosham.
There were also delegates from industry associations including the Building Employers' Federation and the Heating and Ventilating  Contractors' Association.
Aimed at helping the country's construction industry to survive the recession and emerge ready for the competitive European future, the conference fielded a strong line-up of speakers.
Workshops
In addition to considering planning, quality and training issues, a medium-term economic forecast for the Hampshire industry was presented by Rob Thomas, senor lecturer at Portsmouth Polytechnic, while Andrew Stear, European director of international chartered surveyors, David Langdon and Everest, identified opportunities in Europe.
Delegates discussed the issues raised by speakers in five afternoon workshops — The Economic Outlook, Training for Craft, Training for Professionals, the European Market and Quality in Construction.’
TEC managing director Dr. Max Wilson said: ‘The seminar attracted a lot of interest and was definitely mutually beneficial.
Delegates asked the TEC for greater support and we will endeavour to help them.
‘The event gave the TEC a good opportunity to discover the needs of this vital Hampshire industry, which is so important to the country's prosperity.
Now we will be able to come up with a plan in response to the many issues raised.
The new boss
MICHAEL Cannon has been appointed managing director of Sulzer (UK), of Farnborough.
He succeeds Peter Strangeway, who retires from his position, although he remains chairman of Sulzer (UK) Holdings.
When an advert pays off…
OWNER-MANAGED businesses in the south are aware of the need to maintain and increase marketing spend in the current difficult economic climate, according to a survey by chartered accountants and business advisers Grant Thornton.
The survey revealed that nearly 40 percent of those questioned have increased marketing activity in the past year while 57 percent have maintained their activity levels.
Advertising is felt to be one of the most important first choice marketing techniques by over 43 percent of firms.
Accordingly of those who have increased spend on one particular area in the past year advertising has accounted for the lion's share of growth.
However, mail-shots are gaining in popularity and 53 percent now consider them as either their first or second most effective marketing technique.
In addition, of those who have increased spend on one particular area in the past year mail-shots have been increased by nearly one quarter.
Nearly two-thirds of businesses handle marketing in-house with only 29 percent using an outside agency.
Corporate entertaining was considered the single most effective marketing technique by 14 percent of businesses.
Paul Steele, marketing partner with Grant Thornton's Petersfield office, says: ‘Encouragingly this survey confirms that businesses in the area are aware of the need for assertive marketing to maintain market share in the present business climate.
‘Businesses appear to be looking at ways to market themselves with an increasing emphasis on mail-shots, public relations and advertising.
As the survey shows in order to ensure survival businesses have realised the need to market cost-effectively’.
Cheers! at 99p a pint
A 99p-A-PINT CAMRA-Gales Cask milk promotion was launched last week at the Queens Head, Farnham.
The promotion is sponsored by the Alder Valley Bus Company, Gales and the local CAMRA branch.
Alder Valley buses stop outside the Queens Head and there are regular buses including late night journeys from the pub.
Handbills and windowbills will be displayed on buses and distributed throughout the area.
The Surrey-Hampshire Borders CAMRA branch have developed a successful campaign to support the Gales Trail:
‘Don't get a ban, get a bus.’
This campaign has been supported by both Alder Valley and Southdown bus companies.
To coincide with a CAMRA 21st birthday party on April 14th, the Queens Head will also be the base for a press launch of Gales Festival mild, a special brew available for a limited period in 21 Gales-tied houses.
Left to right: George Turner, Gales trade man; John Ward, CAMRA; Moyra Robb, third brewer; Ray Smith, drayman; Grant Cook, branch chairman CAMRA, with a 1926 Austin-Healey dray.
Farmers get the fresh feeling
SUPERMARKETS have taken over the consumer food role that farmers and market gardeners traditionally played in selling products direct to the public.
On Easter Sunday and Monday April 19th and 20th, farm shops and food and drink producers from southern England are coming together at a traditional food fair at the Weald and Downland Open Air Museum, Singleton, near Chichester, to show how local produce can be bought on a regional basis.
Visitors will be able to see, sample and purchase many of the products on show, including cheeses, dairy produce, vegetables, pates and smoked fish, bread, preserves, honey, mushrooms, wine, beer and cider.
Cheese
The show includes a traditional farmhouse cheese from Gospel Green, near Haslemere.
These are just a few examples of the types of products that can be found within the leading farm shops in Surrey who will also be exhibiting, including Secretts from Milford.
The fair opens at 11 a.m. on both days and runs until 5 p.m.
Mortgage plan success
WIMPEY Homes' redundancy protection plan is proving a big incentive to potential purchasers with more and more customers buying because of this policy.
OLYMPIC SUCCESS
ALTON paper merchants Pollock and Searby were visited by an exhibition van mounted by their parent company Arjo Wiggins.
Arjo had won the contract to supply all the printed paper required for the recent winter Olympics at Albertville, France — from tickets to brochures, carbonless forms to photo-copying paper.
The exhibition, which celebrated the event and outlined the role which each department of the company had played in the task, was on the last leg of its 5,000-mile tour of Arjo companies in Britain and Europe.
Throughout its day at Pollock and Searby's Mill Lane premises the exhibition was visited by company staff.
Architect Jack plans house protection
HEADLEY architect Jack Warshaw is pinning faith in the success of his new practice on the growing desire to protect the environment, by helping people prevent damage to their most valuable assets — their homes.
His vision of owners applying the same judgements to their buildings as they might to their car or their rivers being polluted by waste dumping.
It is an idea which has both short and long-term appeal, particularly to those who have period buildings to care for.
Mr. Warshaw, who specialises exclusively in conservation work says the immediate benefits are both financial and aesthetic.
Money spent wisely on repairs, preventive maintenance or sensitive adaptation is money saved, and the value of the property is maintained or enhanced.
The character of the building is also best preserved when its original fabric or ornament is conserved, not altered, removed or replaced.
Estate agents nowadays confirm that the character of any building is a key element of its market value.
Mr. Warshaw points out that most of today's historic buildings are simply old houses which have survived, but believes that many modest houses of no great age have every chance of becoming cherished heritage of the 21st century if they are not spoilt in the meantime.
Large numbers of them have been included in conservation areas over the past 20 years.
Based at the 15th century Wey House, near Headley Mill, Mr. Warshaw practices what he preaches.
Although the house, originally a simple hall house, has been extended and altered at least five times over nearly 600 years, it still has an overall integrity due to the use of matching materials, traditional forms and construction.
Nothing much has changed in nearly 100 years however, and Mr.  Walshaw has no plans to do anything more than careful, small scale enhancement and maintenance using traditional methods and family labour.
As well as being an architect, he is a chartered town planner, and is specially qualified in building conservation.
He moved to Headley with his family last year from London, where he had won a reputation as a campaigner in his community, and set up practice as Jack Warshaw Conservation Architecture and Planning after many years as head of conservation at Wandsworth Council.
That experience, providing free advice to the borough, started a desire to apply his knowledge to promoting the conservation of the environment generally, not just for a relative few previous buildings.
Every day there were enquiries about roof repairs, brickwork and pointing, the design of extensions, reinstatement of missing features and many other subjects.
To increase public knowledge, he set about creating Britain's first comprehensive design guide for houseowners, called Do It In Style, which Wandsworth Council are now publishing, as well as writing and speaking on the subject.
‘I really love my job,’ he says, ‘and that has meant giving up the security of local government to seek a wider role, putting my money and reputation where my mouth is.
‘With house costs running to thousands of pounds, it's crazy not to invest in proper care and expect value for money.
At times when selling is difficult, owners who maintain standards will appeal to a wider market, sell faster and reach a higher price,’ says Mr. Warshaw.
He believes he should always save clients far more than his fee by avoiding unnecessary work which could cost thousands now and even more to remedy later.
Jack Warshaw…plans for conservation
Cash advice
A NEW booklet on practical cash management for small to medium-sized businesses has been produced jointly by accountants and business advisers, Grant Thornton, and print, copy and design specialists, Kall Kwik.
Commended by the CBI, Cash Management addresses the immediate needs of smaller businesses wanting to generate and retain cash.
it is the first of a series of free booklets being produced by Kall Kwik aimed at helping small to medium-sized businesses.
The booklet provides practical guidelines on how businesses can:
manage their working capital requirements
make sure they are properly funded
forecast effectively
identify information needed to monitor and control cash
Richard Brucciani, chairman of the CBI smaller firms council, said: ‘The CBI are delighted to support the initiative that both Kall Kwik and Grant Thornton have taken in producing their booklet.
‘Whether the market is buoyant or depressed and whether you are doing well or struggling, I strongly commend the practical advice contained in Cash Management.
Their joint thoughts on this vital area for business are uniquely relevant.’
Paul Steele, business advisory partner at the Petersfield office of Grant Thornton, said: ‘Grant Thornton grew as a result of our focused expertise in servicing growing, owner-managed businesses, and the advice in the booklet reflects the practical experience we have gained.
‘The bedrock of Britain's business community is formed by its vast number of small and medium-sized businesses.
Their survival is vital, not only to themselves, but to large companies which depend on their products and services.
No matter how potentially profitable a business is, it may go under simply because it fails to meet its day to day cash commitments.’
Cash Management is available, free of charge by sending a C5-sized, self-addressed, envelope (with a 36p stamp) to Mrs. Jo Gawthorpe .
It is also available from local Kall Kwik outlets.
Complaints over the copier
GUILDFORD solicitor Michael Frisby is playing a leading part in the battle to help thousands of unsuspecting businesses left with huge bills after signing misleading contracts for their photocopiers.
Many of the complaints relate to ‘copy plan’ agreements under which charges are based on the number of copies made.
Mr. Frisby believes companies often pay little attention to the contract, thinking it involves only a few pence per copy.
‘but, when they find out they have agreed to spend more than £100,000 over the life of the agreement, they are shocked,’ he said.
A member of Stevens and Bolton's commercial litigation department, he was asked to advise the national Campaign to Clean up Copier Contracts because of his success in dealing with many complaints in the past three years.
He spoke at the campaign's official launch at the Houses of Parliament, followed by a public meeting for companies at Central Hall, Westminster.
The meeting was filmed by the BBC's Watchdog consumer affairs programme.
The aim is to curb rogue salesmen by replacing existing misleading contracts and establishing a code of practice on which Stevens and Bolton are advising.
‘Thousands of businesses, large and small, have already suffered from the activities of unscrupulous photo-copier salesmen, and unclear contracts.
In some cases, these have led companies to liquidation and individuals to bankruptcy,’ added Mr. Frisby.
‘The warning applies to all kinds of contracts relating to business equipment including faxes, and vending machines.
I would urge companies to check their contracts.’
Points to watch for: Service contracts lasting up to nine years when the average life of the machine is three-and-a-half.
Changing machines means a new contract, so the company are locked in for a fresh term, again of up to nine years.
Separate maintenance contracts, much longer than the minimum term of the lease, mean paying for maintenance after the machine has been returned.
Minimum monthly number of copies — irrespective of use — and built-in annual price increases.
For example, an agreement to use a minimum of 20,000 copies per month at an initial 5.4p per copy, and with a built-in annual increase of nine percent, totals more than £168,000 over nine years.
Companies with a problem should act promptly and with legal advice, because delay could affect their legal rights.
An advice leaflet prepared by Michael Frisby is available from Stevens and Bolton on 0483 302264.