

HOW BROWN OWL BECAME A BRIDE
‘MR.
GORDON lets us go into Longreen Park because he likes Brown Owl.
I heard Mitzi tell Pack Leader.’
‘Do you think he wants to be Brown Owl's sweetheart?’
‘If they get married will Brown Owl have the four Sixers as bridesmaids?’
‘No, silly; She couldn't have four bridesmaids.
There's only ever two at weddings.’
‘Oh, no, there isn't, Anita Wellings!
There can be as many as you like.’
‘There couldn't be six.’
‘There could!’
‘There couldn't!’
‘All right, then — let's ask Mitzi.’
Mitzi, who was Brown Owl's assistant, told them when asked that there was no limit to the number of bridesmaids  a bride could have, but that two or three was most usual, for various reasons that she explained.
But when she learned that their questions had arisen through their wonderings about Brown Owl and Mr. Gordon she told them sharply not to busy themselves in Brown Owl's private affairs.
The 2nd Longreen Brownies, however, took a deep interest in their Brown Owl.
She was young and pretty and very nice indeed.
The Brownies loved her.
If, as it seemed, Mr. Gordon did too, it was a matter that greatly concerned the Brownies.
Mr. Gordon was estate agent to Sir George Phillips, the owner of Longreen Manor.
It had not escaped the Brownies' sharp eyes that Mr. Gordon turned up near the close of each Pack Meeting and made himself very charming to Brown Owl.
The 2nd Longreen Pack held their meetings in fine weather in the wild park of Longreen Manor, by permission of the estate agent, which he had obtained specially from Sir George Phillips.
That was another pointer to Mr. Gordon's sweet feelings towards Brown Owl.
‘If Brown Owl married Mr. Gordon would she still go on being our Brown Owl?’ asked Hilary Faulkes, in a troubled voice.
The notion that they might lose their Brown Owl if she married shocked the Pack.
‘If she married Mr. Gordon she'd live at Longreen, so she could still be our Brown Owl,’ argued Anita, ‘but if she married somebody else and lived away she couldn't go on being.’
In the light of this explanation, the Pack decided it would be better if Brown Owl married Mr. Gordon rather than anybody else, who might take her away.
The thing was to keep her as Brown Owl of the 2nd Longreen Pack.
One Brownie, however, Judy Joliffe, who was Second of the Leprechaun, privately hoped Brown Owl wouldn't marry Mr. Gordon.
The reason for this was that she didn't like Mr. Gordon.
She didn't quite know why, but she didn't.
Perhaps it was because she liked Brown Owl so much that she wanted her to marry someone rather  special and wonderful.
Mr. Gordon was young and, in a way, handsome, but he wasn't somehow as fine as Judy was sure the man who married Brown Owl should be.
Mr. Gordon had persuaded Sir George Phillips, who was a rather crabby old man, to let them use the Park for their meetings, but, all the same, Judy had the feeling that Mr. Gordon did it for Brown Owl and not at all for the Brownies.
‘I don't believe he likes Brownies,’ she confided to her best friend, Mary Trent, ‘and if he doesn't and Brown Owl married him he might not want her to go on being our Brown Owl.’
Brown Owl herself didn't know whether she wanted to marry Mr. Gordon or not.
She thought about him a good deal, and she was troubled because she couldn't feel sure about her feelings towards him.
Usually on Pack Meeting nights he waited until Brownie Bells had been sung and the Brownies were ready to go home before joining Brown Owl, but one evening, when the Brownies were engaged on various activities of their own, he came across to Brown Owl, and they walked about, talking earnestly.
The Brownies didn't know it, but he had asked Brown Owl to marry him.
Judy was throwing a ball to Mandy Maddison, who was learning to catch a ball with the left hand as part of her Keep Fit Challenge.
Mandy missed the catch, and flung the ball back rather crossly.
It was a wild throw.
The ball flew high and wide of Judy and over the high wire fence behind her.
This ran along the edge of the parkland and was marked with a DANGER notice giving warning that the ground beyond was swamp.
‘Oh, bother!’ exclaimed Mandy.
‘But I know how to get it back.
I can crawl under the wire where it's broken.
I can do it easily.’
‘No, you mustn't!’ cried Judy.
‘It's all marshy in there.
Brown Owl told us, and the notice says DANGER.
Mandy, it says DANGER.
D'you hear?’
But Mandy wasn't always obedient to rules.
She wormed her way under the fence where the wire had burst from its pegs.
‘I can get it.
It hasn't gone in any bog,’ she called.
Judy was troubled and looked anxiously towards Brown Owl, who, however, was walking with Mr. Gordon and had her back turned.
Judy knew Brown Owl would be very cross if she saw Mandy on the other side of the fence — but she didn't have time to worry very long about that, for in a minute or two a loud, frightened scream shrilled from Mandy, who had stepped forward and bent to pick up the ball resting on the bright-green surface of the ground — and found herself up to her knees in treacherous, clinging slime.
Judy dashed to the fence, but Brown Owl had heard Mandy's cry.
Turning swiftly, she saw at once that the Brownie was on the forbidden side of the fence.
She came running.
‘Stay where you are, Judy!’ she cried, as she saw Judy on her hands and knees about to crawl under the wire to Mandy's rescue.
Judy obeyed and stood up again.
Mr. Gordon sprinted ahead of Brown Owl.
He reached the fence first, then wriggled his way under the wire and ran to the edge of the vivid-green swampland.
Then he reached out, grasped Mandy's outstretched hand and pulled her back to safe, solid ground.
He was very angry.
He shook Mandy, who burst into tears.
Her face was chalk-white.
‘You naughty girl!
How dare you get under the fence!
You can read, can't you?
What does the notice say?
Danger, doesn't it?
I've a good mind never to allow you in the Park again!’
He would have said much more, but Brown Owl, who had crawled under the fence, hurried to them and put her arms round poor, scared Mandy.
‘It's all right, James, leave her to me,’ she said to Mr. Gordon.
‘She's had a nasty fright.
I'll look after her.’
With soothing words, she comforted Mandy.
Brown Owl knew that this was no time to scold her, even if Mr. Gordon didn't.
The result of this drama was that Brown Owl wasn't able to give Mr. Gordon an answer to his marriage  proposal either yes or no.
She took Mandy home at once and explained to Mrs. Maddison what had happened.
Perhaps Mr. Gordon had good reason to feel sore with Mandy, who had chosen to step into the bog just when he wanted Brown Owl to be thinking about becoming his wife.
When the Pack met the following week the broken fence had been repaired and the DANGER notice repainted in vivid red, so that no one could miss seeing it.
Mandy didn't come to the meeting, Mrs. Maddison keeping her at home as a punishment for her disobedience in going into the swamp.
But nearly all the Pack were there, though Mitzi had gone on holiday.
They had a busy and happy meeting and ended by taking a part in perhaps the most thrilling adventure that ever befell a Brownie Guide Pack.
It happened like this.
They were all playing a singing game when they became aware of an aeroplane droning overhead.
Everyone was too interested in singing to the actions of the game to take much notice, but as the game came to an end the Brownies saw that Brown Owl was gazing upwards with a rather troubled look on her face.
The aeroplane — quite a small one — was circling round far overhead.
Its engine was coughing and spluttering, stopping and then picking up again.
‘Is there something wrong with the plane, Brown Owl?’ asked Nicola, the Sprite Sixer.
‘It does sound as though there is,’ answered Brown Owl, ‘and it keeps circling, almost as if the pilot is looking for somewhere to land.’
‘Oh, wouldn't it be exciting if it landed near us!’ cried Hilary.
‘Not if it landed there!’ replied Brown Owl sharply, and pointed towards the swampland on the other side of the fence.
Then the Brownies realised what terrible danger would lie in wait for the pilot of the plane if he should try to make an emergency landing on the wide, green, treeless tract of the swamp, which looked like solid ground but  wasn't.
From the air it might seem to be an ideal landing-strip.
It soon became quite certain that the plane was in trouble.
The engine was stuttering and cutting out.
As the Pack watched, the plane circled lower in wide sweeps.
‘He's going to bring the plane down on the swamp!’ cried Brown Owl sharply and suddenly.
The small meadow in which the Brownies met was dotted with clumps of bushes and young trees, and most other parts of Longreen Park were wooded, so it could be understood why a pilot should choose what looked like a clear open green space to land his plane on.
‘James, the plane!’
Brown Owl called out anxiously to Mr. Gordon, who had just come down to the gate leading into the Brownies' meadow.
‘I'm terribly afraid it's going to come down in the marshland.
Its engine is missing badly and it's circling round as if looking for a landing-place.
Can you do something — anything?’
‘I don't know what,’ replied Mr. Gordon, looking grave as he stared up at the circling plane.
‘There's no way of giving warning to the pilot from here that it's swamp below.
I'll go up to the house and phone the police and get an ambulance to stand by.
I'm afraid that's just about all I can do.’
He hurried away, but Brown Owl was far from satisfied.
She stood gazing up, trying desperately to think of some way of warning the pilot away from the deadly, treacherous swamp.
‘The semaphore flags!’ she cried suddenly to the Brownies.
Then, shaking her head: ‘No, no — he couldn't read them from above.’
She turned to the Pack, standing silent about her.
‘Brownies, the pilot of the plane is in deadly danger.
We must think of some way to save him.
Let us all pray earnestly to God to guide him away from the swamp.’
As the plane circled in wide sweeps, each one lower than the other, the Pack did pray — silently, sincerely — Brown Owl with them.
Then, after a minute, Judy spoke up.
‘Couldn't we write out a message on the ground, Brown Owl, so that the pilot could see it — with stones or something?’
‘I don't quite see how, Judy.’
Brown Owl shook her head.
‘There aren't any stones large enough to spell out a message with.
There wouldn't be…’
Then she stopped.
‘Oh, Judy, there's a wonderful idea in what you've said.
It has just come to me.
I believe it is the answer to our prayer.
We could spell out a warning message — not with stones, but with ourselves!’
‘With ourselves?’
The Brownies looked at each other wonderingly.
‘Listen!’
Brown Owl spoke quickly.
‘Every Brownie must stay exactly as I put her — on the ground.
She mustn't move an inch.
There's not a moment to lose.
I'm going to spell out a warning to the aeroplane pilot by making you all into letters.
I know you will all be true Brownies.
If you truly Lend a Hand now you will all help to save the pilot and the plane.
Please come as I call your names.
Julie Garth — Anita — then Susan —‘
One by one the Brownies stepped forward.
One by one, at Brown Owl's direction, they lay on their backs on the ground.
As they did so, the plane circled lower.
Brown Owl, moving quickly, placed Brownie after Brownie in position, until she had formed the first human letter:—
Without pausing, she called other Brownies forward.
Soon she had formed them into a big circle, like this:—
‘Only one more letter, Brownies!’ she cried.
‘Stay frozen!
You're being quite wonderful!’
It was very hard for the Brownies to stay still and quiet on the ground, just gazing up into space, especially when every now and again the circling plane came between them and the sun and cast a strange, dark shadow over them.
That was rather scaring.
But not a Brownie moved.
Brown Owl felt tremendously proud of them.
At last the third letter was complete:—
Then Brown Owl called to the Brownies who were left and made them lie with their heads pointing towards the swampland, then with the last two Brownies she made an arrowhead, like this:—
Now, clearly outlined on the ground in large letters formed of Brownies, was the word BOG, followed by an arrow of human figures pointing to the green swamp!
And the pilot saw the message, read it, and understood it.
Brown Owl and the Brownies knew, because the plane swerved away.
The pilot couldn't lift the plane higher, for its engine had petered out, but he glided away from the deceptive green expanse of bog as he made further deep circling movements earthward.
Presently Brown Owl and the Pack heard a frightening distant, rending crash, and guessed that the plane had hurtled into the trees of Longreen Park woods.
‘Stay here in the meadow, please, Brownies.
You can get up now, but no one is to leave until I come back,’ Brown Owl called.
Her voice was strained and her cheeks were pale.
She ran through the gate leading into the main part of the Park.
The Brownies waited obediently, talking excitedly in low voices of what had happened.
Brown Owl was gone a long time, but at last she came back, and leaning on her arm and limping was the pilot of the plane.
‘The plane is wrecked, Brownies,’ Brown Owl said, as all the Brownies crowded to the gate to meet her, ‘but happily the pilot escaped with only a damaged leg.
He is Squadron-Leader Parkin.
He is hurt and shaken, but he  insisted on coming back with me to say thank you for making the message that warned him away from the bog.
I've told him how you did it, and how still and brave you were.’
‘You saved my life with your message, Brownies,’ the pilot said to them, leaning on the gate for support.
‘I shall try to think of some way of showing how grateful I am for your bravery.
Just now I can only say to you all, Thank you very, very much indeed.’
As Judy Joliffe gazed at him, she felt a glow of joy surge through her.
He was tall and lean and handsome, although he looked white and strained.
He seemed to her just the splendid, special kind of man for Brown Owl to marry.
And then, just as if in answer to her private thought, the pilot went on: ‘I'd like to kiss each one of you before I go, but as I can't very well do that I'll give your Brown Owl a big thank-you kiss for you all!’
And then, before them all, he bent down and gave Brown Owl a kiss.
And Brown Owl didn't seem to mind!
The Brownies gazed, and one or two giggled, but Judy Joliffe laughed in glee.
She felt quite sure now that Brown Owl would marry this pilot-prince.
And, do you know, she was right!
Mr. Gordon never had a look in after Brown Owl met that pilot.
Within six months they were married, and the four Sixers of the 2nd Longreen Pack were Brown Owl's bridesmaids, and all the Pack, including Mandy Maddison, attended the wedding.
Not only did Brown Owl go on living at Longreen and being their Brown Owl; the Pack won an unexpected new friend in Sir George Phillips, who, when he heard how they had saved the plane's pilot from disaster in the bog, suddenly turned out to be not ‘crabby’ at all, as Mr. Gordon had always made him out to be, but told them that they could use the Longreen Park meadow for just as long as they liked as a reward for their bravery.
MISTLETOE FOR MISS MIGGS
OLD Miss Miggs lived alone in a tiny cottage on the outskirts of Shadwell.
She was poor but proud, and the 1st Shadwell Brownie Pack had to be rather careful what they did for her.
Two or three times a week Brownies would call at Sundial Cottage to see if there was anything that needed doing — and there usually was.
Christine, the Imp Sixer, would sometimes call in on her way home from school and get tea for her.
Anne, the Pixie Second, often ran errands for her, and at one time or another most of the Brownies in the Pack had done a good turn for the little old lady.
One of the very special things Christine did for her was to write notes to leave for the tradesmen when Miss Miggs was going to be out when they called — like NO MILK TODAY, THANK YOU, or ONE SMALL LOAF, PLEASE.
This, Miss Miggs explained, was because her hand had become too shaky to form the letters clearly, but Christine knew perfectly well that the old lady couldn't write.
She had never learned to read, either, and on the very rare occasions she received a letter Christine was called in to read it to her, Miss Miggs being careful to explain that her eyes weren't as good as they used to be or that she couldn't find her glasses.
Christine, who had gained the Brownie Highway Badge, was an excellent writer and reader, and she felt rather grown-up as she wrote out notes for Miss Miggs or carefully read out to her a letter from her nephew.
Not by the slightest word or look did she betray to Miss Miggs that she knew she couldn't read.
Her nephew, Tim, was Miss Miggs's only relative, and he lived a long way away up in the North.
He had two small children, and it was Miss Miggs's dearest wish to see them.
But the journey from Gridford to Shadwell was too long for Tim to bring his family, and Miss Miggs always  said it was too far for her to travel to them .
Christine, however, knew very well that it wasn't the distance that kept Miss Miggs from travelling to Gridford, but the railway fare.
Miss Miggs had only her old-age pension to live on, and the return fare to Gridford, Christine found out, was very nearly seven pounds.
One evening at Pack Meeting about two weeks before Christmas, Christine brought up the subject of Miss Miggs during Pow-wow.
‘Please, Guider, could we have a Pack Venture to help Miss Miggs go and stay with her nephew at Christmas?
She had an invitation from him yesterday, and I know she's longing to go.’
‘She's wanted to go for a long time,’ said Anne, nodding.
‘She's told me so.
She says it's too far to travel, but I think it's really because it costs too much.’
‘It would cost seven pounds,’ added Christine.
Their Guider nodded.
‘Yes, I know.
I'd love to help her, and I know every one of us would; but I don't think for a moment that Miss Miggs would let us pay her fare, even if we could raise so much money.’
‘Why doesn't her nephew send her the money for the fare?’ asked Mary, one of the Sprites, who had often done a good turn for Miss Miggs.
‘Well,’ said the Guider, ‘he might not realise that she can't afford to visit him; relatives don't always think about points like that, and Miss Miggs would never tell him.
Another thing is that he himself might not be able to afford to send her the money, especially as he has a young family.’
‘I do wish we could help her — somehow,’ sighed Christine.
‘She's always talking about going to see her nephew and his children, but she's never gone and it's only because she hasn't enough money for the ticket.’
‘I'm sure it is, too,’ said their Guider, ‘but one has to be very careful about offering money to proud and independent old folk like Miss Miggs.’
‘If we had enough money we could buy her ticket and put it through her letterbox without letting her know who it was from,’ said Anne.
The Guider smiled.
‘It's a very sweet idea, Anne, but, do you know, I should hesitate to do that.
Somehow I feel it might hurt Miss Miggs's pride.’
‘Then I suppose all we can do is to take her one of our Christmas puddings and some holly and things,’ said Christine sadly.
‘Yes,’ agreed the Guider.
‘Unless we can think of something really clever, I'm afraid it's about all we can do.
She won't mind accepting something of that kind from the Pack, I know, and I'm sure she'll enjoy having you decorate the cottage for Christmas for her.’
The 1st Shadwell Pack had been very busy indeed for a long time.
The Pack Meeting Hall was now fairly bulging with Christmas gifts they had made or bought, or begged from their mothers.
Christmas puddings, jars of mincemeat, bunches of holly, fruit, nuts, table-mats, serviette-rings and dozens of other useful little articles they had made carefully and patiently were spread over a long trestle table in the hall.
The Pack spent a busy evening making up gift parcels to take round to the orphanage and to other people on the Guider's list.
They all loved this part of the Venture.
Christine, Anne and Mary arranged to take Miss Miggs's Christmas parcel along to the cottage the following morning, which was a Saturday.
Besides parcels of eatables and gifts, the Brownies carried a bunch of holly and some paper and tinfoil decorations that all the Pack had helped to cut out.
Berried holly was rather scarce and dear this year and their bunch was not very large.
Mistletoe was even dearer, and they hadn't any at all of that.
Most of the holly the Pack had to distribute had been given by Anne's father, who was a greengrocer.
‘Perhaps we could get some ivy to go with the holly,’ suggested Mary.
‘It would make it look more.
Let's look out for some on the way.’
They all agreed to this, and they became so occupied looking for ivy on the walls alongside the lane that they didn't see two boys suddenly come racing round the bend just by Miss Miggs's cottage.
The boys, who were bigger than the Brownies, ran full-tilt into them.
Christine was knocked sprawling.
Anne, trying to jump out of their way, caught her foot in the ditch by the grass-verge and pitched on to her front.
Mary was spun round, but managed to keep her feet, although the parcel she was carrying hit the ground and burst.
The boys didn't stop or even call out that they were sorry, but went charging down the lane as soon as they recovered their balance after the collision.
‘Are you all right, Christine — Anne?’ asked Mary, running to the help of her friends.
Christine was bruised, but her feelings were hurt more than her body.
Anne was not hurt, but her hands, face and overcoat were covered with mud.
The two Brownies struggled up, and Mary carefully gathered up the burst parcel.
‘I only hope the Christmas pudding is all right,’ said Christine anxiously.
‘Do you think it broke, Mary?’
‘I don't think so.
We'd better go to Miss Miggs and tell her what happened.
Don't try and brush the mud off your coat, Anne; leave it to dry, then it will brush off easier.
The three Brownies reached Miss Miggs's cottage feeling rather ruffled.
They told the old lady what had happened.
‘It must have been those boys who climbed the wall after my apples,’ said Miss Miggs.
‘I think they thought I was out.
It's my fault, really, I suppose.
I saw them from the window and called to them that I would tell the police who they were.
They ran away in a great hurry.
That's the second time this week I've had boys over my garden wall.
When Mr. Gosling picked the apples for me last month he left a few on the top branches he couldn't reach, and they're rather a temptation to boys, I expect.
What worries me is that they may break down the wall scrambling over it.
But come in, my dears, and sit yourselves down.’
Miss Miggs soon made the Brownies feel better.
She was a kind old lady.
She fetched some home-made cakes for them and a glass of lemonade each, and while they ate and drank opened her parcels.
She was delighted with the gifts.
‘How kind of you to bring me a Christmas pudding!’ she exclaimed.
‘It will be a great treat for me.
And a box of dates!
How did you know I've got a sweet tooth?’
‘We've brought the holly and the streamers and stars to hang up for you,’ Christine told her.
‘We'd like to borrow your steps, please,’ added Mary.
‘You start just as soon as you like, my dears,’ said Miss Miggs.
‘The steps are in the outhouse.
I expect your clothes will be dry enough to brush clean by the time you've finished.
I'll put your coat to dry by the fire,’ she told Anne.
Mary fetched the steps in, and the three Brownies were soon busy fixing up the decorations.
While they were doing this, Christine was thinking about the boys who had climbed over Miss Miggs's wall after the apples.
‘It would be doing a very good turn for Miss Miggs if we could climb up and pick those apples that are left,’ she suggested to Anne and Mary.
‘Then the boys won't break down her wall trying to get them.’
‘I expect they're very high up,’ said Anne doubtfully, ‘or Mr. Gosling would have picked them.’
‘I know!’ said Mary.
‘While you're brushing down your overcoat, Anne, Christine and I will go and look at the tree and see if we can climb up to the apples.’
‘All right, but mind you come and tell me if you can, so that I can climb up with you,’ said Anne.
This agreed, Christine and Mary ran out and down to the bottom of the long garden where the apple-tree stood.
But there they stopped, staring up, puzzled.
The few unpicked apples that bobbed and swayed on the bare top branches were all shrivelled up.
There were only about half a dozen of them, and they could see clearly that they were wizened and wrinkled and, quite plainly, not worth gathering
‘Well!’ cried Christine, perplexed.
‘Whoever would want those rotten old things?’
‘They must all be frostbitten by now,’ said Mary.
‘They look it too!’
‘Perhaps there are some we haven't seen,’ said  Christine.
She moved round the tree, peering up into the bare branches.
‘Miss Miggs said…’
Suddenly she stopped and let out a cry.
‘Mary, look!
D'you see?’
As her friend ran to her side, she pointed up the tree.
‘I think I know now what those boys were after — not apples at all, but — but —’
‘Mistletoe!’ cried Mary, finishing it for her.
‘Yes, that's it, Christine — mistletoe!
That's what the boys climbed the wall for!’
High up in the apple-tree, sprouting from one of the gnarled old limbs, was a great mass of mistletoe.
‘Mary!’
Christine seized her friend's arm.
‘I've just had a wonderful idea!
Come on — let's go into the house and tell Anne and Miss Miggs!’
Excitedly she raced back up the garden and into the cottage, followed by Mary.
‘Anne — Miss Miggs,’ began Christine breathlessly, ‘we've made a great discovery!
It isn't apples on the tree that the boys climbed the wall for at all—’
‘It's mistletoe!’ burst in Mary.
‘A huge clump of it!’
‘It doesn't look as if any of it has ever been picked!’
‘Anne,’ Christine said eagerly to the surprised Anne, ‘didn't you say that your daddy couldn't get enough mistletoe to sell this Christmas?’
‘Yes, he said it was very scarce,’ replied Anne.
‘Why?
Oh, I see!
You mean that —?’
Christine lowered her voice, so that Miss Miggs shouldn't hear.
‘He'  ll be in his shop now, won't he?
Let's go and tell him about Miss Miggs's mistletoe, and ask him to buy it!’
Christine put her mouth close to Anne's ear.
‘It might sell for enough to pay for Miss Miggs's railway fare to Gridford!’
‘I say!’ breathed Anne, her eyes shining.
‘Wouldn't it be wonderful if it did?’
Having made sure from Miss Miggs that she wouldn't mind if the mistletoe in her apple-tree were sold, especially as it had never occurred to her that she could sell it, three excited Brownies hurried away from Sundial Cottage  and didn't pause until they reached Anne's father's greengrocery shop.
‘Why, of course I'd be willing to buy lots of mistletoe,’ Anne's father told them when Christine put the important question to him.
‘I haven't been able to get enough this Christmas to satisfy my customers' needs.
Where is there any for sale?’
All three Brownies joined in to explain.
‘And Miss Miggs would be glad for it to go because boys have been climbing over her garden wall trying to get it,’ finished Christine.
‘And we want her to get a nice lot of money for it so that she can afford to go and visit her nephew up North,’ added Mary.
‘Oh, and how much money does she need for that?’ asked Anne's father, looking up quickly.
‘Seven pounds, Daddy,’ Anne told him.
‘So we hope that the mistletoe will be worth that.’
‘I hope it will,’ said her father, gazing at each of the three Brownies in turn, very thoughtfully.
‘But the only way we can find that out will be to go and look at this mistletoe, and on the way you can tell me more about Miss Miggs.’
And that is exactly what the Brownies did.
And the result of their explanations was as satisfactory as even they could have wished.
Anne's daddy looked at the mistletoe in the apple-tree when they reached Sundial Cottage and then went in with the three Brownies to see Miss Miggs.
And he said to Miss Miggs:
‘I shall be very pleased to buy the mistletoe in your apple-tree, Miss Miggs.
Mistletoe is very scarce and dear this year, and I can offer you seven pounds for it.’
‘Seven pounds!’ cried Miss Miggs, quite taken aback.
‘As much as that!
Why, that would be enough to take me to see my nephew Tim and his children at Gridford!
I haven't seen them since they were born.’
‘Then it's a deal!’ cried Anne's father briskly, and he counted out seven pound notes into Miss Miggs's hand, which was trembling with her excitement and pleasure.
‘Thank you,’ said Miss Miggs.
‘Thank you, sir, very  much, and thank you, my dears —’ to the Brownies.
‘It's all owing to you three that I'll be able to go to Gridford at last.
I shall take your Christmas pudding with me, and the box of dates too, and I shall tell them all how you came this morning with presents and decorations and then found the mistletoe for me!
This is going to be the happiest Christmas of my life!’
‘I think it's going to be for all of us too!’ said Anne's father thoughtfully.
‘Don't you, Brownies?’
‘Yes!’ cried three Brownies, loudly, all together.
GREEN FOR DANGER
‘YOU'LL be doing, not one good turn, but two, by taking these things to Granny Fordham's, Mary,’ said Mrs. Grant, the farmer's wife.
‘Granny Fordham will be thankful for them, and I'll be glad to know she's got proper nourishing food to eat, and that's a fact.’
The good farmwife packed a thick slab of butter into the basket among the loaves and jam, and then carefully placed eggs in the spaces between the provisions.
‘You'll be very careful how you carry the basket, won't you?’ she said.
‘I don't want the eggs to break all over the other things.’
‘I'll be careful, Mrs. Grant,’ Mary promised.
‘It's a wicked shame that the poor old thing has got to leave the cottage she's lived in most of her life,’ continued Mrs. Grant.
‘The new owner of the Enderley estate is a hard man, or he'd never have the heart to turn her out, even if he does want her cottage for a gamekeeper.
I'd give this Sir Benson Craig a piece of my mind if I met him, that I would.
There now, it's ready, so off you go.’
Mary set off cheerfully.
She was the Imp Second in the 1st Badgeworth Pack, and was keen on doing her daily good turn.
Old Granny Fordham, who lived in a lonely cottage on the Enderley estate, couldn't afford luxuries  like butter and eggs, and couldn't easily get to the shops in the village, so it would be doing a real service to take Mrs. Grant's gift to her.
Mary was wearing her Brownie uniform, because there was Pack Meeting that evening, and she could go straight on from Granny Fordham's to the Guide Hut through Enderley Park.
‘I'll have to ask Granny For&am to let me clean my shoes again when I get to her cottage,’ she told herself, as she picked her way between the puddles and muddy ruts of the lane.
‘They're getting dirty already.’
Badgeworth lay in the depths of the country, and there had been a lot of heavy rain of late.
Most of the land round the village belonged to Sir Benson Craig, the new owner of Enderley, whose great deer-park extended for miles around Granny Fordham's cottage.
Granny's son had been a gamekeeper on the estate, but now that he had gone elsewhere to work Sir Benson had given Granny notice that she must quit the cottage.
Mary's thoughts were suddenly and rudely shattered.
Without warning a big estate-car swung round a bend in the lane, its wheels throwing up a shower of mud and water.
Mary gave one horrified glance at it, then flung herself madly into the ditch at the side of the lane.
She was only just in time to escape being knocked down.
The car had rushed into view so unexpectedly and was moving so fast that Mary's only chance of evading it was to jump.
Mary's Brownie training had helped to make and keep her wide awake, and her swift action saved her.
She landed in a mixture of mud and water.
The substance was soft and so she was hardly bruised, but her uniform and her hands and face were smeared and streaked with mud.
The basket of provisions had hit the side of the ditch hard, and Mary, remembering the eggs, was almost afraid to look inside.
She struggled up, wiping a lump of mud from her forehead, and gazed after the car, which had not even slowed down.
It was almost out of sight now.
Then she peered into the basket.
The provisions were all jumbled together, and she could see at once that three of the eggs were smashed; but, on the whole, the basket had suffered less than she had herself.
‘Well, there isn't all that much damage done, anyhow,’ she told herself thankfully.
‘I think I'd better go on to Granny Fordham's.
I'll have dried out a bit by the time I get to the cottage, and I don't really want to go all the way back to the farm after I've come this far.’
Feeling rather uncomfortably damp and dirty, she set off again, turning off presently into a deep wood, through which a footpath led to the deer-park and then on to Granny Fordham's cottage.
‘Dear sakes!’ cried Granny Fordham when at length Mary rang her door-bell.
‘Whatever have you been doing to yourself, Mary Myers?
You are in a state!’
Mary told her what had happened.
‘The brutes!’ cried Granny indignantly.
‘I'd like to put the police on their track, I would, racing along country roads like that, without a thought for people's lives and limbs.
But come in, dearie, come in.
We'll see if we can get you to rights.’
Granny had a cheerful fire burning in the hearth, and she made Mary take her uniform off and put it to dry while she had lemonade and biscuits.
‘It's only mud, and when it's dry we'll be able to brush it off easily,’ she said.
Three of the eggs were broken, but the rest of the damage was only minor, and Granny was very grateful for having the provisions brought to her.
By the time Mary was ready to go, her uniform was dry and showed only a faint mark or two.
She had washed, and felt quite fit to present herself at Pack Meeting.
‘Goodbye, Granny!’ she said.
‘I'm going straight on to the Guide Hut through the West Wood.’
‘Mind how you go then, dearie.
It's always soggy round the West Wood, bein' as it's near the marsh.’
There were notices in Enderley Park warning strangers that the woods were private, but the villagers had always been allowed over all the estate.
There had been rumours lately that the new owner was going to stop even local  people from using the estate, because poaching had been going on, and some of the deer had been found wounded.
The West Wood was dim and silent as she trod the grassy track through it.
Ferns grew head-high on either side, and suddenly Mary started back with a cry as the ferns parted and something bounded through them and leapt across the path not two feet from her.
It was a deer.
It plunged into the deep undergrowth on the other side of the path and was lost to sight almost before Mary recovered from the shock.
‘Gosh!’ breathed Mary.
‘It must have been lying in the ferns and took fright when I came along.’
She frowned.
‘No, that's not right.
It would have run the other way if it had heard me coming.
Something else must have startled it.’
Puzzled by the incident, she went on, but less than a dozen paces further on came to a sharp stop.
A quiet, grass-grown ride branched off into the dimness of the wood, and in the surface were imprinted deep wheelmarks.
Mary was a sharp-eyed Brownie, and she had noticed the wheel-marks left in the muddy lane by the estate-car that had nearly knocked her down.
They had been in the shape of double diamonds exactly like the ones in the woodland ride!
‘It looks as if that car has come this way,’ murmured Mary.
‘I've a good mind to get its number!’
She knew that the car couldn't go far along the ride, because this ended in dense thickets.
‘I'll nip in and try and get the number and give it to Brown Owl,’ she decided.
If she had stopped to think, she would have remembered that Brown Owl had told the Pack more than once always to seek the help of a grown-up they knew in any case of emergency.
Brown Owl certainly wouldn't approve of a Brownie trying to do something risky on her own.
She guessed now that it was the car that had startled the deer.
The car might belong to the estate or be bringing timber-buyers or tree-fellers to the woods, but it had nearly knocked her down, and she was determined to get its number.
She turned along the ride.
Her feet made no noise on the soft surface.
She kept close to the high ferns at the side.
These were almost as high as she stood.
Suddenly she saw the car.
It had been backed into an opening between the trees.
Mary was certain that it was the same estate-car that had swept her into the ditch.
She couldn't see the number from where she was, so she stole through the undergrowth and came up to it from behind.
‘GHQ7094,’ she murmured, ‘or is it 7994?’
So dim was it under the trees that she had to get close up before she could make certain that the second figure was a nine.
Taking out a pencil, she noted down the number on a piece of paper, and then peeped cautiously into the back of the car.
‘My goodness!’ she breathed.
She could hardly believe her eyes.
In the back of the car, on the floor, was a dead deer, quite evidently newly killed.
Suddenly something she had heard her daddy read out from a newspaper flashed back to her.
This was a report that gangs of men were raiding deer-parks and shooting deer with rifles fitted with silencers, then selling the animals for meat.
‘Deer-killers!’ breathed Mary.
Just as she murmured this, she heard a sound behind her.
She swung round.
A man with a gun under his arm was coming through the ferns.
He looked up just as Mary turned, and let out an exclamation.
‘Look out!’ he yelled warningly to someone behind.
‘There's a gal spying into the car.’
Then he darted forward.
Mary did not wait.
Like a hare, she raced off down the ride.
The man plunged in chase.
Mary was a fast runner, but she wouldn't have been able to escape from the man if he hadn't tripped.
He was dangerously close.
His heavy footsteps were thumping nearer and nearer when the root of a tree sent him sprawling.
Mary raced on, thankful for her escape.
Even now, however, she was not out of danger.
The second man, who was tall and lean, came running from the glade in which the car was parked.
‘Don't let her get away, Tim!’ he shouted.
‘She got the car number —‘
Mary didn't hear the rest of the sentence.
She bolted into a deep brake of ferns and, bending low, crept away and then sank down and crouched motionless, hoping the two men wouldn't find her.
Tim struggled to his feet, grumbling and groaning.
Now, joined by the second man, whom he called Butch, he started off through the undergrowth in search of Mary.
But Mary was well hidden now.
Tim and Butch beat the ferns angrily with their guns as they hunted for her, and once they came so close that Mary's heart almost stopped beating.
She held her breath until they passed by, but once they had gone she felt safe.
‘We'd better call Larry in and get away from here, quick,’ she heard Butch say.
‘If that gal gets to the keeper's cottage he'll phone the police an' we'll be for it.’
‘The keeper's cottage is miles away,’ answered Tim.
‘It'd take 'er an hour or more to get there.
She's got our number all right an' we'll 'ave to give this place a miss for a long time after this.
But that's all the more reason why we should go off this time with a car well filled, eh?
Come on!
Let's go an' bag another couple o' deer.’
Soon after that they moved out of Mary's hearing, but their words had given the Brownie an idea.
It was true, as Tim had said, that the nearest keeper's cottage was something like an hour's hard tramp by footpath across the park and through the woods — but there was a short cut, if Mary dared take it.
It led across a sinister patch of ground known as the Smiling Meadow, which looked just like a pleasant grassy meadow of brilliant green, but which was actually a treacherous tract of shifting marsh, partly waterlogged and with only a single narrow path of firm ground across it.
It was along this thread of a path that Mary made up her mind to go.
She had crossed it once before, but she knew it would be much more risky today, because the recent heavy rains would have made the surface gluey, and if she slipped or made a false step she might find herself caught and held in the treacly morass of the marsh.
But by crossing direct in this way she could more than halve the time to the keeper's cottage, and this might mean that the keeper could get to the West Wood in time to capture the deer-stealers before they drove away.
When she was satisfied that the men had gone back to their car, Mary hurried towards Smiling Meadow.
As soon as she reached the open deer-park she ran, and she hardly paused until she came to the broad track that sloped down to the marsh, smiling and vivid green in the late afternoon sunshine.
At the edge of the marsh stood an old DANGER notice, leaning at an angle and with its warning almost rubbed out by the weather.
Mary could see a row of white stones marking the pathway across the marsh.
Without hesitating, she ran towards them.
She tested the ground before venturing a full step.
The surface was soggy, but there was a solid base underneath.
She trod gingerly.
It would be risky to hurry, so despite her sense of urgency she moved forward warily.
She was nearly halfway across when the faint hum of a car engine came to her ears.
She turned her head.
Then she stopped still in her tracks.
Speeding along the main track crossing the deer-park was the estate-car of the deer-raiders!
‘They must have changed their minds, and decided to leave quickly,’ Mary told herself.
‘I'll be too late now.’
But there were other surprises in store.
Almost at the same moment that Mary saw and recognised the car, the men in it saw and recognised her!
She heard Tim give a shout and saw him stretch out an arm and point towards her, but she-had no fear of capture; she was over halfway across the marsh.
What happened next was utterly unexpected.
At Tim's call, the car slowed down  and then swung on into the track leading to Smiling Meadow.
As Mary stood still and watched, she saw, to her amazement, that the car was gathering speed down the slope, instead of slowing up.
‘My goodness!’ cried Mary aloud.
‘Surely they know — surely they're not —!’
Then the truth dawned on her.
The men in the car badly wanted to capture her.
She spelt danger to them.
She knew too much.
But they didn't know that she was crossing a bog .
They knew where the deer were to be found, but they didn't know about Smiling Meadow.
To them it was what it seemed to be, a pleasant green meadow.
Now they were heading at top speed towards treacherous, shifting, waterlogged marsh!
‘Stop!’ yelled Mary.
‘Stop!’
If they heard her, they took no notice.
Fascinated, Mary stood still on the narrow path and watched as the estate-car tore down the slope.
She could see the face of Tim thrust out of the window and guessed that the look of triumph playing over it was in expectation of the early capture of herself!
Then the car hurtled on to the deceptive green meadow — and into it!
Mary stared in horror.
The marsh was not like water, and the car didn't sink to.
he bottom.
It just slithered over the surface, then, as its wheels became clogged, it stopped, settled down, and slowly, inch by inch, began to sink.
The men inside yelled in fear as they realised that they were in a bog.
They forgot Mary, forgot everything except their own perilous plight.
They shouted for help.
Mary didn't wait any longer.
She was safe from the men, but the men themselves were now in need of quick rescue.
They couldn't get back to the bank without treading on shifting, clutching, cloying marsh, which could trap them and draw them right down; and if they stayed in the car, sooner or later they would go under with it.
Mary ran.
Risking a false step in the bog, she sped over the path.
Quick of eye and sure of foot, she reached the other side safely.
Then at top speed she raced for  the keeper's cottage.
Tired as she was now, she didn't pause.
The keeper was standing at the door talking to a stout man with a stick.
He broke off his conversation as he saw Mary running up.
‘Quick!’ panted Mary.
‘There's a car in the marsh.
The men in it were chasing me.
They're deer-stealers — I saw a dead deer in their car.
But now they're in terrible danger.
Their car's sinking.
They'll have to be rescued.
Hurry — please!’
The keeper and his stout companion acted without asking questions.
They realised that with a car slowly sinking into the marsh there was not a minute to spare.
The stout man ran into the cottage and phoned for the police and then for other keepers to come to Smiling Meadow.
The keeper fetched a ladder and rope from an outhouse.
Then both ran for the marsh.
Mary followed.
The ladder was laid over the slimy surface of the marsh to the car, and the rope tossed to the three frightened men inside.
Then, one by one, with the rope round his body, each man wormed his way over the ladder-bridge to the bank.
It was a long and tricky operation.
None of the men made any attempt to escape when they struggled, subdued and shaken, on to the bank.
Soon after the third man reached safety the police arrived in a car and took all three into custody on a charge of deer-stealing.
‘If what this girl says is true, you'll find proof of their guilt in the car, sergeant,’ said the stout man who had been talking to the keeper.
‘I've sent for a breakdown lorry-from a garage, so we may be able to salvage the car before it goes right under.’
‘We'll take these men to the station, then we'll come back and lend a hand, Sir Benson,’ said the police-sergeant.
Mary stared.
The keeper saw her look and chuckled.
‘He's Sir Benson Craig, the new owner of Enderley,’ he whispered to Mary.
‘Didn't you know?
Folks say he's a hard man, but he's all right, really.
He's been worried by the deer-raiding that's been going on.
That's why he  was thinking about closing the park to the villagers; but now we've caught these three beauties — thanks to you — he may change his mind.
I daresay this capture'll make others who fancy a taste of venison think again!’
When the police had gone, taking the deer-stealers with them, Sir Benson Craig came across to Mary.
‘Thanks, young lady, thanks a lot,’ he said, holding out his hand to Mary.
‘I see you're a Brownie.
It looks as if you've done a very good turn to me and to a lot of other people this afternoon.
Now tell me all that happened.’
Mary told him how she had taken provisions to Granny Fordham, then seen the deer in the back of the car, and been chased, and finally how she had cross the marsh to reach the keeper before the raiders got away.
‘You're a very brave girl’ said Sir Benson, ‘and I must think of some way of rewarding you for what you've done.’
‘Oh, Brownies do good turns without rewards,’ Mary hastened to tell him.
Then she thought for a moment.
‘But I do wish you'd let Granny Fordham stay on in her cottage,’ she added.
Sir Benson stared at her.
‘Granny Fordham?
Ah, yes, she's under notice to move out, isn't she, as the cottage is needed for a new keeper.
Well, well I'll have to think this over.
I wasn't going to turn her out with nowhere to go, you know, young lady — but perhaps it's a bit hard on an old lady to go into a new place after living in the same cottage most of her life.
Yes yes I'll do something about that.’
He smiled at Mary.
‘That's a promise call it my thank-you promise to you.
Will that satisfy you?’
‘Yes thank you,’ replied Mary, smiling back happily.
‘And Granny Fordham willbe pleased.’
SIGNPOST TO DANGER
DEBORAH had a peculiar reason for going through Wyching Wood to Pack Meeting.
She was pony-mad.
That doesn't mean there was a pony in Wyching Wood that she could ride.
There was a pony, but it wasn't real.
It was a pretend pony.
It consisted of a willowy double branch of a tree.
Deborah climbed carefully out on to it.
When she reached a certain point it bent sharply and excitingly down, and she was soon enjoying the sensation of going up and down on a galloping pony.
Deborah had only recently moved to the village of Wyching.
She had come all the way from Wales, where she had been Second in the Bwbachod Six of her Brownie Guide Pack.
She had been working to gain the Pony Rider badge, but there was no riding school in the village, and even if there had been her daddy couldn't have afforded fees for riding lessons, because the move from the old house to Wyching had cost a lot of money.
So Deborah had to be content to ride on a tree branch every Saturday morning on her way to Pack Meeting but she did long to be on the back of a real pony again and to help in the stables as she used to do, and learn how a pony should be shoed, cared for and fed, and to know and do the other things required to pass the Pony Rider test.
This morning she had started out late for Pack Meeting, so instead of going by the woodland path, which was a long way round, she'd taken the direct route by road and arrived in time.
She didn't intend to miss her Saturday-morning ride, though, and so, on leaving Pack Meeting, she took the path back through the wood.
The trouble was that Deborah had never come back through the wood before, only the one way — to Pack  Meetings.
In the reverse direction the wood looked different.
When the path forked into two she took the wrong one.
‘I ought to haff got to my tree by now,’ she told herself presently, in her lilting Welsh voice.
She halted and looked round uncertainly.
She didn't recognise any landmarks, so she went on again, keeping a sharp lookout for her ‘pony tree’ and for any other tree or open space that would tell her she was on the right path.
She didn't see any place or object that she recognised.
What she did see, at last, was a signpost.
It was old and battered, with a single arm that had broken off at the end.
It was standing up at a crazy angle out of a mass of ferns.
When Deborah went across to it she saw that there was a faint footpath running in the direction the broken single arm was pointing.
Looking up, she slowly spelt out the faded letters on the broken-off arm of the signpost, and then she had a shock.
The letters on the signpost spelt one word, which was DANGER.
‘Oh!’ she cried, startled.
She felt like running.
For the first time since losing her way she felt scared.
The day was bright and sunny, but in the wood the light was dim and everything was still and silent.
‘A signpost to danger!’ she muttered.
Deborah turned away from the signpost and began wading back through the deep undergrowth to the main path, intending to break into a run when she reached it; but just as she turned off she heard a faint, distant, reedy cry, which stopped her in her tracks.
‘Why, it sounded like someone crying for help,’ thought Deborah.
She listened intently.
A moment passed; then it came again — a thin, high-pitched cry that sounded to Deborah just like ‘Help!
Help!
Help!’
She hesitated.
Her first impulse was to run away, to run blindly anywhere, as fast as she could go, because  the cry quite certainly came from the direction in which the dilapidated signpost was pointing — and that signpost pointed to DANGER.
Then Deborah checked her panic.
In that moment of fear she remembered the Brownie Guide Law, which points out that ‘a Brownie Guide thinks of others before herself and does a good turn every day.’
Well, someone was calling for help, and she, Deborah Dawson, might be the only person to hear that call; so she had to answer it.
She wouldn't be keeping the Law if she turned a deaf ear to the call or ran away from it.
Her heart beating much faster than usual, her face much paler, she turned and high-stepped through the undergrowth towards the path along which the signpost pointed.
Even if it did lead to danger, as the signpost clearly said, she was determined to follow it, even though she was scared.
The path was overgrown here and there, but she could trace it.
As quickly as she could go, Deborah stepped along it.
Bravely, she shut her mind as firmly as she could against the fears that kept crowding in on her as she hurried through the shadows cast by great trees or trod across soggy glades that made her think with a shudder of hidden bogs.
Once a grass-snake slid across the path in front of her and made her halt sharply with a startled cry, but she went resolutely on again, and at last the trees began to thin out and the patch of sky in front of her widen.
Suddenly she came out through the last curtain of trees and found herself looking down over sunlit green meadowland to where a railway line wound like a serpent through a cutting at the foot.
But she didn't stand and stare for long.
Once again, as if the distressed caller knew she was there, that pitiful high-pitched cry floated thinly over the uplands to her, and this time she saw from where and what it came.
‘Oh!’ she cried, in pity.
On a barbed-wire fence dividing the railway embankment from the meadow a lamb was caught.
It was struggling vainly to free itself, bleating weakly, but suddenly  letting out the long, piping, despairing cry that had first arrested Deborah's attention.
‘Why, it iss a lamb!’ cried Deborah, aloud.
‘It wassn't a cry for help I heard.
It wass the lamb bleating.’
She raced down the slope as fast as she could go.
As she drew near the fence she saw that the poor struggling captive was little more than a baby in size, although it was covered with its first soft coat of wool.
Somehow it must have found its way through the post-and-wire barrier that bounded the meadow, skipped farther on and got itself tangled in the barbs of the fencing at the top of the embankment beyond, above the railway line.
When the poor creature saw Deborah its struggles increased, but it only succeeded in getting its woolly coat even more firmly hooked on the spikes.
‘You poor thing!’ exclaimed Deborah, and put her arm about the lamb's body to keep it still and protect it from further damage.
Then, slowly and patiently, she began to detach the strands of the lamb's coat from the barbs.
It was not only a long job, but a painful one for Deborah, the backs of whose hands were pricked, scored and smeared with blood before she succeeded in freeing the lamb altogether.
‘Oh, it iss a mess that I am in!’ muttered Deborah, as the last woolly knot was left on the barbs and the lamb came away free.
‘And it iss a mess that you are in too,’ she added to the lamb, which was speckled with telltale spots of blood.
‘I think I ought to take you to the farmhouse to be seen to — that iss, if I can carry you.’
Fortunately, the farmhouse was not far away.
When she looked around Deborah could see the roof and chimneys peeping above the brow of the meadow.
Half walking, half running, she carried the lamb up the slope.
At the top she was luckily seen by the farmer, who came striding to meet her, letting out an exclamation as he saw that the object in her arms was one of his lambs.
‘How on earth it strayed so far away from the flock without being missed.
I can't imagine,’ he said, ‘but I'll  look into that later.
First, I'll take this little fellow to my wife.
who'll look after him — she nurses all the farm babies when they need it.
Thank you very much for rescuing him.’
Suddenly he caught sight of Deborah's scratched and bleeding hands.
‘I think you'd better come with me too.
You need quite a bit of attention yourself.’
So Deborah went with Farmer Plant and was washed and generally cleaned up by the motherly farmwife.
The farm was called Dangerfield Farm, and on hearing this Deborah gave a cry of surprise.
‘Dangerfield Farm?
Why, that must be where the signpost wass pointing to!
It said ‘Danger’, but a big piece of the signboard had broken off, so perhaps when it wass whole it said ‘Dangerfield’, not just ‘Danger’.’
‘You're quite right,’ said the farmer.
‘It's an old path from the village to the farm, hardly ever used now.’
He looked at her shrewdly.
‘I think you're a very brave girl,’ he said ‘— braver even than I thought at first.
It must have taken quite a lot of pluck to walk along a path marked DANGER.’
‘I — I wass a bit frightened,’ admitted Deborah.
‘I'd lost my way, you see.’
When the-farmer heard where Deborah lived, he said: ‘I'd run you home in my car, but it's broken down.
The quickest way now is by way of that DANGER path you came along, and I can take you along there on my horse.’
‘On your horse?’ inquired Deborah, wide-eyed.
‘Oh, you needn't be afraid.
You can sit in front of me, and I'll see you don't fall off.
You'll be home almost as quick as by car.’
‘I'm not afraid of falling off, look you; I love riding,’ cried Deborah indignantly, ‘and I'd rather go home on horseback than by car.
There iss nothing I'd like as much.’
So Deborah returned along the DANGER path on Farmer Plant's horse, which was a big one named Sultan and she enjoyed it enormously, especially as Farmer Plant let her take the reins when she told him she knew  how to ride.
She'd never ridden so big a horse as Sultan.
and it gave her a great thrill.
To her surprise, within a very few minutes of passing the broken signpost, she came upon her ‘pony tree’.
‘Why, there iss my pony tree!’ she cried.
‘I wass quite close to it, after all — much closer than I thought.’
She explained to Farmer Plant how she used the outjutting twin branches of the tree as her pony, as she hadn't a real one to ride, and how she was working for the Pony Rider badge.
‘I tell you what,’ he said, after thinking for a few seconds, ‘as you're so keen on horses why not come up to the farm when you've got some time to spare and help my young niece in the stables?
She looks after all the animals on the farm and could teach you all you need to know about horses to pass that test.
I don't know whether she was ever a Brownie, but she was a Girl Guide, and I do know she'd love to have you around if you're mad on horses.’
Deborah said, ‘Oh, yess, pleasse — I'd love to,’ as fast as she could utter the words.
She was at Dangerfield Farm the very next day.
Just as he said, Farmer Plant's teenage niece, Harriet, was delighted to have her to help in the stables, and promised to teach her all about the care and feeding of horses as well.
Two months later Deborah passed the Pony Rider tests and became the first Brownie in the Pack to win the badge with the pony on it.
She ran nearly all the way to Dangerfield Farm to tell Harriet and Farmer Plant of her success, and the short cut she took to tell her news was the path signposted DANGER.
THE BROWNIES' BRIDGE
ALMOST the first thing Jenny did when she came to live at Dale End was to fall in the river.
Jenny was nine, and even if she hadn't been adventurous she would probably have fallen in the river anyway, because there was nothing much to do at Dale End but get into mischief.
It was a very lonely place.
All around rolled wild heather-moors, overhung by rocky cliffs.
Jenny's daddy kept a garage, the only one in the dale for fifteen miles, which was the distance to the nearest town, Botley.
Jenny went to school at a tiny schoolhouse in the dale attended mostly by farmers' children, but out of school she had no one at all to play with, so she had to amuse herself as best she could.
The river fussed through the dale in a great hurry, foaming with impatience where boulders stood in its way and tumbling in joyous cascades where its channel fell in rocky shelves.
It was while exploring this river some distance upstream from Dale End that Jenny came upon stepping-stones stretching across it from bank to bank.
There was quite a wide space between stone and stone, but Jenny felt sure that she could jump from one to the other quite easily.
She was quite right in this.
She found that by giving a little leap she could stride across almost like a grown-up.
What she didn't find out until too late was that it was one thing to jump a gap but quite another to stay put on the landing stone when the surface was wet and slippery.
Halfway across, Jenny jumped, landed, felt her foot slip from under her, gave a yell of fear, and then toppled sideways into the river.
The river was shallow, so Jenny wasn't in any danger of drowning; but she was scared out of her wits and soaked to the skin.
She ran home crying.
There she was scolded and comforted — both at the same time — by the rough tongue and warm heart of Aunt Nellie, the Yorkshirewoman who kept house and served petrol for Jenny's father, who was a widower.
‘Them steppin'-stones is t' Brownies' Bridge,’ Aunt Nellie told Jenny.
‘T' Brownies laid yum acrost t' river one night long ago so'as an old farmwife who'd been kind to yum could get over to her daughter's house on t'other side without goin' miles a-down t' river t' bridge.’
‘The Brownies?’ cried Jenny, puzzled.
‘What are the Brownies, Aunt Nellie?’
‘Don't tell me you haven't heard on t' Brownie wee folk!’
‘Brownie wee folk?’
‘Aye — t' fairy people who lived in t' dale long years agone.
They lived amongst t' roots of t' trees.
They used to do good turns when t' dalesfolk was fast asleep in their beds — cleanin' out t' farmers' churns an' scrubbin' t' dairy floors an' suchlike chores.
Almost t' last good turn they did was buildin' them steppin'-stones acrost t' river.
Then one night they all disappeared, 'cos t' farmers an' their wives kep' forgettin' to say thank you by puttin' out cake an' milk for yum.
They've never comed back, an' 'tis said they went to parts where folks was properly thankful for things done for yum.
‘Tis a rare pity thar ain't no Brownies now in t' dale to do good turns to housewives, with all t' jobs there are to do from morn till night.’
‘But there are Brownies who do good turns still, you know,’ said a voice from the doorway.
‘Surely you've heard of Brownie Guides?’
Aunt Nellie and Jenny jumped in surprise.
They looked through the open doorway, and there, smiling in at them, was a tall, pleasant-looking lady.
‘I beg your pardon for intruding,’ she said, ‘but I came looking for someone to serve me with petrol and I heard your voices and then what you said about Brownies.’
‘I'm sorry, ma'am,’ said Aunt Nellie, jumping up and hurrying out.
‘I didn't hear you drive up.
T' little lass felled in t' river tryin' to cross by t' Brownies' Bridge, an' I was busy a-dryin' of her.’
‘That's all right,’ said the pleasant lady.
‘I hope you didn't get anything worse than a ducking,’ she added, turning to Jenny.
Then: ‘Where is the Brownies' Bridge, please, and what is it?
I am staying for a few days at the Dale End Hotel while I explore the district, and I'd like to know about the Brownies' Bridge, as I am to do with Brownies.’
‘Well, if so's you're to do wi' Brownies an' you could bring yum back to t' dale, ma'am, folk like me would be much obliged,’ said Aunt Nellie.
While she filled the tank of the lady's car she told her the legend of the Brownies' Bridge.
‘Well, as I said to you just now,’ said the lady, ‘there are still Brownies who do good turns, although they aren't fairy folk but real girls like this one — and about her age too.’
She smiled at Jenny.
‘They take the place of the fairy Brownies of olden days, and are named after them.’
‘How could they take the place of fairy Brownies?’ asked Jenny, shaking her head in disbelief.
‘They can't work magic like fairy folk.’
‘You'd be surprised what magic can be worked by willing hands eager to do good turns,’ replied the lady.
‘I can see I shall have to tell you more about Brownies before you believe in what they can do and do do.
Ah I have an idea!
We'll make a bargain.
Suppose you take me down to the Brownies' Bridge sometime — perhaps tomorrow, as you are on holiday from school — and I'll tell you about myBrownies.’
Jenny eagerly agreed to this.
She liked the tall lady, and she was very curious to hear all about the Brownie girls who, although real, worked magic as the Brownie folk used to do.
‘I've heard on t' Brownie gals,’ Aunt Nellie told her when the tall lady had driven off in her smart two-seater sports-car, ‘but I don' reckon they do the sort o' good  turns I'd set store by — like helpin' wash up an' lay t' table — that I don'!’
This shows, doesn't it, that Aunt Nellie didn't know very much about ‘t' Brownie gals,’ because doing good turns in the home is just what they are specially clever at!
When Jenny learned next day about Brownies from the tall lady, whose name was Miss Clinton and who was a District Commissioner in the south of England, made her long to be one.
‘I should love to do Challenges and help with Pack Ventures and go on Pack Holidays and have lots of Brownies to play with, and I'm sure I'd soon win lots of badges and stars and things and be a Sixer and ‘
‘Stop a minute!’
Miss Clinton broke in, laughing.
‘You've caught on very quickly to some of the interesting things Brownies do, but don't forget the first thing Brownies learn to do is to give.’
‘I'd like to Lend a Hand and help people too,’ Jenny said quietly, after a moment's thought.
‘Honestly, I would, miss.’
‘I believe you, Jenny,’ replied Miss Clinton seriously.
‘I hope somehow it will become possible for you to join a Brownie Pack, but I'm afraid Botley, where the nearest is, is too far away for you to go.’
Jenny's daddy agreed with this when Jenny urged him to let her become a Brownie.
‘What — fifteen miles to Botley and fifteen miles back every week, just for you to join a Brownie Pack?’ he exclaimed.
‘Not likely!’
Jenny begged him every day to change his mind, but he was a busy man and declared that it was quite out of the question and he wished to goodness Miss Clinton had never mentioned the subject of Brownies!
Miss Clinton stayed for nearly a week at Dale End before leaving to tour Scotland.
She ordered a new tyre for her car from Jenny's daddy, and left the car at the garage to be fitted, all ready loaded up with her luggage.
She said goodbye to Jenny at the garage and made her a  parting present of the Brownie Annual , which left Jenny almost speechless with delight.
‘It'll make me want to be a Brownie even more!’
Jenny told herself, as she looked through the fine big annual.
‘Perhaps it'll make Daddy want me to be one too,’ she added hopefully.
But when Daddy came into the garage ten minutes later he exclaimed sharply: ‘Where's Miss Clinton's car?’
‘She came for it soon after you'd gone off to t' farm,’ Aunt Nellie explained.
‘She's off to Scotland.
As she were in a hurry an' it were ready I said you'd send on t' bill.’
‘Ready?
But it wasn't ready!’
Jenny's daddy's face had drained suddenly white.
‘I'd put the new tyre on,but I hadn't tightened up the wheel .’
Now it was Aunt Nellie's turn to go white.
While fitting the rear offside wheel back on to Miss Clinton's car, Jenny's daddy had been called away suddenly to see to a tractor that had broken down on Farmer Pullen's farm.
Miss Clinton had taken it away with the wheel still loose and would soon be driving northward over a narrow moorland road that a few miles beyond the road-bridge over the river wound along the shelf of a mountain with a sheer, dizzy drop on one side.
‘If the wheel comes off on Stitherstones Pass she may go over the precipice!’ cried Jenny's daddy.
‘I'm going after her.
Goodness knows I've got only a bare chance of catching her, though.’
He ran to his car, calling back to Aunt Nellie as he started up the engine: ‘Ring up the A.A. box at Begwith and tell them to try and stop her.’
Then he sent the car leaping out of the garage.
Aunt Nellie ran to the telephone, but Jenny stood still, thinking hard.
She knew that even if Miss Clinton hadn't had so long a start, her daddy would have little hope of catching her up in his old car.
She didn't know whether the loose wheel would come off quite soon or stay on for some miles, but she realised that sooner or later the wheel would break loose and that if Daddy or the A.A.  man didn't reach her before that happened Miss Clinton would be likely to crash.
Jenny saw one way by which she could reach and stop Miss Clinton before either of them — if she had the pluck.
That was by crossing the river by the Brownies' Bridge.
Dropping the Brownie Annual , Jenny ran up the dale alongside the river as hard as she could go.
Miss Clinton had driven down the dale, but as she was bound for Scotland she would cross the river by the road-bridge four miles down and then turn back again upstream on the opposite side of the river.
While she was travelling this long roundabout route Jenny could get across in a straight line by the stepping-stones, all in a few minutes.
Jenny dashed down the bank to the river and pulled off her shoes and socks.
She ran to the stepping-stones, but then, suddenly, she drew back, startled.
Till this moment she hadn't looked at the river.
Now, about to cross, she saw that it was swirling much more swiftly than when she had crossed before and fallen in.
It was swollen with the heavy rain that had fallen during the last few days, and it looked fierce and dark.
The stepping-stones were at least two inches deep under the fast-flowing water.
Jenny stared down in dismay.
What could she do?
She couldn't risk slipping on the wet surface of the stones and pitching into the river.
As she couldn't yet swim properly the current might be strong enough to carry her away.
Then she thought of Miss Clinton, and of her daddy and his white face as he ran to the car to chase Miss Clinton — and of poor Aunt Nellie and her scared eyes when she realised what she'd done.
‘I must Lend a Hand,’ thought Jenny.
‘A Brownie would!’
Slowly, with her fists clenched tightly and her lips pursed, she put one foot and then the other out on to the first stepping-stone.
The water was icy-cold.
It swirled over her ankles.
She set her teeth, then, half stooping, sprang towards the next stone.
She landed on it, slipped, and pitched forward.
Both arms plunged down into the  water, but she was able to steady herself by pressing her hands on the stony bed.
Her frock was already soaked, but she paid no heed to that, because she could see she would certainly get wet from feet to head before she reached the farther bank.
Bravely, she stretched out over the gap to the next stone.
This was not so wide as the first one had been, and she bridged it safely.
Now that she had taken the first steps, she was not so much afraid.
The river didn't seem quite so wild or angry.
In fact, she could see the smooth white stones glistening on the bottom.
‘This is my first Brownie Challenge!’ she told herself.
Over to the next stone she went, boldly.
She nearly lost her balance as she brought her left foot alongside her right, but by bending down and clutching the stone she was able to stay on it.
She felt grateful to those fairy Brownie folk who had planted the stepping-stones in the river so firmly.
All the way across not one stone moved or even trembled as she jumped on to it or swayed on top of it or clutched at the sides of it!
The Brownies had done their work well!
Twice before she reached the opposite bank Jenny missed her footing and plunged -chest-deep into the river, but each time she was able, to grasp the slippery stepping-stone and slowly haul herself up on to it.
At last, dripping wet, with water sparkling like jewels on her cheeks and forehead, and rivulets running from her hair, she stepped from the last stone on to the bank.
She had passed her first Challenge!
Then she ran.
She had no idea how long it had taken her to cross the river.
but it seemed like hours.
Her great fear now was that Miss Clinton might have sped past before her.
In a minute the road came into view.
Jenny gazed anxiously at it.
Then she heard the sound of a car — quite close.
She sprinted.
Then, just as she reached the edge of the road, Miss Clinton flashed by.
Jenny's heart turned to stone.
Desperately, frantically, she shouted: ‘Miss Clinton, Miss Clinton — stop!’ and waved both arms wildly.
But the car had raced past.
The roar of its engine drowned Jenny's shouts.
Jenny was just one second too late!
Wretchedly, defeated, feeling ready to burst, Jenny stood on the roadside, her mouth drooping, gazing tearfully after the car.
All her brave effort had been for nothing.
Then hope flared up in her.
She saw the car stop.
A moment later Miss Clinton got out.
She gazed intently back down the road.
Then she gave a quick wave and came running back.
Jenny, sudden joy surging through her, raced to meet her.
‘Miss Clinton!’
‘Why, Jenny!
I caught a glimpse of something waving at me just now, but took no notice.
Then I looked in my driving mirror and saw a girl I decided must be you.
It is you!
Why, my dear, you're wet through!
What have you been doing — falling in the river again?’
Jenny couldn't speak for a moment.
She was too pent up.
At last the words tumbled out.
‘Yes, Miss Clinton.
I came over the Brownies' Bridge.
I came to stop you.
It was the only way to get to you in time.
Daddy's driven after you, but I didn't think he would catch you up because your car goes much faster than his.’
Breathlessly, Jenny poured out the news that the rear offside wheel of Miss Clinton's car was loose, likely to come off at any moment, sooner or later certain to come off.
Miss Clinton's face paled as she listened.
Then, very quietly, she said: ‘What a brave girl you are, Jenny, to cross by those stepping-stones after falling in from them only a few days ago.
I have to thank you, Jenny, for saving me from an almost certain accident.
And I really don't quite know how to thank you enough.’
‘I'm terribly glad I was in time to stop you, Miss Clinton,’ Jenny said earnestly.
Jenny's daddy didn't know how to thank her enough, either, when he came up — especially when he and Miss Clinton went down to the Brownies' Bridge and saw the swollen river and realised how very brave Jenny had been to cross it.
But Jenny told him, without making any bones about it, how he could best say thank you to her.
There was no doubt at all about it in her mind.
‘You can let me join Brownies and take me to the Pack Meetings at Botley every week,’ she stated emphatically.
Daddy made no bones about his answer, either.
‘If that's what you want, Jenny, you shall have it.
A drive to Botley and back each week is a small enough price to pay for what you've saved me from today — and your Aunt Nellie too — and Miss Clinton.
I know now I'd never have caught up in time in my old car.
You've earned the full right to be a Brownie, Jenny — don't you think so, Miss Clinton?’
Miss Clinton nodded vigorously.
‘There's nothing more certain than that!’
She looked back at the stepping-stones, over which the river was rushing noisily.
‘The Brownies' Bridge is well named, Jenny.
Whether it was built by Brownies or not, it's proved to be your bridge to Brownies!’
SARAH THE SLOWCOACH
‘Go on, Sarah — it's your turn!’
‘Quick, Sarah — oh, hurry, hurry!’
‘Oh, Sarah is a slowcoach!’ groaned Christine, the Imp Second.
But Jane, the Imp Sixer, added quickly: ‘But it doesn't matter — she runs quite fast when she does start.’
Jane was a kindhearted and helpful Sixer, but Christine was inclined to grumble about Sarah.
She herself was keen and alert and quick off the mark, and she became  cross when Sarah's slow and dreamy ways lost thee Imps points in team games.
Sarah knew she was slow, and she tried hard to grasp things more quickly and to keep her mind on the task or game in hand, but she didn't always succeed.
She was long-legged and rather awkward and didn't do things quickly even when she got started!
But Sarah loved Brownies.
She liked being helpful to people, as Brownies taught her to be, and she was always ready to Lend a Hand in the true spirit of the Brownie Guide Motto — and Jane, her Sixer, for one, knew that that was even more important than being alert and lively.
But Christine felt vexed when at the next Pack Meeting Sarah lost points for the Six through being a slowcoach.
She complained to Tawny about her when they walked home a little way together.
‘It doesn't seem fair for us to lose all the time because of Sarah, Tawny.’
‘Oh,losing doesn't matter,’ was Tawny's surprising answer.
‘It's how you lose that matters, and — my word!— what a fine, sporting loser Sarah is!
I do admire her for that.
She never minds being first out of a game and never winning.
Try to think of those good points of Sarah's, Christine, and you won't mind about the few points she loses!’
With a bright smile and a goodnight, Tawny turned down her street, leaving Christine rather startled.
Christine did think about Sarah's good points, but she still couldn't help wishing that Sarah belonged to another Six!
But that was before she took her baby brother to Wickham Common.
After that…well!
There were open spaces and woods on Wickham Common.
Several roads ran through it, and motorists often stopped and picnicked there.
It wasn't far from Christine's house, and she and her friends usually played there after school.
‘Will you take Donald for a little walk, Christine?’ her mother asked her when she came home from school one afternoon.
‘I've been too busy to take him out all day, and I do like him to have a little outing.’
‘Oh, Mummy, I promised to go to the common and play rounders with Ann and Ruth.’
‘Well, you can take Donald to the common for his walk and tell the girls you'll be along to play presently.
You'll have plenty of time.’
Christine pulled a face.
She loved her baby brother, and she quite liked taking him out in his pram — but not when she had more interesting things to do, as she had this afternoon.
Mummy, however, was very firm about it, and so Christine rather sulkily pushed Donald in his pram along the lane to the common.
When she reached there she found that Ann and Ruth had been joined by several other girls, including Sarah, and were just about to start their game.
‘I'll just stay for one game,’ Christine said, unable to resist the longing to play.
‘Then I must take Donald home.’
‘We've got even numbers now, Christine,’ Ann told her.
‘Sarah came in for you.’
‘Oh, I don't mind dropping out,’ said Sarah, seeing Christine's vexed look.
‘I really came to search for some things for my collection.’
Sarah was making a collection of outdoor treasures for one of the Footpath Challenges.
‘You'll be sure to find cones and things in the wood, Sarah,’ Christine said eagerly.
‘Does Donald need looking after?’ asked Sarah, who loved babies.
‘No; don't disturb him.
He's nearly asleep.’
Christine wheeled the pram to the edge of the open green where they were going to play, and then ran back.
Sarah watched for a few moments when the game began, then went off to look for her Nature treasures.
Christine quite forgot Donald, whose eyes drooped shut and who stayed peacefully asleep while the game went on — until, suddenly,bump — something struck the pram with a hard thud.
It was the ball the girls were playing with, which Ruth, who was a big girl, had thumped with all her might.
Now, Christine, in her hurry to join in the game, had  quite forgotten to put the brake on when she parked the pram.
The thump of the ball jerked the pram, which was standing on a slight slope.
It began to move.
It ran gently down the slope, and there it might have stopped but for Donald.
The motion woke him up.
He let out a yell and kicked his legs up crossly.
This jerk kept the pram moving over the few inches between the foot of the gentle slope and the beginning of the steep grassy bank that ended up at the road.
Before Christine or Ann or any of the other girls playing realised what was happening, the pram began to run down the steep bank, gathering speed at every turn of its wheels.
Ann, who had raced after the ball, stood horror-stricken.
Donald, who didn't like being so rudely woken up and then bumped about, yelled at the top of his voice.
Christine, her face drained of colour, tried to shout, but no sound came.
Her feet seemed to be rooted to the spot as she saw the pram with baby Donald in it disappear over the bank — too far away for her to stop it.
Frantically — but much too late — she ran in chase of the pram.
How she wished now that she had obeyed her mother and taken Donald straight back home instead of staying to play a game!
Then suddenly a long-legged figure raced from the wood partway down the bank.
It was Sarah, who, on her knees in the mould of the wood, had looked up on hearing Donald's cries and seen the runaway pram careering down the bank.
Sarah wasn't slow on the uptake this time.
Her collection of outdoor treasures shot to the ground as in a single movement she leapt up and out between the trees.
It was touch-and-go whether she could reach the pram before it either overturned or leapt from the rocky wall at the foot of the bank on to the road, along which traffic was speeding in both directions.
She ran as she had never run before.
The other girls had reached the top of the bank now, and they saw her long legs fairly leaping down the slope after the speeding pram.
Once she stumbled and nearly fell headlong, but somehow she recovered her balance and tore on.
Then, just as the pram was on the very verge of the wall, she reached out, grabbed at the handle — and held it!
It stood poised on the wall, just about to go over, with Sarah, dragged to her knees behind it, gripping it fiercely.
‘Sarah!
Oh, Sarah!’
White-faced, her eyes wide with fright, Christine raced down the bank to the pram.
‘Oh, Sarah, you saved him!’
Baby Donald was yelling with all the force of his lungs.
He'd show them how he felt about treatment like this!
He didn't know what they had been doing to him, but whatever it was he didn't like it, and he was going to let them know it in the only way he knew — by making as loud a noise as he could!
‘He — he might have been killed!’ whispered Ann, hurrying down.
‘He would have been,’ said Ruth, ‘if it hadn't been for Sarah.’
‘Oh, thank you, Sarah, thank you!’
Christine sobbed in her great relief.
‘I never thought you could run like that, Sarah,’ said Angela, coming down the slope and joining them.
‘Thank goodness you did!’
‘I'm a bit of a slowcoach mostly,’ said Sarah apologetically.
Christine turned to her.
‘I'll never call you a slowcoach again,’ she said fervently —‘never, ever!’
And she never did.
BRENDA AND THE BROWNIES
BRENDA gave her daddy and mummy a big surprise when she told them what she wanted most of all for her birthday.
‘I think I know,’ smiled Daddy —‘a bike.’
Brenda shook her head.
‘No.
I would love a bike, but  that's not it.
For my birthday I want to join the Brownies.’
Daddy stared.
‘The Brownies?’
Her mummy sighed.
‘I'm not really surprised.
She's been on about the Brownies ever since she was seven, the age at which Granny says girls can join.’
‘Well, I dare say it can be arranged, can't it?’ asked Daddy.
‘I don't think it can.
The trouble is the journey into Stowbridge,’ Mummy explained.
‘There's no bus, and even if she had a bike it's too far for her to ride both ways.’
Brenda had not long come to live in the country.
Her daddy was a nurseryman and grew tomatoes and grapes and hothouse plants and flowers in his glasshouses.
Stowbridge was the nearest town, but there was no bus at all between their village of Applewick and Stowbridge, because a railway bridge crossing the road was too low for a bus to go under.
Brenda's daddy, who had a van, always had to take his produce to a railway station in a different direction because the van was just too high for the bridge.
The first time he had driven the van to Stowbridge he had smashed its top to pieces against the arch of the bridge, not realising it was just a few inches too high to go under.
‘It seems to me,’ said Daddy, ‘that I shall have to get a new van that will go under the bridge.
I need one.
Then I shall be able to take my stuff into Stowbridge, and Brenda to Brownies at the same time.’
Brenda jumped for joy.
‘Oh, will you, Daddy?’ she cried.
‘Please,pleasedo!’
On the strength of that idea, Brenda's mummy took her into Stowbridge on the day before her birthday — because it was the day the Stowbridge Brownies held their Pack Meeting — to see the Brownie Guider about her joining the Pack.
‘I shan't want any other birthday present but that!’ cried Brenda happily.
But a quite terrible disappointment awaited her at Stowbridge.
‘I'm so very sorry, Brenda,’ said the Brownie Guider.
‘The Pack is full up, and there's a waiting-list — a long one.
Of course I'll add your name to the list.
but I'm afraid it may be quite a time before there's room for you, although I'd love to have you.’
Brenda squeezed back the tears that started into her eyes.
Her granny, who had been a Brownie Guider a long time ago, had told her about how a Brownie smiles instead of crying when in trouble.
Brenda couldn't manage a smile, but she shut her lips tight to keep herself from crying — which the Brownie Guider noticed, although she didn't show that she had.
‘Never mind,’ said Mummy, as they went home in the bus — the long way round by the main road, from which they had to walk to Applewick.
‘After all, there are lots of other things to enjoy in the country.’
Brenda liked living in the country for some things, but not for others.
She loved being able to run over meadows and explore woods and paddle in streams, but she didn't like the cows she sometimes came upon suddenly filling a lane; the great horned beasts scared her.
Most of all she didn't like being too far from town to join a Brownie Guide Pack — and even now, when she looked like being able to get into the town, she couldn't join the Brownie Pack!
‘Many happy returns of the day, Brenda!’
Daddy and Mummy greeted her the next morning.
‘Here's our present to you.’
And there, standing in the hall, was a shining new blue-and-cream bicycle, with saddlebag and bell complete!
It nearly took Brenda's breath away.
‘Oh, thank you, thank you!’ she cried, hugging Daddy and Mummy tightly and squeezing her thanks right into them.
‘I think perhaps the bike will make up for the Brownies,’ Daddy confided to Mummy.
‘All the same, I think I'll get that smaller van.
It will save me a long journey twice a day to Norton Junction.’
Brenda soon began to have lovely rides on her bike.
They were really much more than just bike rides, for Granny, who lived with the family, had told her the story of St. George and given her books about Brownies, and Brenda rode along the country lanes make-believing she was the knight riding to rescue the princess from the dragon.
But suddenly one day, right in the middle of a make-believe adventure, she stopped, quite chilled with fright.
There, filling the lane in front of her, was a herd of fierce-looking cows with curly horns!
Brenda jumped off her bike and stood still.
But the cows, packed closely side-by-side across the narrow lane, moved towards her, mooing and shaking their horned heads.
The sight of Brenda in the lane didn't stop them.
It was too much for Brenda, who didn't feel a bit like St. George when faced with that mass of bristling horns.
She turned and ran with her bike the way she had come, and didn't even stop to jump on again, until the-cows were out of sight round a bend!
Then she rode home feeling a bit ashamed that she hadn't been as brave as she felt sure a proper Brownie ought to have been in face of danger.
The summer days slipped by.
June came and went, and then July, and then came the August holidays — and Mummy brought exciting news from the village.
‘What d'you think, Brenda?’ she said.
‘I've just heard.
A Brownie Pack from Ironbridge are coming to Applewick for a Pack holiday!
They're having the schoolhouse in the village as a Pack holiday house.’
‘Oh!’ cried Brenda.
‘I wish I could be with them!
But perhaps I shall be able to show them the best places for picnics and things like that.’
‘I'm sure there are lots of ways you'll be able to help them enjoy their holiday,’ said Mummy.
Brenda looked forward eagerly to the arrival of the Brownie Pack.
Then she learned that the Pack would be coming on the following Saturday.
This happened to be the very day that her daddy, who had sold his old van, was going to bring home his new van from Stowbridge.
‘Thank goodness that at last I shall be able to come  from Stowbridge by the short way and under the low bridge!’ he said.
Brenda cycled along the lane towards Stowbridge that morning to meet Daddy in his new van.
She reached the junction of the lane with the main road, and there she waited, because she was not allowed to go on the main road with her cycle.
Suddenly she stared.
A van was coming towards her from Stowbridge, but it was her daddy's old one!
‘Why,’ she began, ‘Daddy hasn't got the new one, after all —’And then she stopped, for she saw, now that the van had sped closer, that it wasn't her daddy's, after all, but one just like it.
Next instant she had a great thrill, for as the van swung into the lane past her she saw that it was full of Brownies, with luggage all around them!
The Brownies looked happy and excited, and they waved to her when they saw her gazing after them.
She waved back eagerly — but suddenly all her joy fled from her.
The van had turned into the lane to Applewick — the lane that was crossed by the low bridge!
A signpost lettered APPLEWICK pointed down it, and the school-house where the Brownies were to spend their Pack holiday was at Applewick; but the van ought to have gone all the way round by the main road, because it was, as Brenda knew, too big to go under the low bridge.
The rosy colour faded from Brenda's cheeks as she thought what might happen if the van went rushing on unawares at the bridge.
The driver must be someone who didn't know the district well, or he wouldn't have gone along the Applewick lane; and that meant it was very likely he wouldn't realise that his van would hit the arch of the bridge instead of going under it, just as her daddy's had done once.
Brenda didn't like to think what might happen.
For a moment she thought there was nothing she could do.
The van was already rolling along the winding lane out of sight.
She couldn't catch it up on her bike, that was certain.
Then she remembered.
The lane wound in wide  loops all the way to Applewick, but by footpath there was a short cut across a field, through a wood, and then across another field, which came out only a few yards beyond the low bridge.
If she really raced on her bike over the footpath, she might just manage to get to the low bridge before the van reached it.
There was just a chance, anyway, that she might stop it before it crashed against the arch.
Jumping on to her bike, Brenda pedalled madly away.
There was a gate by the stile leading to the short-cut footpath, and she was able to open this and push her bike through.
Once through, she tore along the footpath faster than she had ever ridden before.
On and on she sped.
The path was bumpy in places, and sent her up from the saddle and down again violently, but she didn't pause to think about bruises or anything but getting to the bridge before the van.
The farthest edge of the field was soon reached.
Beyond it was the wood.
A switchback rush as the path dipped down from the field and then up into the wood, and she was again whizzing towards the gate leading to the next field.
And then, as the gate loomed up, her heart almost stopped beating.
On the other side of the gate, in the field, was a herd of cows!
Worse — much worse — three of the cows were standing against the gate, their horned heads thrust over it.
Brenda slowed, then stopped, her cheeks white.
She gazed with wide eyes at the nearest cows, who stared back with large, liquid eyes at her — and didn't move an inch!
‘I — can't — go — through there!’ whispered Brenda
She looked at each side of the gate, but a thick hedge divided the wood from the field.
There was no gap.
The gate was the only way through with a bike.
Then she thought of the Brownie Promise and the Brownie Law and the Brownie Motto, all of which she knew by heart and had often said aloud when riding along the country lanes, so that she would be able to say  them if the wonderful day should come for her to join a Brownie Pack.
To do her best and help other people, to think of others before herself, to do a good turn every day, to lend a hand — she was only partly keeping the Promise, the Law and the Motto by setting off to save the Brownies' van from what could be a nasty mishap.
She had to be brave enough to finish the job, braver than she'd ever been before, really to fulfil the Promise and the Law.
Dare she push her bike through that gate — past those fierce horned heads?
The last time she'd met a herd of cows she'd turned and ridden away.
It hadn't mattered then whether she went on or back.
Now it did — very much.
If she didn't go on — and quickly — the van carrying the Brownies to their Pack holiday might crash dangerously into the low bridge.
‘I must stop it!’ breathed Brenda.
‘This is my first Challenge.’
Drawing a deep breath, she pushed her bike up to the gate.
The cows didn't move.
Brenda put her hand over and pulled back the bar that held the gate shut.
Then, firmly, she pushed the gate before her.
The three cows began to back away.
Holding her breath, Brenda pushed her bike through the gate.
Then — and this was the very worst moment of all, because it cut off her only way of retreat — she thrust the gate shut.
Now she was in the field — alone with the cows!
Now she knew how St. George must have felt when facing the dragon.
The three nearest cows stood still, looking at her and shaking their horns.
Brenda hoped they weren't going to charge her.
But she couldn't go back now; she had to go on.
Not looking at the cows, but keeping her eyes fixed straight ahead, she pushed her bike past them and then on to the footpath.
Then, not daring to glance round to see whether the cows were coming after her, she put one foot on the pedal, pushed off with the other, and began to ride away.
In front of her most of the herd seemed to be grazing  alongside the path, on either side of it, but Brenda couldn't leave the path on her bike.
She didn't dare ride fast in case she startled the cows into a charge or a stampede or something.
So she rode slowly through them, mostly holding her breath and praying that they wouldn't charge at her.
One or two turned and lumbered away as she rode toward them.
Others shook their horned heads and looked — Brenda thought — very angry.
But she pressed her lips tightly together and rode steadily on.
And in another minute or two she was past them.
A clear field lay ahead of her.
She let out her pent-up breath in a loud gasp of relief; then she bent over the handlebars and sent the bike whizzing as fast as she could pedal it across the remaining hundred yards or so of field.
As she reached the gate at the farther edge she could see right under the low bridge — and as she looked she saw the van turn the bend at the top of the short hill leading to the bridge, and increase speed down it.
She jumped off her bike, pulled at the gate, and then saw that it was padlocked.
She didn't wait an instant.
Leaning her bike against the gate, she hopped up and over, then raced to the bridge and under it, and stood in the middle of the road holding both hands out and shouting to the van to stop.
The van did stop.
The driver had to brake rather sharply, as he was letting the van rip down the hill.
But he stopped in time, before reaching the bridge.
and then Brenda ran up to explain breathlessly that she didn't think the van would go under the low bridge, as her daddy's — which was the same size — wouldn't.
‘By gum, little missy, an' I believe you're right an' all!’ said the driver, staring at the bridge and turning quite pale.
‘Crumps, that stonework would have hit us a nasty crack-at the pace I was going.
I don't like to think about it.’
Slowly he climbed out of the van, shaking his head as he stared at the bridge.
Then he went round to the  back and told the Brownie Guider who was sitting on a bench inside with the Brownies.
‘Goodness me, what an escape!’ exclaimed the Brownie Guider.
She climbed out of the van, followed by all the Brownies.
‘What a very, very good thing you stopped us in time!’ she said to Brenda.
‘How grateful we all are to you!’
‘Why, she's the girl we waved to just now!’ cried one of the Brownies, gazing hard at Brenda
‘Yes, she is!’ exclaimed another.
The Brownie Guider took Brenda by the arm.
‘Do please tell us all about how you came to do this,’ she said.
‘I feel sure you've done something very brave to save us.
You're quite out of breath and rather windblown.’
So Brenda told her about the adventurous ride by the short cut.
‘But I don't think I'll ever be quite so scared of cows again,’ she added, when she told of her perilous passage through the herd and how afraid she'd been.
‘I don't think you will,’ said the Brownie Guider, ‘but I do know for certain that you faced what to you was great danger with wonderful bravery.’
‘It's certain the van won't go under the bridge,’ said the driver of the van gloomily, coming up, ‘so we'll have to go back and take another road.’
All the Brownies looked sorry on hearing this, for they were all tired of travelling and longing to get to their Pack holiday house.
But just at that moment a smart new van came into view round the bend, and as it drew nearer and Brenda could see the driver, she let out a cry.
‘Daddy!
Daddy!’
It was her daddy, in his new van.
He stopped on seeing the van across the road and then Brenda.
The situation was quickly explained to him.
‘Well, there's no need for you people to go all that way back and round,’ he said.
‘My new van will go under the bridge and it's almost empty.
I can take you all and the luggage to Applewick.’
And that's what he did — including Brenda and her bike.
So Brenda had the joy of helping the Brownies move in to their Pack holiday house and looking all over it with them.
During their holiday, at the Brownie Guider's invitation, she became a regular visitor and joined the Brownies on several of their outings and picnics.
But her greatest thrill of all came on the very day they were going home, for the Brownie Guider from Stowbridge came to see them off and she brought the exciting news that a second Pack was being formed at Stowbridge and that the way was now wide open for Brenda to become a Brownie.
ONE GOOD TURN AND NO HITCHES
SHEILA lived in a cottage on the rocky shelf of a mountain.
From her bedroom window she could see the mountain rising up in a steep and slippery slope above a deep quarry, which had once been worked for limestone but had long since fallen into disuse.
Sheila was a Scots girl who had come to live in England.
On joining the nearest Brownie Guide Pack, she was delighted to find two other girls from Scotland already in the Pack.
Brown Owl had put all three into the same Six and called them the Ghillie Dhu.
Sheila was now the Sixer and was on the Brownie Highway.
Although she lived a long way from the town, she seldom missed Brownie Pack Meeting.
On Pack Meeting night she always changed early into her uniform, and now she was skipping gaily on the grassy path outside the cottage, practising fancy new steps for the Keep Fit Challenge.
She was singing aloud as she skipped when suddenly and unexpectedly her rope was fouled by something and nearly tripped her up.
Then she jumped, for a voice behind her said loudly: ‘Got you!’
Sheila swung round.
The grinning faces of two boys met her gaze.
‘Made you jump, didn't I?’ said the bigger of the two boys.
‘Didn't hear us comin', did you?’
‘No, I didna',’ admitted Sheila.
‘Will ye let go o' my skipping-rope, please?
I'm practising.’
For answer, the boy caught at the rope with his other hand and tugged suddenly to break Sheila's hold on it.
Sheila, however, hung grimly on to it, whereupon the boy began to pull her along the path.
‘Give us a hand, Chuck,’ he panted to his companion, as he failed to tear the rope from Sheila's grasp.
‘Oh, let 'er have the rope, Dick.
We want those magpie eggs.’
‘I'm goin' to 'ave her skipping-rope first.’
‘Oh, all right, then!’
Chuck slouched forward, grabbed the rope, and pulled vigorously on it alongside Dick.
The combined strength of the two boys was too much for Sheila.
who, after leaning back on her heels to let her whole weight resist the boys' tug, found herself suddenly jerked forward, lost her balance, and fell flat on her hands and face on the path.
‘Serves you right!’ shouted Dick, and snatching up the rope raced off along the path, closely followed by Chuck.
Slowly Sheila struggled to her feet.
Her hands and legs were smeared with mud and green streaks from the damp grass.
‘My uniform isna' badly marked, anyway,’ she murmured.
‘I'd better go and wash again, I suppose.
I hope those boys dinna' tak' my skipping-rope reet awa', that's a'.’
In the bathroom she soon removed the mud.
Towelling herself, she looked out of the window, and paused as she noticed two figures climbing up a path that wound up the side of the mountain.
‘Chuck and Dick,’ she murmured.
‘They dinna' seem tae be carrying my skipping-rope, so perhaps they've thrown it dawn somewhere.’
Hurrying from the bathroom, she ran downstairs and out of the cottage.
Looking keenly from side to side, she walked quickly along the path in the direction taken by the boys.
Then suddenly she saw the skipping-rope.
It was hanging over the side of the quarry, and she might have missed seeing it if the handles hadn't been bright-red.
Dick had probably intended to toss it into the quarry, but it had fallen short and the weight of the handles had kept it from slipping over.
Stepping cautiously to the edge, Sheila picked it up.
‘Guid!’ she murmured.
‘The handles are muddy, but they havena' broken it, and —’ She broke off and looked sharply across the quarry, over which a faint shout had come.
The two boys were on the slope above the perpendicular cliff opposite.
One of them — it looked like Chuck — was safely on the ridge, well above the point where the slope ended and dropped dizzily into the yawning throat of the quarry, but the bigger boy, Dick, was much nearer the edge — perilously near, Sheila thought.
He seemed to be squatting down, and suddenly Sheila realised why.
The slope running down to the quarry-cliff was not steep, but its surface was very treacherous, consisting mostly of loose stones and shale, which were apt to slip under any movement.
Sheila realised that Dick was afraid to stand up.
He dared not move, for fear of starting a slide of loose stones that would carry him down and irresistibly over the edge of the quarry.
Sheila stood rooted with horror for a moment.
Then she sprang up and raced along the path.
She followed this until it branched off.
Then she turned along the route taken by the boys up to the ridge above the quarry.
Chuck saw her coming, and called out to her, but she was too far away to distinguish what he said.
Panting, she struggled on and up until at last she stood beside Chuck.
‘Dick — can't — move!’ murmured Chuck, who she noticed was white-faced.
He jabbed a finger towards Dick ‘Nobody can get down to 'im, neither, 'cos it's all slippery loose stones.
'E was after magpies' eggs.’
‘I ken.
Put your arm round that tree.
I have an idea.’
Quickly Sheila thrust one handle of the skipping-rope into Chuck's hand.
‘If ye hold one end o' the skipping-rope ye'll be able tae stop me from slipping when I work down towards Dick.
Whatever ye do, dinna' let go o' the rope.’
‘I won't.’
Chuck nodded.
‘Be very careful, though; it's mighty dangerous.’
Sheila nodded.
Then, with one end of the skipping-rope in her right hand, she began to edge little by little down the slope.
There was no time to lose.
At any moment Dick might begin to slide towards the quarry.
Chuck, with one arm around one of the saplings that grew on the ridge, hung tightly on to his end of the rope.
Inch by inch — then, as loose shale slid frighteningly from under her feet, a sudden foot or more at a time — Sheila made her way perilously down the slope.
Dick heard her coming, but did not move or speak.
His plight was clearly desperate; the slightest motion could hurtle him down the remaining few yards of slope and over the lip into the quarry.
‘I canna' come any farther, Dick,’ Sheila called out softly at last, reaching the end of the rope.
‘Put your hand out towards me and I wull try and grab it.
Chuck is on the other end o' the rope, and he'll be able tae hold it firm while we climb back.’
For a moment Dick gave no sign that he had heard or understood.
Then, very slowly, fearful of making the slightest movement that might start the surface on an avalanche course and himself down the incline, he stretched out his arm towards Sheila.
Bending riskily forward as far as she could, with her arm at full stretch from the end of the rope, Sheila at last managed to grasp his hand.
His grip closed tightly on hers.
Then she began to pull him up.
Dick's hand-grip grew even more intense.
His face, as he looked up towards her, was chalk-white.
Sheila guessed how great had been the strain upon him as he crouched within sight of the quarry-gulf, looking into its waiting mouth, unable to move an inch.
‘Ye'll be all right now,’ Sheila called to him reassuringly.
He nodded.
Slowly, gingerly, one behind the other, they climbed back up the slope, loose stones and shale slithering and clattering away under their feet and pouring like noisy rain into the depths of the quarry.
Sheila shuddered.
‘You're safe now — only another step or two!’ they heard Chuck call out, and within a few seconds they were both thankfully flinging their arms round the firm, strongly rooted trunks of the saplings on the ridge.
‘I never thought you'd make it,’ muttered Chuck.
‘Thanks!’ whispered Dick.
‘Thanks!’
That was all he could say for quite a time; but when he had recovered his confidence he said a lot more, all of it expressing gratitude to Sheila for her quick thinking and great pluck and shame for his own and Chuck's roughness with her earlier.
‘I'm glad I was able tae lend a hand,’ said Sheila modestly, adding to herself, ‘After all, that's what Brownies try tae do —‘We're the Brownies, here's our aim, Lend a hand and play the game.’
Now I must be awa' tae Pack Meeting,’ she said to Dick and Chuck, ‘or I'll be late.’
‘Goodbye,’ said Chuck.
‘Goodbye,’ said Dick —‘and thanks.’
NO PACK FOR PEGGY
Just imagine having a mummy who'd been a Brownie Guider but who wouldn't let you be a Brownie!
That was the puzzling thing that happened to Peggy Pringle, who was nearly nine years old and just longed to join the Pack to which her friends belonged.
‘But why can't I join Brownies, Mummy?’ she asked  for the twentieth time.
‘Elizabeth's a Brownie, and so's Patricia Bastin.
They're going to play a tracking game in Horsfall Woods this evening.
If I can't join can I go and watch them tracking?
Elizabeth said I could go with her.’
‘Yes, dear, but come home when they do,’ replied Mrs. Pringle.
‘We must talk about your joining a Pack later on.
Ah, here's Rosalind!
I thought you said you'd gone for the evening, Rosalind.’
Rosalind was Peggy's older sister.
‘I had,’ said Rosalind, hurrying in, ‘but I stopped at the post-office to get a stamp for my letter and it was closed and the wretched stamp-machine was empty.
This letter simply must go tonight, and I can't go right down to the G.P.O. or I shall be late for my appointment.’
‘Perhaps Peggy will get you stamps from the machine at the G.P.O. and post the letter for you,’ suggested Mummy, glancing at Peggy.
‘She's going to Horsfall Woods and it will be only a little out of her way.’
‘Oh, would you, Peggy?’ asked Rosalind, with an appealing look at Peggy.
She took a letter from her handbag, and then three pennies.
‘Be a dear!’
Then, seeing Peggy's lips pouting sulkily, she took out a further three pence.
‘Here's three pence for you for a lolly if you'll go.’
‘All right, then,’ agreed Peggy, her pout disappearing at once .
She did not notice that a little troubled crease appeared on her mummy's forehead.
Peggy had lived for a long time with an aunt while her daddy and mummy were abroad, and she had been spoilt by always getting her own way.
Her selfishness often distressed her mummy.
‘Hello!’
Peggy exclaimed, reading the name and address on the envelope.
‘Why are you writing to Richard instead of telephoning him?’
‘Never mind!
It must go tonight, remember,’ Rosalind told her.
‘I want him to get it tomorrow without fail.’
Peggy nodded.
Richard was Rosalind's young man, and Peggy liked him, especially as he sometimes brought a bag of sweets for her.
Peggy rather hoped that Rosalind  was not all dressed up to meet a new boy-friend, but with a letter going off to Richard it looked as if she were.
Peggy hurried off to Elizabeth's house, but there she learned that Elizabeth had already gone to Horsfall Woods.
‘She nearly made herself late waiting for you,’ Elizabeth's mummy said, rather sharply.
‘In the end she thought you weren't coming.
She did tell you to come straight after tea, didn't she?’
Peggy nodded.
Instead of calling for Elizabeth immediately after tea, she'd stayed watching television, thinking Elizabeth would wait for her anyhow.
Now, unless she hurried, she'd miss the Brownies' tracking!
She felt rather put out at Elizabeth's going off like that.
‘I think I'll leave Rosalind's letter till after and go to Horsfall Woods first,’ she thought.
‘The last post doesn't go till night, I believe, so there'll be plenty of time for me to post it.’
She hurried on to Horsfall Woods, stopping only at a sweetshop to buy a raspberry lollipop with the threepence Rosalind had given her for taking the letter.
Eating the lollipop slowed her pace to Horsfall Woods, and when she reached there she could see no sign of the Brownies.
She ran through the woods and only stopped when she reached the fence between the woods and the Botanical Gardens, which spread for a great distance along one side.
‘Of course,’ she thought, ‘if the Pack are tracking they'll be very silent.
I expect that's why I can't hear them.
And I can't see them because of the trees and bushes everywhere.
Well, they can't get into the gardens from this side, so they must be in the woods.
I know!
I'll climb a tree.
Then I can look right over the woods and see where they are!’
This, she thought, was just what a real Brownie Guide would do.
She felt rather proud of thinking of it.
She chose a high beech-tree on the edge of an open glade and climbed up it.
She was a good climber, but she was soon very dirty.
The bark of the tree made black marks on her  frock and on her hands and face.
And then suddenly she had a sad mishap.
Very near the top of the tree she missed her footing and slipped.
A sharp twig spiked into her frock, and as she slid down, it tore her frock through the left-hand pocket and nearly the whole way up.
She saved herself from falling further by clutching at a branch with both hands and then drawing her feet up to safety on a big branch.
‘Mummy will be cross,’ she murmured, wrinkling her nose as she peered down at the long tear.
Then she noticed something fluttering down below her.
She gasped as she realised what it was.
It was Rosalind's letter!
The letter had been in the left pocket of her frock.
Thank goodness the three pennies were in her hanky in the pocket on the right!
When the twig tore the pocket open the letter had dropped out.
It twirled down through the branches and finally landed in the middle of the glade.
Peggy could just glimpse it through the leaves.
‘Well, it won't hurt there for a bit till I can get down,’ murmured Peggy, and struggled up higher and on to the topmost branches.
There, she was high up above the woods, but instead of being able to see all that was going on below for miles around, as she had expected, all she could see was — leaves!
Trees were all around her.
‘Oh, dear!’ she exclaimed, in disappointment.
‘I've climbed all the way up here and torn my frock — and all for nothing!’
But it wasn't quite for nothing.
She could see the ground for a distance round the beech-tree, and as she gazed down she noticed a man coming along a path a short distance away.
As he was partly hidden by the foliage she could not see his face clearly — only that he was wearing a cap and carrying a suitcase.
As she peered down at him she saw him pause and look quickly round.
He seemed to be listening.
Then, as if satisfied that there was no one about, he hurried across the glade, where he almost trod on Rosalind's letter, which was lying face-upwards on the grass.
Peggy very nearly cried out to tell him the letter was hers, but thought she'd better not.
By moving her head about and squinting through gaps in the foliage she could just follow his actions.
He stopped, looked down, then stooped and picked up the letter.
Turning it over, he saw that it was sealed up, and broke it open.
Pulling out Rosalind's letter.
he peered into the envelope as if hoping to find something worth having inside, then glanced swiftly through the letter and having read it flipped it and the envelope, with a gesture of disgust, to the ground.
‘Well!’ muttered Peggy indignantly.
‘Fancy reading somebody's letter and then —’ She stopped and her eyes grew round with surprise.
The man, having given another quick, furtive glance round, darted to the fence along the Botanical Gardens.
Tossing his case over the top of it, he scrambled up and dropped lightly down on the other side.
There, he opened the case, took a trowel from it, and began to dig up bulb after bulb from a long flower-bed on the other side of a path near the fence.
He dropped the bulbs, with the earth still round them, into the case.
Working swiftly, in quite a short time he filled the case, which he then snapped shut.
Scrambling to his feet, he took the case and hung it by its handle on to a support-post of the fence, then quickly climbed back over, lifted down the case, and hurried back across the glade and down the path by which he had come, finally disappearing into the trees.
‘Goodness!’ breathed Peggy, her cheeks pink with excitement.
‘He was a thief!’
She scrambled down the tree as fast as she could.
She decided she must go and tell someone about what she had seen — but who?
There was no one about in the woods, so she'd better hurry back to the town as fast as she could.
Running into the glade, she picked up Rosalind's letter and folded it back into its envelope, which she saw to her dismay had been badly torn by the man's rough handling of it.
She wondered how she was going to repair it and seal the envelope up properly again.
She would have to do it somehow — or post it as it was.
Rosalind would be very cross if she took it home unposted after paying her to send it!
As fast as she could, Peggy ran to the town.
There, she walked quickly towards the General Post Office.
She would get the three penny stamps from the machine for a start.
It might even be, she thought hopefully, that a strip of sticky paper would come out with the stamps, so that she could repair the tear in the envelope!
If something like that didn't turn up — well, she'd post it torn, that was all!
She was still puzzling over this problem when she reached the General Post Office.
She had to stand on tiptoe to reach the stamp-machine.
She had just stuck the first stamp on the envelope when a friendly voice behind her said: ‘Can you manage all right, missy, or do you want a lift up?’
Turning round, Peggy saw a big police-sergeant smiling down at her.
‘My word,’ said the sergeant, gazing at her blackened face and hands and torn frock, ‘you look as if you've been climbing trees.’
‘That's just what I have been!’ exclaimed Peggy in surprise.
She thought it was very clever of the policeman to guess correctly like that.
‘And when I was up in the tree,’ she added, gazing up at him, ‘I saw a thief climb into the Botanical Gardens and dig up a lot of bulbs and put them in a big case and go off with them!’
‘Heh, what's that?’ exclaimed the police-sergeant.
‘You saw what?
Are you sure of what you're saying, young lady?’
‘Yes, I am,’ replied Peggy indignantly.
‘I couldn't see his face very well because the leaves and branches were in the way, but I saw him climb the fence and steal the bulbs.’
She described carefully what had happened while she was in Horsfall Woods, and to prove she was telling the truth she showed the police-sergeant the torn envelope.
‘The thief did that,’ she told him, ‘and I don't quite know how I can repair it.
Do you think it will be all right if I post it like it is?
Rosalind said it must go tonight, and she gave me three pence for a lolly to stamp it and post it.’
The police-sergeant took the envelope and held it carefully by the edges between his fingers and thumb.
‘I think it would be a great pity to send it through the post,’ he said.
‘Supposing instead you tell me where you live.
Then we could go home and explain about the envelope and get a fresh one.
There'd still be time to catch the last collection.
I could post it for you.’
‘Well, that might do,’ said Peggy thoughtfully, ‘especially as Rosalind won't be back home yet.
Will you promise me to post the letter so that it will go out tonight?’
‘I promise,’ the police-sergeant said solemnly.
‘Let's go, shall we?
You see,’ he said, as Peggy put her hand in his, ‘I'm very interested in what you've told me about someone stealing bulbs.
There've been a lot of valuable plants and bulbs stolen from the Botanical Gardens during the last few weeks.
In fact, one of the gardeners was dismissed only a fortnight ago because it was thought he was taking them.
What you saw may help us to prove whether he is the thief or not.’
‘I don't know whether the man I saw was a gardener,’ said Peggy, shaking her head.
‘I couldn't see him well enough.’
‘Ah, but I think we shall be able to find out now!’ said the police-sergeant, who seemed very pleased about something.
‘Yes, I think it's more than likely we shall!’
Peggy didn't quite see how when she couldn't even say what the thief looked like.
Presently they reached Peggy's house.
There, Peggy had a shock.
Rosalind opened the door to them!
She'd come back much earlier than expected.
Peggy gazed at her in dismay.
Rosalind would have to know now that she hadn't posted the letter!
And Rosalind was looking anything but cheerful!
‘I'm sorry, Rosalind,’ Peggy began in a rather shaky voice, ‘but your letter got damaged and the policeman didn't think it ought to go in the post with a tear in it and so we came —‘
‘What?’ exclaimed Rosalind.
She stooped down and gripped Peggy's arms quite fiercely.
‘Are you telling me  you haven't posted my letter to Richard?
Are you, Peggy, are you?’
Peggy nodded, too dismayed to speak.
She pointed silently to the letter that the police-sergeant was still holding carefully between fingers and thumb.
To her astonishment, Rosalind flung her arms about her and hugged and kissed her, which was unusual for Rosalind at any time!
‘Oh, you darling!
You've saved my life!
I've been so miserable thinking the letter had gone to Richard and that the damage was done and couldn't be undone!
Oh, you dear, darling Peggy!’
Peggy couldn't understand this at all, but when the police-sergeant was taken into the house it was explained.
Rosalind had written the letter breaking off her engagement to Richard, but during her short meeting with her new boy-friend realised that he wasn't the right one at all and that Richard was — but that with the letter in the post she had found out too late!
And now, suddenly, everything had come right again!
It was wonderful!
‘Well, I'm bothered!’ said Peggy.
‘I'll give you your letter back, miss — unread,’ the police-sergeant told Rosalind, with a grin, ‘but I'd like to keep the envelope, please, because it's got a nice glossy surface and the man your sister saw stealing bulbs has left two lovely big fingerprints on it, which may or may not enable us to find out who he is, but will certainly prove whether the gardener who was sacked as the thief is innocent.
All we've got to do is to take his fingerprints and compare them with the beauties on this envelope.
If they don't match he isn't the thief and he'll get his job back.
See?’
So that was why the police-sergeant had been so pleased!
Now Peggy understood!
‘You've been pretty useful altogether, Peggy,’ said Rosalind, and Peggy nodded, very pleased with herself.
Rosalind gladly let the police-sergeant take away the envelope and hurried off, singing, to telephone to Richard.
A few days later the sergeant called to say that the  fingerprints on the envelope were not those of the gardener who had been dismissed and that the poor, wronged man had been given back his job.
‘Oh, I ampleased!’ cried Mummy.
‘I'm so glad something good carne out of Peggy's bad behaviour.’
Peggy could hardly believe her ears.
She had been feeling so very proud of her adventure in Horsfall Woods, which had turned out so well, not only for Rosalind but for the poor gardener.
‘Yes, Peggy,’ her mummy said quietly, ‘it was an evening of disobedience, wasn't it?
You weren't willing to do a good turn for your sister without being bribed with a lollipop, and even then you left the posting of the letter because you wanted to go first to Horsfall Woods for your own pleasure.
There, climbing a tree, you ruined your frock and dropped the letter, which a stranger read and tore so badly that when you did get to the post it wasn't fit to send.
It so happened that it turned out a good thing that it didn't get posted, but that was just a lucky chance.
I've been so hoping you would soon be ready to join Brownies, but how can I pass over to a Brownie Guider a girl who won't lend a hand without being given something first and who doesn't know the first thing about being obedient?’
‘But — but — but…!’ began Peggy, in dismay, and then stopped.
What could she say?
She suddenly saw how selfish she had been, and knew at last the answer to the thing that had puzzled her for so long — why her mummy, who had been a keen Brownie Guider and loved Brownies, wouldn't let her join a Pack.
She knew the Brownie Motto and Law, and now they flashed into her mind: ‘Lend a Hand’ and ‘A Brownie thinks of others before herself and does a good turn every day’.
‘I see,’ she murmured, in a very small voice.
‘I see now.’
‘Ah!’ said her mummy, and her smile was suddenly warm and bright.
‘If you see, that's wonderful!
Your evening in Horsfall Woods will have brought good to you, too!
I believe we'll soon be seeing you in Brownie uniform, Peggy, after all!’
THE BROWNIE AND THE TRAMP
‘WHY didn't the Earl write to you himself, Guider?’
‘Couldn't you go and see him, Guider?’
‘I'm sure he'd let us go on using the park if you wrote and told him it wasn't us who left the litter lying about, Guider.’
‘Why can't we…?’
The Brownie Guider put her fingers in her ears, and at last the Brownies stopped talking all together.
They were all walking along the lane that led to Ferngrove Park, where they held their Pack Meetings.
‘Let me explain,’ said the Guider.
‘I've done most of the things you are suggesting.
I have tried to see the Earl, but was told by his secretary that all questions about the use of Ferngrove Park by the public are dealt with by Mr. Bishop, the estate agent.
I wrote to the Earl personally and told him that Brownie Guides are taught to leave behind nothing but their thanks, but received a reply saying that my letter had been passed on to the agent, Mr. Bishop, who handled all such matters.
So, you see, it's no use trying to go over the agent's head.’
‘I think the agent is mean,’ said Jennifer, the Gnome Sixer, indignantly.
‘So do I,’ agreed Anne, the Elf Second.
There was a murmur of agreement, but Jill, one of the Gnomes, shook her head slowly.
‘It iss not really his fault, Jennifer.
It iss the people who leave their rubbish about who're to blame, really.’
This remark quite startled the Pack.
Jill was a Welsh girl.
She was one of the youngest Brownies, but she was very honest and outspoken The Pack had soon learned that Jill never feared to speak her mind and to say what she thought was right.
She hated anything deceitful or dishonest and would never listen to tittle-tattle about another girl behind her back.
She would never let anything unfair pass.
‘Jill is quite right,’ said the Guider.
‘Mr. Bishop is mistaken in thinking we are litterbugs, but he is only doing his duty in taking steps to protect Ferngrove Park.
Now, shall we forget about it and concentrate on enjoying the Park while we are still allowed in it?’
The Pack heartily agreed with this idea, and proceeded to enjoy themselves enormously.
Ferngrove Park, with its woods and meadows and deep thickets full of secret nooks and crannies, was a place where the Brownies really did have a grand time.
They would miss it sorely when it was closed to them, and there seemed no chance now that it wouldn't be.
‘I'm going to finish getting my Nature collection while we're here, look you, in case I don't get a chance again,’ Jill confided to Jennifer, her Sixer.
Jennifer nodded.
‘Good idea.’
The meeting was mostly a ‘Fun out of doors’ one, so Jill soon went off to search the wood to complete her collection of ferns.
She found quite a rare one just as she reached the other edge of the wood.
She was about to turn and go back when she saw something that made her stop and purse her lips disapprovingly.
An old tramp was sitting on a rustic seat in the sunshine a few yards away, and she saw him toss an envelope on to the grass.
‘Well!’ exclaimed Jill, aloud.
The tramp looked up and saw her.
‘Eh?’ he inquired.
Jill looked at him sternly.
She knew she shouldn't speak to a strange man, but as her Brownie Guider was under a tree not many yards away she thought she could tell him about the litter that had caused the Pack to lose the use of Ferngrove Park.
‘We've been stopped from coming into the Park because of people throwing paper and things on to the ground.’
The tramp looked rather surprised.
‘Have you, now?’
When she looked at him closely, Jill felt sorry for him and rather wished she hadn't spoken so pointedly.
He looked so shabby, in a battered hat and a long overcoat, although the day was very warm.
‘The agent hass stopped us, but it iss not his fault, really; it iss the Earl's,’ explained Jill, careful to be fair, ‘though it iss really the people who leave the litter who are to blame, not even the Earl.
Brownies never leave anything behind but their thanks, but the Earl doesn't know that.’
‘He doesn't, eh?’ said the tramp, who was looking at her with great interest.
‘No.
We even spend some of our Pack Meeting time picking up paper people haff left about.
I'll pick this up for you.’
Jill darted forward and picked up the crushed envelope.
‘There iss a litter basket near where the Pack meet, and I'll put it in there.
Even if there issn't a litter basket where you are,’ she pointed out, ‘you can always put paper and things in your pocket until you get to one.
Our Guider makes us do that.’
‘Does she, now?
She seems a very good Guider too.
I see I've been slipping up a bit.’
The tramp pushed up his old hat and scratched his head.
‘I must remember to watch my step in the Park.’
He peered under his ancient hat at Jill, who noticed that his eyes were blue and very bright, although his face was old and seamed and wrinkled.
‘Have you been digging up ferns?
I suppose the Earl doesn't mind that.’
‘Not digging up — just picking,’ Jill corrected him quickly.
‘They're ferns for my Nature collection, look you.
We don't dig up plants or wild flowers or anything like that; our Guider told us we mustn't.
These are all different kinds of ferns, although they may look alike to you.’
‘I see.
Do you know their names?’ asked the tramp.
Jill shook her head.
‘I've got to find them out.’
Unbuttoning her pocket, she pulled out a packet of fruit-gums.
‘Would you like a fruit-gum?’
‘A fruit-gum?
Oh, I see!
Thank you, no — I mean, yes, please.
I should like one — h'm — very much.’
‘I thought you might be a bit hungry,’ said Jill delicately, holding out the packet.
The tramp choked a little, as if the gum he accepted and popped into his mouth had gone the wrong way.
‘I might be able to tell you the names of your ferns.
I know a little about ferns.’
‘Do you, now?’ said Jill, in surprise.
She was about m add, ‘I suppose that's because you're a tramp and sleep amongst them at night sometimes,’ but stopped herself in time.
She handed him her ferns.
He peered at them.
‘This one is a lady fern, and this is a hart's-tongue.
I only know these two.
The others must be quite rare.’
‘I'm glad,’ said Jill, pleased.
‘I shall look them up In a book I haff got at home.
It iss better to find out for yourself, our Guider says, than to be told.’
‘Your Guider sounds very wise,’ said the tramp.
‘She iss.
I'd better go now.
She'll be wondering where am,’ said Jill.
‘You will remember not to leave paper and other rubbish about, won't you?’
‘I certainly will.
I shan't forget our little talk, I can tell you.
It's been a revelation to me.’
The tramp held his hand, his sad mouth crinkling into a smile, and his blue eyes peering brightly into Jill's.
‘Goodbye, my dear, and thank you for stopping to talk to me.’
‘Goodbye,’ said Jill, shaking his hand, which she was secretly surprised to notice was soft and clean.
‘I shouldn't really haff talked to a stranger like that,’ she thought, as she hurried back through the wood, ‘especially a tramp, but if people drop paper about they really ought to be told, because they get other people into trouble.
And he wass very nice and didn't seem to mind at all about being told.’
She didn't tell the Brownie Guider about her chat with the tramp.
She simply dropped the tramp's envelope into the litter-box on the way out of the Park.
But the Guider and all the Pack learned later on about her meeting with the stranger on the seat, because at the next Pack Meeting the Guider read out a letter from Mr. Bishop, the estate agent, which said the Earl of Ferngrove had given special instructions that the Brownie Guide Pack could continue to use the Park whenever they wished, as he was quite satisfied, thanks to a chat he'd had with one of them, that they were very careful not to leave litter about in the Park.
He also said that the envelope the Brownie had kindly picked up had dropped from the Earl's pocket  without being noticed by him, and that as the Brownie was so kind as to share her sweets with him the Earl was sending a tin of his own, which he felt sure from what he had seen of this Brownie would find their way into the mouths of all the other Brownies in the Pack too.
It soon came out that the Brownie was Jill.
The Guider laughed delightedly when she knew.
‘So you've been chatting to the Earl of Ferngrove, Jill!’
Jill was flabbergasted.
‘He didn't look a bit like an earl, Guider,’ she cried.
‘Really he didn't.
He looked just like a tramp.’
The Guider smiled.
‘I'm told that earls do sometimes look like tramps.
They don't have to worry about clothes or how they look, if they don't want to.
And it's rather a good thing this one did look like a tramp,’ she added, ‘because you might not have talked to him if you hadn't mistaken him for a poor old man, and he wouldn't have learned anything about Brownies, and we shouldn't be going to continue to enjoy the use of his lovely Park.
I think the Pack owe you a big thank-you, Jill, as well as your Earl.’
And all the Pack agreed enthusiastically that they did.
BROWNIE ON A BROOMSTICK
THE Brownies' Hallowe'en party had been a great success Carol had enjoyed every minute of it.
There had been games, a lovely feed, gifts for children at the local orphanage, and, finally, a Hallowe'en play in which Carol had appeared as an old witch.
‘I think I liked acting in the play best of all,’ Carol told her friend Gillian when it was time to go.
‘It's fun dressing up.’
She and Gillian were both in the Leprechauns, being both had Irish parents, although they themselves had been born and brought up in England.
‘You were jolly good as the witch,’ said Gillian.
‘You did make me laugh when you fell over the broomstick.’
‘I wasn't supposed to fall over it,’ admitted Carol.
‘It somehow got tangled up in my long skirt.’
Loud cries of surprise from the hall made them run out of the cloakroom, where they were trying to find their coats and berets.
Children and parents were crowded about the door into the street.
Through it Carol could see a white world.
‘Why, it's been snowing, Gillian!’ she cried.
‘It looks ever so deep.’
Snow had come very early in the year, but all of October had been so intensely cold that no one was really surprised to see such a heavy fall, although there had been no sign of it when they entered the hall.
Brown Owl came hurrying up to them.
‘How are you and Gillian getting home, Carol?
You both live a long way out, and the snow is quite deep and still coming down hard.’
‘Gillian's uncle is fetching us in his car, Brown Owl,’ replied Carol.
‘He told us to wait till he came.’
Gillian's Uncle George was a very long time coming.
Carol and Gillian waited patiently while the hall slowly emptied.
At last they-were the only ones left, except for Brown Owl, who stayed with them.
‘I expect Gillian's uncle is finding driving through the snow along the country lanes slow work,’ said Brown Owl.
‘It's been snowing heavily all the time we've been in the hall.
Ah, this looks like him!’
A car thickly covered with snow drew up before the door.
Gillian's Uncle George climbed out.
‘What a blizzard!’ he exclaimed.
‘It's caught us all napping.
Did you think I was lost, Gillian?
I could hardly get through.
The country lanes are feet deep in snow.
Thank you for waiting with them, Brown Owl.
Now jump in, you two.’
Just as Carol was getting in, Brown Owl said.
‘Where's your witch's broom, Carol?
You don't want to leave that behind, do you?’
‘Mummy said I needn't bring it back, as it was old and the twigs were coming out of it.’
‘A broom might be useful if the wheels get clogged up with snow,’ put in Uncle George.
‘Do bring it, Carol.’
So Carol ran into the hall and fetched the broom — which her mummy said was properly called a besom, and which she had used as the witch's broom in the play.
She laid it on the floor of the car.
Soon the car was moving slowly through the snowy streets of the town.
The snow was driving down so thickly that the windscreen-wiper couldn't keep the glass free of it.
Soon after they reached the open country Uncle George had to stop, get out, and clear the snow from the windscreen in order to see through it.
‘Isn't this fun?’ laughed Carol.
‘Glad you're enjoying it,’ said Uncle George dryly.
‘You're going to be very late to bed tonight, I'm afraid.’
When they turned off the main road Uncle George had to drive at little more than walking pace, for he couldn't see where the lane ended and the ditches at the sides began, for snow cloaked everything.
On and on he drove, but again and again he had to stop, struggle out and wipe the piled-up snow from the windscreen.
‘It's not snowing so heavily now,’ he said, on climbing back for the sixth time.
‘I hope it will soon stop.’
It did stop, very soon — and so did Uncle George.
He peered out of the window and groaned.
‘Where are we now, Uncle?’ asked Gillian.
‘That's just what I was wondering myself, Gillian.
I think I must have taken a wrong turning somewhere, because we're certainly not at Threlkeld, where we ought to be by now.
It's terribly late, too — nearly midnight.
Can either of you see any landmark you know?’
Carol and Gillian peered out of the windows.
Then Carol said: ‘Look, there's a signpost!
I'll pop out and see what it says.’
She jumped out and ran down the lane to the signpost; but the lettering on its arms was covered with  snow and Carol wasn't tall enough to reach it and dear it off.
‘I know!’ she exclaimed.
‘My witch's broom!
I can wipe the snow away with that.’
So she ran back to the car and fetched her witch's broom.
With this she knocked away the snow from the lettering — but then found she couldn't make out the words in the dark.
Still, she wasn't beaten!
Leaning the broomstick against the signpost, she grasped the handle and climbed carefully on to the top of the twigs and raised her head towards the words on the signpost arm.
Just as she did so, a clock in the far distance began to strike midnight, and then a most peculiar thing happened.
The broomstick gave a curious twitch, and next instant it soared into the sky — with Carol on it!
‘Goodness!’ cried Carol.
‘What's happening?’
What was happening was that the broomstick was swooping up into the sky, now dotted with stars, and that Carol was astride it, just like a witch in a fairy-tale.
The odd thing was that Carol felt quite safe on it.
She looked down.
There, darkly outlined against the snow of the lane, was Uncle George's car.
‘They'll wonder where I've got to,’ she muttered.
‘When I don't come back I expect they'll go on without be.
Oh, dear, I wish I were home!’
As she said this, the broomstick turned sharply and shot forward at a great pace.
Carol shivered as the wind whistled through her.
‘I'm so cold!
I wish it wouldn't go so fast!’ she thought — and at once the broomstick's pace slowed.
‘Why,’ exclaimed Carol, ‘it seems to do just as I wish!’
To test this, she wished again — this time that she could fly down as low as the treetops.
The broomstick dipped and then dived towards a dark wood of tall elms and flew over the tops.
But next minute Carol was wishing urgently to go higher and faster, for from the elms rose a cloud of rooks, cawing angrily at being disturbed in the middle of the night.
The broomstick bounded forward and soon left the rooks behind.
Peering ahead, Carol saw in the distance, and below, the roofs and chimneys of a town.
This came quickly closer.
There was a river running through it, and a church with a weathercock on its steeple, and a cobbled square with a tall old house at its corner — and suddenly Carol recognised the place.
It was Threlkeld, where she lived, and the house by the square was her own home.
‘Oh, I'm home!
It's brought me home, just as I wished!’ she cried in delight — and then she stopped.
She was at her home-town, but what about Uncle George and Gillian?
They were still far away out on the woods — still lost.
We're Brownie Guides, we're Brownie Guides,
We're here to Lend a Hand…
The opening words of the Brownie song flashed through her mind.
She wouldn't be a real Brownie if she flew home and left them stranded out on the snowy woods.
She must lend a hand.
And there was only one way she could think of to do that.
‘I must guide them home — somehow!’ murmured Carol.
‘If I fly up high I may be able to see just where they are.
I wish to go as high as the church steeple,’ she told the broom firmly.
The broomstick dipped its twiggy end and soared upward like a rocket.
But as it rushed up the side of the church steeple Carol had a fright.
The weathercock, caught by the breeze, swung sharply round and let out a loud, cross ‘Cock-a-doodle-doo!’ right in Carol's ear.
Carol nearly fell from the broomstick.
She wished frantically to go faster, and the broomstick sped away; but as it spurted past, the weathercock made a savage peck at it, and Carol, glancing round, saw that it had snatched a bunch of twigs out with its beak.
‘Oh, dear!’ she said.
‘I hope the other twigs won't drop out now.
I wish to go back to Uncle George and Gillian,’ she added, ‘so that I can guide them back to Threlkeld.’
The broomstick dived lower, and flew between the hedges of snowy winding lanes.
Carol looked to right and left to try and keep in mind the way they were going, but all the lanes looked exactly alike in the snow, and she knew she would never be able to find the route back to Threlkeld by herself.
Presently she saw a dark shape in the distance.
It was Uncle George's car!
‘There's the car!’ she exclaimed.
‘Quickly, please — I wish to go faster!’
But, for the first time, the broomstick did not obey her wish.
It had been going more and more slowly since diving down from the weathercock.
Now it seemed to have difficulty in moving at all.
Slower and slower it went.
Struck by a thought, Carol thrust her hand out behind her.
She could feel only a few twigs.
She turned her head and looked.
Then she understood.
The bunch pulled out by the weathercock had left the rest of the twigs loose in their binding.
One by one they had slipped out until now there were only a few still clinging to the broomstick.
‘What a shame!’ exclaimed Carol.
‘This means can't — oh, look out!’
But the broomstick couldn't do anything to avert the crash.
With most of its twigs gone, it couldn't rise, and it hit a signpost head-on — smack!
Carol wasn't hurt — just startled.
She slid down the broomstick to the ground.
To her surprise, Uncle George's voice hailed her.
‘Have you found the way, Carol?
Come on back now, will you?
We must get moving again.’
Carol ran down the lane to the car.
‘You're miles and miles away from Threlkeld, Uncle George,’ she said.
‘I'll try and guide you back, but I'm not sure that I can.’
‘Jump in by me, then,’ said Uncle George.
Carol was puzzled.
The funny thing was that Uncle George had made no remark about the length of time she'd been away.
Nor did Gillian, who talked just as if she'd only just run to the signpost and back.
As Uncle George drove off, Carol began to tell them about the strange flight she'd had on the broomstick, but then her gaze was caught by several dark objects lying in the snow of the lane ahead.
‘Why,’ she said, ‘they're twigs!’
‘What about it?’ asked Uncle George.
Carol drew a deep breath.
She could see twigs scattered along the lane for as far as the car's headlights reached.
‘I think I shall be able to guide you home all the way, Uncle George,’ she said.
‘Shall you, really?’ said Uncle George.
‘I can't think how, but I hope so.
Clever girl!’
And she did.
All through the long, twisting lanes the route was marked by twigs — twigs from the witch's broom — which led to Threlkeld and only ceased when they came to the church with a steeple crowned by a gilded weathercock.
Carol looked up at the weathercock as the car drew up at her house in the cobbled square.
A puff of wind swung it round on its vane, and snatched a bunch of twigs from its beak and sent them twirling slowly down the steeple to the ground at Carol's feet, where they sank into the snow.
‘Goodnight, Uncle George!’ said Carol, as she ran up the steps to her house.
‘Goodnight, Gillian!
I enjoyed my ride.’
But she didn't tell them it was a ride on the witch's broom she meant.
THE WITCH OF WARDLE WOOD
‘SHE'S a witch,’ said Julia.
‘She'll cast a spell on you if she sees you in the wood,’ Kay warned.
Valerie looked cautiously round, then, lowering her voice, said: ‘Weeks ago our little kitten ran into the  wood, and she caught him and turned him into a witch's cat.’
Can you wonder that Virginia, the Elf Second, used to put her head down, keep her eyes fixed straight in front of her, and pedal as hard as she could past Wardle Wood and the old woman who lived in the cottage in the middle of it.
‘She's got a great big black cat — ever so fierce,’ Janice Grey said.
‘It hisses at you if it sees you, and Trudy says she saw it flying over the lane one night on the witch's broomstick.’
Virginia didn't really believe all the tales she heard about the witch of Wardle Wood — or, at least, she tried not to believe them.
But whenever she passed the wood the tales rushed back into her mind and made her blood run cold.
Wardle Wood bordered the lane between her home and Fordbridge, to which she cycled each Friday to the meeting of the 2nd Fordbridge Brownie Guide Pack.
She always said she couldn't have gone to Brownies at all if she hadn't been able to cycle, for the distance was too far for her to walk, and there was no bus.
Actually, there was a footpath through Wardle Wood from near her village, and if she had dared to go along it she could have walked to Brownies in not much more time than it took her to ride by way of the long winding lane; but she was sure she hadn't the courage to go through the witch's wood by herself.
Her mummy said that the old woman, Mrs. Zealand, was just a lonely old soul who had no one to love but her cat, and no one to love her, but to all the children she was ‘the witch’ and only the most daring boys ventured near her cottage, from the chimney of which it was reported green and red smoke sometimes rose, showing that the old crone was brewing spells inside.
One hot late-summer evening as Virginia left Pack Meeting thunder began to roll across the sky.
The atmosphere became heavy and oppressive.
‘Hurry home, Virginia,’ the Brownie Guider called to  her, as she wheeled out her bike.
‘It looks as if there's a storm coming.’
Virginia hadn't brought a mack, because the day had been hot and sunny.
She cycled quickly along the lane out of the town, hoping to reach home before the storm burst.
She would probably have done it, but about halfway between the town and Wardle Wood something else burst — her back tyre!
‘Oh, dear!’ exclaimed Virginia.
She looked at the tyre and saw at once that even if there had been someone about who could have helped her, the tyre couldn't be mended on the spot-there was a long split in the outer cover.
‘I'll have to walk home,’ decided Virginia, and started off, pushing her cycle.
If you've ever pushed a bicycle with a flat tyre you'll know what a slow and awkward job it is.
By the time Wardle Wood came in sight Virginia was tired and was wondering whether there was anything she could do that would save her pushing the bike all the long way home.
Then, as she was about halfway along the trees of Wardle Wood, the storm, which had been rumbling and threatening all the way, burst.
The thunder crashed, the lightning flared, and the rain came down in torrents.
Virginia pushed her bike on to the grass-verge and stood under the heavy foliage of the trees for shelter.
She found that she stayed quite dry there, but she wished she were somewhere else!
Not far from where she was standing the footpath through the wood began.
She glanced at it uneasily, remembering that it ran past the witch's cottage.
She remembered another thing too — that the path came out of the wood at the other end within a very short distance of her own house.
‘I wish…’ began Virginia, and then stopped.
She was wishing she could find the courage to go through the wood by the path.
It would save her waiting for the rain to stop, and the way the rain was pelting down it looked as if it never would stop.
It would also save her a long and weary trudge along that endless winding lane.
‘I could leave my bike in the bushes,’ Virginia argued.
‘No one would see it, and if they did they couldn't very well ride it away with a flat tyre.
And I could run through the wood.’
Virginia, you see, was quite a brave Brownie, despite being scared by her schoolfriends' stories of the witch of Wardle Wood.
‘I'll do it!’ she declared at last.
She fixed her bike among some bushes where it wouldn't be seen from the lane, and then ran along the grass-verge to the gap in the trees where the path began.
She paused and peered anxiously along the pathway, which made a dim corridor into the wood, almost like the aisle of a great church, thought Virginia.
It was softly carpeted with leaves and was still and silent, except when raindrops found a way through the green roof above and plopped faintly on to the leaves.
‘I'll run all the way,’ Virginia told herself, and started off.
She was anxious not to make a noise, but even though her feet fell softly into the leaves strewing the path the wood was so still and silent that she really felt as if she were thudding through the wood.
On and on she ran until presently she came in sight of the witch's cottage, half buried in greenery.
Smoke was curling up from the chimney, but Virginia was thankful to note that it wasn't coloured .
The cottage lay back quite a long way from the path, but Virginia slowed down and stepped past it with quick, light steps.
Her heart was in her mouth, and she dreaded hearing a shrill witch's voice cry out to her to stop.
But not a sound came from the cottage, and Virginia grew bold enough to glance across at it.
Then her heart gave a great leap.
The front door of the cottage opened, and the tall, bent figure of the witch, leaning on a stick, came out.
Virginia knew at once that the witch had seen her, for she stopped, as if in surprise, and then stared at her.
But Virginia didn't stop.
She ran.
The witch called after her.
Virginia didn't hear what she said.
Heedless of what noise she made now, she flew along the path as fast as she could go.
She didn't slow down until she was almost  out of breath.
Then, with her heart still pounding madly, she looked back over her shoulder.
There was no-sign of the witch, but Virginia knew that she might still be coming in chase of her.
She might even be weaving a spell to tangle her feet or make her lose her way in the wood!
Virginia started forward again — faster — then stopped, frozen suddenly to the ground.
A strange plaintive yowl had curdled through the hushed wood.
Virginia held her breath.
What was it?
Again the yowl quivered through the stillness.
It came from somewhere near —somewhere above .
In that moment Virginia remembered what Trudy Paish had said: that she'd seen the witch's cat riding through the air on a broomstick.
Fearfully Virginia raised her eyes.
And there, above was the witch's cat.
big and black.
But it was not in the air on a broomstick.
It was high up in a tree, its back part and hind legs caught in a fork of two branches.
It yowled piteously again, and Virginia stood uncertain, gazing.
Was this a trick of the witch's to keep her there until she could catch up with her, or was it…?
The cat miaowed piteously again, and suddenly Virginia's kind heart broke through the spell of fear and doubt that kept her feet glued to the path.
She loved animals, and she couldn't bear to see the poor black cat trapped in the tree, unable to free itself.
Witch or no witch, she would have to stay and help the poor captive cat.
‘Pussy — pussy — puss!’
Virginia called soothingly.
‘It's all right, then — I'm coming.’
Crossing over to the tree, she began to climb up, drawing herself up from branch to branch wherever she could find foothold or handhold.
The cat was halfway up the tree, and it took Virginia quite a long time to reach it.
At last, however, she came to within arm's length of it.
‘It's all right, pussy, I'm here,’ she murmured, and the cat miaowed plaintively.
Climbing one branch higher, Virginia reached out and stroked the cat's head; then, gently, she placed her hand round its hind legs and began to ease them out of the fork.
The cat spat suddenly, startling her and almost making her lose her footing on the branch, but Virginia kept her head as well as her footing, and, pulling back one of the branches forming the fork, lifted the cat free.
‘There you are!’ she said, and the cat lifted its tail up with pleasure and rubbed its head against the branch.
‘Come on!
You'd better let me carry you down.’
As the cat put its head down to rub against her, she reached up with her arm, and to her surprise the cat quite readily padded on to her shoulder and nestled there, purring.
She put her hand over its back and then slowly began to climb down.
She had to descend very gingerly, both for fear of missing her footing and of startling the cat into digging its claws into her or jumping from her shoulders suddenly.
Presently she glanced down to see how much farther she had to go — and then nearly fell the rest of the way.
On the path near the foot of the tree, silently looking up at her, was the witch!
Virginia froze, but the witch spoke.
‘My poor dear Billy!
How kind of you to rescue him!
Couldn't he get down?’
‘N-n-no — I-I mean, he was stuck!’ stammered Virginia, when she could answer.
The witch limped to the tree and stretched up her hand.
The cat gave a whimper, as much as to tell its mistress what a terrible time it had had.
‘Come on,’ urged the witch.
‘It isn't far now.’
Slowly and rather fearfully, Virginia climbed down.
When she was within a few feet of the ground, the cat leapt from her and rubbed itself against its mistress's legs.
‘I wondered wherever Billy could have got to,’ said the witch.
‘I came out to call him in and saw you pass.
I'm so thankful he hasn't come to any harm.
I expect he was after a squirrel or a bird up there; he's a regular  hunter.
Dear me, I'm afraid you've scratched yourself and made yourself very dirty rescuing him.’
‘I'm — I'm all right, thank you.’
Virginia lowered herself carefully to the ground.
Up the tree she had decided to make a dash for home as soon as she reached the ground, without giving the witch a chance to grab her, but now she didn't do it.
Instead, she stood still, looking in surprise at the gentle lined face above her, in which was set a pair of kind eyes of the brightest blue she had ever seen.
Not only didn't the soft voice sound like a witch's, thought Virginia; the face didn't look a bit like a witch's; in fact, she decided, the witch sounded and looked so sweet and gentle that she couldn'tbe a witch!
‘Would you like to come back to my cottage with me and clean yourself and perhaps have a drink of lemonade and a biscuit?’
‘Yes, please,’ said Virginia
The witch took her hand, and with Billy running in front of them, performing all kinds of playful antics in its pleasure, they walked along the path together to the cottage.
Virginia wasn't at all afraid.
As the old lady talked to her, she realised that all the tales she had heard about her were nonsense.
And when she went inside the cottage she saw that every room was spotlessly clean and bright with flowers — nothing at all like a witch's lair.
While she drank her lemonade and ate her biscuits she told the old lady about Brownies and how she had left her bike on the edge of the wood.
‘Dear me,’ said the old lady.
‘It may get rusty with wet if it stays there all night.
I'll wheel it along to the cottage and keep it dry for you, and you can call for it tomorrow.
How will that do?’
‘Thank you,’ said Virginia
She had quite a long and happy chat with the ‘witch’ before she left for home.
Next day she called again, and then the ‘witch’ took her into the kitchen and showed her what she had been making all that morning — toffee-apples!
Virginia was surprised.
‘I make them for the shops to sell,’ she told Virginia.
‘The apples come from my own trees, and I make the toffee to dip them in.
Now you shall taste one, and if you like it you can call on your way to Brownies next week and take toffee-apples to all the Brownies in your Pack — as a thank-you to a brave Brownie for rescuing my Billy.’
So that is how Virginia became friends with the witch of Wardle Wood and discovered for herself that the best way of dealing with fear is to face it with brave unselfishness and prove it to be false.
CHALLENGE FOR CHERYL
CHERYL had not looked forward a bit to her holiday.
For one thing, she was going on her own; for another, it wasn't by the sea.
Now she was there, however, in her aunt's cottage near the tiny Fenland hamlet of Coton, she was enjoying every minute of it.
‘I never thought I should have a friend to play with and a pony to ride, Aunty!’ she said happily, as she got ready to go out and call for Angela Yatton.
‘Or a friend who's a Brownie like you.’
‘No,’ agreed Cheryl, ‘and that's the best of all, because Angela's helping me with my semaphore, which is one of the Challenges I'm doing on the Brownie Highway.’
Angela was a Sixer and, like Cheryl, in the Elves.
She was older than Cheryl.
After the holidays she would be going up to Guides.
She was very good at semaphore and had won the Signaller Badge.
She had shown Cheryl little ways that would help her to remember the semaphore letters and she practised signalling with her.
As she hurried over the rough track that made a short cut between her aunt's cottage and the farmhouse where Angela lived, Cheryl's eye was caught by a splash of colour on the far side of the field.
The Fen country around Coton was very flat, with water-filled dykes instead of hedges, and few trees, so that one could see long  distances without the view being obstructed —‘right to the horizon,’ Cheryl reported excitedly to her mummy in one of her letters home.
There was only one low hill in sight, and this had an old, disused windmill on it.
Voices raised angrily floated to Cheryl's ears.
She couldn't hear what was being said, but she saw that three caravans were standing inside the field by the gate and that several rough-looking men were raising their fists and shouting at Farmer Yatton, Angela's father, who was ordering them out.
Cheryl turned rather pale.
The gipsies looked so threatening that she thought they were going to attack Angela's father, but Farmer Yatton stood his ground, and presently the gipsies, grumbling loudly, began to move their horses, which they had unharnessed, back between the shafts of the caravans.
Just then Angela, who had seen her crossing the field, came running out of the farmhouse.
‘Daddy saw some gipsies coming to camp on his land,’ she explained as she came up, ‘and he won't let them.
He says they're not real gipsies and that last time they came to the district they caused a lot of damage to crops and stole several turkeys.’
‘Your daddy was terribly brave to stand up to them alone,’ said Cheryl, in awe.
‘They're only vagabonds, not real Romanies,’ Farmer Yatton told Cheryl and Angela-when he came back to the farmhouse after seeing the gipsies off his land.
‘I told them to go and camp on Rickling Heath, which is public land, if they must stay.
You two girls had better keep away from that part of the world while they're about.
They're a rough lot.’
‘Let's go over to Linby, then, Cheryl,’ said Angela.
‘Mummy wants some shoes to be taken in to be stitched, and I can call in at Jessica Turvey's.
She's Leader of the Patrol I'm going to join when I go up to Guides, and she's asked me to call and see her.
We'll take it in turns to ride Joe.’
So, while Cheryl ran back to tell her aunt where she was going, Angela saddled her pony.
‘It'll be better for me to ride him first, as he's always a bit frisky when he first starts out,’ Angela told Cheryl when she returned.
‘I'll canter him for a bit, then wait till you come up for your turn.’
Taking it in turns to ride Joe, they enjoyed the journey to Linby.
After leaving Angela's mummy's shoes at the repairer's, they went on to Jessica Turvey's house, where they tied up Joe while they went inside.
Jessica was a very keen Patrol Leader and held regular Patrol meetings during the holidays.
She had her all-round cords, and Cheryl noticed the crossed flags of the Signaller among the array of badges which were on her right sleeve.
‘Why, I've got a pair of old signalling flags somewhere you could have,’ she told Cheryl on hearing that she was doing a Semaphore Challenge on the Brownie Highway.
‘They're only home-made, but I found them very useful to practise with.’
Unfortunately, Jessica was not able to lay her hands on the flags, which had been put somewhere among the jumble in the attic.
As she was due at her weekly Patrol meeting she couldn't stop to search for them.
‘Never mind; we'll call in again next time we're in Linby,’ said Angela.
‘Mummy's shoes will be ready tomorrow afternoon, so perhaps we'll call then.’
To the surprise of the two Brownies, when they stepped outside there was no sign of Joe.
‘Why, wherever can he have gone to?’ exclaimed Angela, and then gave a surprised cry.
‘Look, he's got into the orchard and is scrumping apples!’
The enterprising pony had managed to shake his tether free of the gate and had forced his way into the orchard alongside the house.
There he was, having a grand time pulling off clusters of half-grown green apples and gobbling them up.
‘You greedy thing!’
Angela scolded him.
‘And don't you know you're trespassing?’
‘And stealing!’ laughed Cheryl.
‘I'm terribly sorry,’ Angela apologised to Jessica, who was just hurrying off to her Patrol meeting.
‘We can spare them,’ Jessica told her, smiling.
‘We've got more than we need this season.’
Neighing indignantly at having his feast interrupted, Joe was led out of the orchard and mounted by Cheryl, whose turn it was to ride.
‘We shall just about be home in time for lunch,’ said Angela.
Just before they reached the track leading to Yatton Farm, however, they received a shock.
A rough-looking youth with long black unkempt hair and with a muffler about his neck suddenly sprang out from a disused barn standing close beside the lane.
Joe shied, startled by the youth's sudden appearance, but Angela, who was riding him now, quickly tightened the reins and held him steady.
The youth.
after a swift, furtive glance at them, jumped the ditch on the other side of the lane and made off at a run over the fen.
‘He looked like one of those gipsies your daddy sent away this morning, Angela.’
‘He made Joe jump — and me too!
That old barn belongs to Daddy.
He can't have taken anything, because there's nothing inside.
He was snooping about, though.’
The youth was certainly one of the vagabond gipsies, and it looked as if he had been spying out Farmer Yatton's land, for the very next morning Angela's daddy came into the farmhouse with the news that several sacks of potatoes and a quantity of oats had been stolen from one of the storehouses during the night.
This wasn't the worst news.
When Cheryl ran from her aunt's cottage to the farmhouse she was greeted by Angela, who was in tears.
‘It's Joe!’ she sobbed.
‘He's been stolen!’
‘We can't be sure of that yet, Angela,’ said her mummy, coming into the room.
‘Sacks of things have been stolen from one of the storehouses,’ she explained to Cheryl.
‘The thieves came through the paddock where Joe is kept, and this morning we found the gate swinging open — and Joe gone.
It may be that they left the gate open when they went, and Joe just trotted out.’
‘I'm sure Joe would go out if he had the chance,’ said Cheryl.
‘He's quite adventurous.
He found his way into Jessica Turvey's orchard yesterday.’
‘If those gipsies have taken him I may never see him again,’ said Angela, trying to keep back the tears.
‘I've heard that gipsies paint stolen horses so that they can't be recognised.’
‘Well, Daddy's phoned the police, and they're going to question the gipsies, so we must wait patiently until we hear from them,’ said her mummy.
Cheryl stayed with Angela all the morning, and she heard what happened when the police phoned.
They had found three of the four sacks of potatoes stolen in the gipsies' camp on Rickling Heath, and one bag of oats, but no trace of the pony.
‘They want Daddy to go along to the police-station at Poltown to make sure the sacks are the ones stolen,’ said Mrs. Yatton.
‘You'd better come with me, Angela,’ said Farmer Yatton.
‘You can tell them how badly you want them to find Joe for you, then.’
Cheryl decided that as Angela would be away all afternoon and Mrs. Yatton wanted her shoes for the weekend, she would go into Linby and fetch the shoes and at the same time collect the signalling flags, if Jessica had found them.
‘I'll be dying to know if there's any news of Joe,’ she told Angela.
‘I'll be back from Poltown by the time you get back from Linby, so I'll go to the bus-stop to meet you,’ Angela promised.
There was only one bus every two hours to and from Linby, so that Angela knew exactly what time Cheryl would get back.
The bus took a very long and roundabout route to Linby, through a dozen tiny villages and hamlets, but Cheryl thought the journey was worth it when Jessica handed her the promised signalling flags.
They were home-made, but clean and bright, and Cheryl was delighted with them.
Rather shyly, at Jessica's suggestion, she went to  the bottom of the garden and signalled a message to her.
The message she sent was THANK YOU.
‘Well done!’ exclaimed Jessica.
‘You did it perfectly.
I read the message easily.’
Very pleased, Cheryl bade her goodbye and tripped off to the bus-stop, collecting Mrs. Yatton's shoes on the way.
But when she saw the church clock she realised she was too early for the bus — nearly three-quarters of an hour too early.
‘If I walked on,’ thought Cheryl, ‘I could do a bit of signalling on the way with my new flags.
The bus would catch me up about halfway.’
The country between Linby and Coton was largely flat heathland, lonely but bright with flowers.
Cheryl quite enjoyed her walk.
Several times she stopped, put down her shoe-parcel, and signalled a word with her flags.
It was during one of these stops that she heard a sound that made her start suddenly.
It was a curious, low quivering noise.
Cheryl listened intently, and presently it came again.
‘Golly, it sounds like — like —’ Cheryl's cheeks pinked with sudden excitement —‘like a horse!’
The thought of Joe came at once into her mind, but where could Joe be?
The sound had seemed to come from a long way over the heath to the right.
Cheryl decided to go in that direction.
So, sometimes running and sometimes walking, she made her way quickly across the far-flung heath.
It was a long time before she saw anything that would explain the curious horse call; then she saw a notice-board standing up, gaunt and solitary, ahead of her, and she hurried towards it.
DANGER, she read, SCAWBY MARSH.
Then she looked beyond the board, and her heart almost stopped beating.
The heathland had suddenly ended — to give place to an expanse of emerald green, which looked bright and most attractive but which, Cheryl realised with a shudder, concealed treacherous shifting marsh.
And yards out from the farther side of the-marsh, too far from the side to be even touched by hand, was a chestnut pony, trapped nearly  up to his flanks in the quicksilver morass helpless and desperate.
‘Joe!’ breathed Cheryl, in horror.
‘Joe!’
It was Joe.
There was not a doubt about it.
Cheryl gazed for only half a minute.
Then she turned and ran.
She knew she could do nothing whatever to get Joe out of the marsh.
The one and only thing she could do and must do was to fetch help — swiftly.
How long Joe had been in the marsh she did not know, but it was a very lonely spot, and he could have been there for hours and hours — perhaps even all through the night, thought Cheryl.
If she didn't bring help soon Joe would die.
She ran as she had never run before — still clutching the shoe-parcel and the flags.
She was panting hard by the time she saw the narrow white ribbon that was the road to Coton.
But just before she saw it she heard something — to her, rather ominous — the rumble of a bus.
She spurted frantically.
She knew the bus from Linby to Coton must be just about due.
She must stop it, tell about Joe's terrible plight.
If she missed it, it might mean that she would be too late to rescue Joe.
There was not a hamlet or a house that she knew of between here and Coton.
She let out a strangled cry.
‘Stop!
Stop!’
No one heard her.
No one saw her — or, if they did, no one paid any heed to her.
The bus sped on.
Cheryl ran after it, shouting to it to stop.
She ran faster, shouted harder, but it roared noisily on and disappeared round a bend.
White-faced, panting, dismayed, Cheryl came to a stop.
The bus had gone!
She was beaten.
Joe was left to his fate.
But she didn't stand still for long.
She knew she had to do her best to save Joe; she had to do something .
She began to run in the direction of Coton.
It was nearer than Linby now.
She knew that the chances of reaching it, giving the alarm, and getting men and equipment back and across the heath to Scawby Marsh in time to save Angela's pony before he sank to his death in the marsh were very slight, but she must try.
She ran — and ran.
How long she ran, or how far, she had no idea, but at last she felt she could go no farther.
She was spent, exhausted.
She sank down by the side of the road.
A sob broke from her.
‘I can't go any farther,’ she panted.
Then she thought of Angela and her beloved pony, and this made her jerk her head up.
‘I mustn't give in.
I must go on!’ she muttered, and struggled to her feet.
As she did so, she noticed that the heath adjoining the road rose up to a small hill, on top of which stood an old and dilapidated windmill.
‘Why, that's the windmill we can see from Angela's farm!’ she murmured.
The broken sails of the old windmill stood out in silhouette against the sky like a scarecrow's arms, and as she looked at them a sudden wonderful idea flashed into Cheryl's mind.
She was still quite a long way from Yatton Farm, but the windmill on its hillock could be clearly seen from the farm.
If she were to climb up the hillock and semaphore with her flags the signals would be clearly outlined against the sky.
Spurred on by a new hope, she ran across the road and scrambled up the smooth grassy side of the hillock.
As she went she remembered that Angela had promised to meet her at the bus-stop.
‘So she'll be looking this way, waiting for the bus!’ thought Cheryl excitedly.
‘If I can signal a message there's a wonderful chance that she'll see it!
Oh, I do, do hope so!’
She was still clutching the shoe-parcel, as well as the flags.
Dropping it, she stood on the ridge on the hillock, well away from the windmill itself, and placed her flags at the ‘Ready’.
Then she began to signal her message — slowly and carefully, letter by letter: J O E I N M A R S H.
She was sure she had got it right, but after a short pause she signalled it again, exactly as before.
JOE IN MARSH 
In the distance she could see a bus winding along the narrow lanes.
She could see Yatton Farm too, quite clearly.
She couldn't see Angela, but that was not surprising, because there were walls and various other objects in the way, although the land was flat and largely bare of trees and hedges.
Again and again Cheryl signalled the message, hoping desperately that Angela would read it.
Angela did see it and did read it.
Puzzled at first on noticing the familiar shape of Windmill Hill broken by another small, moving outline, she gazed with heightened interest as semaphore signals began to be spelled out from the ridge against the background of the sky.
When she read the first word, J O E, her heart gave a great leap.
Breathlessly she watched for what the moving flags would say next.
Cheryl's three words were hardly finished before Angela was racing back to the farmhouse shouting at the top of her voice.
Farmer Yatton acted swiftly.
He loaded farmhands, ladders, rope and planks into a small lorry, and drove off at top speed towards Windmill Hill, Angela in the seat beside him.
They stopped only to pick up Cheryl, who saw them coming a long way off and ran down to the road to meet them.
Then they tore in a wild, bumpy, breakneck race across the rough heath to Scawby Marsh and got ropes round the poor terrified pony just in time to keep him above the shifting surface before the marsh engulfed him.
It took nearly two hours to get the pony out on to solid ground, but when they had done so and he was examined, Farmer Yatton was able to tell the thankful Angela that her pet had come to no real harm.
‘Thanks to Cheryl,’ he added.
‘To signal like that was the smartest thing I've ever come across in my life, and I'll never forget it — ever.’
Neither would Cheryl!
She was completely happy that her semaphore message had saved Joe.
It saved two others too — the gipsies who had stolen Farmer Yatton's sacks of potatoes and oats, but who had notstolen the pony.
They had left the paddock gate open, and Joe had taken advantage of it to go in search of more of the nice green  apples he remembered having enjoyed so much the previous day — but this time he didn't reach Jessica Turvey's orchard; he got himself trapped in the marsh.
The gipsies, instead of being sent to prison for stealing a pony, were only fined for stealing potatoes and oats.
And when Cheryl's holiday was over and her Brownie Pack met again, the Pack were told about the rescue of the pony by semaphore, and agreed that Cheryl had passed her Semaphore Challenge with flying colours.
THE PACK WITHOUT A HOME
‘Of course we mustn't stop helping others,’ said Trusty, ‘but we must help ourselves too now or we shan't have any where to meet.’
The Brownies sat in shocked silence.
Even Heather, the Gnome Sixer, who was usually bursting with things to say at Pow-wow, was too flabbergasted to utter a word.
Susan, the Pixie Sixer and the oldest Brownie in the Pack, was the first to break the silence.
‘But — but would that mean we shouldn't have our Pack Meetings each week, Trusty?’ she asked in a tone that meant she just couldn't believe in such an awful thing happening.
‘I'm afraid so.’
Trusty was very serious, which impressed the Brownies very much, for Miss Truscott, or ‘Trusty’, as she was called by the Pack, was a young Guider and usually very gay and jolly.
‘You see, Brownies, this hall is being pulled down in a few weeks' time and new houses put up in its place, and there just doesn't seem to be anywhere else for us to meet.
There's no other place at all.’
‘But — but,’ Heather burst out at last, ‘there must be somewhere, Trusty.
We — we just couldn't not meet.’
‘Couldn't we meet out of doors?’ suggested Linda, the Kelpie Second.
‘We've spent lots of time in the fields and woods this summer.’
‘Why, we might make a meeting-place in the woods,’ cried Gillian excitedly —‘all our own!’
Trusty smiled.
‘Out of doors is the best place for Brownies, really, but we've only been able to be out of doors so much because of this hot summer.
It may be that the lovely weather will go on even after the hall is pulled down, in which case we can meet out of doors, but we can't expect to go on doing that when autumn and winter comes, can we?’
All the Brownies shook their heads, and they really began to look glum until Trusty reminded them that being miserable didn't mend anything and that now, if ever, was the time to keep the Brownie smile showing.
‘There must be somewhere for us to meet in,’ said Susan.
‘There just mustbe!’
‘I know!’ cried Heather suddenly.
‘Mr. Olinton!
Mr. Olinton at the farm!
He's got a big loft empty in one of his barns.
Mrs. Olinton lets us play up there with Jessica Olinton.
When I go up to the farm to get Mummy's eggs, I'll ask if we could use it for our meetings and…’
She broke off as she noticed Trusty shaking her head sadly.
‘I'm sorry, Heather,’ said Trusty.
‘It's a fine idea, but Mrs. Olinton told me the other day that Mr. Olinton wouldn't lend any of his buildings to Scouts or Guides or Brownies or Cubs.
I was telling her about our need of somewhere to meet, and she said she would love to help us but that Mr. Olinton wouldn't hear of it.
He doesn't like Brownies.’
‘Why ever not?’ asked Susan, in astonishment.
‘He's had trouble with campers, who've broken down his fences and left fires that have caused a lot of damage — not Guides or Scouts, of course, who you know are taught to leave behind nothing but their thanks but he puts all campers together and calls them all nuisances.’
‘But we wouldn't be nuisances!’ exclaimed Linda indignantly.
‘Of course we wouldn't — but Mr. Olinton doesn't know that.
When I spoke to Mrs. Olinton she said that Mr. Olinton was so set against Scouts and Guides that he wouldn't even let his own daughter, Jessica, join Brownies, although she wanted to.’
‘Why, yes, that's right.’
Gillian nodded.
‘Jessica Olinton is in my class at school, and she did tell me she wanted to be a Brownie but her daddy wouldn't let her.’
‘There you are, then.’
Trusty nodded.
‘One day he will learn better about us, but in the meantime there must be some other place for us.
It's up to every one of us to Lend a Hand and find it.
Between now and next Pack Meeting shall we all keep our eyes open and our minds alert for a place?’
The Pack nodded vigorously.
There was no doubt at all that every Brownie there was determined to think hard and hunt hard for a new Pack Meeting place.
Shurston was only a small country town — or large village.
All around were meadows and woods and farmland, but the 1st Shurston Brownie Pack were as keen and lively as any in city or big town.
There were three Sixes, and Trusty was just about the best Guider any Pack could wish for.
For a Wednesday to come round without a Pack Meeting to look forward to simply wouldn't bear thinking about.
The following afternoon Heather called for Shirley, who was in her Six and who lived two doors away from her, and asked her to go with her to Olinton Farm to get some butter.
‘We can have a look at the barn and see if the loft is still empty,’ she told Shirley.
‘It would be a lovely place for our Pack Meetings,’ said Shirley.
‘Wouldn't it be grand if we could show Mr. Olinton that Brownies are helpful and not nuisances at all?
Then he might let us have the loft!’
‘How could we?’ asked Shirley.
‘I was thinking if we could stop his cows from getting out of a field or save his hayricks when they were on fire,’ said Heather, who loved reading stories and was always having make-believe adventures, with herself as the heroine.
‘Do you think any of the cows would have got out or any of the hayricks caught on fire?’ asked Shirley, who was rather taken with this idea.
‘I don't know, but there might be something else we haven't thought of — like a dog worrying his sheep.’
Shirley nodded eagerly.
‘And we could stop him!’
They hurried up the lane that passed by Farmer Olinton's land.
Much of the hay had already been stacked, but it all seemed quite safe.
And the gates into the fields where the cows were grazing were all properly shut.
And not-only was there no dog worrying Farmer Olinton's sheep; there weren't any sheep in sight, either!
‘Well, there doesn't seem to be anything wrong,’ said Heather regretfully, standing on a five-barred gate and peering over the fields.
‘We'd better go on to the farm and buy…’
Then she stopped, and her cheeks turned pink with excitement.
‘Why, look, Shirley!’ she cried, pointing.
‘Look — over there!
That's smoke!’
Shirley, standing on the bar beside her, followed her pointing linger and gave a gasp.
‘It is — it is smoke!’ she exclaimed.
‘Oh, Heather, d'you really think the hay is on fire?’
‘It looks like it!’ cried Heather excitedly.
‘Come on!’
She almost fell over the gate in her haste to race to the fire.
Shirley followed her flying form as fast as she could.
There was no doubt about it.
A wisp of smoke was rising from the other side of a clump of bushes on the edge of one hayfield where the hay had been stacked.
The warm summer air was clear, and the smoke could be clearly seen billowing straight up.
There was no doubt that if it did spread to the nearest stack it would set the whole hayfield alight in a very short time.
‘Hurry!’
Heather called over her shoulder.
Shirley was a good runner, and she caught Heather up a few yards from the fire.
They burst through the clump  of bushes together — and there they stopped abruptly, quite taken aback.
‘Oh!’ exclaimed Heather.
In front of them, leaning against the stump of a tree, was an old, unshaven tramp.
He had evidently just eaten a meal, for the remains of it lay in a red handkerchief open on the ground.
He had his legs crossed, and he was smoking an old pipe, from which came a vile smell and great plumes of smoke as he puffed at it.
‘Hello, my dearies!’ said the tramp, sitting up and squinting at them.
‘'Ave you come to see me? 'Ow nice of you!
What can I do for you, now?
I 'opes as 'ow you've got some pennies for me, so as I can get meself a bed for the night.’
‘N-n-no, we haven't!’ stammered Heather.
‘We — we didn't know…’
‘Come on, Heather!’ whispered Shirley, tugging at her frock.
‘Let's go!’
Heather nodded, and the two Brownies turned and ran.
They reached the gate in even quicker time than they'd left it.
Heather cast a quick glance back over her shoulder as she climbed over, but the tramp had not followed them.
Thankfully, they both dropped down into the lane.
‘Gosh, that gave me a scare!’ breathed Shirley, and Heather nodded.
She was feeling rather subdued.
‘I was sure it was the hay on fire,’ she murmured sadly.
‘Never mind,’ said Shirley.
‘It might have been.
We couldn't have guessed it was a tramp smoking a pipe.’
All the same, they both felt rather squashed as they walked on to the farmhouse.
They'd had a fright when they ran into the tramp.
They collected Heather's butter from the farmhouse, and asked Mrs. Olinton if they could climb up into the loft of the old barn.
Mrs. Olinton said they could.
They didn't tell her that they wanted to see whether it was still empty, just in case they could have it for Brownie Pack Meetings.
The old barn door was open.
Farmer Olinton kept various farm implements on the ground floor, but up above, in the big loft there was only straw and some  sacking and odds and ends.
It would be a thrilling place for Brownies to meet in — both girls agreed about that.
Even climbing the ladder into it was an extra excitement.
There were no windows, but two large openings that could be closed in by folding doors.
The girls went across to these and looked out.
Suddenly Heather clutched Shirley's arm.
‘Look!’ she cried, and pointed.
‘That's where the tramp is, isn't it, Shirley?’
Shirley shaded her eyes and peered.
Then she nodded.
Although they were looking at the clump of bushes from a different angle now, she knew it was the same clump they had seen from the gate.
Smoke was still puffing up from behind it.
But Heather was frowning.
‘D'you — d'you think that's the tramp still smoking, Shirley?
It's such a lot of smoke.’
‘My daddy told me that tramps and people who haven't any money sometimes smoke cabbage-leaves and things like that instead of proper tobacco.
I expect that makes an awful lot of smoke.’
‘There's quite a cloud of smoke,’ muttered Heather uneasily, ‘and we're a long way from it up here.
Supposing it isn't the tramp, Shirley!
Supposing it really is a fire!
The tramp might have lighted a fire and left it burning.
It might set the hay alight — and…’
She stopped and looked at Shirley.
‘We ought to go and see — and make sure, Shirley!’
‘But — but — the tramp!
He's horrid!’
Shirley's cheeks had turned pale at the thought of facing the terrifying tramp.
‘I couldn't, Heather!
I'm scared!’
‘So am I.’ Heather turned again to the opening and gazed hard over the fields to where the spirals of smoke were rising behind the bushes.
‘But I believe there's something wrong.
There's a great cloud of smoke.
Oh, we've got to go and see, Shirley!
Suppose it's —‘
‘But — but if it is the tramp — if he's still there —?’
‘What if he isn't and there's a real fire?’
Heather caught at her arm.
‘Come on, Shirley — we've just got to make sure — we must!’
Without waiting for Shirley to answer, she sped to  the ladder and began to climb down it.
After a moment's hesitation, Shirley followed her.
Once off the ladder, Heather did not wait.
She placed her parcel of butter on the floor of the barn and then raced across the field towards the bushes.
Shirley wanted to run the other way, but very bravely she set off after Heather.
As she drew near the bushes, Heather slowed down.
She began to tremble.
Supposing the tramp was there behind the clump, she thought, smoking his pipe and waiting to catch her?
He might have lighted a fire to boil something on.
He must know she was coming by now, too.
Fear almost stopped her when she thought of this, but she wouldn't give in to it, for she could see the smoke billowing up.
Pluckily, she started forward again.
Next second she gave a gasp, and beckoned Shirley to hurry.
All the dry grass behind the dump of bushes was ablaze and spreading rapidly towards the adjoining hayfield, eating up trails of loose hay on the way.
There was no sign of the tramp.
‘Quick, Shirley!’ cried Heather.
‘It's a big fire!’
Shirley put her hand to her mouth in horror when she saw the blaze.
‘We'd better go for help!’ she cried.
‘Yes, you go — run to the farm!
I'll try and put it out.’
As Shirley sped away, Heather seized a branch of a tree that was lying on the ground near and began to beat out the flames with it.
But she soon realised that the fire was spreading faster than she was putting it out.
Then she had an idea.
There was a mound of earth that had evidently been dug out of a ditch.
She ran to it, scooped up handfuls of loose earth and began to make a barrier of it between the edge of the fire and the hayfield.
She worked furiously, grabbing up heaps of earth and scattering it over the dry, sun-baked grass and loose strands of hay so that the fire should have nothing to devour.
She was hot and dirty and damp with perspiration, but  the fire was being checked.
It was still burning, but not towards the hayfield.
Suddenly Heather heard thudding footsteps.
Farmer Olinton and two farmhands, armed with besoms, came running up.
‘By George, it is a blaze!’ cried Farmer Olinton.
Then he stared at the barrier of earth Heather had made along the hayfield side of the fire.
‘My word, young lady, you've stopped the fire from spreading to the danger zone!
That's mighty smart of you!’
‘Mr. Olinton said it would be sure to set the hayfield alight, Heather,’ said Shirley, panting up.
‘I told him about the tramp, and he thinks he might have started the fire by knocking his pipe out on the dry grass.’
‘And well he might!’ said Farmer Olinton grimly.
‘Mrs. Olinton's rung the fire-brigade, but, thanks to you, young lady, it doesn't look as if we're going to need it.
Now you've kept the fire from the hayfield I think we can deal with it.’
A farm-boy who came up to help was sent back to the farmhouse to cancel the fire-brigade call.
‘Perhaps they'll already have started,’ said Heather.
‘They may have done, but we'll save 'em a journey if they haven't,’ said Farmer Olinton, ‘and I don't think there's much doubt that it'll be a wasted journey now if they do come.’
It was fully half an hour before the farmer and the farmhands beat out all the flames, but they managed it in the end.
The second call to the fire-brigade was made just in time to stop them setting out, the farm-boy reported on returning.
‘Good!
Fire-brigade or not, if it hadn't been for your bright idea and splendid work and your friend's race for help to the farmhouse the whole field would be ablaze,’ said Farmer Olinton.
‘Thank you!’
‘Well, I hope you won't think Brownies are nuisances any more, Mr. Olinton,’ said Heather sternly.
‘Brownies?
Are you two Brownies, then?’
Heather and Shirley nodded.
‘H'm!
And I said Brownies were nuisances, did I?
Well, that was very wrong of me.
Now I've seen what they can do, I take it back.
You'd both better come back to the farmhouse, and Mrs. Olinton will help you to clean yourselves and give you some tea.
Then perhaps we can have a talk and find out what I can give you as a reward for preventing heavy damage to my hayfield.’
‘Brownies don't do good turns for rewards,’ Heather told him, ‘but,’she added eagerly, ‘if you would let us use your loft as a meeting-place we'd promise not to do any damage or make ourselves nuisances, wouldn't we, Shirley?’
‘Yes!’
Shirley nodded vigorously.
Farmer Olinton scratched his head.
‘Well,’ he said, ‘I must say Brownies are a bit of a surprise to me.
I see I've got quite a lot to learn about them.
We'll go up to the house and have a talk.’
The end of that talk was that Farmer Olinton said he'd be only too pleased for the Brownies to use his loft for Pack Meetings, and if Miss Truscott would call on him they'd arrange the whole thing.
And while on the subject of Brownies, his daughter Jessica was always badgering him to let her join, and he would be very glad for her to become one of Heather's and Shirley's Pack and learn how to Lend a Hand in the same way that they had.
So it was a very happy Pow-wow the next week, when Trusty told of the exciting thing that had happened and that the Pack would be able to meet every week in Farmer Olinton's loft.
‘And go up to it by ladder,’ added Heather gleefully.
THE TREE RESCUE
‘I DON'T feel much like going to Pack Meeting tonight,’ said Penny sadly.
‘I shall be thinking all the time of poor Kelpie.’
‘Moping about Kelpie won't do you any good, or Kelpie, either,’ her mother said briskly.
‘Kelpie may be  safe and sound at this very moment, for all we know, just waiting to be collected from somebody who's found him, so cheer up — do.’
Penny was usually a very bright and cheery Brownie, but she was finding the loss of her pet budgerigar very hard to bear.
Penny was Sixer of the Kelpies, and when her granny had given her a beautiful budgie for a birthday present she decided to name it Kelpie after her Six, especially as the bird had a little silver patch on his throat — just as if he was wearing the Promise Badge, Penny pointed out gleefully.
Brownie Owl was very sympathetic when Penny told her about the lost budgie.
Instead of calling their Guider something quite different from Brown Owl when invited to think of a new name for her, the Pack had decided to change her name simply from Brown Owl to Brownie Owl.’
I know how you feel,’ she said.
‘It's awful when you lose a pet, but don't forget that Brownies smile in time of trouble, and that's just when the smile is most needed.
Your budgie may not be far away and will perhaps come back when it feels hungry.’
Penny almost forgot about poor Kelpie during Pow-wow, for Brownie Owl had some rather startling news for the Pack.
‘As you all know,’ she said, ‘ever since the Pack was formed we've held our meetings in this fine old barn, which Farmer Maynard has let us have for our own use.
Well, Farmer Maynard has retired and sold his farm.
The new owner, Mr. Bolsover, came to see me last week, and I'm afraid he may not let us go on using the barn.
He doesn't really want it for anything, but he isn't keen on having what he calls a flock of children on his land.
He lost a sheepdog puppy some days ago, and he thinks it may have followed one of you and then strayed away.
Has any one of you seen a sheepdog puppy when leaving Pack Meeting?’
No one had.
Brownie Owl continued: ‘I think Farmer Bolsover is mostly afraid that we might do damage to his crops by not keeping to the paths, or taking a fancy to the fruit in his orchard.’
‘But we wouldn't steal!’ cried Brenda, the Sprite Sixer, quite shocked.
‘Farmer Bolsover isn't as sure about that as you are,’ laughed Brownie Owl.
‘Now, don't all look so dismal!
We haven't had notice to quit yet.
Perhaps we never shall, if we all take care to let Mr. Bolsover see that Brownies look for ways of doing good turns to people, not bad ones.’
Every one of the Pack was firmly resolved never to give the new farmer cause for taking away their wonderful meeting-place from them.
The barn was big and roomy, and they had always been able to play the noisiest games in it without fear of disturbing or upsetting anyone, for there was nobody living within half a mile of it.
It was quite unthinkable that they shouldn't have it to meet in!
Penny and her Second, Sylvia, talked about it all the way to the corner where Sylvia turned off for home, and Penny only remembered her lost budgie again when Sylvia said goodbye and added: ‘I do hope you find Kelpie soon, Penny.’
‘Oh, how I wish I could go home and find him there!’ thought Penny, as she hurried along the footpath that led to her house.
‘Well, he might have come back.
He might…’
She stopped suddenly, for across her line of vision had flashed a little bird.
It was beautifully coloured, and it flew in a familiar jerky manner.
Penny knew at once that it was her lost budgerigar.
‘Kelpie!
Kelpie!’ she called delightedly.
‘Pretty Kelpie, come down, d'you hear!’
But the little bird flew on and into a tree on the edge of an orchard.
Swiftly and softly, Penny ran towards the fence bounding the orchard.
Dusk had not yet fallen, and, looking up, she could see the budgie outlined against the sky on a high branch.
Holding out her hand enticingly, Penny called softly and persuasively to try and attract the bird down, but Kelpie stayed on his perch and took no notice at all.
‘If I climb up I may get him,’ Penny said to herself.
Moving as quietly and gently as she could to avoid  scaring the budgie away, Penny climbed up on to the fence and then, by way of various branches, up the tree.
Foot by foot she ascended.
giving little whistling whispers to reassure the budgie.
She might have succeeded in reaching him, but the tree was laden with apples and as she moved up among the higher branches where the fruit had almost ripened, apples began to cascade down.
This alarmed Kelpie, who at once took off.
The last Penny saw of him was his small form flying jerkily over the meadows towards a distant wood.
She could have cried, but she had no time to dwell on her disappointment, for suddenly a harsh voice hailed her from below.
‘Heh, what are you doin' up there?
After my apples, eh?
Well, I've caught you in the act.
Come on down — and quick!’
Looking down, horrified, Penny saw a tall man who she guessed was Farmer Bolsover standing at the foot of the tree, with a black-and-white sheepdog by his side.
‘I wasn't after your apples.
I was trying to capture my budgie, who flew up into the tree,’ she explained breathlessly as she climbed hastily down the tree.
‘He flew away just as I'd nearly got him.’
‘I heard a lot of apples fall — that's what made me come over,’ said the farmer.
‘I thought it was a bit soon for apples to start falling.’
He peered closely at Penny as she dropped to the ground.
‘Hello, you're one of those Brownie girls who use my barn, aren't you?’
‘Yes, but really, truly, I was only trying to get my budgie back,’ Penny assured him earnestly.
‘I lost him three days ago and —‘
‘Don't bother to tell lies, missy,’ said the farmer sternly.
‘I'll have your name, and I'll see that lady who was telling me the other day that Brownie girls don't raid orchards.’
There was nothing Penny could say or do to convince the angry farmer that she wasn't an apple-thief.
The farmer made a note of her name and address, and then sent her off home.
Poor Penny!
Not only had she failed to recapture her  budgie, but she had been accused of stealing apples and brought disgrace upon the Pack!
‘Why,’ she thought, in sudden horror, ‘this may make Farmer Bolsover take our barn away from us!’
This was exactly the result that did occur.
Brownie Owl broke the grim news to the Brownies the following weekend as they walked towards Quandom Wood, where they were going to play some tracking games.
‘He's given us one month to find another meeting place,’ she told the Pack; ‘then we must go.’
Brownie Owl didn't say a word about Penny's encounter with the farmer, although by this time, of course, she'd heard all about it — from both sides.
She knew Penny had not been raiding apples, but she hadn't convinced Farmer Bolsover of it.
Penny was very troubled, but she enjoyed the tracking in the wood.
Hiding in a clump of ferns while being searched for by other Brownies, she kept very still.
The others passed close, but didn't see her.
A squirrel scurried in fright up into a nearby beech-tree.
Penny's eyes followed it u it darted upward — and then they became riveted.
She'd lost the squirrel but found — Kelpie!
There he was silently surveying the world, swaying gently on a twig near the top of the tree!
Penny uttered not a word.
She crossed silently to the tree and swung herself up on to the nearest branch.
Then, faster than she'd ever climbed before, she went up that tree.
She couldn't reach Kelpie from the nearest branch to him, but when she was as near as she could get she put out her hand and called softly to him, just as she used to do at home.
Kelpie looked at.her with his bright beady eyes, and then suddenly began to chirp.
Next instant, he flew on to her open palm.
Penny could have shouted with joy.
Instead, she stroked his neck and then closed her hand very gently over him.
Ho didn't flutter or try to break free, and Penny carefully began to climb down.
Halfway to the ground, a movement caught her eye.
She thought it was the squirrel again, but then realised it was  something moving jerkily in the hollow of a decayed tree below her and close to the beech.
She stopped and gazed intently down.
Then she let out a cry that brought most of the searching Brownies back at top speed to the beech.
‘I've found Kelpie, my budgie!’ cried Penny, ‘and I think there's a baby fox or something caught in the trunk of that hollow tree!’
By the time she reached the ground, Brownie Owl had arrived.
Brownie Owl was tall enough, by standing on tip toe, to look over and down into the hollow trunk of the decayed tree.
‘My goodness!’ she cried.
‘It's not a baby fox; it's a puppy!
It's alive, but only just.
It must have been chasing a squirrel or something and fell into the hollow and could not get out again.’
Much as she would have liked to stay, Penny had to hurry home with her budgie, but she learned later that Brownie Owl got the puppy out of the tree and took it home and gave it food.
The most exciting part of all, though, came with the discovery that the puppy was the one Farmer Bolsover had lost and that it was a pedigree sheepdog worth at least a hundred pounds.
‘Good sheepdogs are always valuable,’ Brownie Owl told the Brownies, ‘especially when they are trained.
I don't wonder Farmer Bolsover is pleased.’
‘I don't know what to say,’ Farmer Bolsover said to Brownie Owl, ‘except that I am very sorry for what I did say about the Brownies, especially about the Brownie who climbed my apple-tree for her budgie.
I am glad now she did lose her budgie — and find it — because if she hadn't she wouldn't have seen my puppy trapped right down in the hollow tree.
Please thank them all very much, and go on using the barn for as long as you like.’
Well, that was a happy ending to a week of troubles, wasn't it?
And just to show the Brownies he really was their friend, Farmer Bolsover sent along to the barn for them all the apples Penny had shaken from the tree she had climbed in his orchard!
THE BROWNIE WHO DIDN'T LIKE DOGS
ANGELA liked kittens, birds and ponies.
She didn't like dogs at all.
The reason for this was that Angela was a very neat, spruce and tidy little person.
Her face was always clean, and so were her hands, teeth and fingernails.
Her hair never looked unkempt, but always shone as if newly brushed and was usually tied in a pony-tail with well-ironed blue or pink ribbon.
Dogs were rough and boisterous and slobbered wet kisses over Angela's face and left paw-marks and hairs on her frocks.
At least, that was what the next-door dog, Bully, did, and Angela really judged all dogs by Bully, who was a big, black-faced alsatian who looked fierce and dangerous but was really just young, strong, and bursting with love and high spirits.
Angela was Sixer of the Gnomes in the 3rd Shortfields Brownie Guide Pack.
If Bully was in the front garden when she set out for Pack Meeting, he would leap the gate and bound up to her, putting his great front paws against her chest, and barking at her.
He was quite a frightening animal to look at, with his sharp white fangs gleaming against his black muzzle, but he wasn't really threatening to bite a piece out of Angela — only wanting to play with her.
Instead of throwing a ball for him — a game he loved — or giving him a stick to carry in his mouth — the next best thing — Angela shrank back, as she didn't understand him and wanted to be rid of him.
So Bully seized what he could see that looked like offering a bit of fun.
That was Angela's belt.
The belt was quite tough and didn't give way at once when Bully pulled at it, so Angela was dragged along as Bully backed, growling, until finally she lost her balance and ended up spreadeagled on her front on the pavement.
It was all very disturbing, and Angela quite dreaded  being seen by Bully and wished very much that he didn't live anywhere near her, or that his owner, Mr. Black, looked after him better and trained him.
One evening at Pack Meeting Beegee, which was the name the Pack had made up for their Guider out of the initial letters B and G of Brownie Guider, told the Brownies that the County Girl Guides' Fete was to be held in a few weeks' time in Morley Park and that the 3rd Shortfields Pack must think what to do to help make the fete a huge success.
There were to be stalls, Guide and Brownie plays, competitions, a Brownie magic pool, fancy-dress parades and various other exciting things.
All the Brownies were invited to go home and think about what the Pack could do for the fete and bring their ideas and suggestions along to the next Pack Meeting.
Angela soon had quite a bright idea.
Her mummy had once shown her photographs of herself as a Brownie many years ago, and Angela had laughed at the funny straw hat and long frock she had worn.
Now she suddenly thought what an interesting and novel item it would make in the fete if the Pack dressed up as Brownies through the years, showing the Brownie uniform from the first days to the present time.
‘Why, I think it's a splendid idea!’ cried Beegee, when Angela put it forward at Pow-wow.
‘Don't you, Brownies?’
All the Brownies agreed, and so Beegee promised to see what she could do about getting old-fashioned uniforms or photographs of them so that mothers could make them in the style of earlier days.
‘Now, besides this Pack entry, you can each do something on your own,’ said Beegee.
‘Every item will help to make the fete a success.
There is to be a fancy-dress parade, with a bicycle as a prize for the best entry, so see if you can think of a good idea for a character.’
Angela loved dressing up.
She thought long and hard about what character she should go as in the fancy-dress parade.
Then one evening after Pack Meeting, when she was folding up her uniform to put it away, she suddenly noticed the Six emblem on it.
‘Why!’ she cried.
‘I'm a Gnome!
That's just the thing for the fancy-dress parade!
I could go as a Gnome, with the broom in my hand and Lend a Hand printed on my front!’
She raced downstairs to tell her mummy, who agreed that it was an excellent idea.
‘One very good thing about it, too, is that the costume won't be hard to make!’ she said, smiling.
‘I don't expect to be idle for a minute between now and the fete.’
‘Oh, if only I could win the first prize!’ breathed Angela.
‘A bicycle is the thing I want most in all the world!’
The next few weeks were busy one for all the Pack and their mothers, who baked and stitched and sewed, and listened to recitations and lines from plays that were to be performed by the Brownies, and answered their questions about this, that and the other, and tried to put their sudden doubts and fears at rest.
At last the day of the fete came — and, goodness, how it rained!
Hundreds of eyes gazed dismally out of windows at the rivers gurgling along the gutters, scores of small noses flattened their ends against the dry sides of windowpanes down the other surface of which streamed rivulets of water.
Then quite suddenly the rain stopped and the sun came out — and then so did the people.
Angela hurried off with her mummy, carrying her red mackintosh with a hood.
Crowds of other people began to make their way to Morley Park.
The sun, as if ashamed of its late arrival, shone its hardest and hottest.
The fete got under way.
Everyone began to enjoy themselves.
Presently a voice from the loud-speaker boomed out: ‘Ladies and gentlemen, the next event will be a procession in costume by the Brownie Guide Packs of the county.’
Loud were the claps and cheers as, one after the other, Brownie Packs began to circle the field.
One Pack were dressed up as Robin Hood and His Merry Men, another as the Knights of the Round Table, pulling along a dragon in chains; a third represented characters from Alice in  Wonderland.
They were all very good, but perhaps it was because all the Packs excepting the 3rd Shortfields had chosen characters from well-known books or plays or nursery-rhymes that when the 3rd Shortfields appeared in the quaint uniforms of Brownies of earlier days they won the loudest and longest applause of all.
When all the Packs had circled the field twice, the judges announced the winners through the loud-speaker.
‘Ladies and gentlemen, top marks have been awarded to the 3rd Shortfields Pack, whose tableau of Brownies through the years was thought the most original and apt.’
Loud cheers and claps showed that the spectators fully agreed with the award.
The Pack hurried back to the dressing-tent to change out of their old-fashioned uniforms.
Angela had a look round the stalls, made a wish at the Magic Pool, bought an ice-cream, and watched a play performed by two Packs from another part of the county, then presently heard a voice through the loud-speaker telling competitors to get ready for the fancy-dress parade.
She hurried back to the dressing-tent, where her mummy helped her into her Gnome outfit, around which was swathed a broad white band on which was printed in big letters the Brownie Guide Motto, LEND A HAND.
Beegee popped her head into the tent.
‘Why, Angela, you look marvellous!’ she cried.
‘What a splendid idea to go as a Gnome!
I really think you have a fine chance of winning the first prize!’
‘Oh, if only I could!’ exclaimed Angela.
‘I've been wanting a bike for ages, only Daddy hasn't been able to manage it.’
‘Well, go out and win it!’ urged Beegee.
With her little black broom in her hand, Angela danced gaily out of the tent, and she looked just as if the Gnome on her Brownie uniform had come to life!
But I hardly like to tell you about the disaster that befell Angela within the next few minutes.
It's almost too distressing to relate.
She was making her way happily toward the roped-in square from which the fancy-dress competitors were to  start their parade when suddenly a big black alsatian dog bounded up to her.
It was Bully, who had followed the crowd into Morley Park and suddenly and delightedly recognised his friend of next door, Angela.
Angela shrank back before Bully could jump up and mark her Gnome costume with his dirty, wet paws.
She thrust her broom out at him in self-defence.
Bully barked joyfully.
This was just what he wanted — a good stick to pull at and play with.
He seized the broomstick between his strong teeth and began to leap about, trying to wrest it from Angela's grasp.
Angela hung on to it fiercely, but the alsatian was too strong and sinewy for her.
He kept pulling on the stick, then swung away and made to carry it off.
As he did so, the stick jerked between Angela's legs and pitched her forward, head first.
She landed flat on her face in thick mud.
People rushed to her rescue, picked her up.
Her mummy, drawn by the noise, ran out of the tent, and seeing what had happened put her arms round her to comfort her and took her back into the tent.
But the Gnome costume was ruined.
Not only was it wet through and covered in mud; it was split.
Being of only flimsy material and fitting tightly round Angela's body, it had burst in two places when she fell, and when Mummy tried to pull it off, it tore again.
Angela could hardly keep back her tears as she was towelled down, but as a Brownie smiles when in trouble she did her utmost not to give way to her bitter disappointment.
‘Put your Brownie uniform on again and I'll fetch your mack,’ said her Mummy.
‘At least we can watch the fancy-dress parade, even if you can't take part in it — and I'm afraid there's no chance of that now.’
Angela was glad she was a Brownie, because if she hadn't been she would surely have broken down and sobbed at missing her great chance of winning the bicycle.
As Mummy hurried away, a man came in with Angela's broomstick.
Behind him was Bully, who had a piece of rope looped through his collar as a lead.
The man had chased  the dog and brought him back, thinking he belonged to Angela.
Bully wagged his tail on seeing Angela, but Angela didn't pat him.
‘You bad, wicked dog!’ she scolded him.
‘You've ruined my Gnome costume and perhaps lost me a lovely bicycle.’
Bully barked and tried to put his paws on her chest, but was held back by the man.
Angela's mummy came back with the red mack.
She took Billy's rope.
‘He isn't our dog, but he lives next door to us,’ she explained, ‘so I suppose I'd better take charge of him and see that he doesn't do any more mischief.’
‘Someone ought to look after him,’ said the man.
‘He's harmless enough — just playful — but some people are afraid of alsatians, and this one looks like a fierce wolf.’
Suddenly Angela, who was gazing at the red mack her mummy was holding out to her, gave a gasp.
‘A wolf!
Why, Mummy, you know what you always say when I put on my red mack with the hood over my head!
You say I look like Red Riding Hood.
Oh, Mummy, could I go in the fancy-dress parade as Red Riding Hood, with Bully behind me as the wolf?’
‘My goodness, that's a fine idea!’ exclaimed the man.
‘It is, indeed!’ said Mummy.
‘But aren't you afraid of Bully, Angela?
Do you think you could manage him?’
‘I am a bit scared of him,’ admitted Angela; ‘but he might behave himself now for spoiling my Gnome costume.
Anyway, I'd like to try.’
‘There's only one thing to say to that,’ said Mummy decidedly.
‘That is, go and do it!’
‘Bully,’ said Angela, speaking very earnestly to the alsatian, ‘here's your chance to make up for the naughty things you've done to me.
So — please be a good dog.’
Angela reached the roped-in starting-square only just in time.
Mummy led Bully as far as the starting-place for her, then handed the rope-lead to Angela.
She also gave her a basket, to be like Red Riding Hood in the story.
The people clapped enthusiastically as Angela tripped along in her red mack and hood, with Bully — looking just  like a wolf — padding behind her.
Without Bully, her Red Riding Hood character would not have made much impression, but with the black-faced wolf-like dog following her she won loud applause.
Bully behaved himself almost perfectly the first time round the field.
He enjoyed being taken for a walk by Angela.
But the second time round he became restless and began biting at the rope and making playful snaps at Angela's heels, then at her basket.
Angela grew rather alarmed.
Then Bully seized the rope in his teeth and began to pull against her.
She thought she would have to loose him or be knocked over again.
Then suddenly, as Bully pulled her to a standstill, she had an idea.
Once or twice Bully had made bites at the basket.
Now, instead of trying to pull against him, she offered him the handle.
Billy dropped the rope at once.
Tail wagging his thanks, he took the handle of the basket in his mouth and padded happily along beside Angela.
For the rest of the way Angela had no more trouble.
Bully had what he loved — something to carry.
And the sight of Red Riding Hood with the savage ‘wolf’ beside her carrying her basket for her brought even louder claps from the spectators than before.
At the end of the parade — almost at once— it was announced that ‘Red Riding Hood’ and her ‘wolf’had been awarded first prize in the parade, and would the winner, Angela Norcroft, of the 3rd Shortfields Pack kindly come to the prize-giving tent in half an hour's time for her prize — a bicycle?
‘Oh, Bully,’ cried Angela happily, holding the alsatian's great head between her hands and putting her face close to his, ‘I'll never call you a bad dog again.
I'm going to buy you a lovely new lead as your share of the prize and take you for walks on it — with something for you to carry in your mouth.’
Bully wagged his tail, but he wasn't really listening.
He'd grown tired of carrying the basket.
He started to tear it to pieces.