

‘…
The Reason Why’
‘And shall Trelawney live?
And shall Trelawney die?
Here's twenty thousand Cornishmen shall know the reason why.’
To which, according to the historian Macauley, came an echo from the mines…
‘Then thirty thousand underground will know the reason why’.
A fine rousing song known by ‘One and All’ as Cornwall's national anthem.
But how many know ‘the reason why’ Bishop Jonathon Trelawney became a folk hero, although looked upon by many clerics as a worldly, indolent and drunken spendthrift?
In three hundred years, since his confinement in the Tower of London for ‘seditious libel’, many myths have grown around the Cornish ‘Squire-Bishop’.
Bishop Sir Jonathon Trelawney was born in 1650 of an old and distinguished Cornish family.
It had its roots in the areas of Altarnun and Menheniot,(where young Jonathon was christened), but by this time the family was well established at the house still known as Trelawne, at Pelynt, near the Looe to Polperro road.
His grandfather had received a baronetcy for loyalty to the Crown in the Civil War.
(Indeed some authorities believe, not without reason, that the famous song from staunchly Royalist Cornwall, referred to Bishop Trelawney's grandfather.)
Jonathon, born a second son, was trained for the Church, as so many younger sons of local aristocrats were.
However, his elder brother was to die without issue, predeceasing his parents, so Bishop Sir Jonathon Trelawney, Bt. was to be squire of Trelawne, as well as Bishop of Bristol, being nominated to that See by James II as reward for loyalty during the Monmouth Rebellion.
A Lord Spiritual he may have been, but not devoid of earthly ambitions and desire for wealth.
He wrote to the Lord Treasurer Rochester begging for appointment to Exeter in preference to Bristol, as the bishopric of Exeter yielded better stipends with which to pay off family debts.
He wrote also that he would be able to serve his monarch better ‘…whenever the King's grace…shall place me in a dignatory of larger value and extent’.
Dissatisfied as he was, it was while Bishop of Bristol that he made the moral stand which guaranteed that his name would be heard for three centuries whenever Cornish men were gathered together.
It was in 1688 that he became a leader of the seven bishops, including Archbishop Sancroft of Canterbury, who refused to ‘make themselves parties’ to the two Declarations of Indulgence issued by James II and aimed at giving the Nation a greater degree of religious tolerance, thus taking some of the pressure off the Roman Catholics.
As a result they were all imprisoned in the Tower of London on a charge of ‘seditious libel’.
That there was an uproar in Cornwall as a result there is no doubt.
The twenty (or thirty) thousand Cornishmen crossing the Tamar hand in hand  and advancing on London owe more to legend and the stirring song than to history.
The song, properly known as the ‘Song of the Western Men’, was not sung on the road: it was not written until two centuries later, by the eccentric Parson Hawker of Morwenstow,(in the intervals between scaring his parishioners by dressing as a mermaid and singing on the seashore).
However, the tumult in Cornwall caused by his imprisonment may well have been sufficient to secure the acquittal and release of Trelawney and the other six bishops.
As an act of conciliation, James II soon afterwards, in one of his last acts as monarch, offered Trelawney his much desired See of Exeter.
The ‘Glorious Revolution’ prevented him from confirming this appointment, but it was confirmed by William of Orange.
Five out of seven of the ‘non-jurors’ refused the oath of allegiance to the House of Orange.
Trelawney, with the See of Exeter within his grasp, was not one of them.
It was later written that he was ‘…right glad to be translated from Bristol to Exeter for, while the former See was poor, the latter was better endowed and he was not withheld by any scruples from begging for promotion’.
TRELAWNE — Home of the legendary Bishop Trelawney a ‘spiritual dragoon’.
He soon settled to his preferred life, that of a country squire at Trelawne, which he seldom left except to go to London.
Visits to Exeter he made as rarely as possible.
Of the seventy-eight clergy whom he ordained, fifty-three had to make the difficult journey to Pelynt for their ordination, either at Trelawne or in the parish church, while in his last seven years as Bishop, only twice did he travel to Exeter for an ordination.
While at Trelawne he was known as a jovial fellow who drank more wine  than was customary among the clergy, but was not without a vicious temper and a rough tongue.
He is supposed to have stated, when rebuked by his chaplain, ‘When I swear, I swear not as a bishop but as a country gentleman and a baronet’.
A satirical poem alluded to him as a ‘spiritual dragoon’.
His more worldly interests included ‘ownership’ of the rotten borough of West Looe.
Trelawney's promotion to the Bishopric of Winchester in 1707 apparently caused ‘…great disgust to many (he) being considerable for nothing but his birth and his interest in Cornwall’.
After his death in 1721 he was buried in Pelynt, where the rusted plate from his coffin,(subsequently excavated), his chair and a crozier are still on view.
A better memorial to him is the statue of Cardinal Wolsey over the gate to Christ Church College, Oxford, which he caused to be erected and underneath which he is named in a Latin inscription.
Why, then, has the legend of Trelawney lived on?
He was not even Bishop of the Cornish See at the time of his imprisonment.
The Victorian historian Macaulay may well have been right when he stated that the Cornish, ‘…a fierce, bold and athletic race, among whom there was a stronger provincial feeling than in any other part of the realm’, were not so much concerned with the matter of religious principle on which Bishop Trelawney had made his stand; Trelawney was ‘…reverenced less as a ruler of the Church than as the head of an honourable house and the heir, through twenty descents, of ancestors who had been of great note before the Normans had set foot on English ground’.
A Cornish Bluebeard
Cornwall's own Bluebeard, so legend would have it, had his castle on the banks of the River Lynher, close to Saltash.
In its four quarters he kept his four ‘wives’, each totally oblivious of the others, until sheer misfortune led to his discovery and his just deserts.
John Killigrew, according to the stories, was a member of the renowned Killigrew family of Falmouth and an ardent admirer of the King, Henry VIII.
Seeking to emulate him in every way, he decided he too would have a multiplicity of spouses.
Scouring Cornwall for a house to suit his purpose, he chanced upon Ince Castle, standing then, as it does now, four-square and isolated on a peninsular in the River Lynher.
Eagerly he bartered his estate at ‘St. Budoch’ in exchange for the castle, which had previously been in the possession of the Courtenay family.
Having established himself at Ince, Killigrew set off for the busy  mercantile town of Plymouth, where he soon fell in with a merchant, Tremayne, who had a daughter, Mary.
Before long the bells of St. Andrew's Church rang out for their wedding and Mary was safely  ensconced in a corner of Ince, which Killigrew had carefully divided into four equal parts.
He alone had the key to each quarter: he and his faithful servant Robert alone knew the key to his secret.
Happily they lived together for several weeks, until Killigrew told his young bride that duty called him to town.
He promised to return within a few weeks, bearing a bonnet of fashionable design.
Meanwhile she was not to set foot outside the door, as a plague of field-mice infested the estate.
Killigrew hastened to Bideford, where he was soon to meet and marry Alice, daughter of Sir Greville Hawken.
Back they came to enjoy wedded bliss at Ince for ten days, before Killigrew announced that he had to join his yeomanry for several weeks.
Over to Mary's quarters he went, while Alice remained locked in her apartment for fear of the plague of adders which her husband assured her infested the grounds.
Off to Penzance went Killigrew, to return with the daughter of the Mayor, Lucy Treleaven,(a brunette, to contrast with his previous two blonde ‘wives’).
Sadly their honeymoon was a short one as Killigrew had, so, he sorrowfully informed his new bride, to hasten to Exeter, where he was to sit on the bench in the City's courts.
Meanwhile Lucy cloistered herself in her rooms to avoid the ghastly plague of badgers which, she was informed, had taken over the countryside.
Back to Alice, then to Mary and eventually, indeed, to Exeter, where Killigrew was to be wed in the Cathedral to Amelia, daughter of Sir Richard Humpherson.
With a loving wife safely  ensconced in each corner of the building, a fact unknown to any save himself and his faithful servant Robert, all seemed set fair for John Killigrew to enjoy a life of quadruple wedded bliss.
All went well until the dreadful day when Killigrew was away and a letter arrived for Mistress A. Killigrew.
Torn between passing the letter to Alice or Amelia, Robert tossed a coin and settled on the latter.
It was an unfortunate choice: Amelia was puzzled to read of the happenings of her non-existent family in Bideford and wrote back to her supposed ‘sister’ denying the relationship.
The Hawken and the Grenville families soon got together and repaired to Ince.
The frightened Robert turned informer and the truth was out.
John was soon to appear at Exeter in the court of which he previously graced the bench — this time in the dock.
The judge pronounced that, as he was so attracted by the number four, he would be sentenced to sixteen  years' imprisonment, four years for each of his four ‘marriages’.
Killigrew protested that his first marriage, at least, that to Mary, had been perfectly legal.
The judge saw the justice of this and the sentence was reduced to twelve years.
The story may be embroidered but Ince Castle, for many years the home of the Killigrew family, stood (until a disastrous fire in 1988) isolated on its peninsular, its oblong castellated building with its four identical towers, one on each corner, perhaps bearing silent witness to a story that is stranger than fiction.
Riotous Times in Cornwall
A rioting mob invading town and the Sheriff raising a posse!
The lawless days of the Old West?
Well, perhaps; but not the Old West of the United States but of Looe and other Cornish towns during the Napoleonic Wars.
With the wars came a rise in the price of corn.
Meanwhile locally grown corn was being stored away in — and being shipped out of— Cornwall.
In January, 1793, between three and four hundred tinners from the St. Austell area heard that there was a cargo of corn in Looe and marched on the town.
The Sheriff of Cornwall chanced to be in the town and he and the Mayor persuaded them to disperse and go home.
A few days later rumour spread that a thousand tinners intended to march on Looe.
The Sheriff sent to the Commander-in-Chief in Plymouth for a company of soldiers to defend the town and he also issued warrants for the raising of a ‘posse comitatus’.
This succeeded in bringing a great number of men from the surrounding parishes, as well as most of the inhabitants of East and West Looe.
The area was on a war footing and all was bustle and preparation, expecting the hourly arrival of the enemy.
The tinners of St. Austell heard tell of the reception planned for them and ‘…thought it prudent not to come’.
Three years later it was the people of Looe who were rioting and ‘…most of the lower orders in these boroughs assembled in so riotous a manner that the Riot Act was read’.
A mob of townsfolk boarded a ship loaded with corn and cut the rigging to prevent it sailing, so that the magistrates felt obliged to call in troops from Plymouth to quell the mob.
Inland, too, there was disorder when the ‘Rising of the Tinners’ led to rioting in Liskeard as bands of tinners invaded the town in order to prevent the transport of corn.
Sometimes they succeeded in their aims, sometimes their leaders were arrested and imprisoned.
Peace with France came and food prices fell, but mob rule in Cornwall could still take over from time to time.
The opening up of copper mines on Caradon in the 1830's led to Liskeard becoming a booming mining town with, as 1850's historian John Allen recorded, ‘…fever and immorality  were the natural consequences’.
A directory of 1852 listed three inns; the ‘Bell’,(recently demolished), ‘Webb's’,(opened by Robert Webb in 1833 and by the 1840's already ‘…very well kept and without a superior in the country’.)
and the ‘London’,(demolished in the 1880's to make room for the Public Rooms.)
The same directory names fifteen taverns (as distinct from inns), the ‘Barley Sheaf’, ‘Boot’, ‘Cornish Arms’, ‘Commercial’, ‘Farmers' Arms’, ‘Fountain’, ‘Globe’, ‘Queen's Head’, ‘Red Lion’, ‘Ring of Bells’, ‘Town Arms’, ‘Union’, ‘Victoria’, ‘White Hart’, and ‘White Horse’.
Of the ‘Town Arms’ it was complained by the police that, ‘No respectable person was seen to enter from one end of the week to the other’.
The great miners' riot, however, occurred outside the ‘Bullers' Arms’ in 1842 — a tavern which was not mentioned in the 1852 directory.
A newspaper of the time commented that the success of the mines in the area had led to ‘…an extraordinary increase in the mining population and, Saturday being pay-day, several hundreds of them were in town’.
After eleven o'clock some of them, having been refused drink, gathered around the ‘Bullers' Arms’, whereupon ‘…the police were then called in, when several of the ring-leaders were taken into custody; upon this a general cry of ‘One and All’ was given and a party of nearly 200 speedily gathered around the house, which they attacked, demolishing the doors and windows and succeeded in rescuing their companions’.
Several policemen and others were apparently injured and ‘…the whole neighbourhood kept in a state of fear and tumult’ until six o'clock on Sunday morning.
Mass civil disorder, whether it be the result of a real or imagined grievance or merely over-indulgence in alcohol, is not purely a recent phenomenon.
Murder at Morval Manor!
A scattering of cottages, an idyllically set Tudor Manor house and, a few hundred yards away, a church dating from Norman times; all this in a peaceful valley of a tributary of the Looe River.
Yet it has not always been so: the valley is no stranger to bloodshed and murder.
The fifteenth century Camborne mystery play has a Satanic scene in which a cat is referred to:—
‘I brought it from Morval,
The place where the Devil was  anointed .’
Certainly there is a Satanic touch to the tale of how the jealousy of a  dismissed Duchy official was to lead to assault, pillage, false imprisonment and the eventual gruesome murder of the Lord of the Manor of Morval.
John Glynn of Morval had been appointed Under-Steward to the Duchy of Cornwall during the disturbed days of the Wars of the Roses.
He replaced one Thomas Clemens.
MORVAL MANOR — Now peaceful scene of medieval  jealousy and murder.
Clemens was not happy at his  supersession and set a crowd of ruffians to make Glynn's position untenable.
On one occasion, as Glynn held the King's Court in Liskeard, a mob assaulted him and he was ‘…greviously wounded in the face’ before being thrown into Liskeard prison.
He was not released until he had been forced to sign an undertaking not to bring any charge against his aggressors.
Subsequently a mob raided and plundered Morval, taking bounty to the value of £200.
Worse was to follow.
One dark night in 1471, John Glynn was horribly done to death and his body found near Morval at Higher Wringworthy.
It was alleged by his widow that Thomas Flete, as agent of Clemens, ‘…him feloniously slew and murdered and clove his head in four parties and gave him ten deadly wounds in his body and when he was dead they cut off one of his legs and one of his arms and his head from his body to make him sure’.
Certainly his murderer took no chances — he did ‘make him sure’.
Glynn also had stolen from him a purse containing £22 and a gold signet ring.
Such was the fear of Thomas Clemens locally that the widow, Jane Glynn, petitioned Parliament that the murderers be tried in London by a Cornish  jury.
She claimed that ‘…there could be no redress for their horrible outrages in the County of Cornwall by reason of the general dread of the malice of Clemens and his lawless gang’.
She asked that if Clemens did not attend his trial in London he be dealt with as convicted in his absence.
Her petition was granted.
The outcome of the trial is unfortunately not recorded.
Violent death was no stranger to the Lords of Morval.
It was Hugh de Morval who was one of the four knights that determined to rid Henry II of ‘…this turbulent priest’ and kept back the crowd while Thomas à Becket was murdered.
More recently General Wynell-Mayow, who is commemorated in the Church, was one of the few survivors of the heroic but futile charge of the six hundred at Balaclava.
It is hard now to associate this restful hamlet with those who have set out to take part in events that have shaken the nation; even more so with the lawless days of mob rule, savage revenge and gruesome murder.
A Polperro ‘Crusoe’
Of the many sea-dogs in Polperro's colourful past, one was to become a real life Robinson Crusoe and, after a fortunate rescue, to return to his home village with a band turning out to welcome him.
He subsequently became a national figure and a wealthy man before dying in poverty.
Robert Jeffrey was brought up by his stepfather in Polperro at the time of the Napoleonic wars.
He was taught the trade of a blacksmith but, like so many from that village, elected for a life at sea.
He sailed from Polperro on the ‘Lord Nelson’ in 1807, out to do some privateering.
After an unsuccessful week in the channel the ship put into Falmouth for stores.
While in Falmouth she was boarded by the crew of the ‘Recruit’, a naval sloop of war, and a press-gang seized various members of her crew, including the unfortunate Jeffrey, who immediately found himself aboard the ‘Recruit’ under a Captain Lake.
The ‘Recruit’ sailed forthwith to the Caribbean to rejoin the Fleet.
While she was at sea and driven wild by thirst, due to the inadequacy of the ship's water storage, Jeffrey broached a barrel of spruce beer intended for the Captain.
Furious at this, Lake ordered his reluctant crewmen to launch a boat and maroon Jeffrey on a barren and desolate rocky island.
Thus Jeffrey found himself on the Island of Sombrero in the Leeward group.
He had no water, only a rotten gull's egg to eat and not even eight gramophone records to entertain him!
Meanwhile the ‘Recruit’ sailed on to join the Fleet at Barbados.
Here Admiral Sir Alexander Cochrane heard the story of Jeffrey.
He gave Captain Lake a severe reprimand for his brutality and ordered him to return to Sombrero to see if Jeffrey were alive and, if so, to rescue him.
Accordingly the ship returned but there was no trace of Jeffrey on the island.
Instead was found a pair of trousers, which were not Jeffrey's, and a tomahawk.
Jeffrey had apparently either been rescued or cruelly done to death.
The story got back to England, as a result of which Lake was court-  martialled and dismissed the Navy.
There was public disquiet, questions in the Commons and an enquiry ordered into Jeffrey's whereabouts.
At last a story was circulated by a sailor, George Hassel, who swore a statement before the Mayor of Liverpool that he had met, in the town of Beverley, Massachusetts, a youth known as Jeffrey, who otherwise styled himself ‘The Governor of Sombrero’.
A document was produced, purportedly telling of Jeffrey's rescue from the island.
However, it was signed with an ‘X’, whereas Jeffrey was known to be literate.
Jeffrey's family and supporters suspected it to be a plot hatched by Captain Lake and his friends.
Nevertheless, a ship was sent to America so that the story could be checked and in 1810, three years after his being cast away on Sombrero, Jeffrey returned at last and set foot in Portsmouth.
His story was that he had collapsed with exhaustion and thirst when a passing American schooner had seen his distress signals and taken him aboard.
Too ill to speak, he had been taken to Marblehead, Massachusetts.
There he had found work as a blacksmith.
He had apparently been too happy to bother about sending word home.
He claimed he had not signed the document properly because, it having been given to him by a ‘gentleman’, he was too nervous to do so.
Despite the fact that he had apparently not put himself out overmuch to get home, he was given a hero's welcome in Polperro.
Flags were flown and a band turned out to celebrate his return.
As a result of his nation-wide notoriety, Jeffrey was persuaded to become a public exhibit in London theatres, where he was shown as ‘Jeffrey the Sailor’.
He also recovered £600 by way of damages from Captain Lake.
With these proceeds he was able to return home to Polperro and purchase a small coasting schooner.
Unfortunately he was not a very good business man.
The venture failed and he died leaving a wife and child in destitution.
‘Dream Days’ of Ratty and Mole by Fowey River
Did the timeless beauty of the Fowey River provide the inspiration for the immortal  children's classic, ‘The Wind in the Willows’?
Did the idea of the middle-class ‘gentlemen/animals’ come to Kenneth Grahame as he rowed gently upstream for tea at Golant — Mole and Rat idling away their idyllic lives by the gentle river and the boastful Toad, whose new-fangled fads led him to downfall and prison?
FOWEY — Kenneth Grahame's ‘little grey seaside town’.
It was in the last year of the old century, 1899, that Grahame began his love affair with Fowey and its river.
Staying at the ‘Fowey Hotel’ with his sister, the writer, already famous for his descriptions of Victorian childhood in ‘Dream Days’and ‘The Golden Age’, became enraptured with the town.
In flagrant breach of Victorian morality he persuaded his inamorata, Elspeth Thomson, to follow him down to Cornwall and into a whirlwind marriage at St. Fimbarrus's Church on 22nd July, 1899.
Throughout his life Grahame kept his affection for Fowey, whose most famous literary figure, Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch (’ Q’), was regularly his host.
Another lasting friendship was with Edward ‘Atkey’ Atkinson, Commodore of the Fowey Yacht Club.
Their only child, christened Alastair but known for ever in the family as ‘Mouse’, was born within a year of their marriage.
It was from tales told to ‘Mouse’ and later continued in letter form — from Fowey — that the tale of the ‘Wind in the Willows’began to emerge.
In 1907 ‘Mouse’ went with his Governess to Littlehampton, his parents to Falmouth and then back to Fowey.
Letters written to his seven-year old son show the story taking shape.
‘The little grey sea-town…that clings along one side of the harbour…’ can be clearly identified with Fowey.
This is the town described in the chapter, ‘Wayfarers All’, in which the adventurous Sea-Rat almost lures away the homely Water-Rat from his beloved river.
‘Through dark doorways you look down flights of stone steps, overhung by great, pink tufts of valerian and ending in a patch of sparkling blue water.’
This was Grahame's Fowey at the turn of the century — just as it is the Fowey of today.
Many of the local traditions have passed away since those days.
There is one, indeed, in which Grahame must have been among the last to take part: the tradition of the ‘Kimbly Cake’.
When he stood Godfather in Fowey, custom demanded that on the way to the christening he should carry the traditional cake and offer it to the first person he saw.
Custom then demanded that this person should hand over three gifts for the child, with his good wishes.
The acceptance of these gifts would keep the child safe from evil powers for life.
The river of Rat, Mole and Otter, which flowed past proud Toad Hall and had the threatening Wild Wood close by, was generally associated with the Thames, beside which Grahame spent many of his younger — and older — years.
No doubt it had considerable influence upon the book but Peter Green, author of the definitive ‘Kenneth Grahame — a Biography’, believes the Fowey River to be the true setting of the tale.
Friends whom Grahame made at Fowey and kept up with for life, the Purves family of Philadelphia, all believed in Fowey as the setting and the opening chapter as being inspired by a gentle row up to Golant one golden Summer in the early years of the century.
They attributed the idea of ‘Wayfarers All’ to a walk over the hills towards the West of Fowey, St. Catherine's Castle and beyond.
It is not surprising that a few years later, in 1911, Grahame was to introduce ‘Mouse’ to his beloved Cornwall — and especially Fowey — before the boy began school.
This, perhaps, was the end of the idyll.
It was in that year that ‘Atkey’ was drowned while sailing with Bevil Quiller-Couch — a shattering blow for Grahame.
‘Mouse’ was to go on to a succession of schools — at all of which he was unhappy — and to Oxford, where he was run over by a train under circumstances which strongly suggested suicide.
There is no record of Grahame returning to Cornwall prior to his death in his home near the Thames, in 1932.
He left behind him a picture of a fast vanishing age of innocence and of an idyllic riverside life, be it by Thames or Fowey, a picture that will last for ever.
He left also a timeless description of Fowey, where  ‘…the little boats that lie tethered to the rings and stancheons of the old sea wall are gaily painted as those I clambered in and out of in my own childhood…and by the windows the great vessels glide, night and day, up to their moorings or forth to the open sea.’
Saltash Maritime Heritage
Once a prosperous port possessing ‘Liberty of the Tamar’, chosen as site for a Royal Dockyard, and renowned for its oyster beds and fisheries, Saltash has now turned its back on its Waterside.
Yet this ancient borough has a maritime history as rich and proud as any West Country port.
The ‘Liberty of the Tamar’, held by Saltash, is symbolised by the town's two ceremonial maces in the form of oars, one dated 1623, the oldest such known in Britain.
The Liberty extended seaward to a line from Penlee to the ‘Shagstone’, up to Ogle Tor Rock above Calstock; to ‘Old Man's Beard’ in the Tavy and ‘Cumble Tor’in the Lynher.
From medieval times until the present century Saltash has held jurisdiction over these waters.
Its Mayor held criminal jurisdiction and various wrongdoers, including mutineers, have been hauled from ships to Saltash Guildhall for justice to be done.
The Mayor could also sit as coroner upon any body found in these waters.
More profitable were the port dues collected on every ship to enter the Sound.
The burgesses grew wealthy, charging up to seven shillings for Spanish ships after the Armada, until they became too greedy and local merchants and fishermen refused to pay.
The burgesses appealed to Parliament to confirm their ancient rights, while the ‘rebels’ were led by James Tillie of Pentillie, owner of Halton Quay and of a merchant fleet.
Tillie won the day, dues were reduced to one shilling for English ships, two shillings for foreigners.
These dues continued to be collected until 1901 when the Board of Trade abolished them as a hindrance to navigation.
Rights to the Lynher river had already been sold to the Admiralty in 1890 for £800, for the Tamar in 1899 for £1,000.
Shipbuilding had always been important to Saltash, which was chosen as the site for a Royal Naval base and dockyard.
Opposition by burghers, who feared for the fishing, ensured that Plymouth Dock, later Devonport, was later chosen instead.
Fishing had always been a major industry.
In the early twentieth century the historian Porter recorded that fish caught between Bull Point and the Tavy mouth included plaice, sole, dabs, flounders, brill, bass, pollock, herring, mullet, gurnet, sprat, eels, pout, ray and conger.
It was shellfish, however, for which Saltash was renowned.
Indeed, a dispute over the oyster beds proceeded to the House of Lords in 1883.
There the Lord Chancellor endorsed the rights of ‘free inhabitants of ancient messuages’ in Saltash to dredge for oysters between Candlemas (February 2nd) and Easter each year, as they had ‘from time immemorial’, the  fishermen's triumph over the Corporation is commemorated by a plaque on the ‘Wheatsheaf’.
The oyster rights were well worth fighting for.
In 1899, during the short Lent season, four hundred thousand oysters were lifted by eight boats.
Saltash shell-fish were sold widely in Plymouth and in nineteenth century Liskeard.
Saltash fisherwomen, in the market under the Guildhall, would sell for a penny a dish of shrimps, mussels, cockles and a pin.
Well into the present century ‘Picklecock Alley’ on Saltash Waterside was well supplied with sea-food shops.
The Saltash Fair and pageant was a popular event of the 1930s, revived in the 1950s as Winkle Fair with ‘King Cockle’.
The Mayoral party would receive a formal greeting to Waterside,…which was the proper old ancient Borough centuries before the town up and over was so much as dreamed of.
Fish from the Water Tamar be pretty eating as all the world knows and we offer your worships this tribute according to ancient customs of our ancestors’.
Pollution largely ended the shellfish industry although there have been recent attempts to revive it.
Other ancient rights have been eroded away.
Little enough of the borough's wealth appears to have filtered down to the townsfolk.
An 1801 description criticised, ‘Though the corporation are said to be enriched by the produce of the ferry over the Tamar, the privilege of dragging the oysters, the anchorage and clearance of foreign vessels etc, yet the town presents but a poor appearance’.
One of the last ancient rights disappeared in 1961.
The Black Prince supposedly granted the ferry rights in 1364 to his porter William Lenche who had lost an eye at Poitiers and later that century they passed to the borough, which held them until the opening of the Tamar Bridge.
Compensation was paid for the loss and at the same time Essanians lost their unique privilege of free pedestrian river passage, the bridge walkway being free to ‘one and all’.
Now the Waterside contains three public houses, a sailing club and various blocks of drab council flats.
As a newspaper review of the 1931 Saltash Fair concluded, ‘Goodbye Saltash, dear quaint little town with a past — what will your future be?’
Towards the Cornish Comprehensive
The  comprehensive schools which endeavour to fit the young people of Looe, Liskeard and Saltash for today's society are continuing a tradition that has lasted since John Buller of Shillingham, near Saltash, set out partially to remedy ‘…the great and deplorable corruption of the present age, both in principle and practice.’
He considered that ‘…early education…was the most probable way to redress so great and growing an evil.’
It was from 1705 that he endowed £1,000 for five schools in Saltash, Liskeard, Looe, Penzance and Grampound; whether education has wrought any substantial change in youth since that day is open to opinion.
From his moneys, each school was to pay a master £10 per annum and forty shillings was to go to the trustees to cover expenses of their meetings.
The remainder was intended for Bibles, Prayer Books and ‘…other books of piety’, as well as putting one of the most hopeful of poor persons from each school to some trade, calling or honest employment.
Saltash, indeed, already had a Grammar School, founded by Queen Elizabeth I. According to Carew, ‘…she hath established fee'd plots of free schools with competent pensions, out of her own coffers, for the teachers at Saltash, Launceston and Penryn’.
The charity continued to pay for the schoolmaster in Saltash, who fulfilled certain conditions, the sum of £6. 17s. 2d. per annum up until 1875, when the school, run by a Mr. Williams, closed down.
The following year a further scheme of the Charity Commissioners set up an education system which led to that enjoyed today.
The Liskeard Grammar School also survived into the nineteenth century but was described by Polwhele, early in the century, as ‘…a low, mean edifice, bad without and worse within, the business of education…having been of late years, it seems, less understood at Liskeard.’
The school, situated on the site of the Castle, eventually closed in 1849.
It was subsequently used — symbolically, some of its former pupils may have felt, as a police station with prison cells.
The school established in East Looe, whose boys were dressed by a charitable fund in light blue coats and caps and were known as ‘blue boys’, also was dissolved early in the nineteenth century.
What the studious schoolboy of Looe learned in 1801 is disclosed in a handbill published that year by Mr. Clement Triggs, the school's last master.
He advertised, ‘Instruction in writing in the various hands, merchants’ accounts by the Italian method of Double Entry, arithmetic in all its branches, algebra etc., plain and spherical trigonometry and geometry, drafting, navigation, the use of the globes, planisphere etc’.
Clearly Looe schoolboys were expected to have a nautical bent and those who had were promised they would ‘…be shown to take Observations of the Sun, Moon and Stars so expeditiously and accurately as if actually at  sea, Looe having the advantage of the Horizon thereat upwards of 110 degrees’.
Would today's pupils, hard pressed as they are by the G.C.S.E. syllabi, care to exchange with those of whom Mr. Triggs promised, ‘…no care or attention will be wanting to facilitate the Learning and improve the Genius of Youth placed under his care’.
From Furze to Fortune
The tale of how an astute Cornish furze-cutter came to be founder of one of the great landed families of Cornwall, with one of the County's most famed stately homes, could be looked on as an ideal example of Thatcherite-style enterprise and self-help.
Alternatively the story of how the Robartes family came to have the money to build Lanhydrock House in the Fowey valley could be considered a tale of blatant exploitation, outrageous usury and greed.
LANHYDROCK — stately home built on furze-cutters wealth.
Tin, as in so many Cornish tales of wealth and exploitation, lies at the roots of the Robartes family fortunes.
In the sixteenth century, before coal was generally available in Cornwall, furze, wood and peat were the main fuels used in tin smelting.
As the County's woodlands disappeared a certain 
Richard Roberts seized the opportunity to contract with landowners for the purchase of their wood and furze crop, which he sold at a handsome profit to the tinners.
As Welsh coal became available he also purchased this and from his Truro base endeavoured to set up a monopoly of the local fuel business.
This business was expanded by his son John Roberts, who also lent money at a vast interest rate to the tinners, who were traditionally improvident and poor.
To open a tin working required capital and this capital was provided by Roberts whose interest was repaid — in tin.
Vast amounts of money were made through Cornish tin but very little found its way to the tinners themselves.
Further financial advances were made to Cornish gentry, many of whom were off to London in search of fortune.
If their fortunes were indeed made, the Roberts' claimed a high rate of interest.
More often they failed and the Roberts seized their land as security.
Thus the Roberts family became landowners and the more aristocratic name of Robartes was adopted.
John's son was in succession knighted as Sir Richard Roberts in 1616, purchased a baronetcy in 1621, and was created Baron Truro in 1625.
His upward career was not unstained.
A charge against him by the Privy Seal for usury was apparently avoided by means of a £12,000 bribe.
Subsequently the Duke of Buckingham was impeached by the Commons for, among other charges, accepting Roberts' bribe of £10,000 to negotiate his Barony of Truro.
According to Roberts the money was, he tactfully put it, ‘to have been employed on a special service for the late king’.
Richard Roberts, Baron Truro, made a beneficial marriage to an heiress, Frances Hender of Boscastle, and purchased the manor of Lanhydrock, formerly property of the wealthy Priory of St. Petroc at Bodmin.
He commenced the building of the great house of Lanhydrock, which was completed by his son, the second Lord Robartes of Truro.
Despite the ill-judged backing of Parliament in the civil war, the family flourished and up to the present century remained prominent in Cornish — and national — affairs.
The house remained in the family until 1953, when it was donated to the National Trust.
Now the public may enjoy its stately grandeur and the magnificent flowering trees of its parkland at the same time, perhaps, pondering upon the enterprise and ethics with which the magnificent property was founded.
From Celtic King to District Council
A mile from St. Cleer, where the slopes of Bodmin Moor fall away to the Fowey valley, is a monument to a ‘King’ of Cornwall, one of those whose story falls between history and legend.
It is indeed hard to distinguish, in the mists of the so-called ‘dark ages’ of Cornwall, as to where fact and fantasy merge.
King Doniert, or Dungarth, whose stone still stands, was supposedly a son of King Caradoc of Cornwall who held court at Liskeard.
So wrote the historian Carew in the seventeenth century, giving the date 443 AD as the period of his reign.
Whitaker also quoted Cornish royalty as having their capital at Liskeard in around 614 AD.
The terms ‘Royal’ and ‘King’are perhaps not altogether appropriate for what would have been no more than tribal chieftains.
In any event, ‘King’ Doniert, Caradoc's successor, was a friend of St. Neot, the pious mendicant whose well is still a source of pilgrimage, and also a friend of King Alfred of Wessex, of history and of cake-burning legend.
Alfred was an occasional visitor to his kinsman Doniert and stayed with him at Liskeard to hunt the red deer and wild boar as well as to visit St. Gueryr, a friend of St. Neot skilled in healing, Alfred not being a well man.
DONIERT'S STONE — King Caradoc's son entreats prayers for his soul
Dungarth (or Doniert) was hunting the deer near Redgate when, according to early historians, he was accidentally drowned in the River  Fowey in 872 AD.
(This date is quite incompatible with that mentioned by Carew in his ‘Survey’; one of them is obviously wrong.)
Borlase states that a cross was erected near the spot.
The legend, ‘Doniert rogavit pro anima’ carved upon it was generally interpreted as, ‘Doniert entreats prayers for his soul’.
Such entreaties to passing travellers were not infrequent in lonely country at the time.
The grave remained thus for eight hundred years until visited by the traveller and writer Hals during the reign of Charles II.
He recorded that the stone was overturned as a result of his visit, as ‘…some tinners in the contiguous country, of these gentlemen, believed that they came for treasure’.
Some, ‘…wiser than the rest, lay their heads together and resolved in council to be before-hand’ and went with picks and shovels and opened the land around the monument to a depth of six feet.
They discovered ‘…a spacious vault walled about and arched over with stones having on the sides thereof two stone seats not unlike those in churches for auricular confession.
The sight of all which struck them with consternation or a kind of horror that they incontinently gave over search and with the utmost hurry and dread, throwing earth and turf to fill up the pit they made, they departed, having neither of them the courage to enter or even inspect into the further circumstances of the place’.
What provoked the panic causing the treasure-seeking tinners to flee may never be known.
The stone subsequently collapsed into their diggings, to be found there by Borlase a century later.
It is now to be seen in a deserted spot, not actually by the river but not far from it, on high ground by a little-used minor road.
Whatever be fact or fantasy about King Doniert, King Alfred and St. Neot, King Caradoc at least appears to have achieved renown in the land he (supposedly) ruled.
He is generally believed to be commemorated in the place name Caradon, which formerly applied only to the hill around which he held sway but now covers a complete District of South East Cornwall.
Pirates, Pagodas and the Eddystone Light
One piece of South Cornish — and Plymouth — weather lore runs, ‘When you can see Eddystone clearly, rain is on its way; when you cannot see it clearly, rain is already here’.
This curious whimsy might well have appealed to Henry Winstanley, the eccentric builder of the first — and most eccentric — Eddystone lighthouse.
During its period of construction, and for the five years until its dramatic destruction, it drew crowds of curious sightseers to the Rame Peninsular and to every other viewpoint.
Winstanley's earlier inventions were scattered throughout his Essex home and included a chair of which, one Cornish visitor recorded, ‘…as my cousin Tresillian sat in it, descended perpendicularly about ten foot in a dark and dismal place’.
Other pranks included a chair which, when sat upon, pinned down the unwary with a pair of mechanical arms: another was a slipper placed upon the floor which, when kicked, caused a weird and ghostly apparition to arise.
It was the Restoration period, following the austerity of Puritanism, and crowds flocked to see ‘Winstanley's Wonders’.
He was chosen as Clerk of Works to Charles II for his Hertfordshire home, Audley End, and also created an early ‘theme park’ at Hyde Park, known as ‘Winstanley's Waterworks’, a fine display of fountains and waterspouts.
Wealth came to him and much of it he invested in shipping.
He was thus naturally concerned when, in 1696, sitting in a London tavern, he was informed that a ship, the ‘Constant’, was the second of his to founder on the Eddystone Rocks off Plymouth Sound.
It was typical of Winstanley that he should at once decide to be personally responsible for a lighthouse upon the Eddystone.
The idea had long been mooted, but no other lighthouse had yet been built upon a rock and many deemed it impossible.
Winstanley set to work with a fantastic design, eighty feet high, the lower part to be of stonework covered with metal, the upper part of wood.
War with France was continuing and H.M.S. ‘Terrible’, a British warship, was on permanent watch to guard him as he worked.
One day she failed to appear; instead a French Privateer arrived to seize Winstanley and his workmen.
On being informed of this, King Louis of France instantly had Winstanley released, declaring, ‘We are at War with England, not with humanity’, and the lighthouse would be of benefit to all nations.
Winstanley was summoned to Paris, where Louis tried to persuade him to remain.
When he refused he was sent home, with lavish presents, to complete his task.
As the lighthouse took shape, visitors flocked to the coastline to view the greatest of ‘Winstanley's Wonders’.
Often compared to a Chinese pagoda, it was decorated throughout with fantastic paintings and mottoes and included a finely decorated stateroom and a richly gilded bedroom.
With memories of his recent kidnapping, Winstanley included a moveable chute to discharge stones towards any enemy.
At last, in 1699, the Wonder was completed.
The whole country rejoiced and again crowds flocked to the coastline, but now at night, to peer towards its flickering light.
Some doubted its ability to withstand rough weather.
Winstanley, however, had full confidence and proclaimed his greatest wish was to be upon the rock during ‘…the greatest storm that ever was’.
This wish was ironically fulfilled.
He chanced to be on the Eddystone on  the night of 26th November, 1703, when the Great Storm, as recorded by Defoe, possibly the worst ever to lash this country, struck the South coast.
When the dawn came, anxious viewers on the shore could see that the waves had taken with them the Eddystone lighthouse, its eccentric architect and five other unfortunate souls.
Henry Winstanley undoubtedly, like many others before and after him, combined eccentricity with genius.
He left behind him, both metaphorically and literally, a rock for others to build upon.
Knights Templars and Cornwall's ‘Gretna Green’
In the wilds of Bodmin Moor, yet only half a mile from the busy A30 trunk road, is the tiny hamlet once renowned for its unconventional religious practices and known as being the ‘Gretna Green’ of Cornwall.
Way back in the middle ages its lonely church was a link with one of the wealthiest, and eventually most corrupt, of religious orders — an order which, it has been suggested, could have shattered, and indeed, still could shatter Christianity to its foundations.
The name of the village — Temple — commemorates its founding by the order of the Knights templars.
The order was initiated in or around 1120 AD, primarily to protect pilgrims to the Holy Land and to guard and protect Holy places.
It was the custom of such military monastic orders to establish ‘Preceptories’ in ‘…desert and uncultivated places, to introduce inhabitants or to civilise those scattered over a wilderness’.
The order grew immensely wealthy and place names all over the country still remind us of lands that they once owned.
The Inner Temple and Outer Temple, two of the London Inns of Court, and Temple Meads Station in Bristol are but two examples.
With its incredible wealth — about £6 million estimated annual income has been suggested — and ownership of about nine thousand manors came inevitable corruption as the Templars took advantage of the privileges granted to them by the Pope.
At last, early in the 14th century, the Pope dissolved the order at the behest of King Philippe of France.
Much of their property, including that at Temple Moor, was given to the Knights Hospitallers, who continued to provide shelter for travellers across that barren land.
Why did Philippe demand that the Pope dissolve the order?
The generally accepted reason was that the French coffers were nearly empty and he wanted to replenish them from the vast treasures of the Knights Templars.
There is an alternative and startling theory for their suppression.
It has been suggested that the Templars were guardians of a secret that could have rocked both the French throne and the entire foundations of Christianity.
The story, passed down through the centuries, is that this powerful order somehow chanced upon the proof that Christ did not die upon the cross but was taken down, survived and was subsequently married.
It was said that he travelled to Europe and established the Merovingian dynasty of kings which ruled France until displaced in 679 AD, by which time the dynasty had become enfeebled.
This extraordinary and highly convoluted story has aroused interest in many quarters from time to time.
It even, some years ago, figured largely in an investigative programme on B.B.C. Television about the priest of a small French town who may, it was thought, have discovered part of the lost treasure of the Templars.
If Philippe knew of — or even suspected — the existence of this story, this would have been adequate reason to abolish a powerful movement whose knowledge of it could give the descendants of the Merovingians excuse to usurp the throne, claiming direct lineage from Christ.
Be this as it may, the church and parish of Temple continued to have a curious history.
The church flourished outside the Bishop's jurisdiction right up until 1774 and the incumbent had the right to marry couples without banns or licence and to bury suicides.
Temple became known as a local Gretna Green and an historian of the time commented, ‘Many a bad marriage bargain is there slubbered up (sic) and grass widows with their fatlings put to lie in and nurse here’.
This last referred to the custom of sending pregnant unmarried girls to ‘lie in’ upon Temple Moor, which was mentioned in the case of Edith Gilpin of Temple in 1777.
Having appeared before the Archdeacon's Court for having a bastard child, she was sentenced to attend church at Blisland, barefoot and bareheaded, to make confession of her sin.
By that time the church at Temple was in decay.
The Parish population, always minimal, had sunk to nil after the last two men had been hung for sheep-stealing.
Now a Victorian church stands amid the barren Moor, a mute reminder of the lonely hamlet's more romantic past.
Yet something of the Parish's strange reputation lingered into the twentieth century; it may still be said of a headstrong woman, ‘send her to Temple Moor’.
‘Fish Seasoning’
Life in Looe today is largely governed by two seasons; the tourist season and the season spent recovering from it and preparing for the next.
Nineteenth century Looe was governed by a set pattern of seasons related to the fishing.
This affected not only the fishermen; all manner of townsfolk would be eagerly pressed into service with the onset of the mackerel or pilchard season.
The earlier part of the year was the crabbing season.
Fishermen would repair to the woods to cut hazel and withies to make or mend their pots, then set out in their small boats to their chosen ‘grounds’ to drop the pots.
In early April the excitement built up as the first shoals of mackerel were expected.
Then it was that the carpenters, masons, tailors and shoemakers would await the cry from the ‘huer’ on the cliff, ‘The mackerel are up’.
At this they would leave their trades and rush to join the fourteen ‘seine’ boats and the fourteen ‘volyers’that followed the seine boats in pursuit of the shoals.
Meanwhile the women would make their more leisurely way to the quays with their ‘gurries’, or hand-barrows.
It was their job to collect the fish that their menfolk landed and to bargain with the’ jowters’who bought the fish.
Each boat had its own huer on the cliff.
The huer's job, after announcing the sighting of the shoal, was to guide his own boat to the fish, signalling East or West by removing his coat and waving it from side to side and, when the boat was on top of the shoal, by placing his coat on his telescope and holding it aloft.
Great rivalry between the boats sometimes led to angry words, or even sea battles, and when smoke over Downderry signalled a shoal along the coast, an exciting race would ensue.
Harvest time ashore coincided with the pilchard season at sea or, as it was said, ‘Corn up in shock, Fish into rock’.
Here again, all manner of tradesmen joined the boats and it was recorded that at the last major haul of pilchard seiners from Looe, in 1866, the master seiner was a tailor!
Now the womens' task was packing the pilchards in ‘bulks’ in the Cellars, laid out and salted.
After twenty-eight days they would be taken out, washed and packed in hogsheads, and pressed for about ten days.
Once pressed, the hogsheads, each weighing four and a quarter hundred-weight, would be sold to the fish merchants for export, mainly to Italy and other Mediterranean countries.
Other pilchards were kept for home consumption.
Each Looe family would stock up, taking up to two thousand pilchards for the Winter.
The ‘Jowters’, too, would purchase some to sell them around in the country districts.
October came and with it the hake, caught with the pilchard nets but some also on hook and line.
With November came the herring season and the boats would sail up the coast to Torbay, then back around Bigbury Bay and Plymouth, although a  few boats continued to fish for pilchards from Looe throughout the Winter.
Then, as Winter storms abated, came the crabbing season and the pattern of the Looe seasons began all over again.
‘Spanish Ships of War at Sea!....’
It was Saturday and a showery, Summer's night four hundred years ago and a South-Westerly breeze blew into the faces of the anxious group of watchers above Whitsand Bay.
Then, as the rain cleared, the moon shone out to reveal what they had feared: one hundred and thirty tall-masted galleons, in perfect crescent formation, sailed slowly but purposefully up the channel coast.
The long dreaded Spanish Armada had arrived.
Cornwall had been at the fore-front of the Spanish wars and indeed, the incident which sparked off the war took place at Fowey and Saltash.
During the uneasy alliance following ‘Bloody Mary's’ marriage into the Spanish royal family, some Spanish ships carrying gold bullion to pay for the upkeep of their garrisons in the Netherlands had taken refuge from French privateers in these two Cornish ports.
While the ships were in port, word came to England that Spanish ships had fired on English ships at San Juan de Ulloa.
The peace was over.
The Spaniards were persuaded to prolong their stay, ostensibly to stay safe from the French, until secret arrangements had been made to seize their treasures.
Six hundred thousand ducats were to be brought ashore at Saltash, while at Fowey the Spanish sailors themselves helped to unload two pinnaces of twenty thousand gold reals, which were carried to Place House before forwarding to London.
Fifty pounds was spent on victualling the Spanish crew during their enforcedly long stay.
Another treasure ship to unload at Saltash was the ‘San Felipe’, an East Indies carrack captured by Drake at Cadiz during his famous raid to ‘singe the King of Spain's beard’.
The townsfolk must have gazed in amazement as there came ashore fine silks, spices, calicoes and jewellery such as none had seen before, including some ‘…other stones of a green colour with spots of red’.
The most important — and alarming — item brought back by Drake from the raid was news of the mighty Armada being constructed by Spain for the invasion of England.
Cornwall and Kent,(close to the Spanish Netherlands), were considered the counties most at risk and bands of ‘home guard’ style levies were mustered.
Peasants and miners were formed into a militia and given several days training, then stationed behind earthworks hurriedly thrown up on beaches, such as at Seaton, which became ‘a handsome fence forbidding  any foe's invasion’, or in the iron age forts.
The historian, Richard Carew, Lord of East Antony and Sheviock was responsible for rallying local musters and personally supervising training.
On July 19th, 1588, it happened — the mighty Armada was sighted off the Scillies.
By the Saturday afternoon it could be watched through the driving rain from Fowey.
By then the English fleet was desperately beating against the wind to leave Plymouth Sound.
The fleet was to include the ‘Francis’ of Fowey, captained by John Rashleigh and paid for jointly by the men of Fowey and Looe, and the ‘John Trelawney’of Saltash and Tavistock.
The English fleet, once at sea, managed to cut across the bows of the Spaniards, then turned to pursue them up the channel.
Meanwhile, the watchers by the beacons above Portwrinkle and at Rame were waiting for the fleet to head inshore to Plymouth.
Here lay Mount Edgcombe House, which the Spanish Admiral, the Duke of Medina-Sidonia, had been promised was to be his.
Two thousand Cornishmen, it had been planned, were to be rushed to the defence of Plymouth, the most likely invasion point.
Instead, the Armada sailed up channel and the watchers at Rame, including Carew, could view the first engagement of battle early that Sunday morning off Plymouth, with the first galleon exploding.
The battle continued up as far as Wight and across to France and Gravelines until, as the world knows, ‘God blew with his wind and they were scattered’.
The Spanish threat was by no means over and in 1590, with Brittany occupied, the Spaniards had a good base to launch attacks on Cornwall.
This they did in 1595, when four galleys landed men at Mousehole and fired the village and Paul Church.
The only invasion of South-East Cornwall came in March, 1597, when Carew, responsible for local defence, was at Bodmin assizes.
One ship came into Cawsand Bay and landed men who ‘…hanged up barrels of matter fit to take fire upon certain doors by which a train should have burnt the houses’.
Cawsand owes its survival to one wide-awake villager.
Disturbed by the noise, he scared off the invaders single-handed armed with a musket and then proceeded to defuse the explosives.
So, again, was a Spanish force put to flight by a Cornish force a fraction of its size.
Boney'll Get You!
Much has been written about the panic fear of invasion in the Armada year.
And many will remember the dread feeling of uncertainty after Dunkirk when German Panzer divisions were expected to land any day.
Yet  few people know about a period of even greater invasion panic which spread during the Napoleonic wars, when a militia of Cornish miners dug defensive trenches to keep the French out of Plymouth.
And even fewer realise how close invasion came to this part of the world.
Concern had grown since 1776, when a newly  independent United States had forged an alliance with France.
Militia and regular troops were soon encamped throughout the Southern Counties and a camp was established at Lodge Park, Liskeard.
The Liskeard historian Allen recalled as a boy visiting the camp and noting the round canvas tents of the red-coats and the oblong marquees for their officers.
Frequent rumours that ‘the French are coming’ created pandemonium amongst them.
Mount Edgecombe and the Rame Peninsula were in the front line and the Reverend Shaw describes, in his tour to the West of England, a visit to Mount Edgecombe ‘where our defensive regiments are encamped’.
He proceeded to Cawsand and reported, ‘Here was the scene of much confusion in the late war, when the French fleet was daily seen to float about this bay meditating destruction to the docks at Plymouth’.
He also noted a ‘genuine piece of intelligence’ from two French soldiers who had indicated the two proposed landing points in Cawsand Bay.
When the French fleet, united with the Spanish, did threaten Cornwall it could not have been at a more perilous time.
The bulk of the English fleet was away across the Atlantic and a mere 39 ships under Sir Charles Hardy were patrolling off the Scillies to guard the Western Approaches.
Such was the position when in August 1779 the French fleet of between 66 and 84 ships bearing up to 30,000 men (estimates vary) appeared off Rame Head and entered Plymouth Sound.
False rumours soon spread that Hardy had suffered a defeat and that no British Ship remained in the home waters to prevent imminent invasion.
The ‘danger’ flag fluttered from Maker Church and invasion fever seized Cornwall.
A ‘tinners militia’, stated as eight hundred strong, assembled at Liskeard and marched to the defence of Plymouth.
Here these Cornish sappers dedicated themselves to the work they knew best, digging defensive trenches and building parapets as well as blowing up houses blocking the range of the gunnery.
Meanwhile, over at Mount Edgecombe, the most favoured guess as the site of invasion, the Earl reluctantly gave permission for one hundred of his finest oaks to be felled as they could have given cover to invading forces.
As panic grew, fantastic prices were paid for coach rides out of the area.
Civilians were fleeing and the Commissioner for the Dockyard sought leave of the Admiralty to destroy all that he could of the yard to prevent it falling into enemy hands.
Fortunately such permission was withheld.
Meanwhile, the cause of this frenzied activity, the French fleet, was pausing indecisively in Cawsand Bay.
Shortage of provisions and sickness of crew caused uncertainty among its officers as to what next to do.
Meanwhile, an easterly wind blew up and the fleet found itself in  difficulties.
Unable to effect a landing, the French satisfied themselves with an attack upon the Cawsand fishing fleet and were then compelled to put back to sea.
Not for the first time could it be said that ‘God blew with his wind’ and kept England and Cornwall safe from foreign invasion.
But the fear lived on.
As in the last war, plans were made for evacuation during 1803–1805.
All Liskeard women and children were to be sent to the moors in case the French again threatened to invade.
And mothers still frightened their children by telling them, ‘if you don't behave, Boney will get you’.
Echoes from Cornwall's Ancient Past
Lent, and the great festival of Easter, have long been celebrated in Cornwall with many ancient customs extending far back beyond the introduction of Christianity, originally intended to celebrate the rebirth of the year.
Lent opened up with ‘Nicky Nan Night’ or ‘Hall Monday’, the day prior to Shrove Tuesday.
On that night the spirits of mischief were supposedly abroad, characterised by small boys who would knock on doors and run away.
They would also remove any personal belongings which were removable and next day place them on prominent display, according to Polperro's Quiller Couch, ‘…to disclose the disgraceful want of vigilance supposed to characterise the owner’.
Why ‘Nicky Nan Night’ is not known: it has been suggested that it is associated with ‘Old Nick’, the Devil, and with the slang word ‘nick’, to steal.
Shrove Tuesday was ‘Colperras day’ and with Shrovetide came the traditional hurling matches.
It has been suggested that the hurling of a silver ball into the air was an ancient rite symbolic of the year's rebirth and the rising of the golden sun into the sky.
Easter Sunday itself was a day of great celebration and merriment, with the dark days of Winter over and the year reborn.
In Polperro it was customary to rise at dawn to ‘See the sun dance’.
Good Friday was the day for a special trek to collect hot cross buns from favoured bakers and this custom has survived within the writer's knowledge, with a trip from Saltash to collect the buns from Kelly Bray,(but by car, not on foot as formerly).
The strangest Easter custom of all was the traditional ceremony of the ‘Duke of Restormel’ at Lostwithiel.
One of the town's freeholders, duly elected, ‘…gaily attired and gallantly mounted, with a sceptre in his hand, a crown on his head and a sword borne before him, and respectfully  attended by all the rest on horseback, rode through the street in solemn state to the Church’.
At the churchyard stile the priest would meet him in ‘reverential pomp’ and conduct him into the Church to attend divine service.
After the church service he was conducted to a house ready prepared, where a regal feast was laid before him.
He sat at the head of the table and was served by kneeling courtiers such as might have attended a real prince.
After the feast, the ‘Duke’ was voluntarily disrobed and resumed the dignity of an ordinary citizen.
The reason behind this is obscure.
It has been suggested that in it is a memory, a hang-over from the days when a true prince ‘reigned’ at Restormel Castle and the peaceful town of Lostwithiel was the busy capital of the Royal Duchy.
‘The Wind's on Bodmin Moor, Brother’
One of the great nineteenth century romantic writers was friend of the gypsies, author of ‘Lavengro’, George Borrow.
Author also of ‘Wild Wales’, he was of Celtic, indeed, staunch Cornish stock.
In his fifties he was to return to the Liskeard area, the ‘land of his fathers’, and make notes for a book on Cornwall; alas, never to be completed.
Borrow's family came from St. Cleer and, he claimed, were gentlefolk who had long lived at Tredinnock and had their own coat of arms.
Certainly the name Borrow appears in Parish records as early as 1690.
Thomas Borrow, the author's father, had been baptised at St. Cleer in 1759 and when of age, apprenticed to a Liskeard maltster named Hambly.
A lively lad in his youth, Thomas Borrow had been a champion wrestler in his time, but his fondness for the martial arts had led to his enforced banishment from the county.
After a fight between lads from Menheniot and Liskeard, at which he had been champion of the victorious Liskeard team, the local constable had intervened.
Carried away by his success young Thomas Borrow had knocked down the officer, then aggravated his offence by twice striking to the ground his master, Mr. Hambly.
Taking precipitously to his heels and hurriedly joining the Coldstream Guards, he eventually settled in East Anglia, where he married and where his literary son George was born in 1803.
George Borrow was to wander many roads before being invited back to his father's home county.
The invitation arose in a dramatic way, the sequel to a tremendous storm at Great Yarmouth where George Borrow was then resident.
During its course Borrow was instrumental in saving at least one man from drowning and, as a result, was mentioned in the Plymouth press.
His relations in the St. Cleer area noticed the name of their now famous  relation and invited him on a visit.
Borrow was pleased to accept the invitation and came down for Christmas, 1853.
Already in his fifties, Borrow was not apparently disconcerted to find the coach meeting the train at Plymouth was full but set out accordingly on foot to St. Cleer, where he was offered hospitality by the Taylor family at Penquite Farm.
Despite an advertisement in his novel, ‘Romany Rye’ for a forthcoming book on Cornwall, none was produced, so we have to depend on his notes for his impressions of the county.
He did record attending the Christmas service at St. Cleer and noted with surprise a fiddle being played in lieu of an organ.
He subsequently set off to explore the county on foot as far as Lands End and his notes show that his book, had it been written, would have contained some far-fetched fantasies — as well as straight inaccuracies.
For example, he refers to Dozmary Pool as being perpetually drained by piskies with leaking shells.
As every true Cornishman knows, it was the wicked Tregeagle who was supposedly punished with this thankless task.
Further West Borrow really let his imagination run riot, writing of the ‘sacrificial rock’ on Carn Brae above Redruth and the gulleys as ‘…outlets for the blood to stream down’.
He was, however, intrigued to talk in Mousehole with those who claimed to have known Dolly Pentreath, the last native speaker of Cornish, who had died in 1778.
He wrote also of an old man who had supposedly been snowed in, in pitch darkness, inside his stone hut, for thirty hours.
On being dug out he claimed to have spent, ‘…the longest night I have ever passed’.
Borrow, as always, delighted to talk to gypsies in their native tongue and was pleased to note, at Tintagel, the name Jennifer in the church register — a corruption of Guinevere.
Between his wanderings he sat in the farmhouse at St. Cleer, where he was considered a definite eccentric by his Cornish relatives.
He reportedly would sit for hours in a depressive silence, to be broken by a harangue on his pet hates, which included sherry drinkers and those by the name of Hambly.
(His blood-pressure must have risen dangerously if he ever met anyone of the name of Hambly who also drank sherry).
On other occasions he would relate long tales of his travels or burst into gypsy songs or ancient Danish ballads.
For his part, he seems to have enjoyed Cornwall, which he described as a walker's paradise and ‘…romantic to a degree’, though he confessed he would not like to live in it.
Of his Cornish relations he said that he found them ‘…most excellent people, but I could not understand more than one half they said’.
A Tale of Three Rivers
Few rivers can compare in scenic beauty with the Tamar as it winds its magic course between Cornwall and England.
It is fitting that the river should, according to legend, be associated with Tamara, a beautiful nymph who in ancient times lived in a cave deep below the earth.
She had heard tales of the sunshine, the flowers and bright colours of the upper world, but her father warned her of the perils that haunted the surface, in particular the giants that in those days walked the wilds of Dartmoor.
Even so she managed to escape from the depths and walked the world, enchanted by what she saw.
It was not long, however, before her father's forebodings were proved to be well founded.
The giants Tavy and Torridge both saw her and each instantly fell spellbound by her beauty.
Across the moors they pursued her until at last, near the North Cornish coast, they caught her and urged her to chose between them.
By then her father had noticed her disappearance, and guessing where she had gone, pursued her.
He found her, with the giants, and urged her to return with him to the depths.
She, still thrilled with the beauty of the world, refused to go until at last, angered, her father used his powers of enchantment to put the giants into a deep sleep and turned his daughter Tamara in to a silver flowing stream.
Tavy was the first to awake.
On finding Tamara gone he went to his father, who dwelt in the heart of Dartmoor and also possessed magical powers.
His father thus turned Tavy also into a stream.
Rushing off across the moors he set off in pursuit of Tamara.
After speeding across the moors and winding through woodland he at last found her and together they flowed slowly as one out into the Hamoaze.
Torridge also, on awaking, went to seek the magician and was also turned into a stream.
He also sped off across Dartmoor in search of Tamara but, totally confused, after running wildly around, set off in the wrong direction, heading north between gently wooded hills to reach the Atlantic.
Thus it is that the Tamar, beautiful as the nymph whose name she bears, winds her way from the rugged north coast between the hills, to be joined by the Tavy, flowing from Dartmoor to join her for the last few miles to the sea, while the luckless Torridge flows ever northward in vain pursuit of Tamara's beauty.
Pelynt, Home of the Famous and Infamous
The peaceful medieval church of Pelynt contains the tombs and memorials to members of various once proud families, some of whom have become renowned in the County and even figured in the Nation's history.
These ancestors have long since been at rest, but during their time around Pelynt there was between them bitter jealousy, treachery and hatred, leading even to murder.
The fortunes of the Trelawney family, which was to include the famed bishop, and the Bullers, to include Sir Redvers Buller of Boer War fame, stemmed largely from the downfall of the Winslade family, long holders of the manor of Tregarrick.
PELYNT CHURCH — Last resting place of the famous and infamous
The Winslade of the time, a staunch traditionalist Catholic, had taken part in the ill-fated ‘Prayer Book Rebellion’ of 1549.
When the King's Commissioners subsequently descended on Cornwall he, with many other land-owners of local renown, was seized and sentenced to be hung, drawn, quartered and have his head boiled with salt and cummin-seed in the hangman's kettle.
He was also ‘attainted’, that is, he lost all his legal rights including that of holding property.
He had, however, already passed his land on to his young son, with a life interest to his wife.
His wife remarried and his rather dismal son, William Winslade, is recorded as having drifted in poverty as an itinerant harpist around the  great houses of Cornwall.
At the time of his mother's death in 1582 he had drifted to France to join other exiled English Catholics at Douai.
His stepfather quickly summoned a lawyer from Liskeard and sold the estate to John Trelawney, Francis Buller and Sir William Mohan.
He is recorded as having said that no way would the Winslades get back their rightful estate save by going to law, ‘…which by poverty they shall never be able to do’.
Thus the self-righteous ‘ nouveau rich ’ Protestants seized the lands of the decadent Catholic ‘ancien régime’.
The Bullers continued to prosper, not always by honest means.
During Elizabeth's reign, one Thomas Achym, member of another local landowning family, sent his steward, Leonard Turner, to renew the tenure of some land leased from the Duchy of Cornwall.
Turner did indeed renew the lease but,(having been suitably bribed beforehand), in the name of Buller.
On learning of this, Achym pursued his steward for three miles to Bury Down, where he did him to death at a place known as Slew Gate.
Achym fled abroad to avoid the consequences of his crime.
Later, letters were written to Sir Robert Cecil, Secretary of State, requesting a pardon and leave to return — by one who had been ‘…forced to forsake my country through the malice of my enemy’.
Francis Buller,(the said enemy), was by now Sheriff of Cornwall.
The Achym family themselves, however, had friends in high places, including the powerful Lord Burghley, and were allowed to return.
The Bullers later removed to the Shillingham estate near Saltash.
They are commemorated by a plaque on the alms-houses at nearby Burraton Combe, given in 1726 by James Buller ‘…whose glorious memory as well as illustrious favours ought not to be forgotten but kept, as tis hoped they will be, in everlasting remembrance.’
Other, better remembered Bullers include Sir George Buller, who fought in the Crimea, Sir Redvers Buller, who fought in the Boer War, and ‘Judge Thumb’(Sir Francis Buller).
It was he who pronounced in open court that a husband was entitled to beat his wife so long as the rod he used was no thicker than his thumb.
Of the other family to benefit from the fall of the Winslades, the Trelawneys went on to fame and fortune, the most renowned member being Bishop Sir Jonathon Trelawney, one of the seven bishops imprisoned by James II and commemorated in Cornwall's unofficial national anthem.
Bishop Trelawney's home, Trelawne, is still standing in the parish, as is the ancient manor of Tregarrick, one time home of the Winslades and now a farm.
Trelawney himself is buried in Pelynt Church and the crozier carried in his funeral procession is also there on view.
Other families there commemorated in monumental form include a striking figure of William Achym in armour and breeches, carved in 1589 and Francis Buller in breeches and ruff, with his wife in a fine gown with gold chain and their children all in a line.
The most intriguing memorial in the church, however, is that of Edward  Trelawney, distant kin of the battling bishop.
His tablet bears the legend:
‘Here lies an honest lawyer, wot ye what
A thing for all the world to wonder at’.
Honesty indeed was in short supply in the lawless days when the great families of Pelynt were establishing themselves.
A ‘Rock’ Performance on Bodmin Moor
High on Bodmin Moor is one of the most fantastic natural curiosities of Cornwall; the weirdly structured pile of rocks known as the Cheesewring.
It is little surprise that legend and lore should have built up around it.
THE  CHEESWRING — the topmost stone turns at cockcrow.
The name is believed to have nothing to do with cheeses.
The ‘cheese’ is a local name for the pulped apples used in cider making and the stones are supposedly similar to the old cider presses until recently a feature of many a Cornish farm.
A natural formation, geologists agree, but one story tells otherwise.
The Cheesewring was the result of the jealousy between the giants, who formerly held dominion over Cornwall, and the ‘invasion’ of saints and their growing influence over the Cornish.
A meeting of the giants was called on Bodmin Moor to discuss the  problem.
St. Tue, whose hermit's cell was nearby, heard of this and he attended the gathering to challenge Ulther, the leader of the giants, to a trial of strength.
If he lost, the saints were to leave Cornwall; and if he won, the giants were to consent to being baptised.
The two champions were to hurl rocks on to a pile,(hurling rocks is a favourite sport of giants, as evidenced in C.S. Lewis's ‘The Silver Chair’).
Twelve rocks, well rounded from previous use, began to mount above each other in a crazy mushroom shape.
The saint was to throw the last and feared lest the rock should dislodge the pile.
He need not have feared; as he threw, a throng of angels seized the stone and carried it, neatly depositing it atop the ‘wring’.
Thus were the Cornish giants vanquished and the pile of stones erected ‘…that men might wonder at it for evermore’.
Perhaps for this reason the topmost stone supposedly retains its own curious powers: it is said that when a cock crows nearby, it turns three times.
There are now few poultry farms within listening distance but, according to a nineteenth century folklorist, ‘In ancient days the cocks must have crowed most lustily to have produced vibrations on either the sensitive rock or the tympanum of man’.
The same gift — of turning thrice when the cock crows — was said to have been bestowed on a rock in Looe harbour which formerly stood on another, elevated rock nearby.
There is, however, no Cornish equivalent to the stone Liver Bird on Merseyside that supposedly flaps its wings whenever a virtuous woman passes underneath.
If there ever were such a bird in Cornwall, perhaps it flew away in despair?
‘Nutcracker Nandie’ and the Black Hole of Saltash
Would-be delinquents in Saltash during most of the Nineteenth century had to face up to the threat of a short, sharp punishment; a visit to the ‘Black Hole’ under the escort of one of the ancient borough's best known characters, ‘Nandie’Keast.
A living legend passed away when Ferdinando Keast died in 1891, aged 87.
He had been Town Sergeant from 1846, and a formidable character he must have been to any offender.
He was frequently called upon to arrest fugitives or criminals on board ship in the Hamoaze, or in the Sound, armed with the silver oar, symbol of his authority, and his oaken truncheon.
In case of opposition he would follow up a tap from his truncheon with a butt from his head, which was reported as ‘generally conclusive’.
His ‘party trick’ was cracking brazil nuts with the back of his head against doors.
Indeed, he believed his skull to be so exceptional that he willed that  after his death it be given to a doctor for examination, but nineteenth century sentiment and regulations prevented this from being carried out.
Among those cowed by ‘Nandie’ were five mutineers whom a frightened ship's captain had clapped in irons.
Fearing nothing, ‘Nandie’ brought them ashore and up Fore Street to the ‘Black Hole’.
The ‘Black Hole’ was the town's lock-up, beneath the Old Town Hall, the site round about that now occupied by the Essa Club,(previously the Saltash Sailing Club).
Its unfortunate nineteenth century occupants varied from those guilty of setting fire to one of her Majesty's ships, embezzling Queen's stores and ‘threatening to stab one Lorrazo Cielcovich’ or breaking a door to the still familiar ‘drunk and disorderly’.
Hardened criminal or drunken sailor, ‘Nandie's’ famous head butt and escort to the ‘Black Hole’was the answer to every problem.
One prisoner, condemned to transportation, found there to be no ship leaving for Botany Bay in the near future.
‘Nandie’.
whose other duties included those of town crier and bill sticker, took him around the town for company and to assist with his bill-posting operations.
The convict suffered from scrofula, known as the ‘King's Evil’, and ‘Nandie’ supposedly introduced him to William Hosking of Burraton, the seventh son of a seventh son, who was famed for curing the disease.
Sadly, the convict's transportation ship bore him to Botany Bay before a cure could be confirmed.
However, on his freedom he returned to Saltash to call on Keast, thank him for his friendship and hospitality and assure him that he had been cured.
(The last sentence of transportation to be pronounced by a Mayor of Saltash was in 1877, upon a ‘ticket of leave’ man guilty of stealing a watch at the town's regatta).
Times were changing.
Keast, who was just able to recall the Jubilee celebrations for George III in 1810 taking place at the Bullers' home at Shillingham, was to officiate at Queen's Victoria's Golden Jubilee celebrations in 1887 at the age of 84.
Described as a colourful character, with his shovel hat and official cloak, he met with an accident on the great day and was tipped from a cart.
He remarked that Royal Jubilees were unlucky for him: at the Georgian celebrations he had been injured by stone throwing.
In 1890 he officially attended the installation of the 46th Mayor in his long career and in that year he also attended the unveiling of the Armada Memorial.
This was to be his last public appearance.
The old man, who had survived three wives and latterly lived ‘above the shop’ in the abandoned Town Hall over the ‘Black Hole’, died on New Year's Day, 1891.
‘Nandie’ had always enjoyed his two-pennyworth of rum, having ‘…always declared, and on several occasions proved, that if he venture three-pennyworth, intoxication resulted’.
At his funeral the grave was found to be too small and his coffin could not be lowered until it was  enlarged.
Local youths soon spread the rumour that ‘Nandie’ refused to go down, but kept popping up for his ‘two penny'orth’of rum’.
After ‘Nandie's’ death the old Guildhall and ‘Black Hole’remained unoccupied and, being found dangerous, were demolished at the turn of the century.
A character and an era of Saltash history had passed away.
Pauper's Grave For A Forgotten Genius
The fine church of Altarnun, the ‘Cathedral of Bodmin Moor’, contains some of the earliest works of one of the most illustrious of Victorian sculptors.
From humble beginnings in Altarnun, Neville Burnard was to haunt the fashionable salons of London before dying in a Cornish workhouse.
Born in 1818, son of a stonemason, Burnard was carving stone by the time he was twelve, making his own crude ‘chisels’ from nails ground down in sand from Dozmary Pool.
A stone in Altarnun churchyard, carved when he was about fourteen, shows a dove flying into the sun's rays and a head of John Wesley over the door of Altarnun's Methodist Chapel was carved when he was eighteen.
By then he had already been ‘discovered’ and had been taken up by two well-known Cornishmen, Sir Charles Lemon of Truro and J.T. Treffrey of Fowey.
Between them they paid for his training and gave him his start in life.
In 1835 the journal of the Royal Cornwall Polytechnic Society was already recording ‘…a youth of 16 who has executed, in an obscure village, without instruction and with rude tools of his own making, a carving in relief of the Laocoon in Delabole slate’.
By the late 1830's, Treffrey, now high  sheriff of Cornwall, was busily extending and renovating Place, his ancestral home in Fowey, by then in a very dilapidated condition., Burnard was employed in carving stone and modelling plaster in the house.
By the age of nineteen the Cornish lad was already in London making plaster reliefs or busts of the rich and famous.
He worked on Gladstone, the future Edward VII,(then aged six), Harriet Beecher Stowe,(of ‘Uncle Tom's Cabin’ fame), and the author Thackeray.
Cornish celebrities of his acquaintance included John Couch Adams, discoverer of the planet Neptune, and Mary Kelynack, renowned as the lady who, at the age of eighty, walked from Newlyn to London and back to see the Great Exhibition of 1851.
By the 1860's, when he was at the height of his fame, tragedy struck as he took increasingly to drink.
His wife left him, he became increasingly  disinterested in his work and he returned to Cornwall as a tramp.
He travelled around the County, staying at various homes where he was apparently always made welcome for the sake of his interesting tales and where he ‘paid’ for his keep by means of pencil sketches of his hosts.
He was to die in Redruth workhouse in 1878.
It is perhaps fitting that he was carried to his pauper's grave by the stonemasons then engaged in restoring Camborne Church.
His works remained in London, in Plymouth, in Truro,(where he carved the Lander statue) and in Sheffield, where his statue of Ebenezer Elliot remained a show piece.
Truro museum also preserves some of the pencil portraits made of his hosts during his pathetic latter days.
Perhaps the best tribute to him comes from Cornish poet Charles Causley, who wrote of Neville Burnard of  Altarnum :
‘…with his finger's bone
Broke syllables of light from the moorstone’.
A Whale of a Story
A news item in 1988 concerning a 590cm. (approximately 19ft.) long pilot whale washed up at Talland Bay recalls other sea mammals washed up on our coastline, one of which apparently qualified for a church burial.
The parish records of St. Martin by Looe Church refer to a seventy foot whale ‘…driven ashore, dead, near Millendreath’ in 1718.
The Looe historian, Bond, related that a townsman who climbed a ladder to cut up the whalemeat fell into the corpse and narrowly escaped death by suffocation.
Other sea monsters washed ashore have proved objects of interest and attraction to visitors at first, but soon becoming so offensive as to render the town of Looe barely inhabitable.
Such was the rorqual whale, 64 feet long with a 12 foot tail, washed ashore in 1879.
An epidemic of measles was subsequently blamed upon the stench from the rotting corpse.
Heavy seas early in the twentieth century washed up a number of whales along Whitsand Bay.
The garrison at Fort Tregantle were eventually obliged to evacuate the fort and camp along the lee side of the hill until the bodies had been removed.
Some may still remember Christmas 1929, when a whale washed ashore on rocks at Looe was cast back into the sea by the townsfolk.
Undiscouraged by its lack of welcome, the corpse returned upon the next tide to Looe Island, where, cut about by the rocks, the grisly spectacle finally came to rest well to the windward of the select Hannafore part of the town.
Indignation grew as the stench became increasingly nauseating and each  local body in turn denied its liability for disposing of several tons of putrefying whalemeat.
Three months passed until Spring arrived and, with it, a hardy body of men sent by the Duchy of Cornwall to hack, blast, burn and bury the remains.
All eventually disappeared except the rorqual's flippers and teeth, for which the Marine Biological Laboratory had put in a request.
These were made into a parcel about six feet long, covered in a tarpaulin and wheeled on a hand cart to Looe Station.
The arriving passengers, viewing the cortège and the tarpaulin-covered, six foot long parcel, paused solemnly and doffed their hats.
It was, perhaps, a fitting tribute to one of Looe's least desirable visitors.
Three Cornish Risings
Each Spring, as Cornwall prepares for its annual, generally welcome, English invasion, times seem far removed from the troubled Tudor days when hastily mustered Cornish armies invaded England in support of various causes, culminating in the Western Rebellion of 1549, when a largely Cornish army  besieged Exeter for five weeks.
There were troubled times generally following the Wars of the Roses and the Cornish in particular, not for the last time, felt that they, a Celtic race with their own language, were treated with increasing indifference by a centralised London Government.
The final straw came when, in 1497, commissioners visited the Duchy to levy taxes to subsidise the Scottish wars, a distant dispute of no interest to the Cornish.
Indignation grew and a persuasive Bodmin attorney, Thomas Flamanck, gathered a band of Cornishmen who assembled, armed largely with farm tools, and marched, that early Summer, on London.
They reached Blackheath, Kent, when they were fallen upon by the army of ten thousand prepared for the Scottish wars.
Though they fought bravely, they were no match for the trained mercenaries.
Two hundred Cornishmen died in battle and the leaders were captured and dragged from the Tower to Tyburn to be hung, drawn and quartered.
Nevertheless, within six months a Cornish army again invaded England.
This time it was headed by the pretender Perkin Warbeck who, in Bodmin, had been proclaimed King Richard IV.
With six thousand Cornishmen he crossed the Tamar and breached the walls of Exeter before being repulsed.
A disheartened army continued towards Taunton where, hearing of the superior army approaching from London, Warbeck slipped away.
The Cornishmen were left to pay the price of rebellion and a high price it was, too.
Commissioners were sent to collect a ‘fine’ from each parish totalling £600; much money from a poor County.
Further troubles, however, were to ferment.
As part of the Reformation, Henry VIII was to order that the English Prayer Book was to replace the Old Latin Liturgy in Church services.
This was especially unwelcome in Cornwall, where Cornish was still generally spoken and English an alien language.
Indeed, Dr. Mooreman, the vicar of Menheniot from 1530, had been the first to teach parishioners the Lord's Prayer and Liturgy in English.
The conservative Cornish, who had not forgotten their previous grievances, had a deep affection for the Latin Liturgy.
The compulsory new Liturgy was the spark that caused to flame the so-called ‘Prayer Book Rebellion’ of 1549.
Violence flared first in Helston, where an angry crowd of about a thousand gathered as William Body, a Commissioner charged with destroying every relic of popery, was desecrating the Church.
The alarmed Body fled but was captured and murdered.
The London Government, sensitive to the disquiet, hastily granted a general pardon, but Cornwall was out for blood.
Led by Humphrey Arundell, a mob gathered in Bodmin and, after a sortie to take St. Michael's Mount, headed for England.
A contingent headed for Plymouth and met their first serious  resistance at Trematon Castle by Saltash, held for the King by Sir Richard Grenville.
Instead of endeavouring to penetrate its ten-foot thick walls, the rebels invited Grenville out to parley.
They then, ‘…not knowing what honesty and far less the word of a soldier imported’, seized him and threatened to kill him if the Castle did not yield.
Thus Trematon fell, its womenfolk were ‘…stripped of their apparel to their very smocks and their fingers broken to pluck away the rings’.
The rebel Cornishmen, joined by sympathetic Devonians, marched on Exeter and laid siege to the City.
Here the Cornish ‘tinners’ contrived an ingenious scheme of tunnelling under the City and laying explosives to bring down the walls.
This could have worked and altered the course of history, had not another miner within the City devised a scheme of counter mines through which water was directed and the gunpowder flooded.
The City was close to surrender when, after five weeks, government troops vanquished the rebels around Aylesbeare.
Even one of the ‘enemy’ admired the ‘valour and stoutness’of the Cornishmen and ‘…never in all the wars he had been in did he know the like’.
Exeter was safe, but reprisals were to follow.
Nine hundred prisoners were slaughtered on the battlefield and as Arundell was escorted from Cornwall to the Tower of London, he saw many a miserable peasant dangling from a crossroads gibbet.
The Provost Marshall sent to Cornwall, Sir Anthony Kingston, relished his task.
He is reported to have invited himself to lunch with the Mayor of  Bodmin, but firstly asked his worship for a gallows to be erected for a hanging.
After a sumptuous repast he asked the Mayor whether the gallows was prepared.
When he answered yes, Kingston ordered, ‘Then up with thee, Mr. Mayor, for thou art the man’.
The King's displeasure with the two counties was marked by the order that all church bells be confiscated.
It was not until after the accession of ‘Bloody Mary’ that Cornish church bells were to ring out in short-lived jubilation.
A Royal and Ancient Shaving Mug
The barren heights of Bodmin Moor now not surprisingly among the most lightly populated areas of Cornwall, were in ancient days the most densely settled.
Free from the forests and swamps of the lowlands they would have been the most healthy as well as the most defensible homesteads for prehistoric man.
Many legends naturally grew around this barren and ancient land and were passed down through generations.
One such tale has an intriguing 19th century tail-piece.
High on the moorland wilds, ancient travellers told of meeting with a mysterious stranger who would offer them a golden goblet of wine.
There was magic behind this goblet as, however much wine the traveller drank, the goblet would never seem to empty.
One such traveller, riding across the moor, met with this stranger and determined to drain the goblet dry.
He drank heavily and deeply, but still wine remained.
Infuriated, he seized the goblet, leapt on his horse and galloped away.
He had gone only a few yards however when the horse hurled him over a precipice to his death.
Of the mysterious stranger and his goblet no more was heard until, perhaps, a strange chance discovery early in the last century.
The 19th century saw a host of amateur  archaeologists many of whom were more in search of treasure than knowledge.
Some finds were made by chance during digging for granite.
It was apparently a group of labourers seeking stone for a new engine house, whose opening of a barrow was witnessed, in his youth, by Mr. J. Harris of Liskeard.
In his old age, memory perhaps somewhat affected by imagination, he wrote his recollections for the ‘Cornish Times’ of 1901.
‘On a fine Spring morning some sixty years ago I saw a crowd of half-nude men digging ruthlessly into the old grave barrow that has stood from time immemorial on the eastern slope of the hill between the traditional Hurlers and that towering rock idol, the Cheesewring.
Tradition, with her thousand tongues, said this barrow was the tomb of a Cornish King or  Roman General, the Arch Druids of the day, an Irish Saint etc; and, moreover, that vast treasures lay burried with the body and that in the early part of the century a golden boat had been found concealed below its surface.
It was the prospect of finding gold that induced these excited men to make such frantic efforts to open out the barrow’.
Within the tomb Mr Harris claimed to have seen uncovered, a human skeleton, a bronze sphere, a bronze sword, a bronze urn and a goblet ‘…of peculiar workmanship quite distinct from Saxon, Roman or Phoenician manufacture, shaped like a modern breakfast cup’.
This would appear to be an eye witness account of the finding of the famous golden ‘Rillaton Cup’.
Another contemporary states:—
‘A small cromlech was discovered by some miners about the year 1837 near the Cheesewring in a barrow or cairn and under it was found a bell-shaped gold cup with a sphere or sceptre.
The cup, which was valued at £30, attracted much notice and was sent to London to be presented to William IV.
An earthen urn and human bones were also found, the former was broken to pieces’.
The subsequent fate of the cup, which appeared to  archaeologists to be of Greek design and bearing ribbing resembling that of one found at Mycenae, is uncertain.
William IV died shortly afterwards and it has been written that, a search being instituted, it was found that that bluff and breezy monarch had been using this unique ancient artifact as a shaving mug!
It subsequently found its way to the Swiss Cottage at Osborne, Queen Victoria's Isle of Wight residence.
The Rillaton Cup is now in the British Museum and a replica in the County Museum at Truro.
The barrow was subsequently restored and is still to be found deep in the moors half a mile North East of the Hurlers.
If you know where to look, that is.
The Beltane Fires of Midsummer
As dusk gradually falls at the end of Mid-summer's Eve a flicker of bonfires links the highest points of Cornwall, from the far West to Kit Hill on the English border.
Those assembled along the hill lines are keeping alive one of the world's most ancient and wide spread fertility rites.
The Mid-summer eve fires have been recorded by Frazer in ‘The Golden Bough’ across Europe from Ireland to Russia, from Norway to Greece, and even spreading in to Moslem North Africa.
In Britain the ‘Beltane’ fires, supposedly named in honour of the sun god Baal, were recorded in the Celtic fringe of Scotland and Wales and were lit earlier, on or around Walpurgis Night, or on May Day.
Cornish historian Doctor Borlase, writing in the eighteenth century, commented on the Druidical significance of ‘the Festival Fires, call'd Bonfires…kindled on the Eve of St John Baptist and St Peter's Day and Midsummer is thence, in the Cornish tongue, call'd Goluan which signifies both light and Rejoicing’.
Later historians have cast doubts on the Druidical practices.
However, it seems clear that the custom is a relic of pre-Christian sun worship, a celebration of the fact of the sun reaching its Zenith and an offering as an earnest for the promise of a good harvest.
With the spread of Christianity the Beltane fires, like so many pagan practices, were ‘Christianised’ and were now lit to celebrate the feast of St John.
Again Dr Borlase is considered to have erred on the side of romance and the Cornish term for mid-summer, ‘golowan’, is now believed to be derived from ‘gol Jowan’, the feast of John.
In the far west all the witches of West Cornwall supposedly met at Zennor and re-pledged their Satanic allegiance around the dying embers.
In more worldly Penzance the Mayor would, each Mid-summer's eve, issue a proclamation that no bonfires were to be lit, knowing full well that, as evening fell crowds of youths would nonetheless throng the streets flourishing torches, rolling tar barrels and lighting fires at every town and village around Mounts Bay.
In East Cornwall the lighting of the Summer solstice fire was ‘from time immemorial’ a feature of the Pelynt Fair at which the village mock Mayor would be treated with great ceremony at the village's two Inns before being unceremoniously drenched with muddy water at Old Shute Pond.
Polperro's festivities fell five days later at St Peter's Fair, and Quiller Couch beautifully described how a pile of tar barrels and wood would be built up on the beach for the entire village to gather around and see it lighted.
‘The fire blazes up and men and boys dance merrily round it and keep the sport till the fire burns low enough, when they venturously leap through the flames’.
The next day the fair proper would begin with stalls around the quayside, strolling musicians, jugglers, side shows, wrestling and boat racing.
Again a mock Mayor would be chosen, ‘generally some half witted or drunken fellow who, tricked out in tinsel finery,’ promenaded through the village in his chariot —’some jowster's huckster's cart dressed with green boughs’.
At each ale house he would pause to sample the brew and give a speech promising shorter working hours, better pay, and free beer during his mayoralty.
Again the ceremony frequently ended by his attendants ‘wheeling the Mayor in his chariot with some impetus into the tide’.
The ‘chain of fire’ and the  attendant customs largely died out through the l9th Century, some few lingering into the 20th.
The stern Quaker historian of Liskeard, Allen, wrote in the 1850's that ‘all these idle, absurd  practices were abandoned about the same time, early in the present century’.
Yet, when the Old Cornwall Society revived the custom in 1929, the fire at St Ives was lit by ‘Rechard John’ Hoall of Hellesvean who himself proudly recalled having taken part in lighting the midsummer beacons of former days and seeing the huge blazes in the streets of Penzance.
The fires that flicker across the country each June are now a more sober reflection of the  junketings of old.
Herbs are cast into the fire by the Lady of the Flowers in lieu of what may have been gory sacrifices by our sun-worshipping ancestors.
Times change; the magic of those last lingering minutes of twilight on one of the longest days of the year, still remains.
Tragic Lovers of Castle Dore
Could one of the great medieval romances, which inspired a Wagnerian opera, as well as the Arthurian legend of chivalry, romance and treachery, both have their roots in the rolling hills between Fowey and Lostwithiel?
Certainly one of the ancient routes from Ireland and Wales to the continent of Europe crossed Cornwall and followed more or less what is now the B3269 road which passes the Iron Age fort of Castle Dore, for many years associated with the tragic love story of Tristan and Iseult.
The fort is believed to have been constructed about four centuries before Christ by an Iron Age Celtic society.
Signs are that it fell into disuse during the period after the Romans had left and legendary Celtic leaders, such as Arthur, were endeavouring to maintain civilised standards against waves of barbarian invaders.
Excavation suggest that before this, Castle Dore was the centre of a large community made wealthy by the trade in tin and iron, as well as busying themselves with agriculture.
It has been suggested that there was here a large wooden palace with a chapel and attendant out-buildings.
The chieftains' domain might have been delineated by the ‘Giant's Hedge’, apparently a defensive barrier constructed between the Fowey and Looe rivers.
The tale of Tristan and Iseult refers to King Mark of Cornwall as Tristan's uncle, and by Castle Dore, in former times, stood a seven foot high inscribed stone.
Much of the inscription has worn with time but still clearly decipherable are the words, inscribed in Latin, ‘Here lies the son of Cunomorus’; King Mark's full name is given in ancient accounts as Marcus Cunomorous.
The stone was later removed to the gates of Menabilly, the Rashleigh home, occupied for many years by  Daphné du Maurier.
King Mark's palace, to which Tristan returned with the King's prospective bride Iseult, is named by the twelfth century Norman writer  Beroul as Lancien.
This seems very close to the name of the former manor of Lantyan, still the name of woodlands and a farmstead beside the River Fowey below Castle Dore.
In the legend Tristan is condemned to death by his uncle Mark for having fallen in love with Iseult, but on his way to his death is allowed to pause and pray at a wayside chapel.
From here he escapes and leaps down a cliff onto a beach.
The scene of this has been identified as Chapel Point near Mevagissey.
However, the chapel of St. Catherine, formerly on the site since occupied by St. Catherine's Castle, Fowey, would seem a probable alternative.
The hamlet of Castle, a mile South of Lostwithiel, has also been suggested as the site of the palace from which Iseult watched for her Tristan across what were then tidal waters but is now a small stream.
If so, the beautiful small church of St. Sampson at Golant would be that at which King Mark worshipped and to which Iseult presented her best dress, to be exhibited on feast days long after her death.
It could even be that one of the worn words on the aforementioned standing stone was ‘Drustans’, another name for Tristan and that the stone marked the place where Mark ordered the lovers to be buried together.
But this would mean that Tristan was the son of King Mark, not the nephew as the legend would have us believe.
Could Castle Dore even challenge Tintagel as being at the root of the Arthurian legends?
One Cornish historian at least believed that the name of the tenement Car Hurles, by Castle Dore, is a link with the ancient castle of Gorlais, the Celtic prince wedded to Igraine.
Uther Pendragon's lust for Igraine, his murder of Gorlais, his seduction of Igraine and her subsequent giving birth to Arthur form the basis of the Arthurian legend!
The stories of Tristan and Iseult and of King Arthur and his knights are inextricably linked together in muddled and often contradictory legend.
However, there is enough solid evidence to lead us to believe that the stories which gave inspiration to medieval balladeers and to Wagner in his sensuous love music,(including his well-known Liebestod), were based on events of long ago beside the now peaceful Fowey River.
The Resurrection of Bessie Lee
A tale of when Saltash was a busy riverside fishing town and, so it was said, Saltash lads and maidens were noted everywhere for their smart trick of turning their hand to everything, including fishing, gardening, boat building, oyster dredging and pulling at the regatta for prizes, is that of boatswain's mate Charles Hoskins and his sweetheart, Bessie Lee.
The story was supposedly told by Charley's friend, Bill Bellaser and was  related at the turn of the century in ‘Stories, Lyrics and Legends of the West Country’ by Mary Walsh.
Charley Hoskins had been trained as a blacksmith but, like so many Saltash boys, had his heart set on the sea and it was when he had joined the Royal Navy that he met Ben Bellaser.
Charley had lived in Saltash next to the Lee family, who had a fleet of small boats and made their living by carrying country produce over the river to the rapidly growing Three Towns.
(Plymouth, Devonport and Stonehouse.)
They had four sons and a daughter, Bessie Lee, who had inherited the beauty of her grandmother.
Grandmother, still living, though a good age, had been a Mademoiselle Touzeau and a refugee from the French revolution.
Young Bessie had been educated and did not wish to follow her mother's trade, selling pickle-cocks, dabs and oysters around Devonport.
It was after a tiff, when Charley went to sea, that she found employment in Devonport's ‘Royal Hotel’.
It was on a Sunday in July, 1849, that Charley first introduced his pal Ben to his loved one.
At that time cholera was raging through the unhealthy streets of the Three Towns — indeed, disease stalked the streets through much of the nineteenth century.
Many of the populace had fled the town by the time when, on one hot Summer's day, Ben and Charley purchased some cheap fruit in Devonport Market, unaware that the town crier had already warned off buying it.
They took it with them to the ‘Royal’ and called on Bessie.
At the hotel a tearful maid told the sailor pair the tragic news that Bessie had been carried off to the cholera hospital.
Off they hastened, to be told that no living patient in the hospital had the name of Bessie Lee, but a young girl answering her description had died half an hour before.
It was a mournful pair that hired a boat to take them to Saltash and acquaint the Lee family of the tragedy.
As expected, the whole family was devastated at the news and they all hastened back to Devonport in the ‘Bessie’, the boat launched by the deceased daughter and renowned for her speed throughout the length of the Tamar.
When they reached the Ferry Beach at New Passage they made all speed to the hospital and to the ‘dead house’, which held seven coffins.
As Mrs Lee opened the fourth one she cried out, recognising her daughter's face.
As her cry rent the air, Mr Lee gazed at his daughter's eyes and murmured, ‘I fancied I saw them tremble’.
Mrs Lee felt the body, which was still warm.
She had with her some French brandy, purchased from a Cawsand smuggler's wife; she rubbed this on the inert face of the girl, then forced a little into her mouth.
There was no doubt now: there were definite signs of life.
A quick discussion and it was agreed; awakening to find herself in a coffin in that house of death could cause the poor girl to really die of fright.
Her body was lifted from the coffin and carried through the dusk across the open fields that then came up to the hospital, to Ferry Beach.
It was dark as they sailed back up river to Lees' wharf.
‘There was no Albert Bridge then,’ recalled Ben Bellaser, ‘to span the river and ride over the ancient town with its oppressive grandeur, and the moon was rising and lighting up the shore and houses as they rose one over the other in terrace fashion against the dark blue starry sky’.
The tale soon ran round Devonport — of a dead body carried across country by three men and a woman.
However, back in Saltash Bessie soon recovered and forgot what little she had remembered of her horrific experience.
Six weeks later she married Charley Hoskins one Sunday morning.
Ben Bellaser was best man, of course, ‘…and had first kiss of the fair bride I helped to save from the grave’.
Versatile Looe Engineer (Retired) Designs Banjo
The visitor to, or resident of, Looe who strolls along Banjo Pier, drives round to Hannafore Point, or rides the railway to Liskeard has, for these feats of engineering skill, to thank a Cornishman who came to the town in retirement in 1890.
Joseph Thomas, engineer, was born in Roche and came to Looe to retire after a distinguished career.
This had included work on docks in London and New York, on canals in Arizona, and railways in Hungary and India.
Nearer at hand he had been involved in the building of forts at Bovisand and Crownhill.
He was clearly not content to sink into idle retirement but was soon full of schemes to open up Hannafore, then reachable only by a path that climbed steeply over a down that fell sharply to the Looe river in a precipitous cliff.
In 1891 he began making plans for a road and in 1893 he commenced work.
It was a mammoth undertaking involving digging into the side of a sheer cliff face, much of it by hand since the proximity of buildings made the use of explosives hazardous.
At other points the road was built out over the river, at one point over the top of former pilchard cellars, still to be seen.
The turrets above were purely ornamental but had guns installed during wartime.
Thousands attended the grand opening in July 1895.
The High Sheriff of Cornwall, Sir John Trelawney, opened an ornamental gate with a silver key and a free tea was laid on for the children of the surrounding parishes.
The  memorable day also included the launching of a new lifeboat, the ‘Boys' Own No 1’, funded by the readership of the ‘Boys' Own Paper’.
The momentous day ended with fireworks.
Not content with this triumph, Joseph Thomas turned his attention to the groyne at the mouth of the harbour which attempted, not very successfully, to prevent sand from the beach silting up the harbour mouth.
Thomas decided that the solution was a rounded end to the groyne.
Some doubting townsfolk had their reservations, so Thomas offered that if it did not have the desired effect he would forego his fee.
The pier was built; intended to be named after an admiral of the time it was quickly dubbed ‘the Banjo Pier’ by the locals and the Banjo Pier it remains.
The last, and possibly greatest, achievement of Joseph Thomas was the linking of the Liskeard and Looe railway with the Great Western main line.
Many solutions had been proposed including an Alpine style rack railway.
Joseph Thomas engineered the line that winds in nearly a complete circle to cover two miles and end up three quarters of a mile from its start.
Thus he was to earn the gratitude of those who, on missing the Looe train at Liskeard, have hurried down the hill to catch up with it at Coombe Junction.
Commenced in 1898 the line took three years to build and finally was opened in May 1901.
The ‘Cornish Times’ reported that ‘the twin towns of East and West Looe gave themselves up to celebrating the auspicious event with popular rejoicing.
The principal portions of East Looe were gaily decorated’.
A band led a procession, which included four hundred schoolchildren, through the streets and a public lunch was held on East Looe Quay.
The day was not without its hitches.
On the return journey up the incline from Coombe the engine ran out of steam, causing passengers for Plymouth to miss their last connection.
As a relief engine was hastily summoned the trainload of passengers were merrily singing ‘We shan't get home til morning’.
They had no cause to fear; a special train to Plymouth was chartered.
The Thomas family were no strangers to Looe.
It was Joseph Thomas' father who, as County Surveyor, was largely responsible for the present Looe Bridge.
The previous medieval bridge, built in the early fifteenth century, had fifteen arches, all of a different design.
Its width varied between 10′ 3″ and 6′ 8″.
It had originally been built from the proceeds of the sale of indulgences and originally had on it a chapel to St. Anne.
First licensed by Bishop Lacey of Exeter in 1436 it was used for special intercession by barren women seeking fertility.
Full of character the bridge may have been but woefully inadequate for the increasing traffic of the busy port and in 1856 the new bridge was opened.
Mr Thomas Senior was also responsible for the ‘New’ road to Polperro.
Looe — and its visitors — have much by which to remember the Thomases, senior and junior, and Joseph Thomas was well deserving of the silver bowl donated to him on the opening of his railway link in 1 901.
He died later that year having certainly left his mark upon the town he had adopted for his ‘retirement’.
Peace and War in Saltash
It began, in Saltash as elsewhere, with patriotic fervour and paranoic anti-Hun feeling and spy mania.
It soon developed into disillusion as the town's death toll grew and ended in jubilant relief not unmixed with sorrow at the memory of towns-folk who would not return.
The history of Saltash through the Great War of 1914–18 was echoed by that of towns and cities throughout the country.
Turn of the Century Saltash was largely the epitome of Victorian respectability where ‘many neat and tasteful villas and cottages have been built on the most interesting and commanding sites’.
A l9th Century Directory describes Port View, ‘Where many good houses have been erected, is regarded as one of the most beautiful localities in the West of England’.
Saltash's service tradition added to its patriotism.
Empire Day in the last years before the Great War was described as celebrated with a procession led by the Duke of Cornwall's Light Infantry through gaily decorated streets.
The civic procession followed, leading the school children and concluded by the band of the Mount Edgecombe training ship.
At the Recreation field the Union Jack was unfurled, patriotic songs sung, dancing displays given and tea and cake dispensed to children and the training ship boys..
The Edwardian era of peace, pomp and prosperity (at least for some) seemed destined to last forever.
War clouds were soon to gather.
In the glorious Summer of 1914 military guards were to be stationed at Saltash Pier and other landing places ‘as a precaution’.
The first days of the war saw the Saltash Territorials ordered to break  up camp at Exeter and proceed to Falmouth.
At home the outbreak of hostilities was marked by the ferry service being terminated at 8.00pm, two hours early.
Spy fever gripped the country and a couple seen sketching the Royal Albert Bridge were, as a result of information given by a boy scout to a sergeant of the Royal Scots, arrested in the nearby tea gardens and escorted to Devonport by the police.
The troops, expecting to be ‘home by Christmas’ after a few gallant cavalry charges, held an impressive open air church parade in the  Recreation Field and in late August the town gave a lively send off to a detachment of the ‘Kings Own’.
The band played ‘Auld Lang Syne’ and cheers and counter cheers were given as the ferry pulled into midstream….
By late September a letter from the front recorded, ‘…of the chaps that were with us in Saltash, nearly all are killed.
All my company Officers are out but one’.
For those who stayed behind there were still impressive spectacles.
In October the Hamoaze was filled with ships bearing the first contingent of Canadians heading for the front.
‘From Bull Point to North Corner was a double tier of huge steamers.
During the day hundreds of people took a trip around the harbour in Saltash steamers’.
Local admiration of ‘gallant little Belgium’ led to the ‘adoption’of a refugee family, parents and four children, who arrived at Liskeard totally bewildered and unable to speak any language other than Flemish.
Excitement was rife in Spring 1915 with the arrival at Saltash of the Steam Collier ‘Thordis’.
She had achieved national fame on her course down channel by ramming a German submarine which had attacked her.
Local patriotism resulted in the formation of Saltash's Volunteer Company.
Eighty men joined on its formation in April 1915.
One recorded of its first drill, ‘if only the Kaiser could have seen it it would have made his Imperial Hunship feel frightfully sick’.
The war dragged on, making itself felt in the town.
In February 1916 a tribunal met in Saltash Guild Hall to consider two claims for exemption from compulsory military service.
The Borough Council, at a special meeting, decided to entirely discontinue public lighting and fines were imposed at the petty sessions for failing to obscure indoor lights.
School children were encouraged, in June 1917, to support the war effort by collecting tufts of sheep wool from hedges and thorns, while in September of that year Field Marshal French visited the town to inspect the troops camped at Wearde.
Disillusion grew as the list of names which were destined to be graven into the monument at Alexandra Square slowly grew.
Small wonder that the Armistice in November 1918 was noisily celebrated with joyful relief.
Ships in the Harbour sounded their sirens, peals of bells rang out and bunting was unfurled.
‘The Waterside especially soon became en fete, festoons of evergreens, flags and flowers being placed across the street.’
Peace and normality returned with the only outward memory of the Great War to end all wars, that memorial with its 60 names — to be joined within three decades by 88 more.
‘A Cure for the Common Scold’
The Magistrates sitting at the new Court buildings in Liskeard, dealing mainly with motoring offences, together with  drunkenness and minor public order offences, are continuing a long standing tradition of ‘grass roots’ justice.
The offences dealt with, however, have changed over the centuries, as shown by the seventeenth century records of the borough of West Looe.
Here the charges are more likely to range from scolding wives and profaning the sabbath to removing top-soil from the Common.
Scolding wives seem to have predominated, so much so that in 1673 a jury demanded that the borough provide a cage and ducking-stool for the punishment of scolds and ‘lewd’ women.
The advice was heeded; records of 1676 show payment to ‘…
William Boarden for timber and making ye coking stool — 14s. 11d’.
The offending wife would be clamped into the chair, which was on wheels, then propelled off the quay into the estuary where — temporarily at least— she might be silenced, to the relief of the husband and the general hilarity of all save the wife herself.
Various charges recorded include ‘Jane Sweet, wife of William Sweet, for a common skoulde’.
One such charge appears to have caused an aftermath.
In 1642 Jane Walsh and Elizabeth Piper were charged for scolding.
Later Elizabeth Piper was to appear again, charged with an assault on Jane Walsh.
The name Piper appears again in 1649, when a John Piper and his wife Marjory were both charged with scolding.
John Piper was, at the time, a constable, but was to be discharged from his duties at the following session.
The last time that a scolds' cage is recorded as being in use was when two Looe ladies, Hannah Wit and Bessy Niles, both being of ‘fluent tongue’ and having, over some dispute ‘exerted their oratory on each other’, at last thought it prudent to leave the matter in dispute to be settled by the mayor.
After hearing the two women for a while, Mayor John Church summoned the Looe town constable, at which each woman presumed the other was to be suitably punished for her infamy.
Instead, the Mayor ordered the constable, ‘Take these women to the cage and keep them til they have settled their dispute’.
Primitive as it may have been, the scolds' cage had its desired effect.
After a few hours in there the two women became ‘as quiet and inoffensive beings, as ever breathed’.
Although the cage remained in 1823, Bond reported ‘to the credit of the sex it has not been used of late years’.
The scolds' cage was an unusual punishment — in Cornwall at least— although it was reported that ‘the ladies of Penzance were formerly privileged with the like comparatively elegant mode of punishment, a cage’.
The more general means of quietening a ‘contentious woman’ was the tri-bucket, or ducking stool.
Lostwithiel too dealt with its scolds by means of the ducking stool near the mill by Cotter Lake, close to the present railway station.
Liskeard had its pillory and the town's records during the reign of Charles 1st shown for 1635, ‘paid for amending the pillory and cage, 2s.8d’.
Those for 1650 include ‘for whipping Alice Piper 6d, for walling under the pillory 2d’.
Lord Byron noted the treatment of recalcitrant women in 19th Century Penzance; ‘The women (blessed be the Corporation therefore!) are flogged at the Cart's tail when they pick and steal, as happened to one of the fair sex yesterday noon.
She was pertinacious in her behaviour and damned the mayor’.
A part of the 17th Century West Looe constable's duty (as now) was to prevent Saturday night merry-making from getting out of hand.
As such, they had a duty to enter each ale-house on a Saturday night as well as to ensure that Sunday was treated by townsfolk with due sobriety.
They appear to have not infrequently fallen short of their duties.
In 1674 Constables Henry Hopkins and Charles Badcock were censured for ‘…not executing their office of Saturday nights in visiting the Ale Houses for good order and on Sabbath Days’.
Again in 1699, criticism was levied of, ‘…the Mayor and Constables for not punishing of wicked and lazy persons, both old and young, who absent themselves from the service of God and profane the Sabbath Day’.
Some did fall foul of the constables on a Saturday night.
In 1653 William Hill was in trouble for, ‘…suffering disorder in his house to the great disturbance of his neighbours’.
Also that year trouble came to Mr Nicholas Foote for being ‘…a common ale-house haunter’.
‘Thomas White, a tippler, for keeping shuffle board play’ came before the Court during the stern days of the Commonwealth, while in 1666 were charged, ‘John Parson, James his son, Stephen Parker and Sidney Randall for not going to church on the Lord's day’.
One frequent source of judicial comment was commoners' rights over the Downs, frequently abused it would seem.
In 1642 Eliza Wood was charged with keeping pigs on the common.
Other forbidden animals found there included sheep, goats and geese.
Some commoners abused their rights by turning visitors' animals onto the common.
Marion Harvie, a tippler, was charged in 1646 for turning a guest's horse on the Down.
The offence was compounded when one Anthony Hurke released the animal from where it had been impounded and turned it back to the Down and was himself fined.
Frequently in trouble were ‘foreigners’ from East Looe who would cross the river to steal soil from the common; presumably it had a good name for fertility.
Typical was the case of John Welshman of East Looe, charged in 1686 for ‘sending his servant with his horse to fetch earth from the Down without licence’.
Also ‘tried on’ was encroaching on and hedging in parcels of common land and none could have offended more often than one Mephibosheth  White.
Charged four times with the offence in between 1640 and 1652, he came before the Court yet again in 1691 for keeping on the Downs far more than his ‘stent’ or allotted number of animals.
The laws affecting the common land were supervised by Down Drivers, themselves not immune from prosecution.
In 1653 they were fined for ‘…not impounding the hogs which have turned up in divers places’.
At the turn of the next century one negligent Down Driver, John Serle, was especially harshly treated.
In 1700 he was dismissed from his duties as Down Driver, lost the privileges of a free burgess and was fined the then considerable sum of £5.00.
Then, as now, it would appear that the assumption of responsibilities and power, however small, was not without its dangers.
An Ancient Lifeline of Commerce
It begins as a metalled road but soon  develops into a deep ‘green lane’ running from beside the church, over the downland, past an iron-age fort before plunging through deep woodland to a forgotten quay beside one of Cornwall's loveliest rivers.
It is hard to recall that this peaceful pathway, less than a mile long, was once an important means of communication and is a vital link with part of Cornish history.
The lane, known as George's Lane, runs from Sheviock church to George's Quay on the River Lynher.
This forgotten highway once formed part of an important link between Saltash, Crafthole and the sea.
Sheviock was then a typical Cornish church-town, isolated from the newer and busier settlement of Crafthole, which held a regular fair and was described as ‘…a poor village but a much frequented thoroughfare’.
Crafthole was on one of the main routes into Cornwall and the same writer Carew, recorded that it was customary for those passing through to make fun of the village ladies for their somewhat notorious lack of morals.
The ladies of the village would retaliate with the use of buckets of ‘slops’, kept for such a purpose and the wary traveller, having had his joke, had to ‘…plead his heels the faster’.
Since the opening of the Torpoint turnpike, around 1820, it has been Sheviock that now stands on the main thoroughfare.
The village toll-house still remains, though it is no longer necessary for local farmers as in former days to drive their cattle through fields to avoid paying the toll.
The thirsty Sheviock villager must today climb the steep lane to Crafthole to assuage his,(or her), thirst at the ‘Finnygook’.
For this he has to thank — or curse — Mr Glanville, a nineteenth century vicar of Sheviock.
Before his time there was a flourishing inn in Sheviock; the ‘Carew Arms’.
Too flourishing, indeed, for the vicar, who objected to the time his bell-ringers sat drinking ale.
He accordingly bought the pub and closed it down.
In former times George's Lane, starting close by the church, toll-house and former inn and running down to the river, was the village's main link with the outside world and the river Lynher the main artery for trade and industry.
Stone from local quarries, bricks from Sheviock brickworks and all local agricultural produce would find its way down George's Lane to the barges which plied the estuaries.
In exchange, limestone to fertilise the fields, all coal and other industrial products required by the agricultural community would find their way back upstream and up the lane to the village.
There was formerly a ford across to Erth Barton near Saltash, which can still be defined at low tide, and probably also a ferry.
Certainly the Bond family, of fourteenth century Erth Barton, religiously rowed across to George's Quay each Sunday to attend church at Sheviock, where they had their own pew.
A more interesting and illicit trade followed this route — smuggling!
Contraband brandy landed around Portwrinkle could be hidden awhile in Sheviock Woods before being ferried across the Lynher to Erth and on to Saltash.
There are various smuggling tales about Sheviock.
One relates how eight men from St. Stephens by Saltash crossed the river to collect their kegs from Sheviock Woods, when they were surprised by Shovel, the local exciseman, who demanded the kegs ‘…in the King's name’.
One of the men, however, easily held down the exciseman while the others made off with the booty.
On seeing them escape, Shovel requested that he be shot with his own pistol, rather than return in disgrace.
The smugglers refused to do this, insisting that they had no personal quarrel with him and would each go his own way.
Smugglers' caves around Shillingham and Elm Gate on the Saltash side still supposedly exist, one being found by a cobbler who lived in the cottage above one and noticed an echo when nailing the boots.
The smugglers have gone, the last major encounter being in 1831, when six coastguards armed with muskets surprised about forty smugglers at Whitsands, only one of whom was caught while heading for Sheviock.
More legitimate traffic lingered into the twentieth century with the market boats, motorised in later days, continuing to collect fruit and vegetable produce and passengers until the 1930s.
Since then the road has born all the traffic; George's Lane and Quay have been allowed to overgrow and become a peaceful and unspoilt backwater, home of the curlew and heron.
Sturdy and Bold — but Crafty!
(Some early tourist views of Cornishmen)
The tourists whose cars clog the roads into Cornwall each Summer Saturday know pretty much what to expect of Cornwall and the Cornish.
To judge by the number who return each year, most enjoy the welcome and hospitality that Cornwall offers.
Earlier visitors, a mere two or three centuries ago, knew less of what to expect.
Cornwall was then truly the ‘ultima thule’, the limits of civilisation — or beyond, and indeed many wrote of the Cornish as of a barbaric tribe and treated any elements of civilised behaviour with surprised condescension.
Daniel (’ Robinson Crusoe’) Defoe, after reaching Saltash, which he found to be in a state of decay, and travelling to Liskeard, which was more to his taste, wrote, ‘In the neighbourhood of these towns are many pleasant seats of the Cornish gentry…they are the most sociable, generous and to one another the kindest neighbours that are to be found’.
This generous view was endorsed by the Reverend Shaw in 1788; ‘All ranks in this County are very sociable, generous and kind to each other’.
A less favourable note was added by Lady Fanshawe, who declared that the Cornish were, ‘…hospitable to their neighbours, but they are of a crafty and censorious nature, as most are so far from London’.
One traveller at least came with no great expectations.
On crossing the border in 1808, a Mr Warner, ‘…bade adieu to all the features of the picturesque and quitted the entertainments of taste for the gratification of dry curiosity’.
On leaving the County, he considered, in stark contrast to most of today's visitors, that Cornwall could, ‘…offer no claim to the praise of the picturesque or beautiful’.
He did have good words to say for its menfolk; ‘…sturdy and bold, honest and sagacious’.
The nineteenth century novelist Wilkie Collins was none too struck with the people of Liskeard, describing ‘…misanthropical-looking shopkeepers, clad in rusty black, standing at their doors to gaze on the solitude around them.
Such samples of the population as we accidently encountered were not promising.
We were unlucky enough to remark, in the course of two streets, a nonagenarian old woman with a false nose and an idiot shaking from the palsy’.
Nor was he much impressed at the Liskeard inns of the times, or at least one: ‘…a tavern of despair frowned amid congenial desolation’.
It is best, perhaps, not to speculate whether the hostelry still exists in which he discovered ‘…a low-spirited little man sitting at an empty ‘bar’ and hiding himself, as it were, from all mortal inspection behind the full sheet of a dirty provincial newspaper.
Doleful was our petition to this secluded publican for shelter and food, and doubly doleful was his answer to our appeal’.
It could only get worse for poor Mr Collins as room and meal  materialised, but at least he acknowledged of the Cornish in general that they had, ‘no propensity to jeer at strangers’.
But perhaps the most kindly and satisfying compliment to the Cornish was paid by one of the earliest tourists, John Taylor, in 1649…
‘Cornwall is the Cornucopia, the compleate and repleate Horne of Abundence, for high churlish Hills and affable courteous people: they are loving to requite a kindness, placable to remit a wrong, and hardy to retort injuries; the country hath its share of huge stones, mighty rocks, noble, free Gentlemen, bountiful housekeepers, strong and stout men…handsome, beautiful women and (for all that I know) there is not one Cornish Cuckold to be found in the whole county.
In brief they are in a most plentiful manner happy in the abundance of right and left hand blessing’.