

Overloading the Engine, 1945–79
Today our image of government is more that of the sorcerer's apprentice.
The waters rise.
The apprentice rushes about with his bucket.
And none of us knows when, or whether, the magician will come home.
Professor Anthony King, 1975
I have…often been worried that we are imposing more and more on a system of collective ministerial decision-taking that was designed for quite a different era.
Lord Hunt of Tanworth, ex-Cabinet Secretary 1983
The Cabinet is not a place where decisions can be formulated.
David Howell, ex-Cabinet Minister, Thatcher Administration, 1985
It's amazingly difficult to discuss anything serious in a group of twenty-two, twenty-three men and women.
Sir Frank Cooper, ex-Permanent Secretary, 1985
The general calibre of ministers is normally low.
Their irrelevant experience, coupled with the impossible burdens of office, have contributed to thirty years of policy failure.
Sir John Hoskyns, ex-Head of Mrs Thatcher's Policy Unit, 1983
There are dangers involved in the writing of contemporary history quite apart from the standard objection that distance and hard evidence are required if a true perspective is to be gained.
Hindsight throws a retrospective shadow over people and events which distort light and shade as they were actually perceived at the time.
The period of the Attlee governments of 1945–51 was particularly prone to retrospective retouching by the ideologically driven in the mid-1980s, as Paul Addison noted in the Preface to the second of his two outstanding studies of the 1940s:
When the Marxist Left and the radical Right emerged in the 1970s there was one point on which they were agreed: that many of the seeds of decline were planted in the immediate post-war years.
According to the Marxist Left, this was because socialism and the class struggle were betrayed.
According to the radical Right, it was because free market forces had been stultified by the welfare state and the managed economy….
I do not believe that either of these theories is plausible as a reading of postwar history or workable as a means of governing Britain….
Yet each theory illuminated a disturbing corner of reality neglected by conventional opinion.
The Marxist Left drew attention to the fact that the sources of industrial conflict were just as explosive as ever.
The radical Right drew attention to the fact that the public sector sheltered powerful vested interests whose claims for greater resources were theoretically boundless.
These were truths and remain so in spite of the fallacious ideological baggage with which they are mixed up.
Neither problem reached critical proportions between 1945 and 1951, but with hindsight they cast a shadow over the period.
Identical pitfalls await the student of what political scientists call the ‘overload’ problem in government when he or she attempts to read into the past harbingers of difficulties which subsequently became acute.
In fact, this is a double-headed danger.
For example, the period 1945–51 has come to acquire a retrospective glow which it may not altogether deserve.
Anthony King, in his seminal article on overload, published in 1975, commented on ‘the increasing difficulty that both major political parties seem to have in carrying out their election manifestos’ and cast his mind back thirty years to find the standard from which subsequent administrations had fallen: ‘The fit between what the Labour Party said it would do in 1945 and what the Labour Government actually achieved between 1945 and 1951 is astonishingly close.
Most of Let Us Face the Future reads like a prospective history of the immediate post-war period.
Since about 1959, however, the fit has become less close.’
The best antidote to myth-making is, as R. B. McCallum, pioneer of the Nuffield Election Studies, once said, to photograph events in flight.
This becomes technically possible for Cabinet government, a private practice carried on between appointed adults, only when the Cabinet Office archive has become available under the thirty-year rule.
But, even with the files at one's disposal in the Public Record Office, it is still perfectly possible to go astray.
Attlee did not expect to win the general election held on 5 July 1945 (though the result was not declared until 26 July, to allow the votes of the Armed Forces to be garnered from around the globe).
He told John Colville, one of the junior private secretaries he inherited from Churchill, ‘that in his most optimistic dreams he had reckoned that there might, with luck, be a Conservative majority of only some forty seats’.
In fact, Labour accumulated a majority of 146.
Attlee, the least affected of post-war politicians, with the possible exception of Sir Alec Douglas-Home, made one concession to his new and unexpected status, as Colville recalls:
On August 2nd the new Prime Minister returned from Potsdam with all too little settled by the Big Three and completed the formation of his Government.
He thought he should acquire a sober ‘Anthony Eden’ black Homburg hat and asked me where to buy one.
With deliberate irony I took him to Lock's in St James's Street, the most aristocratic hat-maker in London.
He bought a hat that suited him well.
Thus armed, Attlee assumed his political inheritance.
On any measurement of overload, the pressures and problems were overwhelming.
Britain was probably the most efficiently and successfully mobilized combatant in the Second World War.
But the very thoroughness with which British industry had been converted to war work, the degree to which overseas investment had been sold to pay for the war effort, and the war-weariness accumulated over six years of privation created a twin dilemma: public expectations of a better post-war world had increased in reverse proportion to the capacity of the British economy to finance it.
Keynes spoke of a ‘financial Dunkirk’.
Five million men and women in uniform had to be demobilized and found work, minus those needed to maintain Britain's commitments overseas as an imperial power and one of the ‘Big Four’ at the United Nations.
The problems were daunting.
Expectations soared.
The outlook was grim.
Yet the Attlee Cabinet enjoyed some very real advantages.
Of all new administrations this century, it was probably the best prepared for office.
Virtually all the faces around Attlee's Cabinet table had served in the wartime Coalition (Aneurin Bevan was the most important exception).
Attlee and Ernest Bevin, the Foreign Secretary, had sat on the key Coalition Cabinet committees on post-war reconstruction at home and overseas.
They started their jobs running.
The country  was spared the follies that all too often accompany the first six months of a new government while tyro-ministers clamber up what the Civil Service likes to call their learning-curve.
Attlee could and did capitalize on another legacy bequeathed by the war years.
The political nation his administration inherited in July 1945 was, by historical and subsequent standards, a highly self-disciplined one.
Almost six years of total war had left no citizen untouched by its rigours, whether in the form of the siege economy on the ‘Home Front’ or by military service abroad.
The population was used to receiving orders and to strict regulation in face of shared danger and privation.
From the Government's point of view, the condition of the people was a policy-maker's boon, all the more so as such self-restraint and national unity initially took the habitual pessimists in Whitehall by surprise.
‘However ingeniously and wisely the civil and industrial controls and rationing schemes may have been devised’, wrote Sir Richard Hopkins, Head of the Civil Service and Permanent Secretary to the Treasury from 1942 to 1945, ‘they would not have achieved that full success but for the goodwill with which amid the strain and stress of war they were accepted by industry and by the community as a whole.’
This goodwill, Hopkins added, ‘went beyond — in my judgement much beyond — any forecast which could reasonably have been made before hostilities began’.
Furthermore, Attlee inherited a highly efficient Whitehall war machine, with a variety and quality of machine-minder unparalleled in the history of the British Civil Service (though most of the gifted outsiders who had served as wartime temporaries would soon depart).
Addison has encapsulated the result by observing accurately that ‘for a few critical years after 1945, the home front ran on without a war to sustain it, and Britain was reconstructed in the image of the war effort’.
Attlee and his ministers, despite being a radically intentioned government, did not embark on a reform of the Civil Service because they knew the wartime machine personally and liked what they saw.
They had seen the recent administrative past and it had worked.
Yet there is a danger here in over-gilding the memory of Attlee's Whitehall — a danger that even familiarity with the formerly secret record of his government cannot entirely eradicate.
It is the danger of imposing reason and order where it was not always present.
I have to plead guilty to this.
In the 1970s, as a Whitehall journalist with a historical background and an interest in political science, I found  myself reading the Cabinet papers of the Attlee Administration as each new batch was declassified and comparing the performance of the Labour governments of 1945–51 with those of Wilson (1974–6) and Callaghan (1976–9) which I was engaged in reporting.
Wilson in particular did not shine in comparison.
I was sufficiently impressed by the performance of ‘the diminutive, monosyllabic former solicitor from Stanmore’, to co-author a study of his Cabinet-committee structure.
Nothing has happened in the interim to alter substantially the conclusion of Mr Attlee's Engine Room that
Perhaps the virtue most appreciated, with over 30 years of hindsight, is his sheer effectiveness.
Late 1940s Britain like early 1980s Britain felt itself strapped for cash.
Yet Attlee's Whitehall achieved things, substantial things, on very little money….
One way and another, Attlee looks better with every passing year — a kind of benevolent public school master, whose sense of duty and justice raised him above the sectional partisanship of class or party.
The study's thesis was that Attlee built on the Whitehall machine constructed in the Second World War and used it to implement the Labour Party's reform programme.
Lord Hunt, at the time a young official in the Dominions Office, offered a similar interpretation in his 1983 survey of what had happened to Cabinet government since Lloyd George and Hankey invented it in its modern form.
Speaking of the machinery-of-government implications of Beveridge, Keynesian economics and Labour's programme of public ownership, he said,
The field of government activity and interest extended rapidly, and the size of the Cabinet with it; and at the same time Ministers found — particularly with an economy weakened by the war — that these new problems were both more complex and inter-related than they had perhaps expected.
How then could one get the necessary co-ordination at ministerial level and make a reality of collective discussion and responsibility?
The answer was to develop the system of Cabinet Committees to reduce the load on the Cabinet by settling minor matters and, in other cases, sharpening up the issues for decision.
Indeed it has been argued that 1945 to 1951 was government by committee — hundreds of them — rather than Government by Cabinet.
The system worked remarkably smoothly.
New material, both archival and interpretative, requires these judgements to be modified to some degree.
First, internal Cabinet  Office files suggest that Mr Attlee's engine room was not quite as clean a machine as I had portrayed it.
In fact, within a year of the formation of the Labour Government, senior officials in the Cabinet Office, Treasury and Board of Trade had become seriously alarmed by the cumbersome nature of the organization supporting the Attlee Cabinet, the proliferation of committees and the prolix and indecisive performance of some ministers.
Attlee took their concern seriously, and a review of Cabinet machinery was commissioned which took place in the summer and autumn of 1946.
The initial impetus for the rethink came not from the officials but from Sir Stafford Cripps in the summer of 1946.
Cripps, at that time President of the Board of Trade, had long had a penchant for machinery-of-government matters and had been active as a minister in the wartime Coalition on reconstruction committees established to consider the issue.
The beginning of the story is recorded in a minute exchanged between the two dominant figures in post-war Whitehall, Sir Edward Bridges, Head of the Civil Service and Permanent Secretary to the Treasury, and Sir Norman Brook, Secretary of the Cabinet.
On 5 July 1946 Bridges wrote to Brook,
I happened to see Sir John Woods [Permanent Secretary to the Board of Trade]tonight and he told me that Sir Stafford Cripps had been reading the minutes of Cabinet committees during his absence [in India, where he had been for nearly four months trying to reach a settlement which would lead to independence]and had been depressed by the amount of time and energy taken up in the Ministerial Committees with the discussion of quite minor matters which individual Ministers ought to settle in their discretion.
He asked whether anything could be done about this.
Bridges reckoned that, in every new administration, ministers had a tendency in their first year ‘to bring matters to the committees which with greater experience they would settle themselves’.
Shortage of supplies was also forcing more decisions to be taken centrally.
But he thought Attlee ought to consider the problem ‘and send a little note to his colleagues or address some remarks to them in Cabinet about the working of the committee system’.
Lower down the hierarchy and, apparently, quite independently of his seniors, the young William Armstrong (who was to head the Treasury in the 1960s and the Civil Service in the 1970s) was, as Brook's private secretary, trying to make sense of the proliferation of  committees, some of which had been inherited from the Coalition while others had been created at a considerable rate by the new government.
There is a note of despair in his minute of 19 July 1946 to Alexander Johnston, under secretary in Herbert Morrison's Lord President's Office, about the contents of the Cabinet Committee Book, the Cabinet Office's instrument for tracking the growth of its machine:
Another point which has given me some concern is that the present book is supposed to be a directory of Cabinet Committees.
So far as I know there is no definition of what constitutes a Cabinet Committee and, as the practice has grown, I believe there may be among the 70-odd Committees in the book some with less title to be treated as Cabinet Committees than some of the 700-odd interdepartmental committees of which we have no detailed information at all.
The point is of some importance since a number of rules of procedure are growing to be applicable to Cabinet Committees and we ought to know where there is a real, useful distinction or whether it is merely the pragmatical difference that some are serviced by the Cabinet Office and some are not.
If there is anything in the distinction I believe that the term Cabinet Committee ought to be kept for Ministerial committees and perhaps for committees of officials directly subordinate to a Ministerial committee; but I am far from certain that the distinction is worth making.
Back at the stratospheric level of government, Bridges pursued the problem of the performance of the Cabinet system with Attlee and recorded a note of the conversation which took place in No. 10 on 26 July 1946:
In a talk with the Prime Minister this morning he asked whether I thought too much time of Ministers was taken up by Committees and whether there were too many Committees.
I said I thought a great deal of time was taken up with Committees.
The [Parliamentary]recess would be a suitable moment for having an overhaul of the committee system and seeing whether any could be reduced.
It might also be appropriate for him [the Prime Minister]to issue instructions to the Chairmen of Committees to see that time is not wasted in the discussion of irrelevant matters.
The Prime Minister also asked whether I thought that Ministers brought matters unnecessarily to the Cabinet.
I said I thought there was a tendency to do this.
Armstrong, meanwhile, was doggedly struggling to create some sort of classification system, a Domesday Book in miniature, for the Cabinet  committees.
On 23 July 1946, in a minute to W. S. Murrie, Brook's deputy, he wrote that
I am attracted to the idea of a printed Directory of Committees in a number of parts:
I
Standing Ministerial
II
Ad Hoc Ministerial
III
Standing Official
IV
Ad Hoc Official
I should also be prepared to include in the appropriate sections, committees which, though not Cabinet Committees, in fact perform closely similar functions.
At this stage the Bridges-Brook review of Cabinet procedure and the Armstrong exercise on committees came together.
On 30 July, while Brook was away on holiday, Bridges sent Murrie the note of his conversation of 26 July with Attlee, adding, ‘It all sounds to me frightfully reminiscent of proposals which have been made before and, I think, discussed.’
Murrie prepared for Brook's return an assessment of the factors contributing to the overloading of Mr Attlee's engine room.
Starting from scratch in July 1945, the Government had embarked on a huge legislative programme and laid the foundations for another big instalment in 1946–7.
This had necessitated a large number of meetings, particularly for the Socialisation of Industries Committee and the Social Services Committee: ministers had tended to bring too many items to committee; senior ministers had wanted to keep an eye on their more junior colleagues, and as a result a heavy burden fell on a handful.
Murrie suggested Attlee should be encouraged to scrutinize carefully the number of committees being created and to circulate a memorandum discouraging ministers from raising questions unnecessarily.
The review went largely according to Murrie's specifications, with Armstrong and, from November, his successor, David Hubback, pruning the committees and Bridges and Brook handling the procedural aspects.
In the course of his committee cull, Armstrong came up with a phrase which deserves a permanent place in any anthology of Civil Servicese.
Writing to Brook about the Palestine Committee, a survivor from the Coalition, he said that its nominal chairman was Herbert Morrison  but that it had ceased to function, its work having shifted to the Middle East Ministerial Committee under Ernest Bevin.
Bevin and Morrison detested each other.
The MEMC, Armstrong noted, ‘is not an active body either.
It has never had any papers circulated to it and never met.
But it may be well to keep it in existence.’
Armstrong continued, ‘Actually on account of the personalities involved, I think it might be better to take no action about the Palestine Committee but allow it gradually to sink into the limbo of forgotten things ’(emphasis added).
The need for a more efficient Cabinet machine was discussed in No. 10 on 4 September at a meeting between Attlee and Hugh Dalton, Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Attlee saw Bridges the following day.
The Prime Minister told the Head of the Civil Service (who was still nominally in charge of the Cabinet Office, too, to avoid a conflict of status between Brook and General Sir Hastings Ismay, who had been Military Secretary to the Cabinet throughout the war and did not leave Whitehall till 1947) what he wanted as the ingredients of reform:
1
When the Government was newly formed it was perhaps natural for many matters to be discussed in Ministerial Committees which, with growing experience, should now be settled by the individual ministers concerned.
Alternatively, if there are differences between Ministers, these can often be resolved by a meeting of two or three Ministers, if need be under the chairmanship of a Minister-without-Portfolio.
2
Papers for Committees must be short and must contain a concise summary of the proposals put forward for consideration.
It is the responsibility of all Ministers to see that papers are drawn up on these lines.
3
Ministers when they come to Committees should assume that other Ministers have read their papers and time should not be spent on an oral regurgitation of what already appears in writing in the paper.
4
Fewer papers should be taken at very short notice before there has been time for the Departments to comment on them.
Brook proceeded to turn Attlee's proposals into the more statuesque prose of the standard Cabinet paper.
Armstrong urged Brook to persuade Attlee to announce simultaneously the abolition of a number of Cabinet committees.
Brook ruled this out: ‘I do not, however, favour this suggestion — we could not adopt it without undertaking a review of the Cabinet Committee organisation and that always takes a substantial time, as so many Ministers and others have to be consulted.
Nor do I think that there are at the moment Committees which cause unnecessary work.’
Brook clearly thought this anti-committee mania was getting out of hand and sent Bridges a minute to this effect:
I should rather like to have an opportunity of putting to the Prime Minister some of the arguments in favour of handling business through Cabinet Committees.
I suspect that at the moment he sees all the disadvantages and none of the advantages of committee work.
I should like, in particular, to explain that if, as he himself desires, the size of the Cabinet is to be restricted [it had twenty members, more than twice the number in Churchill's War Cabinet, which oscillated between five and nine], the Committee structure affords a useful means of preserving the collective responsibility of Ministers as a whole.
Another point which should not be overlooked is that Committee papers are read by a good many Ministers who do not attend the meetings, and these papers are often the only means they have of keeping themselves abreast of developments in policy.
Bridges agreed.
It is not clear which of the pair put these points to Attlee.
But somebody did.
The ploy worked.
The Cabinet paper circulated on 26 September 1946 was in the Prime Minister's name but was imbued with the Cabinet Secretary's philosophy.
In addition to classic injunctions such as‘I look for a marked reduction in the number of problems put forward for discussion in Ministerial Committees’, in the terse Major Attlee style, the paper contains a passage which is pure Brook: ‘The Cabinet Committee system has a valuable part to play in the central machinery of government, both in relieving the pressure on the Cabinet itself and in helping to give practical effect to the principle of collective responsibility at times when the Cabinet does not include all Ministers in charge of Departments.’
Attlee's 1946 directive did not solve some of the more important machinery-of-government problems of his administration.
It needed a sterling crisis and two ministerial reshuffles, the first caused by Morrison's demotion as economic overlord after the convertibility crisis of August 1947, and the second triggered by Dalton's resignation the following November, before the Cabinet machine adequately adapted itself, with the creation of the Economic Policy Committee, to tackle the fundamental problem confronting the Government.
Under Attlee's chairmanship the new Cabinet committee became the most important  in the system, the one where all the big economic issues-domestic and overseas — were handled.38 Armstrong, by this time back in the Treasury, had the belated satisfaction of witnessing a modest committee cull.
The relevant internal Cabinet Office organization files in the CAB 21 series at the Public Record Office do not seem to have been used by previous commentators on British Cabinet government.
They are an important source for two reasons: they indicate that the overload problem has been a constant since the Second World War and is not peculiar to the sixties, seventies and eighties, and that even what has come to be regarded as the most efficiently run administration since 1945 had serious difficulties in the handling of business.
Recent material also illuminates another intractable problem: the quality of the pool of talent from which ministers are chosen — something no amount of reboring the Cabinet machine can remedy.
Sir Alec Cairncross, a former Chief Economic Adviser to the Treasury, heaps praise on the Attlee governments at the end of his highly regarded study Years of Recovery : ‘Whether one tries to look forward from 1945 or backwards from forty years later, those years appear in retrospect, and rightly so, as years when the government knew where it wanted to go and led the country with an understanding of what was at stake.
Yet even he concedes,
the economic problems encountered by the government were not, as a rule, those which it had expected.
Equally, the solutions to the problems were rarely of the government's devising.
There were exceptions, as when Bevin grasped at what became the Marshall Plan.
But more commonly ministers were the reluctant pupils of their officials.
On one economic issue after another — the American Loan, the coal crisis, the dollar problem, devaluation, the European Payments Union — they were slow to grasp the true options of policy and had great difficulty in reaching sensible conclusions.
Hugh Gaitskell, an economics don and wartime civil servant who was elected to Parliament in 1945 and in six years rose from backbencher to Chancellor of the Exchequer, illustrates with his diary entry for 14 October 1947 (when he was Minister of Fuel and Power) just how little impact Attlee's directive of a year before had had on the performance of individuals:
Sometimes Cabinet meetings horrify me because of the amount of rubbish talked by some Ministers who come there after reading briefs which they do not understand.
I do not know how this can be avoided except perhaps by getting more things settled at the official level, and when they cannot be settled there having the issues presented plainly to ministers.
Also, I believe the Cabinet is too large.
A smaller Cabinet, mostly of non-Departmental ministers, would really be able to listen and understand more easily and hear the others arguing the matter out.
But it was Sir Norman Brook who identified what to 1980s eyes is the most startling of the missing links in the Cabinet process of the late forties: the lack of any systematic attempt to review long-term public-expenditure trends and the future spending-implications of current policies.
In a file graphically labelled ‘Cabinet Procedure.
Memorandum on classes of business not regarded as appropriate for Cabinet discussion’ is a minute from Brook to Bridges dated 21 April 1950, two months after Labour had been returned to power with a slim majority of six and two months before the Korean War stimulated a huge increase in defence spending.
Brook wrote,
It is curious that in modern times the Cabinet, though it has always insisted on considering particular proposals for developments of policy and their cost, has never thought it necessary to review the development of expenditure under the Civil Estimates as a whole.
It is remarkable that the present Government have never reflected upon the great increase in public expenditure, and the substantial change in its pattern, which has come about during the past five years in consequence of their policies in the field of the social services.
Brook added that his analysis confirmed the importance of the proposal to submit twice-yearly forecasts to the Cabinet on the trend of future spending.
He urged that a review procedure should be devised to assist ministers to ponder ‘its distribution between the various services’.
Very little seems to have come of the initiative until five years later, when the Treasury created something along these lines for the Conservative Chancellor, R. A. Butler, as part of an examination of spending on the social services.
By the time Labour left office in October 1951, its Cabinet machine — what might be called the Attlee-Brook model — was enormous.
It consisted of 148 standing  committees and 313 ad hoc committees.
So much for Armstrong's attempt at rationalization five years earlier.
One of Brook's first tasks when Churchill re-entered Downing Street was to  explain what had happened to the Cabinet system since 1945.
In fact, Brook had prepared the brief before the election result was declared.
It opened with his favourite theme: ‘During the past ten years the system of standing Cabinet Committees has proved its value as a means of relieving the Cabinet of a great weight of less important business.’
He suggested the new prime minister should establish immediately ‘a Defence, Legislation, Lord President's and Economic Policy Committee before reviewing existing sub-committees at his leisure’.
Brook was not averse to extending his advice into the heartland of prime-ministerial patronage — the shape and composition of the Cabinet.
Later, when his relationship with Churchill was particularly close, Brook, took it upon himself, on at least two occasions, to advise on which minister should hold what portfolio — his advice extending even to Sir Anthony Eden, the number-two man in the government.
Constitutionally, this was, to say the least, a controversial activity for a career civil servant.
In October 1951 Brook, in addition to his paper on Cabinet committees, supplied Churchill with a brief on the composition of the Cabinet.
The document has a dual interest: its own intrinsic historical value; and the insight it provides into the thinking of perhaps the greatest technician of the Cabinet machine in Cabinet Office history.
‘The composition of your Cabinet’, Brook told Churchill, ‘must be influenced by personal and political considerations.’
But some points were important ‘to the smooth running of Cabinet machinery’:
The advantages of a relatively small Cabinet are obvious.
And the system of Standing Cabinet Committees, which was developed in the War Cabinet days, now makes it possible to work with a smaller Cabinet, on the lines of your War Cabinet and ‘Caretaker’ Cabinet, 49 without impairing the principle of collective responsibility.
The ideal size, in peace, is probably somewhere between 12 and 16.
Brook then sketched the outline of a suggested Cabinet:
It is convenient that, in addition to the Prime Minister and the Minister of Defence, the Cabinet should include at least one, and preferably two, Ministers without Departmental duties who can act as Chairman of Standing Committees.
The old offices of Lord President and Lord Privy Seal may conveniently be used for this purpose….
The Lord Chancellor is, traditionally, included in the Cabinet.
And it is convenient in practice that he  should be a member, since this obviates the frequent summoning of the Law Officers for advice on points of Law.
The Foreign Secretary and the Chancellor of the Exchequer are key members of a peace-time Cabinet; and public opinion will expect that the Commonwealth and Scotland should be represented in it.
Personalities apart, it is convenient that at the present time the following Departments should also be represented in the Cabinet — Home Office, Ministry of Labour and Board of Trade.
Surprising omissions from Brook's list are Housing and Local Government, Health, and Education — all three ministries even then conduits for large amounts of public spending.
The Cabinet Secretary went on to elaborate the case for keeping ‘under a single Minister the supervision of both economic and fiscal policy, and both internal and external economic questions’.
For, like Attlee before him, Churchill originally had it in mind to curb the Treasury by parcelling out the functions of economic policy-making to a team of ministers, of which the Chancellor of the Exchequer would be a member, but not an over-mighty one.
In fact, Churchill attempted in October 1951 to refashion Cabinet government in a fairly dramatic fashion by peacetime standards.
In essence, it was to be the War Cabinet of 1940 to 1945 by another means.
The old warrior was harking back to what John Grigg has called ‘the heroic, and in a way surreal, interlude of 1940 and 1941, when Britain, as it were played its finest match before relegation to the second division’.
It was a case, as Colville put it, of ‘Auld Lang Syne…ringing out along the Whitehall corridors’.
Like Attlee and his senior ministers in 1945, Churchill had seen the wartime machine and it had worked.
His attempt to re-create it embraced both method and people.
His main interest was foreign and defence policy (for a time he was both Prime Minister and Minister of Defence, as he had been from 1940 to 1945).
Domestic policy he tended, with a few exceptions such as social security (where he would reprise his old refrain about the law of averages coming to the rescue of the millions), to regard largely as a matter of ‘drains’.
He appreciated the difficulties of the economic position but was content to devolve the chairmanship of the Cabinet's Economic Policy Committee to his Chancellor, Butler.
The distinction between overseas and defence policy in 1951–5 was for Churchill almost as clear as that between the Defence Committee, which, with the Chiefs of Staff, he  used to prosecute the Second World War, and the Lord President's Committee under Anderson and Attlee, which he allowed to get on with handling the Home Front.
Churchill, too, wanted a smaller Cabinet, one dominated by ‘overlords’ who would co-ordinate the work of clusters of departments.
He sought out members of his old winning team for the purpose.
His original idea was to appoint four peers, which is how they acquired the nickname ‘overlords’.
One, John Anderson, Viscount Waverley, a wartime Chancellor and Lord President, was to be Lord Privy Seal and ‘overlord’ for supply and raw materials and of the Treasury and Board of Trade.
He declined the offer.
Three of the peers accepted: Lord Woolton, the hugely successful wartime Minister of Food and begetter of ‘Woolton Pies’, became Lord President, with responsibility for co-ordinating the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries and the Ministry of Food; Lord Leathers, former Minister of War Transport, became overlord for the Ministry of Transport and Civil Aviation and the Ministry of Fuel and Power; Lord Cherwell, ‘the Prof’, Churchill's personal boffin in wartime, returned to his old post of Paymaster General with responsibility for co-ordinating work on the Bomb, scientific research and development generally, and Churchill's revived personal think-tank, the Statistical Branch.
It is worth lingering over Churchill's ‘overlord’ experiment, as it was put back on the agenda of reform by Sir Douglas Wass, former Permanent Secretary to the Treasury, in his 1983 Reith Lectures.
Memories flickered in late August 1984 when Mrs Thatcher appointed Lord Young of Graffham, the former Chairman of the Manpower Services Commission, Minister-without-Portfolio with responsibility for ‘enterprise’, with his own Enterprise Unit in the Cabinet Office.
Shrewdly, he insisted on calling himself an ‘underlord’.
There were tensions, however: most notably with Tom King, Secretary of State for Employment.
Just over one year later, King was in the Northern Ireland Office and Lord Young was in the Department of Employment.
Churchill's ‘overlords’ certainly enabled him to slim down the Cabinet to sixteen members.
But, the memory of their efforts is blighted.
‘An unsuccessful experiment’, Colville called it.
Whitehall's Big Two, Brook and Bridges, had disapproved of the idea from the start.
Constitutionally it had not been thought through.
Parliamentary answers intended to explain the phenomenon left a messy impression.
Woolton told the House of Lords on 30 April 1952 that ‘the work of the co-ordinators is not a responsibility to Parliament; it is a responsibility to the Cabinet’.
That answer, at least, is consistent with the passage in Questions of Procedure which makes it clear that the internal arrangement of Cabinet business is no concern of Parliament or public.
But it ignores entirely the question of Parliamentary accountability and its division between co-ordinator and co-ordinated.
A month later, Churchill told the Commons that the role of the ‘overlords’ had developed naturally from the functions of Cabinet-committee chairmen in the Second World War and that ‘the co-ordinating Ministers have no statutory powers.
They have, in particular, no powers to give orders or directions to a departmental Minister.’
By this stage, Field Marshal Lord Alexander of Tunis had been dragooned by Churchill to become Minister of Defence and, in effect, ‘overlord’ of the Admiralty, War Office and Air Ministry.
In practice, it was left to each overlord to co-ordinate according to taste.
Woolton was an exponent of laisser faire , Leathers a rather unsuccessful interventionist, Alexander ineffectual all round, and Cherwell what he had always been, a highly intelligent courtier to his chief, though he did succeed in driving through his pet project of hiving off atomic energy from the Ministry of Supply into what became the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority.
He was also very active on the economic front and played a prominent part in killing off a proposal to float sterling in 1952.
The experiment faltered bit by bit.
By the spring of 1953 Leathers and Cherwell wanted to leave the Government.
Woolton told Churchill his supervisory role had largely ceased to function.
Anthony Seldon has written the overlords' epitaph: ‘Thus the Conservatives reverted to the former system of co-ordination of policy in Cabinet Committees and in the Cabinet….
Churchill's idea of overlords had proved an ineffective (and largely untested) luxury.’
The system died formally with the Cabinet reshuffle of 4 September 1953, after barely two years.
The ‘overlord’ experiment should not be allowed to create a distorted impression of Churchillian style.
He was a great Cabinet-government man.
Meetings were conducted with a sense of occasion.
‘He regarded the Cabinet’, wrote Anthony Seldon, ‘as extremely important, even sacrosanct, and would only rarely ride roughshod over it to get his way.’
He was keen for more business to be taken at full Cabinet level and set about dismantling parts of the Attlee machine.
The Churchill Government inherited a highly efficient system of Cabinet and  official committees, but with in a few months officials were complaining that  the neat system consolidated by Clement Attlee was in disarray.
Churchill simply disliked working through committees, the Defence Committee excepted.
In particular he disliked the two-tier system of committees Ministerial and Official, with identical terms of reference, and attempted to cut away as many official committees as possible — twenty in a day according to a contemporary rumour — and also instigated a review of all committees in Whitehall and the Cabinet Office.
Churchill's assault on committees yielded results.
Attlee's tally it should be recalled, was 148 standing Cabinet committees and 313 ad hoc, accumulated over six and a quarter years.
Churchill's complement was 137 standing and 109 ad hoc over three and a half years, representing a substantial economy among the GEN groups.
Dr Seldon is right to exempt the Defence Committee from Churchill's strictures.
The old warrior treated it as a kind of personal adventure playground where he could drive through cherished projects such as the revival of the wartime Home Guard or toy with trifles such as the age of entry to the Royal Naval College at Dartmouth.
The classic illustration of Churchill's reverence for Cabinet government is his insistence on taking to the full Cabinet in 1954 the decision to build a hydrogen bomb (see chapter 4).
The last Churchill Cabinet was brimming with independent spirits.
The old man, though accurately described by Lord Kilmuir as having ‘enjoyed a wonderful Indian Summer in the House of Commons.
Partisan hostility seemed to disappear miraculously’, had to navigate some fairly rough passages in the privacy of the Cabinet Room.
The worst occasion from Churchill's point of view occurred in July 1954, after he had indulged in a piece of private diplomatic enterprise in an attempt to thaw the Cold War.
Travelling home on the Queen Mary after a visit to Washington and discussions with President Eisenhower, he despatched a telegram to the post-Stalin leadership in Moscow proposing a meeting.
On his return Churchill had to endure several difficult Cabinet meetings, and threats of resignation from Salisbury and Crookshank.
Colville's diary shows just how shaken the Prime Minister was and how grim the mood that occasionally intruded at Chequers over the weekend of 24–25 July 1954, during the ‘stag party’ to celebrate Oliver Lyttelton's retirement from the Cabinet:
There was a crucial Cabinet on Friday July 23rd, at which Lord Salisbury threatened to resign and was supported by Harry Crookshank.
We did not  therefore send off the telegram he had drafted to Molotov, more especially as he had received from Eden a cold and almost minatory minute just before the Cabinet began.
The matter was adjourned till Monday, with the threat of Lord S's resignation hanging over everybody and the still more alarming possibility that Winston, if thwarted, would resign, split the country and the party and produce a situation of real gravity.
The crisis blew over.
Churchill heeded his Cabinet dissenters.
Foreign policy tended to be the area where Churchill kept full Cabinet somewhat at arm's length, as Anthony Seldon notes:
When foreign affairs were discussed, few would offer their comments.
Indeed, the Cabinet was scarcely used as a forum of discussion in foreign policy, although Eden kept Ministers informed at all times.
Salisbury, and occasionally Lyttelton and Macmillan, would offer comments on foreign affairs, but on major policy matters Eden preferred to deal with Churchill direct.
A fascinating example of this, with hindsight at any rate, is the secret despatch, on Churchill's instructions, of a small task force to the South Atlantic in February-March 1952 after the Argentine dictator, General Peron, had made threatening noises about the Falklands.
The initiative was confined to a small circle — Churchill, Eden and the Chiefs of Staff — and I described the episode in The Times , after the 1952 papers had reached the Public Record Office in January 1983, as ‘one of the best kept secrets in the 1950s’.
No account of Churchill's stewardship of Cabinet government is complete without mentioning the swiftest and most comprehensive Cabinet leak in the long history of unauthorized disclosure.
The problem arose because of Churchill's increasing deafness.
He could not hear the mumblers around the Cabinet table.
So microphones and loudspeakers were installed.
Lord Home takes up the story:
Winston put these machines in front of everybody and there was a button that you pressed when you spoke and you released when you listened….
Anyhow, it had been going for a very short time, not very satisfactory, because none of us really were very successful with our machine, and then a…messenger came in to say that a [radio]taxi driver had come into No. 10 to say he's heard everything going on in his taxi in Whitehall.
So that was the end of that experiment!
The memory of Churchill's last premiership is suffused with a golden haze — the England of the Ealing comedies, of amelioration in social and economic life.
To be sure there was stress in government.
Churchill's stroke in June 1953 put a dent in the working of the Government.
Fortunately for those who wanted him to continue in Downing Street, his period of incapacity and recovery coincided with the Parliamentary recess.
Colville is candid enough to recognize the highly unorthodox expedients — unorthodox in constitutional terms — to which he and Christopher Soames, Churchill's son-in-law and Parliamentary Private Secretary, resorted while the old man was out of action.
Colville, Soames and Brook played an intimate part in keeping the show on the road while Churchill recovered.
‘My colleagues and I’, wrote Colville, ‘had to handle requests from Ministers and Government departments entirely ignorant of the Prime Minister's incapacity.
Discussion of how best to handle such enquiries, whether by postponement, by consultation with the Minister or Under Secretary responsible or, in some cases, by direct reply on the Prime Minister's behalf were the subject of daily discussion with the Secretary of the Cabinet.’
Thus arose the delicate question of whether Soames should be allowed access to secret documents and Cabinet papers.
The rules were waived.
‘Before the end of July the Prime Minister was sufficiently restored to take an intelligent interest in affairs of state and express his own decisive view.
Christopher and I then returned to the fringes of power, having for a time been drawn perilously close to the centre.’
The health of individuals apart, overload was not a severe problem in the early fifties, as Lord Thorneycroft, at that time Mr Peter Thorneycroft, an energetic and successful President of the Board of Trade, recalled in an interview with Terry Coleman more than thirty years after Churchill's retirement.
While a Cabinet minister, Thorneycroft was in the habit of attending the life class at Chelsea School of Art on Tuesdays and Thursdays between six and nine.
‘Could that happen today?
‘I don't know.
In an earlier dispensation, they liked to foxhunt or something.
Now they work incredibly hard.’
There was less government in those days.
‘Now there's too much.
We try and do too many things.’’
Churchill was succeeded by Eden, like Thorneycroft a bit of an artist, and like Churchill vulnerable to illness.
The torch was passed from the grand old man to the heir-apparent at a touching little ceremony  at the end of the Cabinet meeting on 5 April.
Brook recorded it in his usual dry fashion:
The Prime Minister said that it remained for him to wish his colleagues all good fortune in the difficult but hopeful situation which they had to face.
He trusted that they would be enabled to further the progress already made in rebuilding the domestic stability and economic strength of the United Kingdom and in weaving still more closely the threads which bound together the countries of the Commonwealth or, as he still preferred to call it, the Empire.
Eden, saying he had been asked to speak by the Cabinet, said ‘they would remember him always — for his magnanimity, for his courage at all times and for his unfailing humour, founded in his unrivalled mastery of the English language’.
Eden began his premiership in a businesslike fashion even though he had decided on an instant election.
He wrote to all his senior departmental ministers asking, ‘have you any problems to which we shall have to give our early attention?’
The replies yielded little political intelligence, though Iain Macleod, Minister of Health, told the Prime Minister he was dissatisfied with the organization of the social departments.
Eden was instantly plunged into industrial disputes in the docks and on the railways.
While utilizing the existing Emergencies Committee, he commissioned an ad hoc group, GEN 496, on economic aspects of the emergency, under Bridges.
When the strikes were over he established a Standing Committee on Industrial Relations to produce suggestions for improving the collective-bargaining system and for curbing wildcat strikes.
Eden was the supreme foreign-affairs specialist, but he constructed a battery of new committees on the home front, of which the most important were the Ministerial Committee on Industrial Relations, IR, the Committee on Colonial Immigrants under Kilmuir, CI, and a ministerial group on long-term spending on the social services.
When the 1955 files were released at the Public Record Office, Eden's committee-making in these areas was interpreted as evidence of vacillation and lack of grip on the part of a premier of whom Kilmuir later wrote, ‘no one in public life lived more on his nerves than he did’.
A first leader in The Times on 3 January 1986, surveying, from thirty years on, the lessons of Eden's stewardship in his early months in No. 10, criticized the new Prime  Minister's tendency to kick for touch on handling coloured immigration and curbing wildcat strikes.
And the historian M. R. D. Foot, writing anonymously,(as is house style) in the Economist , declared,
Though the Cabinet is supposed to be a decisive body, much of its time [in 1955]was taken up with postponing decisions: whether to legislate against immigrants from the Caribbean or of Indian ancestry; whether to help the Egyptians build the Aswan High Dam; what to do about Cyprus or Malta, about admitting Japan to GATT [the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade], about the textile market, about the death penalty.
To upbraid Eden for failing to give the green light to the Home Office's draft four-clause Commonwealth Immigrants Bill, is a bit harsh.
The Cabinet was deeply divided on the issue, between those, such as Alan Lennox-Boyd, the Colonial Secretary, who argued that immigration curbs could damage ‘the Commonwealth concept’, and those, such as Duncan Sandys, Minister of Housing and Local Government, who warned the Cabinet that ‘in certain districts, such as Birmingham and Lambeth, colonial immigration had already led to serious over-crowding and consequently to social disturbance’.
An unnamed minister (probably the Lord President, Lord Salisbury), in the absence of control on coloured immigration, spoke of ‘a real danger that over the years there would be a significant change in the racial character of the English people’.
There was at that time little public pressure to curb immigration.
Party-managers were not sure they could carry Conservative backbenchers on a control bill, let alone the Commons as a whole.
That Eden should have allowed the Cabinet a full and lengthy debate on 3 November 1955 could be construed as skilled management, and his referral of the issue for further thought to a Cabinet committee might be seen as prudent policy.
His pattern of personal leadership, as revealed by the Cabinet committees he chose to chair himself, reinforces the standard interpretation of him as a man more at ease with overseas than with domestic policy.
He followed Churchill's practice and allowed Butler, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, to chair the Economic Policy Committee.
Eden, naturally, took Churchill's place at the head of the Defence Committee, and the list of ad hoc committees he chaired reflects both his appetites and the intrinsic importance of their subject matter: GEN 502 on the supply of military aircraft; GEN 503 on security in Cyprus; GEN 506 on preparations for the meeting of foreign  ministers of France, the UK, USSR and USA in Geneva in October 1955; and GEN 511 on a third Indian steel plant.
In procedural terms, Eden was neither a reformist nor a tinkerer.
His sole initiative was essentially a matter of housekeeping.
On 16 December 1955 he circulated a note on ‘Submission of Business to the Cabinet’.
Eden told his colleagues that ‘on certain occasions recently a decision taken without reference to the Cabinet or a Cabinet Committee has had to be re-considered soon after it has been made public because of the weight of criticism it has provoked.
This is damaging to the Government's credit and we must do all we can to avoid it.’
Eden was probably referring to the unfortunate statement from Henry Hopkinson, junior minister at the Colonial Office, that Cyprus would ‘never’ be granted full independence, and a domestic slip-up: an announcement that the manufacture of heroin would cease entirely in the UK (the medical profession subtly pointed out its legitimate uses as a drug).
Eden's remedy was to encourage departmental ministers to bring to Cabinet or Cabinet committee ‘any questions which are likely to occasion public controversy or criticism or may need to be carefully explained to the Government's supporters in Parliament’.
But, rightly or wrongly, Eden's tenure in Downing Street is remembered as a single-issue premiership.
As his wife, Clarissa, put it, the Suez Canal ran through her drawing-room.
Eden was tested to destruction by the Suez crisis.
The ground on which he broke was his speciality — foreign affairs.
But the nature of the Middle East crisis of 1956, and the interplay of diplomacy, war and personality exposed Eden's temperament in all its frailty.
It also put the Cabinet system itself under severe stress.
Colin Seymour-Ure, taking Korea, Suez and the Falklands as his case studies, has made a ground-breaking study of Cabinet government in small wars:
The subject is illuminating because it shows the Cabinet system under stress.
In war, a Cabinet designed to manage political conflict finds itself instead directing armed force.
On the one hand military action must be pursued with maximum efficiency, defined by military criteria.
On the other, the uncertainties of war are likely to need the most sensitive political response in terms of the Cabinet's relations with party, Parliament and public.
Cabinet business always involves a mixture of political and specialist (or administrative) considerations.
Some matters are no doubt decided only by reference to their intrinsic merits, others on purely political grounds.
But many must  involve both; and reconciling them is a purpose to which the Cabinet is specifically suited.
In a war, however, the two considerations arguably tug in opposite directions.
To intrude political criteria into military decisions risks reducing efficiency at the cost, conceivably, of disaster.
Yet the resort to arms is by definition a crisis of politics, and to neglect the political response for the sake of military considerations may be just as perilous.
There is a further element too — the personal stress of war.
The Cabinet is only as good as its members.
Eden cracked under the strains of Suez, and his Foreign Secretary, Selwyn Lloyd, came close to cracking at times.
The roots and branches of the Suez war require an arboretum of their own.
This is not the place to disentangle the foliage.
For our purposes the story starts in the dining-room at No. 10 on 26 July 1956.
Eden was entertaining his friend and ally Nuri es-Said of Iraq when news that Nasser had nationalized the Suez Canal was conveyed to the Prime Minister.
As soon as his guests had left, Eden summoned his senior ministers and the Chiefs of Staff (plus Jean Chauvel, the French Ambassador, and Andrew Foster, Chargé d'Affaires at the US Embassy in London) to the Cabinet Room.
The meeting lasted till two in the morning.
There was to be no let-up for more than three months.
Later on the 27th Eden established his version of a war Cabinet.
He did not use the existing Defence Committee, which he chaired, as Attlee had done for Korea.
A special Egypt Committee was commissioned which included Macmillan, Chancellor of the Exchequer; Selwyn Lloyd, Foreign Secretary; Salisbury, Lord President; Lord Home, Commonwealth Secretary; and Sir Walter Monckton, Minister of Defence.
The Egypt Committee's membership, despite the delicacy and secrecy of its work, was highly fluid.
At least sixteen ministers attended at various stages.
It was liquid in other senses, too.
It lacked terms of reference.
Initially, it handled the diplomacy of the crisis: ‘an instrument for flexible political management of a particular diplomatic crisis which culminated in war’.
Contingency planning for the use of force was undertaken by the Chiefs of Staff.
Later, once a variety of diplomatic initiatives had been tried and discarded, it became more literally a ‘War Cabinet’.
Seymour-Ure uses the inning and outing of Butler, a sceptic about the use of force, to illustrate the peculiar, shifting nature of the Egypt Committee:
The general impression is of a body strongly affected by political considerations.
The inclusion of Butler (Lord Privy Seal and Leader of the  House of Commons) was typical: omitted from the original membership he simply turned up to the first meeting, according to Hugh Thomas, ‘and of course was allowed to stay….’
Yet by the time the invasion neared he was one of the inner-most group of five Ministers — with Eden, Lloyd, Macmillan and Head [who had replaced Monckton as Minister of Defence](plus Mountbatten, the Chief of Staff)— who effectively took the decision to issue an ultimatum to Egypt and Israel.
Despite the gravity of the crisis, Eden in 1956 followed the practice which he had adopted in 1955, of putting the full Cabinet on ice during the summer recess.
‘The Egypt Committee’, Selwyn Lloyd remembered, ‘would, however, continue to function, but if emergency decisions had to be taken the Cabinet would be recalled.’
When the Suez crisis boiled over in the autumn, the strain on ministers was immense.
As Lord Chancellor, Kilmuir was part of the floating composition of the Egypt Committee.
His memory of this classic outbreak of overload remained green when he was compiling his memoirs six years later:
After Eden had returned from the House, there might be another meeting of Suez Ministers at about 4.30 or 5.00 pm, and another between 10.00 and 11.00 pm, to give Sir Pierson Dixon in New York his final briefing for the United Nations, which would come to the boil about 12.30 or 1.00 am in our time, i.e. 7.30 to 8.00 in New York.
If any decision required taking in regard to Egypt, one had to remember that 1 o'clock was 3.00 am on the Canal.
I usually left the night meeting about 2.00 pm, but quite often after that Anthony [Eden]had long telephone conversations with Guy Mollet, the Prime Minister of France, which went on until 4.00 or 5.00 am.
Even to someone like myself, who has been envied in politics much more often for my physical stamina than for my brains, it was a severe pace, and I had only a fraction of the work and strain of Anthony.
His courage never faltered, but his health collapsed.
After determined application of the economic weapon by the Eisenhower Administration had forced a cease-fire as British troops advanced down the Suez Canal on 6 November 1956, an exhausted Eden flew to Jamaica to recuperate on 21 November.
‘We were all, Ministers and backbenchers’, wrote Kilmuir, ‘emotionally and physically exhausted.’
Eden returned to London on 14 December.
On 9 January 1957 he told the Cabinet that he was about to resign on health grounds.
Salisbury, Butler and Macmillan spoke kind  words.
Kilmuir and Salisbury sounded out the Cabinet one by one in the Privy Council Office.
The Chairman of the 1922 Committee sounded out the backbenchers.
Macmillan was summoned to the Palace.
Before turning to Macmillan's premiership, another casualty of Suez must be mentioned.
As the crisis deepened, Bridges was in his last weeks as Permanent Secretary to the Treasury.
He, who had been so close to the innermost of inner circles since succeeding Hankey in 1938, was receiving only fragmentary details of the inner Cabinet's war-planning, despite having to advise the Chancellor on the financial implications.
He was not even receiving the minutes of the Egypt Committee.
He sent his private secretary down the corridor to see Sir Norman Brook to ask if they could be provided.
The Cabinet Secretary was most apologetic.
But the Prime Minister himself had compiled the circulation list and Sir Edward's name was not on it.
Harold Macmillan was not a reluctant prime minister.
He savoured the office, its history and its place in the scheme of things.
‘He seemed’, wrote his early biographer Anthony Sampson, ‘to see himself as part of a fashionable play.’
His attention to the style of his premiership shone through even at the age of ninety, twenty years after his departure from No. 10, in a television interview with Ludovic Kennedy:
MACMILLAN
I enjoyed Prime Minister because I found it much the most relaxed of the offices I held.
I didn't work so hard.
KENNEDY
Many people would find that surprising.
MACMILLAN
Yes, but you didn't have to do the work of the departments.
Oh, you had the Cabinet to run and all that.
I found I read a lot of books and so on, I rested a lot.
It's a great mistake to get yourself into a state of nervous excitement all the time…nobody should ever overdo it you know…you should read Jane Austen and then you'll feel better.
In fact he was a nervous man, particularly before making one of his unforgettable, mannered speeches whose flow continued into the mid-1980s.
The unflappable image needed to be worked on — and he began as soon as he entered No. 10 in January 1957.
He hung up a notice in his own writing bearing a quote from The Gondoliers :
Motto for Private Office and Cabinet Room.
Quiet, calm deliberation
Disentangles every knot.
HM
His irreverent friend and Downing Street assistant (unpaid and unofficial), John Wyndham, added,
And remember, if it doesn't
You will certainly be shot.
The new relaxed Downing Street style was instantly picked up by the Cabinet and greatly appreciated.
None had relished Eden's tendency to transmit his own nervousness to colleagues.
The transformation was vividly recalled by the man Macmillan pipped for the premiership, R. A. Butler:
Eden would ring up, sometimes as often as a dozen times a day, to ask why there had been a certain speech made in the provinces by a member of the opposition, why an answer hadn't been given, and that sort of thing.
When I came to Macmillan, it was with the greatest difficulty that I telephoned him at all.
Because when you raised the telephone…he showed great irritation and pretended not to hear you, so that it immediately made you think that you'd been unwise to telephone at all.
Macmillan may have appeared to treat the premiership as if he were a Whig grandee running a great estate in the gaps between his private reading.
In reality ‘he had a firm business-like approach to running the Cabinet’, according to John Barnes and Anthony Seldon.
He made use of the Cabinet-committee structure as a filter for business, though he chaired very few committees himself (the main exceptions were the Economic Policy and Defence committees).
He kept abreast of committee minutes and in dose touch with the chairmen.
Sometimes, if taking an initiative in an area he deemed crucial, he would take the chair, as he did at the Reflation Committee in 1958.
In the early years of his premiership he was very sharp, though, as Iain Macleod recalled, ‘he could be maddeningly discursive — it was nothing to reach a decision on an enquiry into rating via the Greek Wars and Parnell’.
He made Cabinet fun, as his successor, Lord Home, remembers: ‘He was marvellously entertaining always.
You did your business but it was great fun at the same time.’
All the same, Home thought he was over-indulgent: ‘Harold was very clever.
He was one of those prime ministers in Cabinet who let everyone talk — too much sometimes.’
Inevitably, Macmillan's grip slipped as his premiership wore on and the economic problems (pay pause and EEC membership) crowded in.
One Cabinet minister told Anthony Sampson that 
Harold is a very good prime minister as far as taking the Cabinet goes.
He takes it slowly, lets everyone have his say, and if they don't agree he doesn't mind calling an extra meeting to come back to it.
As he grows older he thinks about fewer things — he is now mainly occupied with the Common Market, the cold war and the Atlantic Alliance.
But he can turn his mind to detailed needs, like pensions, if he has to.
Macmillan took great pains to husband his energies.
He had seen Eden's health break under the strain.
Reading Jane Austen was more than an affectation: it was a life-preserver.
His habits of work, write Barnes and Seldon, were ‘business-like.
In contrast to his predecessors who worked at all hours of the day Macmillan tended to keep office hours.
He made it a rule that the work which flowed in during the course of the day had to be dealt with during that day, unless there was a very good reason.’
In terms of overload, though, the Macmillan years probably did add to the problem.
One of the reasons was procedural.
In the early 1960s the practice of fixed fifteen-minute sessions of Prime Minister's Questions twice a week was established.
This development, as Professor George Jones has pointed out, contributed to the modern phenomenon where the Prime Minister is expected to be answerable for every aspect of government business virtually all the time.
Secondly, Macmillan adored summits and playing the world statesman.
Foreign affairs and nuclear policy were among his greatest preoccupations.
Not everybody believes a profusion of summits are a good investment of prime ministerial time: the results do not always justify the hours and the nervous energy spent.
Lord Home for one disapproved, recalling ‘the only difference I ever had with Mr Macmillan.
He used to love summits.
I used to say ‘they are the most useless thing’….
He used to like the…social…side…of the…meeting.
Well, they are rather fun.
But as far as efficiency is concerned the work could be done without nearly so many.’
For what will Macmillan's Cabinet stewardship be remembered?
Certainly for his sacking of a third of his colleagues in the ‘Night of the Long Knives’ in July 1962.
His unflappability deserted him in the face of by-election reverses.
Lord Kilmuir's harsh recollection of his summary despatch may usefully be compared to Macmillan's sepia portrayal more than twenty years after the event.
First, Kilmuir:
On the following evening [11 July 1962], as a meeting of the Committee of the Cabinet was ending, Macmillan took me aside and said ‘The  Government is breaking up’, and murmured something about ‘You don't mind going?’
I was startled but merely replied, ‘You know my views.
–…
On the following morning, when I was attending another committee of the Cabinet, I was handed another message that the Prime Minister wished to see me….
I got the impression that he was extremely alarmed about his own position and was determined to eliminate any risk for himself by a massive change of Government.
It astonished me that a man who had kept his head under the most severe stresses and strains should lose both nerve and judgement in this way.
For Macmillan nineteen years later it was still, to be fair, a matter of regret.
But ‘It's a cruel life, politics.
Somebody's got to be in charge….
We had nearly 14 years of continuous office and a lot of my older friends were worn out.’
Macmillan's management of Cabinet will be remembered, too, for what Whitehall regards as ‘the biggest bounce of all’: Concorde — an enterprise which David Henderson, the former Chief Economist at the Ministry of Civil Aviation, has called one of ‘the three worst civil investment decisions in the history of mankind’.
The genesis of the Concorde project was a meeting of boffins at the Royal Aircraft Establishment, Farnborough, in February 1954, when Macmillan was still engaged in building his 300,000 houses a year.
For him the issue did not become live until well after the 1959 general election.
By 1962 — the critical year of decision — it had become bound up with high politics (rupturing a prestige Anglo-French collaborative project was not the best way of smoothing Britain's path to EEC membership) and the phenomenon of imperial surrogate whereby hi-tech enterprises became a substitute and a consolation for loss of empire.
True to his style, Macmillan held himself aloof while the programme crawled its way through the working-party and interdepartmental undergrowth, the estimated cost rising all the time and the Treasury losing no opportunity to attack the project on grounds of both need and expense.
In the spring of 1962, Lord Mills, Macmillan's favourite  industrialist from Ministry of Housing days, was invited to chair a committee to examine the pros and cons, and came out in favour.
In the autumn it went before a Cabinet committee chaired by Butler.
Jock Bruce-Gardyne and Nigel Lawson quote ‘a senior member’ of the committee summing up its conclusion thus: ‘even then we thought it was going to ruin us; but also that you can't control the march of science’.
The Treasury and the Ministry of Aviation, now run by  Julian Amery, Macmillan's son-in-law, remained at loggerheads as the issue moved to full Cabinet on Guy Fawkes Day 1962.
The ‘Europeans’ lined up with the ‘technologists’(and those who spoke for party opinion in the Commons) against the Treasury.
At last Macmillan showed his hand: it was essential to get the aircraft companies to contribute to the cost of Concorde's research and development.
But, if Britain pulled out, the French were likely to go ahead anyway.
Macmillan then deployed a favourite tactic: he deferred the final decision till a later meeting of the Cabinet.
Between the meetings he began to operate in earnest, seeing individually spending ministers worried that Concorde would drain funds from their budgets.
The final Cabinet meeting on Concorde abounds in folklore.
First, there is the lunch-break story (though it is not entirely clear that this relates to the very last meeting: it might relate to 5 November).
Barnes and Seldon deploy it as a classic example of Macmillanesque subtlety in handling colleagues.
He took his senior men aside at lunchtime for a tour d'horizon on ‘the wider implications of the project for European unity, and when the Cabinet resumed matters of cost and technical detail which had caused objections that morning were swallowed up in the wider prime ministerial perspective’.
Bruce-Gardyne and Lawson recount the most famous anecdote of all.
Reminiscences of the trenches in the First World War or Stockton-upon-Tees in the twenties and thirties (his favourite standbys) did not fit the occasion.
So he turned to an aged relative for assistance:
He told his colleagues about his great aunt's Daimler, which had travelled at the ‘sensible speed of thirty miles an hour’, and was sufficiently spacious to enable one to descend from it without removing one's top hat.
Nowadays, alas! people had a mania for dashing around.
But that being so Britain ought to ‘cater for this profitable modern eccentricity’!
He thought they all really agreed.
No one seriously dissented.
It was all over in a few minutes.
Ironically, Concorde travelled the crucial stage of its budget-busting passage just as Macmillan's new system for bringing both reason and control to the public-spending process was bedding down.
On the recommendation of a 1958 report from the Commons Select Committee on Estimates, a technocratic team had been commissioned to build on the forward looks for social-service and defence spending pioneered by the Treasury in the mid-fifties.
The committee took its  name from Lord Plowden, the former head of the Central Economic Planning Staff, who chaired it.
He led a team of Whitehall heavy-weights including the formidable Dame Evelyn Sharp from the Ministry of Housing and the Treasury's ebullient innovator Sir Richard ‘Otto’ Clarke.
Plowden's recommendation in 1960 of greater long-term planning of public spending went very much with the Macmillan grain.
Planning had been his cri de coeur as a Tory rebel in the thirties and was the cornerstone of his political testament,The Middle Way , first published in 1938.
As a result, the Plowden Report found favour at No. 10 and achieved a speedy and lasting impact on the machinery of Cabinet government.
In terms of personality, the Chancellor was strengthened by a second Treasury minister in the Cabinet with a special spending-brief, the Chief Secretary.
The first incumbent of the post, Henry Brooke, was appointed in October 1961.
A Public Expenditure Survey Committee (PESC) of finance officers from twenty-four departments, with a Treasury deputy secretary in the chair, provided ministers with five-year forward looks at expenditure patterns, and the notion of a rolling programme was established.
The big decisions thrown up by PESC have always been taken by full Cabinet, though Macmillan set a precedent followed by future prime ministers when he established in autumn 1960 a small Ministerial Action Group on Public Expenditure, known as ‘Magpie’.
Its membership consisted of Brooke (still Minister of Housing at that stage); Iain Macleod, the Colonial Secretary; and John Hare, Minister of Labour.
In their own way they were the spiritual precursors of Mrs Thatcher's ‘Star Chamber’.
Unlike in the early eighties, though, Tory philosophy in the early sixties embraced the concept of public expenditure as a positive tool of progress.
The establishment of the PESC system, like the way Macmillan eased the Concorde project through the Cabinet Room, is an illustration of his tactic of modernizing madly behind a smokescreen of Edwardian charm and timeless tradition.
It was fun to be a Cabinet minister under Macmillan unless you were Enoch Powell.
The Prime Minister rearranged the seating round the Cabinet table so that he could avoid the unnerving penetrating eyes of his Minister of Health, as Lord Home revealed in his memoirs:
One morning I came into the Cabinet Room rather early and found the Cabinet secretary, Sir Norman Brook…changing all our places.
I asked  what had happened —‘Had their been a shuffle?— or had one of us died in the night?’
‘Oh no, said Sir Norman, ‘it's nothing like that.
The Prime Minister cannot stand Enoch Powell's steely and accusing eye looking at him across the table any more, and I've had to move him down the side.’
Lord Home, Macmillan's surprise replacement after the undignified scramble (Home himself apart) for the Tory leadership in the autumn of 1963, avoided those steely eyes, as Powell refused to serve under him.
In a sense, Lord Home was a landed version of Attlee.
They are the only two post-war premiers to have had no time for the black arts of political news management and personal public relations.
Both were frugal in their use of energy and time.
Both practised political economy around the Cabinet table.
Both were tough on the prolix.
As we have seen, Home thought Macmillan, whom he liked and admired, lax in this respect.143 For Lord Home, in Cabinet ‘the great thing is to be short.
People can't bear — they've got enough to listen to already — and anybody who waffles is written off pretty quickly and, therefore, you lose your point….
To be short and concise is the secret of making an impact in Cabinet.’
Another Home technique for reducing the burden on the premiership was to devolve, even in an area central to his and the Government's fortunes:
HENNESSY
You were always very honest about the one area in which you lacked expertise, which was economics.
Did you try and compensate for that by the way you set up your Cabinet-committee structure?
Did you chair the Economic Policy Committee, can you remember?
HOME
Oh no.
No, no, I wouldn't.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer did that.
But I used to talk to him [Reginald Maudling]regularly, of course.
I used to talk to him regularly about what he was up to.
I was not familiar with economics.
They had never come my way.
Nor have I been encouraged ever since to think there's an exact science.
But it was a weakness.
If I had thought I was going to be Prime Minister, I would have taken more trouble to understand the various theories’.
In No. 10 Lord Home relied on his Principal Private Secretary, Derek Mitchell, a Treasury man, for assistance in this area.
‘He was very efficient.
I never understood a word about economics and his strength was economics.’
Lord Home, who possesses a degree of candour unusual in political life, is still ambivalent about his  handling of economic policy.
‘If I'd taken more trouble with economics I might have been more effective as Prime Minister.
But then, on the other hand, I believe in devolving your economics to the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
If he can't make a go of them, nobody can.’
In one area he did, reluctantly, take steps to improve upon his lack of natural gifts.
HENNESSY
It seems to be a conventional wisdom that relations with the media are absolutely crucial for a prime minister.
But you, with Mr Attlee, were thought to be the most unworldly of post-war prime ministers on that.
You just behaved as you, in fact, naturally were and had no time for the black arts of propaganda.
Is that right?
HOME
Well, I was bored by the whole of presentation as far as television was concerned because I think television is bound to be superficial.
I was wrong.
Harold Wilson convinced me I was wrong because he trained himself very, very well to be a pretty good television performer, and I think it is necessary for the Prime Minister.
I still regret it, but I'm afraid the Prime Minister has to appear a great deal on the media.
Lord Home's remains the unknown premiership of the post-war period.
One reason is that nothing very much happened between October 1963 and October 1964 in terms of high policy.
Activity was concentrated on the low politics of the forthcoming election.
‘There wasn't much scope for doing very much that year….
We had one controversial term — the Resale Price Maintenance Bill’, Lord Home recalled.
Resale-price maintenance (RPM) was the arrangement whereby the price of an article — an item of grocery or a washing-machine — was kept the same whether it was sold in the most efficient supermarket or the most run-down corner shop.
The Board of Trade, a free-trading department down to its last paper-clip, had long opposed this restrictive practice as a conspiracy against the consumer and as a malign, artificial inflator of prices.
But in the Tory Party there are a lot of votes piled up in corner shops.
Board of Trade officials had tried for nearly twenty years to change the policy of RPM.
But the political price was always judged too high by ministers, despite the logic of the abolitionist cause.
When Home succeeded Macmillan, he moved Edward Heath from the Foreign Office (where he had been Home's number two) to the Board of Trade.
The man, the hour and the issue were met.
Heath was determined to abolish RPM.
Heath sold it to Home as a symbol to the country  that, after twelve years in office, the Conservatives were still capable of radical action.
The party's political managers thought it a ruinous ploy in election year.
The Cabinet had to move swiftly, however.
The Labour MP John Stonehouse had a private member's bill on the subject about to begin its passage through the Commons.
RPM reached the full Cabinet on 14 January 1964.
The Cabinet was seriously divided.
Quintin Hogg was highly critical of the failure to prepare party opinion: ‘You must always let people see the cat before you let it out of the bag.’
Selwyn Lloyd, Redmayne and Blakenham warned of the effect on the party.
Butler was critical.
There was stalemate.
Stonehouse's bill was due for a second reading in three days' time.
The Government would have to be ready with a view either way.
Cabinet met again on 15 January with the words of one critic, who claimed it would be ‘throwing the small shopkeeper to the supermarket wolves’, still ringing in their ears.
As Nigel Lawson and Jock Bruce-Gardyne discovered subsequently through their excellent insider links,
This time the argument was entirely over the onus of proof.
Heath, in the words of one witness, ‘made it eyeball to eyeball’.
He refused to budge, and was given full support by Douglas-Home, whose diplomatic skills softened the rough edges of Heath's ‘extraordinary resolution’.
Eventually after, in all, three hours of Cabinet discussion of this one issue, the opponents conceded: Heath had won.
There was to be full-blooded abolition of RPM and legislation to achieve it that session'.
The furore on the Conservative side raged all year; it has been continually claimed ever since that RPM cost Home the October 1964 election, in which Labour won the slimmest majority of four seats.
Twenty years later, Lord Home was as philosophical as he was phlegmatic:
Ted Heath was very keen and nobody else was very much.
I thought it was right and therefore we went ahead.
It probably cost us seats at the general election.
That was a clear case where the Bill was right and the timing was wrong.
But I didn't feel I could overrule Ted Heath on this particular occasion because he was essentially right on what the Bill proposed….
It certainly lost us quite a lot of Conservative votes.
But then if a thing is so patently right…you have to take the decision and risk it.
Throughout his year in Downing Street, Lord Home brooded on ways of coping more successfully with the pressures on government.
He toyed with the possibility of a think-tank.
‘The idea had occurred to me.
But I didn't have the time to do anything except prepare for  the election during that year.’
He developed in his mind a set of procedural reforms for implementation after the election.
HOME
It would have been a much more efficient use of the Cabinet system, the committee system.
Because in my last five years before [becoming Prime Minister]I had been Foreign Secretary [and], therefore, away a lot.
But nevertheless I had seen the Cabinet agenda getting more and more overflowing and, therefore, Cabinet decisions had to be taken quickly.
You'd start off with parliamentary business then have a review of foreign affairs, and very important departmental things may often have to be shoved out of the way to another Cabinet.
Wasn't really as efficient as it could have been.
HENNESSY
So your ideal system would have been to have a few strategic Cabinet committees beneath the Cabinet that would have done all the most controversial business?
HOME
That's right.
And, what is more, I would have instructed the ministers, as far as the Prime Minister can instruct another minister, to take the decisions in their committees and only bring the really most controversial aspects of particular bills to Cabinet.
In other words, a lot more decisions ought to be taken at the committee level.
In the event, the problem of how to streamline Whitehall was handed by the electorate to that old Cabinet Office hand Harold Wilson.
At first glance, Wilson should have been a superlative practitioner of Cabinet government.
As the young secretary of the War Cabinet's Manpower Requirements Committee, he had learned his craft from Bridges and Beveridge; he was President of the Board of Trade and in the Cabinet at the age of thirty-one; he had a sense of history, he was numerate and he knew all the tricks of political manipulation and presentation.
When he took over in October 1964, he enjoyed two other advantages: his majority of four ensured that the fractious Parliamentary Labour Party would have to behave; and, apart from Patrick Gordon Walker, whom he appointed Foreign Secretary, and James Griffiths, who was sent to the newly created Welsh Office, only he possessed Cabinet experience.
This added to his ascendancy over the tyros round his Cabinet table in the autumn of 1964, as he now acknowledges.
‘It was very hard work in many ways’, he told me in February 1985, ‘and the fact that we'd been thirteen years [in Opposition]meant that most of them, almost all of them, had no experience at all in government.
To that extent it strengthened the hand of the Prime Minister in  my earlier period.’
Peter Shore, Wilson's Parliamentary Private Secretary in 1965–6, puts it even more strongly: ‘Harold's supremacy within that Cabinet in the first two, perhaps even three, years was enormous.’
Wilson self-consciously capitalized on that supremacy in his ‘First Hundred Days’ of dynamic action, a deliberate imitation of the Kennedy style in early 1960.
He played, as he would later say, the centre-forward role.
Included in that hundred-day programme was what at first sight seemed substantial changes in his own bailiwick — a clutch of new ministries, of which the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA) was the most important.
Peter Shore, who served as its last secretary of state, believes that the creation of the DEA was an attempt to remedy ‘the principal defect of Cabinet government, as well as the principal defect of economic policy, which was the overweening power of the Treasury, which was too great for…the full collective work of a Cabinet’.
The concept of the DEA, conceived, according to legend, by Wilson and his deputy, George Brown, in the back of a taxi on the short journey between the St Ermin's Hotel and the House of Commons (a legend Wilson has demolished, though on that journey he did offer Brown the job of running the DEA) had scarcely received the attention it deserved during Labour's preparation for power.
Wilson did put some flesh on the bones in a television interview with Norman Hunt, only to have it torn off in strips by the venerable Bridges, long since retired but still a determined advocate of a unitary Treasury dominating economic policy from the centre.
Yet the chaos that occurred after the election, when Brown was put into the DEA with the grand title of First Secretary of State, showed to what paltry use Wilson had put his unique background (unique, that is, since the death of his predecessor, Hugh Gaitskell) as skilled Whitehall technocrat and top-flight politician and parliamentarian.
The chaos was physical: early meetings in the Storey's Gate offices earmarked for the new department saw George Brown on a chair while everyone else ‘sat on the floor like Buddhas’.
It was hierarchical, with silly rows about the status and pay of its permanent secretary, Sir Eric Roll.
Most serious of all, chaos blighted both policy and politics as what was supposed to be the creative tension with the Treasury deteriorated into petty demarcations and empire-building.
This is not the place to attempt a history of the DEA.
For our purpose it is important to note that it merely threatened to dent the Treasury ascendancy over economic policy-making.
Until the  introduction of deflationary measures in July 1966 (Brown wanted devaluation as an alternative, and lost to Wilson and to Callaghan at the Treasury), the DEA and its mercurial First Secretary did present the Cabinet with an alternative voice and, in the shape of the 1965 National Plan, a growth strategy, an emphasis on production to counter the Treasury's obsession with finance.
Once Brown had departed to the Foreign Office in 1966, the life drained from the DEA.
Roy Jenkins, who succeeded Callaghan at the Exchequer after the enforced devaluation of November 1967, persuaded Wilson formally to bury the DEA cadaver in 1969.
Lord Wilson's account in 1985 of the decay of what was intended to mark a sea-change in the process and outcome of economic policy-making at the highest level is best read slowly and without comment — except, perhaps, to note that, in reforming terms, an almost ideal apprenticeship for a Prime Minister is no guarantee that he will deliver the goods:
HENNESSY
In 1964 when you came in you tried to recast both the structure and the thrust of Cabinet government….
There was a spate of new departments.
There was a Welsh Office, a Ministry of Land and Natural Resources, a Ministry of Overseas Development.
But, above all, there were two new bodies to tackle the fundamental problem of Britain's long-term economic decline, a Ministry of Technology to harness research and development to industry, and a Department of Economic Affairs to break the Treasury monopoly of advice.
They were going to produce a National Plan, which they did.
You were, in fact, a very production-minded Prime Minister.
What went wrong with all that?
WILSON
Sterling…in those days you couldn't float the pound.
You had to go through all the misery and raise it with the danger of leaks all the time in some of the central international establishments in America.
HENNESSY
So you think this vitiated all the economic planning that you'd so carefully prepared for?
WILSON
No, it didn't vitiate it.
The way the press attacked it and so on obviously made life a lot harder for us.
HENNESSY
But, before the devaluation, the Department of Economic Affairs had failed pretty consistently over three years to actually break the monopoly of Treasury advice and the National Plan had all but gone under.
What had gone wrong there?
WILSON
All of the Treasury.
They're still at it.
Recently, we were having a debate in the Lords and we got on to nationalization and I said that one thing that we need to nationalize in this country is the Treasury, but nobody has ever succeeded.
HENNESSY
One thing baffles me about that, Lord Wilson: you were Prime Minister, you were the boss, you were presiding over Cabinet government.
Whitehall is the direct-labour organization of a prime minister.
It's the one area where his writ runs.
Why couldn't you break the power of the Treasury and get your beloved Department of Economic Affairs to take off?
WILSON
Moles.
Moles.
‘Moles’ was a phrase we very often used about the Treasury and it's been used many times since.
The Treasury were very, very skilled chaps in more or less stopping you doing anything.
HENNESSY
You're suggesting they leaked against you and the departmental structure you wanted and undermined it?
WILSON
They lost it.
I mean I said ‘I want something by next Thursday’ and, of course, they weren't there or the papers weren't done.
And also they wanted harsh decisions to be taken in respect of their effects on industry.
HENNESSY
It's a very depressing conclusion that elected people, Cabinet, Prime Minister, cannot prevail against an ancient British institution at the centre of events in Whitehall…
WILSON
Some of us have had more success than others.
I had the advantage of having been in the Civil Service in the war and [was]even offered establishment in the Treasury as a permanent thing.
Anyone who had had that knew a bit about the Treasury and knew a little bit about fighting back and working round them and all the rest of it and of giving orders direct to the Chancellor and saying, ‘Look, this is what we must have’, and then getting the Cabinet to back it, so that it was harder for the Treasury to say ‘No.’
They still wheedled and played their little tricks.
But, with the Cabinet decision and the Chancellor party to it, it was harder for them, and I think we had more success than most other governments in doing this just because I knew the background.
HENNESSY
Why, then, did you wind up the Department of Economic Affairs in ‘69?
WILSON
It was a disappointment.
The Treasury, as I say, undermined it to some extent, but all the time there was duplication going on.
And, well, I just felt it had been worth trying but it wasn't going to work.
The fate of the DEA was symbolic of Wilson the supreme Whitehall technician — failure at every level, from the Cabinet command post to the interdepartmental bush, where drive, energy and strategy can disappear without trace.
His was a hugely disappointing premiership in terms of modernizing the instruments of government.
His explanation, in our 1985 conversation, of what happened to the DEA is typical too.
He is an arch-practitioner of the politics of scapegoating.
It was all the Treasury's fault.
As the disappointments crowded in — the economy, Rhodesia, strife  within the trade-union movement — Wilson tried the expedient of a semi-formal inner Cabinet, or Parliamentary Committee, as he misleadingly liked to call it.
‘Civil servants’, wrote Susan Crosland, ‘thought the inner Cabinet a joke.’
Certainly, as Wilson used it, it seems to have been as much an instrument of personnel management as one of Cabinet government.
If a member crossed him on a policy issue, as Callaghan did on trade-union reform in the spring of 1969, he would be expelled, even if, like Callaghan as Home Secretary, he was a pillar of the administration.
A similar fate had befallen Tony Crosland, President of the Board of Trade, a year earlier.
Every twitch in the fortune of Cabinet government under Wilson Mark I was lovingly recorded by Dick Crossman, the would-be Bagehot of the twentieth century.
There he sat at home on his Oxfordshire farm every few months, behaving like a one-man Greek chorus, informing us (he had every intention even then of publishing well short of the thirty-year limit) of the vicissitudes of the British Constitution.
Initially he is overwhelmed: ‘I continue to have this curious sense of fiction, the feeling that I am living in a Maurice Edelman novel.
All this business of being a Cabinet Minister is still unreal to me….
It's as if we are taking part not in real life but in a piece of reportage on the British constitutional system’(22 October 1964).
He gets shirty with Sir Burke Trend because of the impersonal way in which the Cabinet Minutes are prepared: ‘I pointed this out to Burke Trend and I said, ‘Harold can't have said this.’
To which he replied, ‘Ah, of course, he never said it, we never do give verbatim what people say.
We précis the sense and give the substance of what they say.’
To which I replied, ‘This is not the substance of what he said, and if it had been the substance he would have divided the Cabinet’ ' (15 December 1964).
Occasionally, on the train from Banbury to Paddington, Crossman would do his Bagehot impression, as in this entry for 19 July 1965:
I came up to London last night by the last train because I had to face a Monday morning of solid Cabinet Committees.
As I sat there first at EDC [Economic Development Committee]and then at Home Affairs, I reflected on the way that Cabinet Committees as well as the Cabinet itself are becoming part of the dignified element of the English constitution.
This is very largely because under this Government, maybe under all governments, Ministers are more and more departmentally conditioned before they come to these meetings….
And no Department will prepare a brief for its Minister on anything outside the departmental purview.
Crossman consulted Thomas Balogh (the Oxford economist and close friend of Wilson then residing rather unhappily in the Cabinet Office).
They agreed on the need for ministers to bring in their own staff from outside to remedy this conditioning:
If I started again I would like to have…(1) a ghost writer, not for my speeches but for my letters and statements: he would be the kind of person who could take the Ministry's policy and translate it into the kind of words I would use;(2) perhaps an economist; and (3) a general investigator whose job it would be to brief me so that I could participate intelligently at Cabinet Committees and in Cabinet on subjects outside my own Department.
All these men would not only write; they would also have to read, because the Minister is not able to read all the Cabinet agenda before he gets there, or even all the agenda of the Cabinet Committees; and if he does read the papers he reads them with an eye which often fails to understand and to spot the relevant.
Crossman at heart was a traditionalist.
He believed in collective Cabinet government and abhorred anything that smacked of an over-mighty premiership.
For example, he took comfort from the deflationary economic measures of July 1966, which he opposed, as it gave him the chance ‘to reassert collective Cabinet authority because I see how disastrous it is to allow Cabinet government to decline into mere Prime Ministerial government…if I achieved anything it was by asserting the right of Cabinet to take part in the making of economic strategy so that Harold conceded we must be given that right’.
It did not last.
The entry in Barbara Castle's diary for 3 January 1968 records a dinner at Crossman's Westminster home where she, her host, Peter Shore, Tony Benn (then Minister of Technology) and Balogh engaged in a collective whinge about Wilson's management of Cabinet:
Dick told me I had got it all wrong.
None of these special Cabinet committees really did anything: it didn't matter a damn that people like Wedgie [Mr Benn]and me were not on SEP [Steering Committee on Economic Policy]or OPD [Oversea Policy and Defence].
The trouble with Cabinet was not that Harold ran it through little cabals, but that there was no focal point of decision-making at all.
Harold operated purely bilaterally, ringing up some Ministers on some things and others on others ('And only ringing us up when he wants something’, interjected Wedgie).
Wedgie suggested that we urgently need an inner Cabinet of four: Chancellor, Foreign Secretary, Lord President  and Secretary of State for Economic Affairs with, of course, the PM.
‘And backed by a proper Cabinet secretariat’, added Tommy.
‘Burke Trend would never stand for that, it would undermine his power’, said Dick.
Crossman and Castle were longstanding allies.
From time to time they would engage in what read like mannered conversations on whether they were acting as Cabinet ministers or as purely departmental ministers.
Even the most casual reader of the Crossman and Castle diaries cannot fail to pick up the sense of exhaustion that permeates their pages.
The late sixties, in soccer terms, were the era of Alf Ramsey, who placed supreme emphasis on work rate.
Wilson, himself a soccer fan, was the same, as Crossman discovered when he went to see him in April 1970 about a set of lectures on Cabinet government he was preparing for Harvard:
The next point that upset him was that I said that unlike the American President, the Prime Minister was relieved of a great deal of official ceremonial by the Queen and Prince Philip.
Harold said that this would be a most unhappy way of putting it.
‘I hope you won't say that.
After all, let's be clear about it.
Macmillan was an idle man, who just didn't work as Prime Minister, and Douglas-Home was idle.
I am not an idle man, I have never worked harder than I do here.’
Crossman on that occasion found Wilson ‘rather white and puffy’.
But not all Wilson's senior ministers fell into the overload trap.
Roy Jenkins, both as Chancellor of the Exchequer and as Home Secretary, was expert at itemizing the workload of his high office and at time-budgeting accordingly.
Reviewing Mrs Castle's diaries for 1964–70, he observed loftily if accurately, ‘She was always ‘dragging’ herself to an early meeting, ‘crawling’with exhaustion out of Cabinet, and finally ‘creeping home’to a tired bed.
She made exhaustion into a political virility symbol, and was foolishly critical of those who did not believe that decisions were best taken in a state of prostration.’
Across the road in Parliament in the late sixties, as Wilson, Castle and Crossman wore themselves out in the cause, as they saw it, of a more modern and socially just Britain, there sat in the Leader of the Opposition's office a man who not only shared the Jenkins view of workload but was planning exactly what he would do about it if the electorate gave him his chance.
Edward Heath was the most managerially minded prime minister since Attlee.
As part of what he  would later call his ‘quiet revolution’, Heath made detailed preparations for a new style of government, business-like, rational and free of Wilsonian gimmickry.
‘Heath’, wrote Phillip Whitehead, ‘was a problem solver first, and ideologue only a distant second.’
Heath, in fact, was a permanent secretary manqué .
He would tell friends that, if, after he had taken the Civil Service Competition in 1946, he had been offered the Treasury instead of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, he would have stayed in Whitehall and eschewed a political career.
This trait was noted by fellow politicians such as Enoch Powell: ‘[Ted]believes there is an answer to all problems which can be worked out by proper bureaucratic means — I'm not using that word abusively for once— by the proper approach.
If all the relevant facts are assembled and put together by competent people, and logical analysis is made, then that will provide the answer.’
The same was noticed by the senior civil servants themselves, who, almost without exception, had a high regard for the former assistant principal in the Ministry of Civil Aviation.
‘Ted’, said one, ‘was a technocrat.
He would have been a jolly good permanent secretary.
He was rather slow, rather ponderous.
And, unlike Mrs Thatcher, he did not rush to conclusions.
He liked to sit seeing others, including the permanent secretaries, arguing in front of him.
He would make up his mind and then he was unshiftable.’
One insider has a view of Heath in Downing Street etched in his memory.
The Prime Minister was coming down the stairs from the first floor flanked by Burke Trend, the Cabinet Secretary, William Armstrong, Head of the Home Civil Service, and Robert Armstrong, then his Principal Private Secretary — all three Treasury men.
‘There's Ted’, mused the insider, ‘surrounded by the Treasury.’
Many noticed he was happier in the company of the permanent secretaries than he was with his ministerial colleagues.
In Opposition days, Heath the permanent secretary manqué set about preparing for government with a will.
In chapter 5 below, David Howell, his leading backroom boy, describes the work of the Public Sector Research Unit, how it scoured North America for business methods adaptable to Whitehall's needs and searched for think-tanks to visit.
Heath sought the advice of seasoned Whitehall figures such as Lord Plowden and Lord Roberthall, who were summoned to his flat in the Albany.
He had an appetite for organization very rare in a politician.
As he later told Charles Wintour and Robert Carvel of the Evening Standard ‘I find this [the machinery of government]of extraordinary interest.’
The result of that extraordinary interest was a White Paper four months after Heath's surprising victory in the general election of June 1970.
The Reorganisation of Central Government marks the most systematic attempt to reform the mechanics of Cabinet government since Lloyd George.
In its second paragraph it accepted the overload thesis:
This administration believes that government has been attempting to do too much.
This has placed an excessive burden on industry, and on the people of the country as a whole, and has also overloaded the government machine itself.
Public administration and management in central government has stood up to these strains, but the weakness has shown itself in the apparatus of policy formulation and in the quality of many government decisions over the last 25 years.
There are clear signs that senior officials, such as Burke Trend, William Armstrong and Ian Bancroft, involved in drafting the 1970 White Paper went along with the Heath analysis.
The remedies adopted reflected very strongly the work of Heath's backroom team of the late sixties and were intended to ‘remove the need for continual changes for a considerable period in the future’.
There were three main strands to the Heath reform:
(1)
an efficiency system, Programme Analysis and Review, designed to examine critically longstanding policy commitments and to improve policy-making at the micro-level;
(2)
a change in the departmental structure creating giant super-ministries such as Department of the Environment and the Department of Trade and Industry to suck back decision-taking from the centre; and the establishment of business-like organizations, such as the Property Services Agency and the Procurement Executive, to secure the better management of large blocks of Whitehall work;
(3)
the foundation of ‘a small multi-disciplinary central policy review staff in the Cabinet Office’ to help formulate and sustain a clearer overall strategy for the administration as a whole, for ‘governments are always at the same risk of losing sight of the need to consider the totality of their current policies in relation to their longer-term objectives’.
When his new style of government was still running in, Heath explained to Wintour and Carvel that his aim was ‘a more intensive Cabinet government’ rather than prime-ministerial government, ‘because it's the Cabinet all the time which is dealing with the strategy’.
He outlined his purpose to the pair of journalists in much the same words as he had used to the members of the nascent Rothschild CPRS on the lawn at No. 10 in 1971:
What was most important was for the Cabinet to be in a position to take strategic decisions.
I had seen Cabinets which all the time seemed to be dealing with the day-to-day problems and there was never a real opportunity to deal with strategy, either from the point of view of the Government or the country.
What I wanted to do was so to change things that the Cabinet could do that.
Implementation of the thinking developed in Opposition was not totally smooth, however, as David Howell remembers:
HOWELL
Of course, once we got into government a great many of our ambitions and aims and the ideas we'd seized hold of from talking to the Americans, people like Robert McNamara for instance , of the American Department of Defense, came up against the realities of Whitehall.
Nevertheless, we did find a general mood in Whitehall and amongst the senior civil servants that their system was not perfect and that the time had come for some fairly radical changes.
And I think even while we'd been in Opposition, remember no one knew whether we were going to win or not, it surprised many people when we did, there had been some sort of discreet across-the-fence interest at the professional Civil Service level in some of the concepts that we were developing and I'd made it a point of writing the occasional pamphlet as our thinking went along to send out smoke signals to everyone including the civil servants as to what we were about.
HENNESSY
The outcome of the exercise in the White Paper, I think, had three main parts: one was a new think-tank, the Central Policy Review Staff, which presumably reflected some of the stuff you'd seen in the United States at Rand and so on; the other was a new system of, I suppose you would call it, zero-based budgeting, where you would look at longstanding government commitments and see if they should stagger on — that was Programme Analysis and Review; and, to reduce the weight on Cabinet, there were to be big conglomerate departments, which led to the Department of Trade and Industry and the Department of the  Environment.
Now, what in fact had been watered down from your original keenness in the late sixties in terms of what actually emerged in that White Paper?
What had the civil servants bargained away?
HOWELL
Well, I think the form was rather similar to what we wanted.
The substance, though, was not.
First of all the Central Policy Review Staff.
Frankly some of us actually wanted that to be a staff for No. 10, for the Prime Minister, rather more like today's Policy Unit which the present Prime Minister has in No. 10, and less a general body to serve all the Cabinet.
We thought that No. 10 was under-equipped to deal with the great departments of state.
So we wanted the CPRS to be less of a Cabinet-wide body more serving the Prime Minister than was actually the case.
As far as the conglomerate departments were concerned, I think those came about broadly as we intended.
But, of course, our idea depended on something else as well , namely the substantial delegation of functions to non-departmental bodies and indeed the privatization of functions as well .
We said everything should be examined and questioned to see whether it needed to be done at all.
If it needed to be done, could it be done in the private or public sector?
And if it had to be done in the public sector then could it be done by a separate hived-off body or by a department?
And, even if it had to be done by a department, could it be done with fewer people in a different and more managerially efficient way?
So we wanted this systematic question to go right through Whitehall and to greatly reduce the functional load on departments.
As it was, the functional off-loading didn't really get going, so these departments ended up huge in policy terms but huge in functional terms as well.
And that I think led to some weaknesses.
Heath's new style of government was tested to near destruction within three years as a concatenation of crises generated at home and abroad struck his administration in 1973.
But, before we examine his 1970 model under stress, it is necessary to eavesdrop on the Heath style in the Cabinet Room.
There was no lightness of touch.
It was always a very serious business.
As one insider put it, ‘In the Cabinet he would sit there glowering and saying practically nothing.
The colleagues would watch him to see what impression their words were making.
Then he would come down one way or another and that was it.
He wasn't terribly interested in the politics of it.
He would just do it if it was right and that, in the end, was what got him into trouble.’
David Howell was not a member of Mr Heath's Cabinet but he was close to him.
I asked him about Heath's style as Prime Minister:
HENNESSY
He's said to have been very presidential in the Cabinet Room.
I know you were only a junior minister, but one hears about things when one's down the line, that he was very presidential, that he wouldn't let them talk much and was very stiff and frozen.
And yet he did encourage those six-monthly sessions at Chequers when the think-tank would come and brief the full Cabinet, and smaller ones in No. 10 for the junior ministers.
And it's never quite fitted for me that he could be so stiff and laconic in Cabinet and yet try and be much more expansive on these set-piece occasions.
HOWELL
Yes, as you say, I wasn't in the Cabinet so I can't really speak with any authority at all about how he conducted affairs there.
But, of course, he was and is a fairly silent man.
He's very amusing and can be a very able speaker in public.
But he's not a great conversationalist and not a great chatterer and talker and worker out of problems, like, for instance, Viscount Whitelaw, whose genius is that he's always absolutely ready with many views on every single problem that's going, political, policy and so on .
That wasn't Ted Heath's style at all.
He's a very silent man and yet I think he actually, at the same time, the opposite side of the silence and inwardness,…did want a great many people working on issues and analysing them around him.
I remember before he became Prime Minister he was in charge of the Conservative re-think where I helped him do a lot of that work and I think he enjoyed that very much.
He was very good at it.
He was always waiting, very receptive to new ideas and so he did like people and organizations to present their views and he did like to hear discussion.
But he didn't say much himself.
HENNESSY
The other thing that was said about him, particularly towards the end, after the U-turn on economic policy, was that he'd been captured by his officials, and that he also, in the end, rather relished the company of the permanent secretaries more than he did his Cabinet colleagues.
Is that fair?
HOWELL
I think there is obviously a danger with all people in high office that very able officials round them with very clear minds who are aside from all the political pressures must be a very attractive haven.
I should think that all politicians, and I speak for myself, we all face this temptation.
You forget the political pressures and relax in the company of brilliant minds.
And I'm sure that Ted Heath was as prone to that as the rest of us and he had some very able people round him.
One aspect of bureaucratic life which did not appeal to the permanent secretary manqué in No. 10 was the dense committee undergrowth.
He took the opportunity of Sir Burke Trend's retirement in 1973 to hack it down.
Cabinet committees were reduced by half from around 140 to seventy.
Heath also used the opportunity of Trend's retirement  to change the nature of the steering-briefs for the Prime Minister — Brook's innovation, it will be recalled.
‘Burke Trend’, said one insider, ‘used to say a brief should be Socratic and ask a series of questions.
John Hunt developed a more stylized form of briefing.
All new entrants to the Cabinet Office got a model brief.
Section one would give the background and the options.
Section two was on handling the problems that were likely to come up.
Section three was the conclusions, the decisions needed with a bit of advice.’
In addition, Heath adopted the expedient of mixed  committees of ministers and civil servants, a task-force approach to Cabinet government.
He thought it wasted time to have official committees pre-processing options before they came before ministerial groups.
The mixed committee experiment was generally unsuccessful.
Civil servants found it very difficult to contradict their ministers or to pursue a different line.
There was one major exception which worked well — the Civil Contingencies Unit created after the 1972 miners' strike.
It gave ministers an improved intelligence system on the physical consequences of industrial disputes in vulnerable industries and services.
It also fashioned an improved operational instrument for ministerial use to buy time and to distribute scarce resources once a dispute started.
By and large it performed well during the miners' industrial action of 1973–4 and the concurrent ‘go-slows’ in the electricity-supply industry, as David Howell recalls:
HOWELL
The system of government was rather good.
In fact I'm told we ran the three-day week so well that it didn't make enough impact on the country; they didn't realize the crisis and thought they wouldn't support Ted Heath.
HENNESSY
So the Civil Contingencies Unit, the Cabinet committee set up after the miners' strike of ‘72, which I've no doubt you were intimately involved in, in –74 actually delivered the goods.
It ran Britain exceedingly well under duress.
HOWELL
I think it did.
I think everyone says the three-day week produced some remarkable results and I think that side of things continues to be run very well indeed.
I am enormously impressed.
It's fashionable, and always has been, to sneer at civil servants.
I think the way in which they organize that side of things is quite brilliant.
The Civil Contingencies Unit does seem to have stood up well to the battering inflicted by the 1973–4 winter of discontent.
Serious collapse was avoided (though, as one official involved recalled, ‘it was  pretty close at the end’), but the new style of government as a whole did not stand up so well.
As ministers grappled with a quadrupling of oil prices after OPEC's deployment of the oil weapon in October 1974 and mounting industrial trouble at home, exhaustion and slipshod policy-making accumulated relentlessly, one problem compounding another.
Heath, a glutton for work, had also to devote large chunks of energy and concentration to the EEC and to Ireland as the Sunningdale Conference on power-sharing approached.
Douglas Hurd's memoir captures the reality the particular cocktail of overload mixed by the pressures of late autumn and early winter 1973:
On Sunday 8 December, for example, the Prime Minister entertained the Italian Prime Minister, Signor Rumor, to dinner at Chequers.
The meal was hardly over when Mr Heath flew to Sunningdale by helicopter to preside over the last stage of the conference on the future of Northern Ireland.
Three days later it was time for the state visit of President Mobutu of Zaire.
Two days after that the European summit began in Copenhagen.
These were four major events, two of them (Sunningdale and Copenhagen) of outstanding importance.
They were all the kind of diplomatic event which in normal times Mr Heath would much enjoy and at which he would perform very well.
They all involved talks, travel, long meals, extensive briefing beforehand; yet none of them had anything to do with the crisis which was swallowing us up.
The officials on whom Heath relied so heavily felt the strain too.
One broke under it.
William Armstrong, Heath's right-hand man particularly after the U-turn in 1972 on incomes policy, public expenditure and industrial intervention, may have been, as Head of the Home Civil Service, one step removed by virtue of his office (Sir Douglas Allen was Permanent Secretary to the Treasury).
But Heath raised him to a kind of economic overlordship which led Bill Kendall of the Civil and Public Services Association to dub him ‘deputy prime minister’, a tag which stuck.
In bureaucratic terms, Armstrong was the keystone in the arch of Heath's economic strategy from the autumn of 1972.
By the end of January 1974, Armstrong, a highly sensitive man, was at a conference at Ditchley Park in Oxfordshire ‘talking wildly of coups and coalitions to his alarmed fellow guests’.
Campbell Adamson of the Confederation of British Industry went with his fellow industrialists to a meeting with Armstrong in February 1974: ‘We listened to a lecture about how Communists were infiltrating everything.
They might even be infiltrating, he said, the room he was in.
It was quite clear that the immense strain and overwork was taking  its toll, and two days later of course he had to give up and have a rest.’
The proud anti-overload device, the 1970 White Paper, had not noticeably eased the burden of government when overload went into overdrive after October 1973.
The system changed gear into short-term crisis management — the CPRS, whose energy study in the summer of 1973 had predicted the oil-price explosion, included.
No longer was it to be a question of careful, rational long-term planning of public expenditure.
It was a desperate search for cuts and economies.
Programme Analysis and Review was too slow and too cumbersome to inject reason into necessity.
In January 1974, Heath's giant Department of Trade and Industry was broken up and a separate Department of Energy created.
Heath had heeded official opinion, which argued that now too much policy-making was bottled up in the super ministry and too little was reaching Cabinet.
As Heath went down to electoral defeat in February 1974, the yellowing of the 1970 Reorganisation of Central Government White Paper was the last thing on people's mind.
Heath wanted to be, in machinery-of-government and Cabinet terms, the Lloyd George of the 1970s.
The National Union of Mineworkers and the oil sheikhs denied him the title.
Yet, ten years later, some surprising people remembered and cared.
‘Ted Heath’, said Dr David Owen in November 1983, ‘had some of the best ideas of any postwar Prime Minister.
He…was a rather radical person.’
One senior official with a ringside seat at the traumas of winter 1973–4 contemplated resignation during the first week of March so that he could tell the country that Heath was a serious man and had been a worthy prime minister.
It was the reappearance of Harold Wilson in the driving-seat of government which prompted this.
The official stayed and, in later years, coined the best metaphor for the Wilson style: Harold as the great player of Space Invaders taking the first blip to cross the screen whether it was important or not.
Wilson's own choice of metaphor was no longer that of the centre forward, but the seasoned centre half feeding passes to his experienced forwards and allowing them to score the goals.
For those officials who remembered Harold Mark I in 1964, he was not the same man ten years later.
‘I always had the impression’, said one, ‘that we were not seeing the best of Harold Wilson in that period.
He was tired and almost bored.’
He did tinker a bit with the machine.
The Department of Trade and Industry was broken up still further into three separate  departments: Trade, Prices and Consumer Protection, and Industry, to accommodate the ministerial dispositions he wished to make in the Cabinet.
Each Cabinet minister was allowed up to two ‘special advisers’ drawn from outside Whitehall who would serve as temporary civil servants for the duration of the administration.
Wilson therefore regularized a practice he had begun in 1964 when outsiders such as Professors Nicholas Kaldor and Robert Neild had been recruited into the Treasury, a practice which Heath had followed on a smallish scale.
He showed little interest in the CPRS, but was happy enough to keep it and sent Lord Rothschild a chirpy Prime Minister's personal minute on 1 April 1974 which Rothschild reproduced in his Random Variables :
In view of the current economic crisis, I would be grateful if you would give consideration to the following figures:
Population of the United Kingdom 54,000,000
People aged 65 and over 14,000,000
People aged 18 and under 18,000,000
People working for the Government 9,000,000
The Armed Forces 2,300,000
Local Government employees 9,800,000
People who won't work 888,000
People detained at Her Majesty's pleasure 11,998
Total 53,999,998
Balance left to do the work 2
You and I, therefore, must work harder, especially you, as I have felt no evidence of your considerable weight since I took office.
1 April 1974
HW
Wilson's most important and, to date, durable innovation in March 1974 was the creation, separate from the CPRS, of a Downing Street Policy Unit under Dr Bernard Donoughue, a political scientist from the London School of Economics.
It was a prime-ministerial cabinet in all but name and plunged instantly into the economic blizzard which engulfed the new Labour administration and with which, initially, it coped so inadequately.
Labour's first fifteen months back in office — the era of the Social Contract between government and unions, the partnership meant to curb soaring inflation in return for an improved ‘social wage’— was a very one-sided affair.
As Joel Barnett, Wilson's Chief Secretary to the Treasury, later described ‘the quaintly titled social contract’, ‘the only give and take in the contract was that the government gave and the unions took’.
For all its experience, the Wilson Cabinet grappled scarcely at all with the realities of the post-OPEC economy.
Bernard Donoughue noted ‘the almost complete absence of discussion of economic policy.
I think it's true that the Cabinet never really discussed economic policy before the October [1974]election; indeed didn't, as I recall, discuss it until early 1975.’
Its weekend strategy session in the autumn of 1974, tapping the intellectual horsepower of the CPRS, is graphically recorded in Mrs Castle's diary entry for Sunday 17 November.
It is worth quoting at length for a number of reasons: it is the only detailed eyewitness account available of a CPRS Chequers presentation to ministers during the Review Staff's thirteen-year life; and, perhaps most important of all, it captures the banality and desperation of top-level discussions on intractable problems at a time of crisis.
Mrs Castle opens her account with a few reflections on the ‘feminine’ touch Edward Heath had brought to the redecoration of Chequers and some bitter-sweet memories of 1969, when she and Wilson had clashed there with trade-union leaders over the In Place of Strife proposals for union reform.
Her note of the occasion, which took place in the library at Chequers, speaks volumes about the quality of British government in the mid 1970s:
Though the CPRS had drawn up an agenda in four parts, starting with our relationship with the external world, we soon found ourselves in the middle of a second reading debate over the whole field.
Ken Berrill [Head of the CPRS]introduced the discussion succinctly, setting out the problems (the threatening world slump, the petrodollar crisis, etc.) rather than attempting to answer them.
Harold Lever then spoke to his own paper.
‘We have only a 50 per cent chance of avoiding world catastrophe’, he told us.
Getting some international machinery to recycle the petrodollar was the only hope.
Everything else, like petrol rationing, was only ‘frolics at the margin'.
We should broadly back the Americans.
Denis [Healey]admitted that it was very unlikely we could close the whole of the balance of payments gap by 1978–79, even if things went well.
But unless we improved our competitiveness our balance of payments position would become disastrous.
There was a strong case for an energy conservation programme, if only on psychological grounds.
Roy [Jenkins]ruminated: ‘Your memory is better than mine, Prime Minister, but I believe it is ten years ago to this very day that we sat in this  room discussing the Defence Review.
The world has changed out of all recognition since then.’
He then talked about the changes in the power blocs, adding that those like himself who had expected the coherence of Europe to develop strongly had found the reality ‘disappointing’.
The Middle East situation was full of menace and he believed a pre-emptive strike by the USA was possible.
Eric [Varley]talked about energy extremely competently, though he insisted that looking for major energy savings was likely to be ‘extremely disappointing’.
He was ‘very opposed’ to petrol rationing and maintained that rota cuts, organised systematically, would be the only effective method — and they were out of the question.
The only hope was to move to energy self-sufficiency.
But the miners' attitude was frightening.
He had been speaking only a day or two ago to a miners' meeting attended by what he called the ‘Scargill Mafia’.
When he told them that the Government could have used more oil at the power stations this summer and so built up coal stocks for the winter against a possible strike, but hadn't, they merely  retorted , ‘More fool you’ and thanked him for letting them know how strong their position was.
He concluded sadly: ‘Don't let us frighten the oil companies away.’
We needed their investment.
Wedgie [Tony Benn]then made what I found a very effective speech, pointing out that we had got to look at the problem in domestic as well as international terms.
A devolution of power had also been going on at home and all our policy must take account of it.
‘We cannot win consent to a technocratic solution.
We must redistribute power in this country by peaceful means.
Beyond the slump must be the perspective of a better society.’
He did not believe the solution lay in bigger and bigger units: he had been immensely struck by the emphasis which Jim [Callaghan]laid on devolution in his paper.
‘We must show what sort of Government we are.’
Were we going to go for impersonal macro-solutions, or were we going to realise that the people were looking for us as their leaders to provide an answer to their difficulties?
To them their leaders seemed utterly remote.
‘Without consent no solution we work out round this table will have a chance.’
Mike [Foot]said wryly that if, as Harold Lever said, we had only a 50 per cent chance of avoiding catastrophe, we had better work out a contingency plan in case that chance did not come off.
Roy [Mason]made a fluent contribution about the added danger of war in the Middle East.
The gathering gloom was compounded by Jim [Callaghan]acting Cassandra as usual.
‘When I am shaving in the morning I say to myself that if I were a young man I would emigrate.
By the time I am sitting down to breakfast I ask myself, ‘Where would I go ?’’
(Laughter).
Mike had talked about contingency plans for catastrophe, he continued.
If we ever got to a siege economy he, Jim, dreaded the effect on our democracy.
He didn't think that the US would do a Suez in the Middle East.
The more likely prospect was our declining influence.
‘One prospect is that we shall lose our seat on  the Security Council.’
Jim concluded gloomily that in his view we should go on sliding downhill for the next few years.
‘Nothing in these papers makes me believe anything to the contrary.
I haven't got any solution.
As I said, if I were a young man, I should emigrate.’
By this time faces were getting pretty long.
I hadn't intended to speak on the external affairs section, but the discussion had widened so much that I came in with the attached remarks.
Mrs Castle's contribution to this cornucopia of political wisdom and strategic insight was that policies had to be put in their philosophical context to win consent.
Presentation was the key.
It must be demonstrated to the ordinary worker what he gained from public expenditure, the so-called ‘social wage’.
At this point, Denis Healey, Chancellor of the Exchequer and the Cabinet's intellectual heavyweight, weighed in:
Denis rallied the defeatists with a robust speech: what everyone had said showed how pretentious were some of the demands made by the party for us to interfere here, there and everywhere.
‘It is no good ceasing to be the world's policeman in order to become the world's parson instead.’
But he would have nothing of Jim's gloom.
‘If we do join the Third World it will be as a member of OPEC.’
He wasn't as pessimistic as Harold L. (who by this time had gone home, pleading that he was suffering from gastric flu).
We could not sensibly plan ahead for a doomsday-type catastrophe.
He agreed with Wedgie about the dissolution of the power blocs.
He rejected the conspiracy theory of foreign affairs.
‘International Communism has as much or as little significance as the Commonwealth.’
by this time it was nearly 1.00 pm.
Harold summed up by saying the discussion had been first-class: ‘the best I have ever heard in this type of gathering’.
Wilson's last remark is truly chilling.
He had been Prime Minister for nearly seven years in all when he produced that judgement.
What can the ‘second-class’ discussions of his Cabinets have been like?
This was not some throwaway line intended to perk them up before lunch after a morning of incoherent doomwatching.
He took the opportunity of his first book after leaving No. 10 to state, ‘I was not exaggerating when I called the 1974 Cabinet the most experienced and talented Cabinet this century, transcending even the Campbell-Bannerman Administration of 1905.’
Matters did not improve in the afternoon when Tony Crosland, a man of immense intellectual curiosity and an adornment of the Oxford  Economics Faculty in the immediate post-war period, added his dose of wisdom and hope: ‘There was’, he said, ‘no surefire recipe for economic growth.’
(He can say that again!)
There was a role for general incentives and also one for selective assistance.
We needed to find a balance between them and help the regions to help themselves.’
We did not know, continued Crosland, how our relative decline had taken place.
He added what could, with a slight dose of exaggeration, serve as the epitaph of modern Cabinet government: ‘All we can do is press every button we've got.
We do not know which, if any, of them will have the desired results.’
Lord Wilson found nothing untoward about the quality of that Chequers discussion when I reminded him of it in conversation more than ten years later.
‘It meant that I'd got through all my policies…[they]all had a little bit of fun and expression and there was no change in policy.
I was quite pleased with it.’
On minor matters, too, Cabinet drift was evident.
Joel Barnett, a new boy to Cabinet-committee life, was suitably shocked by what he found.
‘On complex issues, Cabinet committees are just about the worst possible way of arriving at sensible decisions….
In most cases, the ministers not directly involved had either read the brief late the previous night, or started to do so as the argument proceeded.’
He quickly learned the tricks.
The Cabinet committee on a new Government Conference Centre to be built on the Storey's Gate site ruled out the investment on grounds of cost (it was subsequently given the go-ahead and, as of Autumn 1985, has almost been completed).
Playing it long became second nature.
Barnett wanted to defer the building of a new British Library next to St Pancras Station.
‘I was once told of a favourite phrase of Harold Wilson's: ‘A decision deferred is a decision made.’
Well, we deferred many difficult decisions, and this was just one of them.’
But Wilson remained supreme at one aspect of Cabinet management and control: the art of isolating his more turbulent opponents within the government.
For example, Tony Benn, his Industry Secretary, was wedded, in a fashion the Prime Minister found highly inconvenient, to the manifesto pledges on greater public ownership and planning.
Wilson used both his Policy Unit, which contained a special ‘Benn-watcher’, the economist Richard Graham, and the Cabinet machinery to geld Benn's favoured strategy.
Industrial policy was effectively hijacked from the Department of Industry to No. 10 and the Cabinet's Public Enterprise Committee, which produced the 1974 White Paper  on the Regeneration of Industry with its watered-down National Enterprise Board and voluntary planning agreements.
The diluting of the industrial strategy was a classic Wilsonian operation, as Bernard Donoughue remembers: ‘I'm sure that Tony Benn felt himself betrayed by his Prime Minister because the moment the word got around, as it rapidly did in Whitehall — and the Cabinet Office made sure that it got around — that the Prime Minister was not giving his support to Tony Benn, then the civil servants began to back off from their minister.
Although in this case Mr Benn had backed off from them in the beginning.
–
But in another area Benn had a fairly dramatic if temporary impact on the conduct of Cabinet government.
In successfully pressing for a referendum on the Common Market, he obliged Wilson to suspend the doctrine of collective Cabinet responsibility, an event without precedent since the National Government had done the same on the free-trade issue in the early thirties.
Neither Lord Wilson nor Peter Shore, reflecting on the suspension ten years later, remembered it causing any difficulties inside the Cabinet Room.
‘I think we managed to keep our personal relations reasonably good’, said Shore, a strong anti-Marketeer.
And Lord Wilson, who was in favour of continued EEC membership, said, ‘I made it very clear, that as soon as this was all over, we would revert to strict Cabinet rules and collective views and all that kind of thing.’
Prime ministers go to great lengths to preserve public appearances over collective responsibility.
For example, it was quite a story in December 1985 when Mrs Thatcher briefly appeared to have allowed Michael Heseltine, Secretary of State for Defence, to campaign publicly against the Cabinet's position that the Westland helicopter company could do a deal with the American firm Sikorsky if its shareholders so wished.
Political correspondents were told initially that the Prime Minister believed his activities to be ‘unorthodox but in order’.
The day after that smoke signal was released, the same non-attributable sources let it be known that Heseltine had been rebuked in Cabinet for busting the collective line.
And the rest, as the saying goes, is history.
Wilson Mark II contributed two innovations to the practice of Cabinet government, both on the public-expenditure side.
He sanctioned the use of cash limits as a means of control.
And he established the principle that any decision which drew on the contingency reserve of public money should go to full Cabinet and not be taken in Cabinet committee, where the Chancellor and the Chief  Secretary could all too easily fall prey to ambushes set by cabals of spending ministers.
James Callaghan, who succeeded Wilson in April 1976, was the sweatiest of old political sweats.
He had held all three great offices of state — the Exchequer, the Home Office and the Foreign Office — before succeeding to the premiership.
His style was emollient.
He was a great fixer.
He was discriminating in his use of advisers and the techniques of advice.
He retained both the Downing Street Policy Unit and the CPRS, regarding them as complementary.
But Programme Analysis and Review, which had not flourished since the early Heath era, effectively died under Callaghan, though it was not formally buried until Mrs Thatcher was in No. 10.
Callaghan tinkered very little with the machinery of government apart from breaking off a chunk of the Department of the Environment and re-creating a separate Transport Ministry in his ministerial reshuffle of September 1976.
After the sterling crisis of autumn-winter 1976, he did toy with the idea of splitting the Treasury into a finance ministry and a department of management and budget, which would have combined the Treasury's spending-divisions with the manpower work of the Civil Service Department.
He postponed a decision until the 1979 election and, had he won it, a reshaping of the central departments was a strong possibility.
Callaghan was a superb manager of Cabinet, as Peter Shore recalls:
I didn't support Mr Callaghan as successor to Harold Wilson.
[There were]several reasons for it: one of them was I thought they were too much alike.
But their styles were really very dissimilar and that became very plain from the moment really that Mr Callaghan took over.
There was a much more, if you like, restful quality about him.
He inspired, I think, a great deal of confidence in the country and indeed among his colleagues, and deservedly so.
And looking back on it, when you think about his own experience — he'd been Home Secretary, Chancellor of the Exchequer and Foreign Secretary — I think most of his Cabinet colleagues who served under him would say he was a better prime minister than he was a secretary of state in either of these three roles.
In other words he was a successful prime minister, successful in his personal relationships in Cabinet, successful in getting the business of government done, again in the extremely difficult circumstances of having no majority in the House of Commons.
In terms of Cabinet conventions, Callaghan was an arch-traditionalist.
After the leak of Cabinet minutes on child benefit in 1976 he decided  it was time, once more, to have a secrecy law under whose rubric juries were likely to convict.
He established and chaired a Cabinet committee on reform of the discredited section 2 of the Official Secrets Act, 1911.
He stacked the membership of GEN 29 to ensure that freedom of information did not get a look-in, despite a pledge in the October 1974 Labour manifesto to introduce an open-government statute.
In February 1978 he circulated a Prime Minister's personal minute on ‘Disclosure of Cabinet Committees’.
It contained not a trace of the spirit of openness, and its timeless tone will be familiar to all connoisseurs of Questions of Procedure for Ministers :
Consistently with the practice of all former Prime Ministers I have always refused to publish details of Cabinet Committees or to answer Questions in the House about them.
Hitherto this has led to some allegations in the Press about Whitehall obscurantism but little interest or pressure in Parliament itself.
There is however now some evidence that Select Committees would like to interest themselves in the Committee system and may be seeking to erode the present convention.
I have therefore been considering the case for taking the initiative and disclosing details of the Committee structure.
I accept that the present convention has certain disadvantages for us.
In particular non-disclosure makes it difficult to answer charges that the government's policies are not properly coordinated.
For example the Select Committee on Overseas Development has recommended the establishment of a Cabinet Committee to coordinate political, trade and aid policies towards the developing world largely because the ODM were not able to disclose that such a Committee (RD) already exists.
It is also arguable that non-disclosure is inconsistent with a policy of greater openness.
In any case some parts of the Committee structure are quite widely known about outside Government; in these cases what is at issue therefore is a refusal to admit publicly what a lot of people know about privately.
It is important therefore to understand the reasons for the current practice of non-disclosure.
They are as follows: the Cabinet Committee system grew up as the load on the Cabinet itself became too great.
It allows matters of lesser importance to be decided without troubling the whole Cabinet; and major issues to be clarified in order to save the time of the Cabinet.
The method adopted by Ministers for discussing policy questions is however essentially a domestic matter; and a decision by a Cabinet Committee, unless referred to the Cabinet, engages the collective responsibility of all Ministers and has exactly the same authority as a decision by the Cabinet itself.
Disclosure that a particular Committee had dealt with a matter might lead to argument about the status of the decision or demands that it should be endorsed by the whole Cabinet.
Furthermore publishing details of the  Committees would be both misleading and counter-productive.
The existence of some could not be disclosed on security grounds; others are set up to do a particular job and then wound up.
The absence of a Committee on a particular subject (for example, agriculture or poverty) does not mean that the Government do not attach importance to it; and the fact that a particular Minister is not on a Committee does not mean that he does not attend when his interests are affected.
Publication would almost inevitably lead to pressures for both more and larger Committees, and for disclosure of information about their activities.
I do not believe that we could in any event disclose the existence of the GEN groups.
This is partly because of their ephemeral nature and partly because disclosure would often reveal either that very sensitive subjects were under consideration or that we had something in train about which we were not ready to make an announcement.
Disclosure of the main standing Committees would thus give a partial picture only.
Moreover having gone as far as this I do not believe that it would be possible for me to hold the line and refuse to answer any further questions about the composition and activities of the Committees.
At the minimum we would be under pressure to reveal the names of the Chairman.
This would make it harder for me to make changes; and it would have implications for the responsibilities of Departmental Ministers since Select Committees would try to summon the Chairman of Cabinet Committees to give evidence in addition to the responsible Minister.
I should also be under continuing pressure to say that a Committee was considering a particular subject (and often it would be a GEN group); and there would be questions about when Committees were meeting, the work they were doing, whether particular Ministers are on them, the details of under-pinning Official Committees, etc.
I have therefore decided that we should not change our stance on this matter.
The present convention is long established and provides a basis on which we can stand.
Any departure from it would be more likely to whet appetites than to satisfy them.
I ask my colleagues therefore to rest on the position that the way in which we coordinate our decision is a matter internal to Government and not to answer questions about the Cabinet Committee system.
LJC February 1978
Callaghan's secretive instincts had been strongly reinforced by the leaks which poured out of the Cabinet Room in the autumn of 1976, the first of the two great crises of his premiership.
The collapse of sterling in September and October 1976 forced the government to seek a loan from the International Monetary Fund.
Managing his colleagues and steering them to a compromise between the Fund's tough conditions for a loan and those on the Left who favoured a siege economy as an  alternative to rescue by the international banking community obliged Callaghan to practise traditional Cabinet government in the classic mould.
It took twenty-six separate Cabinet meetings to resolve the issue.
Callaghan carried the day early in December 1976 without a single resignation.
But it had been a very close-run thing.
As one very senior official put it, ‘The IMF was real Cabinet government but it was very unusual.
Even there it was Cabinet government because everything else was swept up in one issue.’
Peter Shore agrees with the ‘classical cabinet government’ interpretation of the 1976 crisis:
HENNESSY
It seems to me that it was the high-water mark of collective Cabinet government [of]the traditional type in recent times.
One got the impression that Mr Callaghan felt that he had to put on one side the normal practice of consulting only a small group of inner ministers on economic issues, and had to carry all the colleagues, all twenty-two, if he was to have a hope of carrying the party in the country clearly out of the crisis.
Is that a fair assessment of it?
SHORE
Yes, it is.
I haven't heard it put like that, but I think it's a very accurate and perceptive one.
The Cabinet did behave as a Cabinet and although I said earlier about the Treasury being forced to disgorge information when the DEA existed, that wasn't the case to the same extent in 1976.
But sitting round the Cabinet table were at least three ex-Chancellors, about four ex-Presidents of the Board of Trade, one ex-Secretary of State for Economic Affairs and all of us, I suppose, had our different advisers on economic policy whom we contacted.
And we did require and demand and obtain from the Treasury a great deal of information before we would allow, as it were, any decision to be made.
And there were times indeed, I think, that the effect of the very strong resistance to public-expenditure cuts and then the promulgation of an alternative economic strategy, which I myself was much concerned with, did have a very considerable effect.
Callaghan took great pains inside the Cabinet to be seen to let the notion of an alternative strategy have a fair run.
But he managed very effectively to isolate Benn and others who leaned towards a siege economy.
Tony Benn, who acknowledges that ‘Jim Callaghan…ran the Cabinet with considerable skill’, brought to the 1976 Cabinet a set of Cabinet minutes from August 1931 ‘in which exactly the same discussion took place…to remind them that there was a history in this matter’.
Benn was invited by Callaghan to prepare a Cabinet paper containing the alternative strategy of planned growth and industrial reconstruction behind a  tariff wall.
Callaghan also invited the CPRS to prepare two papers — one putting flesh on the siege-economy option, the other assuming Britain's continued engagement in open trading.
The exercise was called ‘Fortress Britain’.
The CPRS's view, after surveying the evidence, was strongly in favour of the open economy.
Meanwhile, Callaghan primed sympathetic colleagues to counter Benn, as Bill Rodgers, then Transport Secretary, remembers: ‘Jim Callaghan tipped off a number of people to have their questions ready and [Benn's paper]was completely massacred….
Callaghan was brilliant…one of the great achievements of his period in Cabinet as Prime Minister was isolating Benn.’
The middle ground, personified by the sceptical Tony Crosland, swung into line, and Callaghan, after twenty-six Cabinets, was home and dry.
Successful he may have been in October-December 1976 at using the full Cabinet as a forum for crisis management, but Callaghan was not tempted to extend the practice in more tranquil times.
As a member of his Policy Unit, the economist Gavyn Davies, revealed in a private paper for a Fabian Society inquiry in 1980, Callaghan withdrew effective decision-taking on sensitive market-related issues into a highly secret ‘economic seminar’ which was not even given the status of a formal Cabinet committee.
The ‘seminar’ included Denis Healey, Chancellor of the Exchequer; Harold Lever, Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster; Gordon Richardson, Governor of the Bank of England; Sir Douglas Wass, Permanent Secretary to the Treasury; Sir Kenneth Berrill of the CPRS; Sir John Hunt, Cabinet Secretary; Kenneth Stowe, Callaghan's Principal Private Secretary; plus a supporting cast from the Treasury and the Bank of England.
Ministers were outnumbered about three or four to one by officials.
As Davies told the Fabians, ‘collective responsibility under these circumstances was a sham’: ‘The Cabinet was not informed of the existence of this group, or of its critical decisions.
The Prime Minister is able to operate a system of ‘divide and rule’ mainly because of the tradition of secrecy which permeates the entire system of British government.’
And, as his administration staggered through its winter of discontent in the first two months of 1979, Callaghan's famed skills as a crisis-manager seemed to desert him.
He vacillated over the lorry-drivers' strike, shrinking in the end from declaring a state of emergency and ruling out the use of troops to move medical supplies from the docks.
There was the daily undignified spectacle of Sir Clive Rose of the Civil Contingencies Unit meeting with Alex Kitson of the Transport and  General Workers' Union to discuss breaches of the union's voluntary code on picketing during the lorry-driver's dispute.
Macabre humour broke out inside the Unit, as Joel Barnett recalled:
We leafed through the various contingency plans in the Home Secretary's committee but none seemed satisfactory.
It was made clear to us that Operation ‘Brisket’ for the road haulage dispute, ‘Bittern’for the rapidly growing ambulance drivers' dispute, and ‘Nimrod’in the case of the water workers' action, were all long on detailed planning, but short on how much could actually be done in a major dispute.
(Gerald Kaufman, later appointed to assist the hard-pressed Merlyn Rees [Home Secretary], said the next plan would be called ‘Loony’.)
Barnett's account of the Cabinet meeting of 1 February shows that matters had improved little in the command and control post of the British system of government since that awful day at Chequers in November 1974 when gloom descended:
The Prime Minister summed up what many of us wanted to say when he put a question to Tony Benn: ‘what do you say about the thuggish act of a walk-out, without notice, from a Children's Hospital?’
[The hospital ancillary workers were also taking industrial action against Callaghan's 5 per cent pay norm.]
Tony replied that: ‘When decent people become irrational, something must be wrong if they are driven to such desperate acts.’
Jim Callaghan's response was that he ‘had never in fifty years been so depressed as a trade unionist’.
Three months later a very different Prime Minister took over and established a very different command and control post in No. 10.
Conviction Cabinet, 1979–86
It must be a conviction government.
As Prime Minister I could not waste time having any internal arguments.
Mrs Margaret Thatcher, February 1979
She cannot see an institution without hitting it with her handbag.
Julian Critchley, MP, on Mrs Thatcher, 1982
I take your point about frankness!
That's what Cabinets are for, and lively discussions usually lead to good decisions.
Mrs Thatcher to James Prior, August 1984
A brilliant tyrant surrounded by mediocrities.
A view of the Thatcher Cabinet attributed to Harold Macmillan, Earl of Stockton, 1985
I had not expected to find it necessary to leave the Cabinet.
But when I did so, the words I uttered for the record were that I could not accept that the proper constitutional practices, as I understood them, were being observed.
Michael Heseltine, 1986
My eyes light up at the sight of her even though she's hitting me about the head, so to speak.
Sir Keith Joseph, Secretary of State for Education, on Mrs Thatcher, 1985
There are only two ways of getting into the Cabinet.
One way is to crawl up the staircase of preferment on your belly; the other way is to kick them in the teeth.
Aneurin Bevan, undated
In one area, Mrs Thatcher has proved to be a Keynesian on a scale unmatched by her predecessors in the recent past.
Her style of government has turned out to be a marvellous make-work scheme for political scientists, contemporary historians and political commentators.
She is, as one permanent secretary put it, the ‘most commanding prime minister of recent times’.
Once the Cabinet purges of 1980 and 1981 had been completed, a large  proportion of the Cabinet were what Nye Bevan would have called ‘staircase’ men, who owed their high office entirely to her patronage rather than any independent standing in the Conservative Party.
Commenting on the effect of the September 1981 reshuffle in an interview with Jeremy Mayhew, James Prior said of the Cabinet,
I don't think it was ever as good a debating forum again.
There was more and more control by the Prime Minister.
To that extent there was greater cohesion in Cabinet, because there were a lot of new faces who owed their promotion much more to her than to their record in the party.
I don't think it was as good a Cabinet and certainly the debates on economic policy really ceased to exist.
A fairly convincing case for an imperious premiership could be assembled even before Heseltine's ‘grand remonstrance of protest’, as the Observer called it.
After all we had been warned.
Three months before defeating Callaghan at the polls she announced publicly her intention of running a ‘conviction Cabinet’.
An argument-free zone was to be established in the Cabinet Room.
Her homage to frankness in her letter to Jim Prior more than five years later caused a great deal of ironic laughter in Whitehall.
There was no shortage of evidence from her Cabinet purges about the disagreeable qualities of life in the Thatcher Cabinet Room.
As one senior figure put it, ‘She was not really running a team.
Every time you have a Prime Minister who wants to take all the decisions, it mainly leads to bad results.
Attlee didn't.
That's why he was so damn good.
Macmillan didn't.
The nearest parallel to Maggie is Ted.’
David Howell spoke openly about it:
HENNESSY
Mrs Thatcher has the great virtue of candour, and just before she became Prime Minister she announced in a newspaper interview how she was going to run her Cabinet and she said it must be a ‘conviction–government.
‘As Prime Minister, I couldn't waste time having any internal arguments.
–Now this remark implied that she was going to mount a substantial assault on the traditional nature of Cabinet government, which is collective discussion — free-ranging before decisions are reached.
Did it turn out like that?
You were Secretary of State for Energy in –79 weren't you, when the Government was first formed.
Was it actually like that in the Cabinet Room?
HOWELL
Well, it's very hard to say.
On some issues there was a good deal of discussion, but if by ‘conviction government’ it is meant that certain  slogans were going to be elevated and written in tablets of stone and used as the put-down at the end of every argument, then, of course, that is indeed what happened.
Certain things were asserted beyond peradventure: namely, that we had to get the public-sector borrowing-requirement down, because if it went up or stayed up it would keep interest rates up.
Now, it happens that is a very controversial and highly questionable economic proposition.
But as a political shibboleth it was raised to all-powerful heights and was used as a battering-ram to silence any suggestion by anybody that one might ever spend more on anything even if the aim of spending more immediately was to spend less later.
HENNESSY
That rather vitiates the traditional nature of Cabinet government if you have a strong-minded figure ending discussions in this way.
Presumably it meant that after a while you ceased to bring things to the Cabinet that you knew would produce a put-down?
HOWELL
Of course there is a deterring-effect if one knows that one's going to go not into a discussion where various points of view will be weighed and gradually a view may be achieved, but into a huge argument where tremendous battle lines will be drawn up and everyone who doesn't fall in line will be hit on the head.
Of course it deters you, and I think that element of deterrence did take place.
I don't want to exaggerate it, because on the complex issues, however determined or single-minded a Prime Minister is, they have to discuss things with an inner group of colleagues.
You're talking now to someone who certainly worked very closely with Mrs Thatcher and was a member of the Cabinet.
But I wasn't of the seniority to be one of the inner group of ministers which all prime ministers tend to work most closely with.
This country really since the sixteenth century has basically been run by five or six people.
I don't think it's very different today: five or six is what you need and that's what any prime minister tends to form around them.
Howell was alluding, among other things, to Mrs Thatcher's equivalent of Callaghan's ‘Economic Seminar’, the significance of which will be considered shortly.
It all seemed a far cry from his and Heath's attempts, through those seventies acronyms, the CPRS and PAR, to inject a dose of reason and analysis into the policy-making process.
HENNESSY
You mentioned that there's a great degree of toughness since 1979 on Treasury targets and public expenditure, and the word goes down the line and there's no argument.
And yet the process for fixing expenditure allocations seems to be as much of a shambles as ever it was when you and Mr Heath were so concerned about it in the late 1960s.
Every September we have the small ad hoc Cabinet committee known as the ‘Star Chamber’[MISC 62]in which Lord Whitelaw sits down and tries to bang  heads together, and then the Prime Minister comes in at the last minute and bangs heads together even more.
And it seems that the money, in so far as it emerges in budgets that clearly, is determined by crude political muscle and nothing to do with reason and analysis — all the things that you stood for in the sixties and seventies.
Don't you find that depressing?
HOWELL
A bit depressing but not entirely.
Because even in a more refined system there is going to be a stage where issues cannot be resolved by analysis or delicate agreement and can only be resolved by crude political battering.
So I'm not totally depressed.
If I'm depressed at all it is that I think that you could make this process slightly less obtrusive and violent and spark-generating if there was more systematic analysis and discussion beforehand, going back a long way.
You've got to start back a long way before you get to the final decisions on costs and budgets.
So more programme analysis and discussion and less argument and assertion, I think, would make the whole thing less fraught on the one side.
On the other side, the fraught quality is greatly heightened and increased by the feeling I've already described that the Treasury's figures are there and absolute and that to transgress beyond them will be the end of civilization as we know it, and interest rates will go sky high and hyperinflation will return.
And, therefore, the argument is of people whose backs are pinned to the wall before they're questioned as it were, and that doesn't make for a sober and calm discussion, especially as there is some doubt, I suspect, in the mind of ministers, but certainly in the mind of many people in the Conservative Party, about whether these great absolutes, this wall against which ministers and departments are nailed, really need exist in quite the form it's being constructed or whether the whole issue couldn't be handled in a rather more sensitive and relaxed way.
HENNESSY
Mrs Thatcher wrote a letter in 1984 accepting Mr James Prior's resignation from the Northern Ireland Office and she said in it, ‘I take your point about frankness!
That's what Cabinets are for, and lively discussions usually lead to good decisions.’
How did that remark strike you?
HOWELL
It struck me with some foreboding because I feel that ‘lively discussion’ is a code word for argument and I don't regard high-pitched argument as the best means of reaching decisions.
I think there's got to be plenty of discussion.
I like a discursive approach.
Now this happens not to be the style of other people, but it's mine.
In the end you may get a nitty-gritty point where there has to be an argument because there are two different points of view both supported by substantial analysis and objective study.
All right, but I don't think one should argue right from the start, and, if lively discussion means that the whole of government decision-making should be conducted from entrenched, opinionated positions with heavy mortar fire of argument right the way through, I query  whether that's the best way to get things done.
I think in the end the tortoise does better than the hare.
The quiet discursive approach actually delivers the goods in terms of reforming this nation and increasing our prosperity more effectively than carrying on everything as a flat-out argument.
HENNESSY
So what you're saying is that Cabinet government in the eighties has been a matter of trench warfare with exchanges conducted in the shape of mortar fire.
HOWELL
Well, now you're putting in my words grand judgements which I'm not equipped to make and it would be impudent for me to make.
I'm saying that in my experience there is too much argument and not enough discussion in processes of government generally, and I believe we would make more progress by a more discursive approach.
I think it was once said that the mark of an undergraduate is someone who turns every discussion into an argument.
I think sometimes that we have a shade of the undergraduate in our government which we could well do without to strengthen and consolidate this nation.
HENNESSY
Is it fun being a Cabinet minister?
HOWELL
It has good moments and very bad moments.
I enjoyed some parts of it.
I must confess I didn't enjoy others at all.
I don't think I was on the same wavelength as the Prime Minister almost from the start, although I did work for her beforehand and try to pull together some of the policies.
I preferred discussion to argument.
So, I think, if you are asking me I can only speak of my personal experience.
Yes, I enjoyed certain moments very much indeed but other moments were most certainly not fun.
And Parliament can be a very demanding mistress indeed.
And there we are: Parliament a demanding mistress; the Prime Minister a demanding mistress.
How much fun can you have with so many demanding mistresses?
There is plenty of lore and legend from Whitehall and Westminster to buttress the case for an imperious premiership.
Take three scenes from life at the top in 1984.
(1)
Senior civil servants called to policy sessions in No. 10, says one insider, have their own four-minute warning-system.
If asked by your secretary of state to speak on the departmental paper, you have four minutes to explain it, however complicated the subject matter, to present the choices and to add a touch of heterodoxy.
Beyond that point, unless her interest is awakened, Mrs Thatcher's eyes glaze over.
To continue is to jeopardize future promotion.
(2)
It is January 1984.
The place is No. 10.
The forum is the Cabinet's Oversea and Defence Committee.
The subject is the possibility of an attempt to normalize relations with Argentina,not the sovereignty of the Falklands, which is the ‘Great Unmentionable’ of mid-eighties Whitehall.
Sir Geoffrey Howe is four minutes into the Foreign Office paper on the need to open exploratory talks with the Alfonsín Government.
Mrs Thatcher cuts in, ‘Geoffrey, I know what you're going to recommend.
And the answer is ‘No!’’
End of item: nobody argues with the boss.
(3)
Seasoned Cabinet minister walks into the Commons tea room late on a Thursday morning.
‘What are you doing here?’ asks a Tory backbencher.
‘I thought you'd still be in Cabinet.’
‘Cabinet?’ replied the Minister.
‘Oh, we don't have those any more.
We have a lecture by Madam.
Its government-by-Cabinet-committee now.
Half the decisions I read about in the newspapers.’
One experienced Whitehall figure reckons that ‘temporarily we don't have Cabinet government….
We have a form of presidential government in which she operates like a sovereign in her court’, which is just about the most toughly worded formulation of the case for Mrs Thatcher as Queen Boadicea driving a chariot of conviction politics through the conventions of collective Cabinet government.
What evidence can be gleaned for the ‘Queen Margaret’ school, or for the counter-argument that such changes are largely a matter of style rather than substance, by examining the procedure and mechanics of government since 1979?
Take first the raw statistics of Cabinet business.
It is rare for Mrs Thatcher to have more than one meeting of the full Cabinet per week.
Allowing for parliamentary recesses, that adds up to between forty and forty-five Cabinet meetings a year — not a particularly significant statistic if more business is being taken in committees, of which more in a moment.
Attlee and Churchill, however, logged twice that figure (see table 2).
The flow of Cabinet papers is well down, moreover.
The CP (84) series, as the 1984 collection will be classified in the Cabinet Office's Confidential Library, includes only sixty to seventy papers, about one sixth of the annual totals accumulated in the late forties and early fifties (see table 2).
Sir Robert Armstrong, incidentally, for all his protestations about open government, refused to release under Section 5(1) of the Public Records Act, 1958 (which permits declassification ahead of the thirty-year rule), statistics on the number of Cabinet meetings and papers since 1955.
He argued that ‘It would be entirely contrary to longstanding conventions in these matters to publish this sort of information.’
Judged by the frequency of meetings and the flow of formal Cabinet papers, full Cabinet activity under Mrs Thatcher is at an historical low.
So, too, is the workload being devolved to Cabinet committees.
On entering No. 10 in May 1979, Mrs Thatcher made it clear to the Whitehall machine that she was not a Cabinet-committee person.
She would do business with her fellow ministers free of the curse of committees.
‘Events’, as one insider put it, ‘soon took care of that.’
As we have seen from the blueprint of Mrs Thatcher's Engine Room in table 1, she now presides over some 160 of the hated things, though not, naturally, in the literal sense of chairing the lot.
Yet, she is running the slimmest Cabinet machine since before the Second World War.
As we have seen, Attlee accumulated 148 standing and 313 ad hoc groups in six and quarter years, and Churchill 137 and 109 respectively in three and a half years.
The figures for Eden are incomplete, and those for Macmillan and Home remain a mystery which the current Cabinet Secretary refuses to resolve.
Thanks to Mrs Castle's Diary, we have some intelligence on Wilson Mark I. Elected  in October 1964, he had by early 1969 (i.e. after four and a quarter years) reached his 236th ad hoc group.
The Heath era is another unknown.
Wilson Mark II, between March 1974 and March 1976, ran up a total of somewhere around 120 ad hoc groups.
Callaghan in the three years between April 1976 and April 1979 commissioned about 160 ad hoc committees, a similar growth rate to Attlee's.
Judging by the Cabinet-committee criterion, Mrs Thatcher has done exceedingly well.
Under her, there have been 30–35 standing-committees and just over 120 ad hocs in six and a half years.
So Cabinet and Cabinet-committee discussion is down.
Does that indicate that the load has diminished in parallel?
Has Britain against the odds re-entered a period of small government?
In philosophical terms the answer is probably ‘Yes’; in practical terms ‘No.’
The reason has been stated frequently by Sir John Hoskyns.
In the short run, disengaging from state activity is just as difficult and time-consuming as getting into it — if not more so.
Privatization, like nationalization, imposes a stiff workload and absorbs a great deal of parliamentary time.
So, where is the business being done?
A fair amount is conducted by ministerial correspondence, a perfectly acceptable method in constitutional terms.
The Franks Report on the Falklands gives an indication of just how much this goes on.
One reason, for example, why the Falklands issue figured so infrequently on the agenda of the Cabinet's Oversea and Defence Committee before the Argentine invasion of April 1982 is that Lord Carrington, then Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary, disliked bringing Foreign Office business before committee meetings of his colleagues.
Another swathe of high-level business is tackled by Mrs Thatcher in ad hoc groups which fall outside Sir Robert Armstrong's Cabinet Committee Book.
The most important of these is her version of Mr Callaghan's ‘Economic Seminar’, though it no longer has that name.
It handles similar subjects to his — monetary policy, delicate decisions affecting the money markets.
Early in her first premiership it caused her a moment of acute embarrassment.
One Cabinet minister, a member of the Economic Strategy Committee but not of this most secret inner group, which was meeting straight afterwards, was a bit slow to gather his papers.
As he was about to leave, Sir Geoffrey Howe, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, launched into his paper on the plan to abolish exchange controls.
‘Oh’, says the laggardly minister, ‘are we going to do that?
How very interesting.’
Embarrassed silence.
Then  Sir Geoffrey says, ‘X, I'm afraid you should not be here.’
X departs Cabinet door left.
Under Mrs Thatcher the ‘Economic Seminar’ remains highly important.
But it is a flexible, amoeba-like group whose composition changes according to circumstances.
‘It's a habit of working, not an approach’, explains an insider.
‘If there is a problem or a proposal, she'll call a meeting involving those immediately concerned.
She may also invite someone who will be important when it comes to selling it in Cabinet — someone like Willie Whitelaw.’
Other ad hoc groups beyond the reach of the MISC series can have a considerable impact, even though they may only meet once or twice.
For example, Mrs Thatcher convened a meeting of ministers to consider the now legendary minute entitled ‘It Took a Riot’ prepared for her by Michael Heseltine, then Secretary of State for the Environment, based on his experiences in Merseyside following the inner-city riots of July 1981.
It proposed an ambitious programme of investment and the designation of Cabinet colleagues as ministers for various decaying areas.
Mr Heseltine had evangelized Whitehall on behalf of his cause like a latter-day John the Baptist.
He held a secret dinner at Locket's restaurant in Westminster for several influential permanent secretaries, including Sir Robert Armstrong.
They were impressed.
The Prime Minister, however, prevailed.
In September 1981 she convened an ad hoc group on inner cities and stacked it against Heseltine.
It consisted of herself, Heseltine, Sir Geoffrey Howe, Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Keith Joseph, Secretary of State for Industry, and William Whitelaw, then Home Secretary.
Whitelaw, concerned as ever to be the mediator, strove to find a middle way between Heseltine and those who did not want a penny extra for the cities for fear of being seen to reward rioters.
Heseltine was isolated.
There was an increase in the urban programme but on nothing like the scale he wanted.
On this occasion, he succumbed to the verdict of a loaded ministerial group.
Mrs Thatcher conducts a great deal of business in gatherings such as that.
The pattern varies but is often along these lines.
Mrs Thatcher will ask a particular Cabinet colleague to prepare a paper on a particular issue just for her, not for the Cabinet or a Cabinet committee.
This explains why the tally of Cabinet papers is so low.
The Minister is summoned to No. 10 with his back-up team.
He sits across the table from Mrs Thatcher and her team, which can be a mixture of people from the Downing Street Private Office, the Policy Unit and the Cabinet  Office, with one or two personal advisers and sometimes a Treasury minister.
She then, in the words of one insider, proceeds to ‘act as judge and jury in her own cause’.
It is this practice more than anything else which causes those on the inside to speak of ‘a devaluation of Cabinet government’ and her ‘presidential style’.
The build-up of leaks and stories from such occasions created a cumulative impression of a truly over-mighty premiership long before Heseltine's departure.
But is that impression accurate?
A case can be made for both its constitutional propriety and its administrative efficiency.
Take first Mrs Thatcher's version of the ‘Economic Seminar’.
David Howell is a critic of the Thatcher style but he sees nothing wrong in it:
HOWELL
I don't think one would have expected, not being in the Treasury, to be involved.
One would have assumed that — indeed, I think it was generally known — that the Prime Minister and Treasury ministers and her Chancellor kept in very close touch with the financial authorities and the central monetary authorities, which means the Bank of England among other people, and that all that would go on.
I don't think one would assume anything else.
If it had a name, or a code word, well that sounds like civil servants playing games.
Ministers would assume that went on.
Occasionally other ministers might be called into those discussions.
But of course the nexus of any government in this country is No. 10 and the Treasury, with the Bank of England as the Treasury's appendage, which unfortunately it is.
I say ‘unfortunately’ because I would like to see a more detached monetary authority myself.
Therefore one assumes they're very hugger-mugger all the time.
Under this government and under the regime that emerged after ‘79, which wasn't quite the one we planned for before ‘79…the nexus between No. 10 and the Treasury is decisive, it overrules, it's everything.
The Treasury always knows they can win.
That is why they're able to go for these very precise figures of public spending, scientific precision about estimates for the years ahead and then say, ‘All argument hereafter ceases.
Anyone who wants to change anything will have to somehow change it without altering the figures because they're settled and we know that if we ever go back to No. 10 or the Cabinet we'll always get the backing of the Prime Minister and the appellant will always be overturned.’
HENNESSY
Going back to the ‘Economic Seminar’, you seem to accept these things are bound to exist, these small inner groups.
Doesn't it rather vitiate the nature of Cabinet government, though, if a decision, like the one to remove all exchange control, a very fundamental one for any economy, is in fact worked up, although it goes to full Cabinet in the end, in such a body?
Doesn't it mean that you're presented with a set of faits accomplis ?
You're meant to be collectively the highest strategic decision-making body in the land and here are all these great slices of crucial economic decisions done in a group in which ministers are outnumbered three or four to one by officials.
HOWELL
Yes, well, you say ‘meant to be’ and you're right to say ‘meant to be’, because, of course, Cabinet government is only a layer of the Government and there is a kind of inner Cabinet government, whether it's called that or not, under different prime ministers — it always tends to develop.
On top of that there must be an even more inner kind of government concerned with very, very sensitive issues, of which exchange control is one.
It would have been inconceivable for exchange control to be tossed around and knocked around in Cabinet.
HENNESSY
Why?
HOWELL
Because of the numbers of people involved and because of, well, I suppose I have to say it, the inevitability of leaks.
Senior civil servants, the privileged connoisseurs of prime-ministerial style and procedure, tend not to be purist about the operational implications of Cabinet conventions, except when routinely deploying them in the occasional public lecture or dismissing requests for the early declassification of harmless material.
They seem, in practice, to treat Cabinet government as a chunk of modelling-clay to be pummelled and fashioned by the prime minister of the hour.
This is the kind of reasoning you hear when senior men think aloud in private about the theme of Cabinet government:
The Cabinet system has been different for Heath, Wilson and Mrs Thatcher.
There's a reaction, which we can get in our constitution, to suit the PM of the day and his or her working relationships.
The decisions get taken in the way in which people want to take them.
Mrs Thatcher is very clear about her views, very much a leader.
Because of that she doesn't need or want to resolve things by collective discussion.
She knows what she wants to do about almost everything.
But it is a collective machine because they all sink or swim with her.
She uses the Cabinet as a sort of sounding-board.
It restrains her when restraint is necessary.
She has her own instinct when she cannot carry her colleagues with her.
She lets them know what she thinks.
Then they try and adapt and mould it.
She has very acute antennae.
She's very quick to take the signals if she can't carry it.
Sir Frank Cooper is happy to speak publicly about the Thatcher Cabinet style, of which he approves:
HENNESSY
Do you think…that she has, in fact, put severe dents into the traditional model of collective Cabinet government?
COOPER
No, I don't…
I think she's changed a number of things.
She certainly leads from the front.
No one would argue about that and she believes it's the duty of any prime minister to lead from the front.
And I would have a great deal of sympathy with that view, quite frankly.
…We do actually need leadership of the right kind in the right areas….
I don't think I've got any difficulty with that.
Other Whitehall insiders caution against the view that the Thatcher Cabinet is largely characterized by deferential ‘staircase’ men: ‘Ministers report to Cabinet pretty freely and frankly.
She has a passion for knowing what is going on and will be extremely cross if she isn't told.’
But the Thatcher Cabinet does not behave like ‘a bunch of chums’, as previous Tory Cabinets tended to do, according to an experienced figure.
Conservative Cabinets used to present a strong contrast to Labour ones, as ‘Labour governments are very much more used to the idea of people being mandated to do things.
They have tended to have fierce debates leading to some kind of resolution.’
But Mrs Thatcher's Cabinets have seen ‘positive forces ranged against her’.
Michael Heseltine, Peter Walker and Jim Prior have all pressed their reservations much more explicitly in the Cabinet Room than any minister did in the Heath years.
Lord Whitelaw and John Biffen come into the category of influential ministers whose views cannot be taken for granted.
And, since the casualty list of the Westland Affair, there have been signs that the Thatcher Cabinet may function more collectively for a time at least.
The crucial question, however, is how much opportunity critical ministers are afforded in full Cabinet when it comes to reshaping or even reopening decisions reached in Cabinet committees, those ad hoc meetings or the Prime Minister's ‘judge and jury’ sessions.
Sir Geoffrey Howe was surprisingly candid on this point in an interview with the Daily Mail in February 1984.
‘There are’, he said, ‘very few discussions of Government decisions by full Cabinet.’
Sir Geoffrey was referring to the decision to ban trade unions at GCHQ, a decision taken by a small group of ministers (himself, the Prime Minister, Lord Whitelaw, Mr Heseltine, then Secretary of State for Defence, with a bit of advice on likely union reactions from Tom King, then Secretary of State for Employment).
Cabinet under Mrs Thatcher is ‘not used so much as a formal forum where there are papers saying we have this problem and here are the options for what we can do about it.
Earlier Cabinets were much more like that’, said one senior official shortly before Michael Heseltine converted semi-covert insider objections to the Thatcher style into a glowing neon sign.
The Heseltine affair was, on the face of it, about Government involvement in the financial restructuring of Westland, Britain's sole manufacturer of helicopters.
The pros and cons of which financial saviour should be favoured — a bid led by the American company Sikorsky, or a European consortium including British Aerospace — need not concern us here, because to dwell unduly upon them would be like treating the assassination of an archduke in Sarajevo as the cause rather than the trigger for the First World War.
In his dramatic resignation statement before a huge press conference in the Ministry of Defence on the afternoon of Thursday 9 January 1986, Heseltine explained his sudden walkout at that morning's Cabinet meeting in terms which raised it high above a small, troubled helicopter manufacturer in the West Country.
His chosen battleground with Mrs Thatcher was nothing less than that sludgy amalgam, the British Constitution.
The manner in which the Prime Minister had handled the Westland issue within the Cabinet system, Mr Heseltine told the world's press, was ‘not a proper way to carry on government and ultimately not an approach for which I can share responsibility’.
This remained the leitmotif of a torrent of radio, television and newspaper interviews Heseltine gave in the days following his resignation.
In an interview with Fred Emery on BBC's Panorama on 13 January, for example, he put the point in no fewer than three ways: ‘I resigned on my judgement of a breakdown of constitutional procedures’; ‘I believe there was an affront to the Constitution’; ‘I decided there was a setting-aside of the Constitution and I resigned.’
On the same programme, John Biffen, Leader of the House of Commons, challenged Heseltine's strictures on improper breaches of Cabinet procedure.
The day after the resignation, Sir Geoffrey Howe, the Foreign Secretary, accused Heseltine of presenting ‘a wholly exaggerated and misleading picture’ of the Prime Minister's conduct of the Westland issue.
The story began to gain dramatic content deep in the entrails of the Thatcher-style Cabinet system early in December 1985.
Heseltine, in his resignation statement, concentrated on ‘three ministerial meetings chaired by the Prime Minister at the beginning of December’.
The  first two, on 4 and 5 December, were ad hoc groups consisting of the Prime Minister, Heseltine, Leon Brittan, Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, John MacGregor, Chief Secretary to the Treasury, Sir Geoffrey Howe, Foreign Secretary and Sir Patrick Mayhew, Solicitor-General.
They were not formal ad hoc Cabinet committees in the sense of belonging to the MISC series.
They were bodies whose chemistry accorded closely with the Thatcher style, like the ministerial group Mrs Thatcher had convened and stacked against Heseltine in the aftermath of the 1981 riots.
They were rancorous in tone.
‘One hostile critic’ was quoted in the Observer as saying, ‘she ranted and raved.
It was typical of the way she conducts Cabinet Government.’
At this point, disagreement about the truth of the matter intrudes into the tale.
Heseltine claimed that the Prime Minister failed at these ad hoc groups to get her way, which was to ‘close  off the European option’ for the Westland rescue.
By the following Monday ‘Downing Street sources’ were telling journalists that the records of those two ad hoc meetings showed ‘that a majority of those present were probably prepared to repudiate or reject’the course followed by the national armaments directors of Western Europe, the basis of the European consortium's bid.
‘A source close to Mr Heseltine’ swiftly countered with ‘That is a lie.’
Anthony Bevins's account in The Times continued, ‘Mr Heseltine's friends said last night that ad hoc meetings were a Downing Street device to kill internal Cabinet dissent.
They were known as ‘the club’.’
Short of Mrs Thatcher releasing the ‘club’ minutes for 4 and 5 December 1985, of which there was no sign at the time of writing, it will be impossible to ascertain who is telling the truth about the tides of opinion within those gatherings.
The Prime Minister then shifted the Westland issue to a formal meeting of EA, the Cabinet's Economic Strategy Committee, on Monday 9 December.
This, as Economist journalists discovered, proved to be a highly unorthodox meeting, as two outsiders, neither of whom were bound by the Privy Counsellor's oath of confidentiality, were in attendance: ‘Chaired by Mrs Thatcher,[the meeting]was attended, unusually, for part of the time, by two outsiders: Sir John Cuckney, Westland's chairman…and Mr Marcus Agius, a director of Lazard's, Westland's financial advisers.’
According to Heseltine, ‘virtually every colleague who attended the enlarged meeting and thus came fresh to the arguments supported me, despite the fact that Sir John Cuckney had been invited to put his views to the meeting’.
Again according to Heseltine, it was decided at EA that the ad hoc group should meet again on Friday 13 December, after the Stock Exchange had closed.
That meeting was cancelled.
At the meeting of the full Cabinet on Thursday 12 December, the Prime Minister, said Heseltine, ‘refused to allow a discussion….
I insisted that the Cabinet Secretary should record my protest in the Cabinet minutes.’
At this point, yet another mystery, unresolved at the time of writing, arose.
‘When the minutes were circulated’, Heseltine continued,
there was no reference to any discussion about Westland and consequently no record of my protest.
Before the next meeting I complained to the Secretary of the Cabinet.
He explained that the item had been omitted from the minutes as the result of an error and he subsequently circulated an addendum in the form of a brief note of the discussion.
Such an error and correction was unprecedented in my experience.
The minutes, as finally issued, still did not record my protest and I have since informed the Secretary of the Cabinet that I am still not content with the way in which this discussion was recorded.
The accepted convention is that, if a minister specifically requests that his or her dissent be recorded, it is so recorded.
There has been a tradition too, evident in the lengthy confidential annexes containing the Cabinet discussion of Sir Winston Churchill's highly personal diplomacy in seeking a meeting with the Russians in July 1954, that when a resignation is threatened an unusually full record is created of the proceedings.
The mystery of the disappearing note of Heseltine's dissent remains.
According to Lord Wilson, the most recent premier to go on the record about the conventions of minute-taking, ‘the writing of the Conclusions is the unique responsibility of the Secretary of the Cabinet….
The Conclusions are circulated very promptly after Cabinet, and up to that time, no minister, certainly not the prime minister, asks to see them or conditions them in any way.’
It is not known if Mrs Thatcher continues to practise this self-denying ordinance.
Unless Sir Robert Armstrong takes the unprecedented step of issuing a statement, this will have to remain one of what he has called ‘the marvels and mysteries of Cabinet government’.
Whatever the ins and outs, it was the abandonment of that third ad hoc meeting which prepared Heseltine for take-off.
As he told Fred Emery on Panorama , ‘from the moment that decision was taken to cancel the opportunity for a collective judgement to be taken, I knew that something very wrong had happened.’
What finally propelled him from his Cabinet seat on 9 January was the promulgation of a new and improvised Cabinet convention by Mrs Thatcher — that all future ministerial statements on the future of Westland would have to be cleared by the Cabinet Office.
As Heseltine wrote in the Observer the following Sunday,
I told the Cabinet that I could not accept that the traditional basis for collective responsibility had been established.
In these circumstances, on a constitutional matter, I was obliged to leave the Cabinet…
Of course, Westland and all the associated issues about the harmonisation and rationalisation of the European defence industrial base are important, but I doubt that one specific case would in itself have been enough to become a resigning Issue.
What was much more important to me was the emergence of what I consider to be the breakdown of constitutional government.
That was something I could not live with.
There was, therefore, no option for me but to resign.
But, as Heseltine's private secretary, the highly regarded Ministry of Defence official Richard Mottram, put it during the trial of Clive Ponting, ‘In highly-charged political matters, one person's ambiguity may be another person's truth.’
John Biffen, a very straight character and very much his own man, said of Mrs Thatcher's handling of Westland, ‘I thought the Cabinet discussion…was reasonable enough.
It wasn't obviously a particularly long discussion…you are dealing with a company of a modest size….
I don't feel the discussion of it was particularly skimpy.’
And, as for the cancellation of the ad hoc ministerial meeting due on 13 December, Biffen said, ‘I don't think there was any question of constitutional impropriety.’
But for Heseltine it brought a kettleful of resentment, accumulated over more than six years, to boiling-point.
Quite apart from the memory of the treatment Mrs Thatcher had dealt out to ‘It Took a Riot’, around the time of the 1983 general election Heseltine was telling friends he was very concerned about an accretion of power to the premiership (this was the period when the possibility of a prime minister's department or, at the very least, a beefed-up Downing Street Policy Unit was being floated).
But, in terms of the written conventions, in his very public championing of the European-consortium option prior to his resignation, Heseltine himself was bending the rules.
Take the section in Questions of Procedure for Ministers dealing with collective responsibility, which reads,
Decisions reached by the Cabinet or Cabinet committee are normally announced and defended by the minister concerned as his own decisions.
There may be rare occasions when it is desirable to emphasise the importance of some decisions by stating specifically that it is the decision of Her Majesty's Government.
This, however, should be the exception rather than the rule.
The growth of any general practice whereby decisions of the Cabinet or of Cabinet committee were announced as such would lead to the embarrassing result that some decisions of government would be regarded as less authoritative than others.
Critics of a decision reached by a particular committee could press for its review by some other committee or by the Cabinet, and the constitutional right of individual ministers to speak in the name of the government as a whole would be impaired.
Since the EA meeting on 9 December, Heseltine had succeeded in making the decision to let Westland seek succour from whom it wished look distinctly ‘less authoritative than others’.
He himself had not ceased to ‘press for its review by the full Cabinet’, pressure which eventually brought about his downfall.
There had not been anything to match the Westland affair as an example of competitive leaking since the ‘display of histrionic talents’, as Edmund Dell put it, 64 which accompanied Callaghan's Cabinets on the terms of a loan from the International Monetary Fund.
By resigning and going public, Heseltine stimulated a crescendo of complaint about the Thatcher style of Cabinet government.
Sir Ian Gilmour, sacked from the Cabinet in September 1981, was on both main television news bulletins on 10 January, telling viewers that being a good listener was not one of Mrs Thatcher's virtues, and that there had been ‘a downgrading of Cabinet government’; Cabinet meetings were something to be got through, not the place where views were to be aired and decisions reached.
For Dr David Owen, Leader of the Social Democratic Party, the whole Westland affair was ‘damning evidence of a total contempt for democratic Cabinet government’.
Even more remarkable was the manner in which the resignation of Leon Brittan, after the Prime Minister's revelation in the Commons that he had authorized the leak of a confidential letter from Sir Patrick Mayhew, the Solicitor-General to Heseltine, stimulated Mrs Thatcher and her Home Secretary, Douglas Hurd, to deliver in public disquisitions on Cabinet management.
At lunchtime on Sunday 26 January 1986 Hurd told Brian Walden in a television interview:
I think it is very important that people should see that we are under Cabinet government.
I think that is what people prefer and want to know about…they want to see that it is Cabinet government.
Speaking almost simultaneously on Tyne-Tees Television's Face the Press , Mrs Thatcher showed an acute awareness of criticisms of her Cabinet style and used it as an explanation for not confronting Heseltine earlier in the Westland debate:
There was a period when the Cabinet did not seem and, in fact, was not acting with collective responsibility, because one person was not playing as a member of a team.
The press were very critical of me in many ways before that.
Some said that I should, in fact, have dealt with it and asked Mr Heseltine to go earlier.
I can only tell you that had I done that…
I know exactly what the press would have said: ‘There you are, old bossy-boots at it again.’
But was the Heseltine resignation proof positive of the Queen Boadicea or ‘bossy-boots’ interpretation of Cabinet government since 1979?
Not really.
Thatcher diktats do not simply slide down the Cabinet table like castor oil.
Anticipation of Cabinet resistance does prevent Mrs Thatcher from establishing ministerial groups skewed in favour of policies she might favour but which will not run in full Cabinet.
Instances given by insiders include the total abolition of the closed shop; the radical breaking-up of the National Health Service; student loans; rates; vouchers for schools; and, in earlier, pre-Hillsborough days, the restoration of what she and the late Airey Neave used, according to insiders, to refer to in private as the restoration of good local government in Northern Ireland.
She may have siphoned much of the collective spirit from the Cabinet Room in the way meetings are conducted, but more than a shadow remains.
Her style is not collegiate.
But to call it ‘presidential’ is both to go too far and to dignify it.
Her fervent anti-collectivist impulse is a strong shaper of the kind of policy advice she wants and the way it is served up.
Mrs Thatcher is very much alive to new ideas, ‘ideas that support and implement her view of the world’, as somebody inside her ideas market put it.
‘That's why her style is better suited to a Policy Unit that is hers rather than to a CPRS which serves the Cabinet.’
Yet, when the think-tank was wound up at the first Cabinet meeting after the 1983 general election, not a single minister spoke up in its defence.
Certainly, compared to the Rothschild days, it had run out of steam.
As one of Mrs Thatcher's own people put it, ‘The CPRS was not delivering the goods.
The conclusion in No. 10 was, therefore, that it had become part of the Cabinet Office and was politically starved…on anything that had a political dimension, the tank found itself rather isolated.’
For Professor John Ashworth, the CPRS Chief Scientist in the late seventies and early eighties, it was quite simple.
Margaret Thatcher and the kind of neutral policy analysis the tank produced simply do not mix: ‘Of its very existence it sort of encapsulated a view about government for which she had no great sympathy.
She was what she called a conviction politician.
There is a difference between being a conviction politician and being a rationally guided politician.’
Even David Howell, one of the tank's progenitors, dances, albeit regretfully, on its grave:
By the time we got back in 1979 the CPRS had already changed beyond recognition.
It had become a sort of trouble-shooting body that had been put in to try and dish the Foreign Office and got a bloody nose.
It had been asked to do strange one-off affairs and its reports had been leaked and bandied about in Parliament and any role it was originally supposed to have, as a systematic, regular bringing-together of reports of programme analysis throughout Whitehall to present an overall strategic picture to the Prime Minister and the Cabinet, had long since disappeared.
It had become a sort of one-off adventurer and then after '79 it took on another role again.
The head of the CPRS had a seat at the table of ministers and ministerial committees, which is a very significant thing.
And he was always there and really was another voice, not a bad role actually.
But, of course, if you're going to be another voice you really need to know what you're talking about and you need to have vast access to information at least as good as all the departments who are putting forward their voices, and you need to have the time and the staff and I don't think they always had that.
So as a result papers would fly round of, I'm afraid, rather a shallow kind — a last minute dash by some bright brain on a subject which very able people in departments and outside advisers might have worked on for months and months and months.
And that created a slight sort of canary-hopping attitude to policy-making which I don't think was very good and in the end I think Mrs Thatcher felt the same.
‘What's the point of having this body?’ she must have felt.
She much rather wanted a real policy-research unit, which of course is what she's now got.
Her craving for advice with a Thatcherite spin on it does not mean that the Prime Minister will automatically diminish Civil Service  contributions as flowing from a tainted source.
One well-placed career official does not accept the ‘four-minute warning’ principle.
‘It can be fifteen seconds or ten minutes.
It depends on whether you interest her.
There are people in the Civil Service who can talk in a way that fascinates her.’
And even Mrs Thatcher's detractors in the senior bureaucracy do accept that her anti-collectivist, commanding style is one way of tackling the overload problem, temporarily at least.
‘The number of Cabinet meetings is not necessarily an index of efficiency’, said one who believes her brand of Cabinet government (‘a president within a monarchy’) is a more effective way of shifting business than the traditional collective model.
Another, more sympathetic figure reckoned that a slimmer committee system and under fifty Cabinet meetings a year ‘doesn't indicate overload — she manages to get through the business in a different way’.
We shall return to the overload theme in the final chapter.
But, before leaving the Thatcher phenomenon, a glance at the Falklands War and what preceded it is a must.
For it shows modern Cabinet government at its best and at its worst.
And, in the Franks Report on ministerial handling of the conflict, we have an archive which not only shortens dramatically the interval before the normal release of classified information but goes considerably further than any disclosures at the end of the statutory thirty years in the amount of intelligence material displayed.
For one seasoned Whitehall figure involved in the build-up to the Falklands War, in the conflict itself and its aftermath, among the starkest lessons of the greatest trauma of the Thatcher period was the way in which the shortcomings of contemporary Cabinet government were thrown into sharp relief.
‘The biggest gap we had’, he said, ‘was trying to get the Falklands put before some kind of Cabinet committee.
The whole thing went undiscussed throughout 1982, though people had been trying to have it discussed since they came back from their holidays in 1981.’
Why was it so difficult to get ministers to meet (a judgement, incidentally, buttressed by a careful reading of the Franks Report)?
The problem is particularly acute for the key ministerial group concerned, the Oversea and Defence Committee.
Its members are very often dispersed at summits, EEC meetings and foreign visits of various kinds.
There is an aversion to holding meetings at short notice with a diminished complement.
Many secretaries of state are not particular admirers of their junior ministers and do not care for the department to be represented by them at OD.
Lord Carrington, Foreign Secretary  in the crucial period, disliked meetings of ministers and preferred to do as much business as possible through ministerial correspondence.
And probably the most important factor of all, until the beginning of March 1982 (the Argentine invasion of the islands took place on 2 April), the Falklands was very much a ‘backburner’ issue compared to the EEC budget, the Middle East, pressure on defence-spending, the NATO decision to deploy cruise missiles, and a host of other apparently more pressing concerns, as the Franks Report makes clear:
Government policy towards Argentina and the Falkland Islands was never formally discussed outside the Foreign and Commonwealth Office after January 1981.
Thereafter the time was never judged to be ripe although we were told in oral evidence that, subject to the availability of Ministers, a Defence Committee [i.e. OD]meeting could have been held at any time, if necessary at short notice.
There was no meeting of the Defence Committee to discuss the Falklands until 1 April 1982; and there was no reference to the Falklands, in Cabinet, even after the New York talks of 26 and 27 February [with the Argentine government], until Lord Carrington reported on events in South Georgia on 25 March, 1982.
In their understated way, Lord Franks and his fellow privy counsellors commented,
We cannot say what the outcome of a meeting of the Defence Committee might have been, or whether the course of events would have been altered if it had met in September 1981; but, in our view, it could have been advantageous, and fully in line with Whitehall practice, for Ministers to have reviewed collectively at that time, or in the months immediately ahead, the current negotiating position; the implications of the conflict between the attitudes of the Islanders and the aims of the Junta; and the longer-term policy options in relation to the dispute.
Ministers are busy people.
They cannot be expected to read every piece of intelligence that pours into Whitehall.
They pay clever people to do that for them — people who, collectively, go under the name of the Cabinet Office Assessments Staff.
The system works like this.
Each Monday, current intelligence groups for various parts of the world meet in the Cabinet Office, bringing together line men from all the intelligence-gathering agencies and their customer departments.
They filter and assess new material.
Every Wednesday morning, their bosses gather in the Cabinet Office for a meeting of the Joint Intelligence  Committee.
They do a quality-control exercise on the product of the current intelligence groups and compile a ‘Red Book’ of summaries which, the following day, is circulated to ministers on the OD Committee on a strictly ‘need to know’basis.
There is a current intelligence group on Latin America.
In military terms, it has two preoccupations: Belize in the north and the Falklands in the south.
The most chilling sentence in the Franks Report is this one: ‘We were told in evidence that the Latin America Current Intelligence Group met 18 times between July 1981 and March 1982, but did not discuss the Falkland Islands on those occasions.’
The Cabinet's watchdog on the Falklands had failed to bark.
One insider explained how difficult it was, with the cuts in secret budgets, to run a proper intelligence operation in Argentina, certainly compared to the late forties and early fifties (when Churchill sent his task force).
Wartime concerns with the pro-fascist inclinations of the government in Buenos Aires had bequeathed a large intelligence operation to the peace.
But in the early eighties it was very different, and, as the same observer comments, Argentina then ‘was a very hermetic society.
Actually to go and take pictures of a dockyard would have been very difficult.’
Another insider said, ‘I think there was an invasion plan.
But I don't think we had it or that it would have made any difference if we had.’
At the time of writing, it has been disclosed at the trial of the former military junta in Buenos Aires that on 5 January 1982 it ‘set up a working group to analyse the possibility of taking the islands’.
On 6 March the junta ordered the chiefs of staff to make detailed preparations.
On 26 March the junta decided that the invasion would take place on one of the first three days in April.
Sir Frank Cooper was Permanent Secretary at the Ministry of Defence during the Falklands crisis.
I asked him how he read the lessons of the Franks Report:
HENNESSY
We're lucky, outsiders like me, in that we've got the Franks Report on the origins of the war, which covers the seventeen-year build-up, the era of non-decision-taking almost, which led to the Argentine invasion of 1982.
And I've always thought it [the Report]did for foreign and defence policy-making and intelligence…what the Crossman and Castle diaries did for economic and domestic policy-making.
It seems to show it's a shambles with more or less benign intent.
Do you think there are lessons for the wider public in the Franks Report?
Was it in fact such a creaking system as all that?
COOPER
I'm not sure I'd wholly agree with what you've just said.
But I think what the Franks Report illustrates to me very, very clearly indeed is that, within a parliamentary democratic system of government, there are some issues which are insoluble in that the government of the day…are incapable of delivering through the House of Commons.
And the question to me is that, where you have got a parliamentary system and where essentially you're dealing with the backbenchers of the…government in power, can you deliver them?
And the British government in some ways is very much more effective at delivering what it decides to do than many other governments — it's much more effective than the American government.
And this was what happened in the Falklands.
Neither the Labour government nor the Tory government was able to deliver its party.
HENNESSY
I accept that.
But if you look inward, inside the Cabinet system itself, in the way that Franks allows one to, you'll see, will you not, that it was very difficult to get the relevant Cabinet committee — the Oversea and Defence Policy Cabinet committee, which the Prime Minister chairs — to discuss this issue?
It was also exceedingly difficult to get the Joint Intelligence Committee and its Assessments Staff to update the intelligence assessments.
So that's the bit that alarms people like me.
The mechanics, the in-house mechanics, which are nothing to do with the backbenchers, which they know nothing of and understand even less.
COOPER
I think one of the things that is necessary is that you do need quite a strong centre within government at the moment, and, as we deal with all these complicated issues, whether they are…political or intelligence issues [such]as…the Falklands Isles or whether it's something highly controversial such as nuclear power or defence or even road systems, you need a much stronger centre than we have got at the moment.
HENNESSY
What worried me in looking at the Franks Report is that it was the same group of ministers on the same committee that were dealing with the big issues of war and peace in Middle Europe, with the procurement of nuclear weapons systems.
Was the Falklands element in that committee and its back-up staff so peripheral, so much of a backburner issue, that in fact it gives a false impression of it?
Or are they as incompetent as that across the whole waterfront?
COOPER
No, I don't think they're as incompetent as that even if I accept that they were as incompetent as you imply.
What I think was true was that the Falklands was not regarded as a front-line issue for some period of time, and indeed the forecast was that it wouldn't really boil up again until August or thereabouts in 1982.
But, having said that, it is not or was not an issue at the forefront of British politics and in a sense you can say the whole nation was guilty in that way.
It's part of the price you do pay for democracy.
HENNESSY
I as a taxpayer pay money for clever chaps like you to be the production engineers of the Cabinet system of government.
Once a week ministers will get their intelligence summary in the ‘Red Book’, all the trouble spots in the world, and one pays clever people like you to actually sit there and be plugged in as best one can to the trouble spots, with much better sources of information than the poor old chap in the street, to alert ministers on our behalf of potential disasters.
That's your job and the Franks Report shows that the function was not being carried out at all.
COOPER
No.
I personally do believe that it would have been much better if ministers had had a number of discussions about the Falkland Islands in the period preceding the invasion of the Falklands by the Argentinians.
But, having said that, there is no system in the world, whether it be in government, outside it, public-sector, private-sector, wherever it may be, which is going to get everything right the whole time.
And one of the difficulties…is that [private citizens]have an innate belief that the government should get everything right all the time.
They're just like other men and women.
They're going to get some things wrong every now and then.
The price that's paid tends to be higher in government than it does elsewhere.
HENNESSY
…
If…one prescient soul at your level, say, early in 1982,…really had thought ministers should be forced to meet on this issue and they kept postponing discussions on the Falklands, could you as Permanent Secretary of Defence have ensured that relevant Cabinet ministers did get together and look at the problem rationally and seriously, in so far as it's possible, in time?
Could you have shifted it as an individual in the right direction?
COOPER
I don't honestly know the answer to that.
I think it is possible.
It might have been.
But it would depend very much on you getting hold of the relevant minister-it would probably almost inevitably be your own secretary of state- and saying, ‘Look we really must have a situation where there is a discussion about the Falklands.’
HENNESSY
And presumably you didn't do that with Mr Nott, the Secretary of State of the day?
COOPER
I think there was great anxiety about should there or should there not be a discussion about the Falklands within the Cabinet-committee system.
But we also, I think, all took the view, because that was what all the signs were showing at the time, that the crunch would come later than it did, and I think that was the perceived view of anybody working in Whitehall at that stage.
HENNESSY
You mentioned that we need a stronger centre in government.
On the intelligence assessment of possible trouble with the Argentines in the South Atlantic, you say the intelligence assessments were it might boil up in…
August…1982.
Well, by April 1982, surely the Cabinet should  have been thinking about it.
It was leaving it a little bit late, even if there was the possibility of serious trouble in the summer, not to be talking about it.
COOPER
I didn't actually talk about the intelligence assessments at all.
I was talking much more about the political assessment.
And the political assessment was that there would be another round of talks in the summer.
But that if they did not make progress we were going to be in a really difficult situation which might have military overtones as well.
And that was, I think, the essential issue at stake in those days.
The engine room, the Cabinet-committee structure, may have seriously under-performed in the six-month build-up to the Argentine invasion of the Falklands, but its command post, the full Cabinet, according to one senior minister not of the Thatcherite persuasion, performed its classic function once the crisis had broken: ‘She had to carry the Cabinet on every major decision’, he said.
‘That task force would never have sailed without Cabinet approval.
There is no question of that.’
Intriguingly, the Falklands made Mrs Thatcher turn to a pair of old statesmen for assistance: Lord Franks, probably the most distinguished Ambassador to Washington since 1945, to sort out the origins of the affair once the war was over; and Harold Macmillan, now the Earl of Stockton, at the outset.
Lord Stockton has revealed, in a television interview with Ludovic Kennedy, the substance of his conversation with Mrs Thatcher in Downing Street in the fraught days immediately following the seizure of the islands:
MACMILLAN
I did try and help her about how to run a war because it's such a long time since anybody's run a war — I mean the technical methods of running a war — which she did very well.
KENNEDY
What were you able to draw on there in your own experience?
MACMILLAN
Well, I mean that you have to have a War Cabinet, you have to have a Committee of Chiefs of Staff, that the Secretary of the Committee of Chiefs  mustn't be the Secretary of the War Cabinet.
It must be the nearest thing you could get to Lord Ismay…it was just the tip how to run it, how to manage it from the Government point of view.
All of which I'd learnt from Churchill, of course.
Mrs Thatcher followed his advice.
She commissioned a War Cabinet of five: herself; her deputy, William Whitelaw; Francis Pym, Foreign Secretary; John Nott, Defence Secretary; and Cecil Parkinson, Paymaster General and Chairman of the Conservative Party, to liaise  with the party and press and, according to Whitehall talk, to ensure she had a majority in the War Cabinet's deliberations.
Officially, the War Cabinet was a sub-group of OD.
It was known as OD(SA) — Oversea and Defence (South Atlantic).
The ‘nearest thing she could get’ to a Lord Ismay was Sir Michael Palliser, who had just retired from the headship of the Diplomatic Service.
Sir Michael was installed in a new Falklands Unit in the Cabinet Office and attended meetings of OD(SA), though not as its secretary.
That job was performed by Sir Robert Armstrong.
During the Falklands War, Mrs Thatcher was punctilious about keeping full Cabinet informed about major developments, and consulted them before implementing the bigger decisions.
Under duress from external events, she practised collective Cabinet government in something approaching the traditional form, though David Howell, at that time Secretary of State for Transport, cautions against being carried away by the collective theme:
HENNESSY
Some observers have thought that the Falklands crisis of 1982 actually saw a revival, albeit briefly, of classic Cabinet government.
I know you weren't in the War Cabinet, the small group that ran it operationally, but you were in the full Cabinet.
In fact this small War Cabinet had to consult the full Cabinet at all the big decisions, like sending the task force, the landing at San Carlos, before they could actually take any decisions to move in, and…this was a restoration of almost nineteenth-century Cabinet government.
Do you think that's right?
HOWELL
Well, I can't discuss that.
It would not be proper or right for me to discuss what went on on the specific issues in the Cabinet and I don't wish to do so.
But I think it is reasonable to observe that the major issues of the Falklands War were more or less written in the stars.
There wasn't actually a great sense of option or choice.
It was clear the task force had to go.
Having gone, it was clear that, if it reached there before any kind of serious and sensible peace proposal could be offered,…the task force then had to do something.
It was clear that…fudge proposals from the Argentinians which amounted to saying ‘We've done what we've done now let's negotiate from here’ were quite unacceptable and it was clear that the task force had to land and do its bit.
So I think, of course, it was right and proper that these things came to Cabinet.
But I think it would be glorifying things a bit to say that re-created Cabinet government in its full glory, if it ever existed in its full glory in the nineteenth century, which I frankly rather doubt.
The aftermath of the war did oblige Mrs Thatcher to engage in a piece of Cabinet reform on a small but important scale.
The Franks  Report was critical of the operation of the Joint Intelligence Committee and its assessment machinery.
Its one recommendation was confined to this area:
We are concerned here with defects in the Joint Intelligence machinery as we have seen it working in an area of low priority.
As we have seen only the papers relevant to the subject of our review, we are not able to judge how the assessment machinery deals with areas of higher priority, but we believe that, in dealing with Argentina and the Falkland Islands, it was too passive in operation to respond quickly and critically to a rapidly changing situation which demanded urgent attention.
We consider that the assessment machinery should be reviewed.
We cannot say what the scope of such a review should be in respect of the machinery's wider preoccupations, but we think that it should look at two aspects in particular.
The first…is the arrangement for bringing to the Joint Intelligence Organisation's attention information other than intelligence reports.
The second is the composition of the Joint Intelligence Committee.
On this, consideration should be given to the position of the Chairman of the Committee: to the desirability that he or she should be full-time, with a more critical and independent role; and, in recognition of the Committee's independence in operation from the Government Departments principally constituting it, to the Chairman's being appointed by the Prime Minister and being a member of the Cabinet Office.
As a result of the Franks recommendation, the JIC was reviewed.
The Foreign Office lost the chairmanship.
It moved to the then co-ordinator of security and intelligence in the Cabinet Office, Sir Antony Duff, who was given the right of direct access to Mrs Thatcher and encouraged to override the JIC's supporting machinery and voice his concerns at the highest level when a potential emergency was sensed.
It is immensely difficult for outsiders to begin to assess the efficiency of the secret world.
But, one year later, some experienced figures reckoned the post-Franks changes had been pretty superficial.
‘Falklands is now on the agenda’, said one.
‘But how do people know that things are not the same today?
How often is Hong Kong discussed?
Belize?
Gibraltar?
The Caribbean?’
For one participant, the lesson of the Franks Report was the dangerous degree to which civil servants run policy on the intelligence side: ‘Ministers should meet and say ‘we have heard what you think but our view is…–.’
The shortcomings of the JIC and the secret agencies tend only to be exposed after the kind of failure they exist to prevent.
In 1984 Sir Antony Duff was  moved to the directorship of MI5, the Security Service, to clean it up after the Security Commission had criticized it as part of its investigation of the Bettaney affair.
In 1985 Duff was succeeded as JIC ‘overlord’ and Cabinet Office co-ordinator by Sir Colin Figures, the former Director-General of the Secret Intelligence Service, MI6.
Given the record of her ‘conviction Cabinets’ between 1979 and 1985, where, in a spectrum stretching from collective decision-taking to ‘presidential’command, does Mrs Thatcher's handling of Cabinet place her?
The public rhetoric tends to point firmly in one direction.
Three quick examples give what is a fairly consistent flavour.
First, Nicholas Budgen, the somewhat maverick right-wing Tory MP, said on 5 December 1984 when receiving the Spectator Backbencher-of-the-Year Award, ‘My hope is that this Parliament will see a restoration of Cabinet government.’
I telephoned him and asked him to explain.
He did so: ‘I wasn't surprised by what has happened.
After all, before the 1979 election she said the Cabinet was going to be a place for handing down the orders of Great Britain Limited and was, no doubt, applauded for it in Rotary Clubs throughout the land.’
Next, Peter Jenkins, the respected political commentator of The Sunday Times , writing on the possible impact of such men as Kenneth Baker and Kenneth Clarke brought into the Cabinet in the September 1985 reshuffle (in alliance with existing Cabinet members such as Douglas Hurd and Norman Fowler): ‘It is not easy to reassert Cabinet government in the face of determined prime ministerial power but the new Cabinet contains a group of capable and ambitious men of political middle age who are not eager to sacrifice the best years of their careers for the sake of someone else's ‘conviction politics’.’
Finally, let us take a pre-Heseltine witness from the inside track.
In the autumn of 1985, Peter Walker, Secretary of State for Energy, had taken to making the following joke in after-lunch speeches: he would quote the Duke of Wellington's reaction to his first Cabinet meeting as Prime Minister: ‘An extraordinary affair.
I gave them their orders and they wanted to stay and discuss them.’
Then he would pause and say, ‘I'm so glad we don't have Prime Ministers like that today.’
The broadside of Mr Walker's friend and colleague Michael Heseltine has already been examined.
The implication of the Heseltine resignation, assorted other speeches, asides and articles can be made to seem too strong.
For a start, no prime minister's exposition of Cabinet government is consistent.
The Falklands obliged Mrs Thatcher to behave more collectively for a time, as did the unexpectedly hostile reaction across the political spectrum to her handling of the trade-union issue at GCHQ, where policy-making by cabal truly backfired.
And after the resignations of Heseltine and Brittan there were signs of a revival of collegiality in the Cabinet Room.
Her sensitivity at all times to what will run in Cabinet is genuine, even though she always lets colleagues know what she wants at the outset of any discussion.
There genuinely is a contrast between her rhetoric and assertion of personality and the reality of the decision-making process.
Having acknowledged that, Cabinet does meet less frequently, it discusses fewer formal papers, it is presented with more virtual faits accomplis at the last moment, and she does prefer to work in ad hoc groups — many of the most important ones remaining outside the Cabinet-committee structure.
Collective deliberation on the basis of choices served up by the official machine go against Mrs Thatcher's personal grain.
She likes advice with her kind of spin on it and brisk meetings with those most closely involved.
She has certainly flouted the spirit of traditional Cabinet government.
But she has not handbagged it, to use Julian Critchley's metaphor, beyond recognition.
She has certainly not privatized it from the Constitution, for all Michael Heseltine's complaints.
At worst she has put Cabinet government temporarily on ice.
In a political and administrative system as riddled with tradition as the British, the old model could, and probably will, be restored in the few minutes it takes a new prime minister to travel from Buckingham Palace to Downing Street.