

A MATCH FOR NEWCASTLE
Having scored his first major triumph in the Southern League Championship, Chapman began to question the merits of the framework of that triumph, that is, the Southern League itself.
The competition lacked the prestige of the League Championship, and its future looked uncertain as one club after another abandoned it by successfully applying to enter the Football League — Bristol City in 1901, Chelsea in 1905, Fulham in 1907 and Tottenham in 1908.
This influx of southern clubs ended the North's monopoly of the ‘big’ League, making it a more nationally representative competition, and eroding the standing of the Southern League.
In November 1911 Chapman added his own voice to many others suggesting plans for restructuring the entire league system.
Some of these schemes involved a third division in the English League, but Chapman went further.
He circulated clubs with a proposal that would set up, in effect, the system existing today, of four national divisions.
His plan was to reorganize the Southern League with other clubs into two divisions of eighteen to twenty clubs each, to be called the Football Alliance, with promotion and relegation between the Second Division of the League and the First of the Alliance as well as within the two organizations.
In this way, thought Chapman, the Southern League, in its new guise, would provide greater competition within itself and would have greater command over its members' loyalty by providing automatic access for successful clubs to the League.
The plan enhanced Chapman's fame in the football world generally, but it was too radical to win immediate acceptance.
The League clubs found the idea of relegation to what was in effect the  Southern League too terrible to contemplate.
It was not until 1920 that a Third Division of twenty-two southern clubs was formed, with another of twenty-two northern clubs the following year.
In 1950 the two Third Division sections were increased to twenty-four clubs each and in 1958 were replaced by the present Third and Fourth Divisions.
In later years Chapman came to realize that the extension of the league system was having a bad effect on the game.
When he and others advocated extra divisions in the Edwardian period they could not have foreseen that the formation of a Third Division in 1920 would create an extra demand for players of talent at a time when a large part of the male population had been wiped out in a world war.
This led to young players being drafted into top-class soccer before their abilities had had time to mature.
Before 1920, writes Charlie Buchan in his autobiography, ‘the county leagues had been the happy hunting grounds for the professional clubs.
Scouts had only to go to the North-east, the Birmingham area or any of the thickly populated districts to discover several players almost up to the top League standard.
But in the next few years, these areas were practically drained of their promising material.
The standard of play dropped in the counties.
There was keen competition among the big clubs to get any promising young player that came along.’
Abolition of the Southern League also robbed players of a useful safety valve, for no transfer fee was payable when a player moved into it from the League.
Under the old system, if a player was dissatisfied with his terms at a League club he could move to a Southern League team at the end of a season without waiting for a fee to be agreed.
Chapman came to criticize the league system most for making success the overriding consideration.
Just as at Northampton he questioned the merit of the Southern League after shaping a team that mastered it, so after his later Championship triumphs at Huddersfield and Arsenal, he was to question the league system that was the framework of those triumphs.
He disliked the way clubs were compelled to concern themselves with points at the cost of skill, the restrictions imposed on development  of young players by the prime importance of the first team, and the premature blooding of young players in the first team.
He criticized in particular what he saw as the fundamental flaw in a system based on the pursuit of points: that a team was given a point before it even kicked a ball.
It was an observation that has been sadly misinterpreted.
His comment shows, say his critics, that Chapman's aim was to defend that point at all costs — he was thus a defensive-minded manager who set a bad example for football.
He was not.
Never at any time in his career did he set out solely to defend.
His aim, from his Northampton days on, was a team that could switch quickly from attack to defence and back again as the game dictated: and the development of Arsenal's defence-in-depth system was matched by the creation of one of the most powerful forward lines in soccer history.
He admired the traditional style of Scottish football for the ‘finesse and cunning with which they invest their attack’.
‘Their combined craftsmanship,’ he said, ‘makes for a spectacle that is all too rare on English fields.’
But he saw that Scottish football too was on the decline and blamed the system of promotion and relegation introduced into the Scottish League in 1921.
And he showed his cynical disregard for the system by suggesting that promotion and relegation should be on an eleven-up, eleven-down basis.
The enlargement of the Football League has had another effect that Chapman was to deplore — the escalation of transfer fees.
This was bound to happen by the law of supply and demand, with too many League clubs chasing too few good players.
In the pre-First World War days of two divisions, the top limit of transfer fees rose in the eight years from 1905 to 1913 from £1,000 to £2,500, an increase of 150 per cent; in the first eight years of three divisions (1920–28) they went up from £3,300 to £10,890, an increase of roughly 230 per cent .
The rise has continued, reaching the £1½ million mark in 1980, accompanied by the customary, but vain, protests.
But as Chapman set about maintaining the momentum of his Northampton team after their 1909 Championship, and went in search of new players, transfer fees were not a problem.
He made an exciting ‘discovery’ at Wellingborough.
Outside-right Fred  ‘Fanny’ Walden, 21, was just over five feet tall, weighed less than nine stone and looked easy meat for burly defenders.
But what he lacked in build he made up for in speed and skill, nipping in and out of solid defences with astounding ease.
He came into the Northampton side at home to Luton on 30 October and scored a hat-trick in a 6–1 win, following this with another against Southend in December.
And he cost Chapman next to nothing.
Walden was so small that on one occasion, entering the players' quarters behind his team-mates on arrival at an away game, he was told, ‘Go away, sonny,’ by an official.
His size, combined with considerable talent, made him a popular figure at Northampton and Chapman called him a ‘star artist’ who could draw in the crowds and was ‘largely the making of the Northampton team’.
Walden, who also became a Northamptonshire County cricketer, went on to play for Tottenham.
Billy Jones, a Spurs amateur centre-forward in the 1920s, remembers him for his clever ball control.
‘He didn't score many goals but he was brilliant at laying on the ball for others.
He was another Stanley Matthews.’
Walden was the first in a line of great Chapman discoveries.
Chapman also secured Barnsley goalkeeper Thomas Thorpe to replace Cooch, who went to Norwich.
The team continued to astound with their attacking flair and sound defence, treating the home crowd to wins of 5–1 over Plymouth, 10–1 over Croydon Common and 7–1 over New Brompton.
Their opponents, lacking the shrewd tactical direction and sense of purpose that Chapman provided, were slow to arm themselves against the Cobblers' swift, sudden onslaughts.
Most were still bewildered by the way Northampton opened out the game to create openings for surprise attacks, and after a 4–1 win at Swindon, the Railwaymen's international winger Fleming told Chapman: ‘You have something more than a team: you have a machine.’
Despite these successes, Northampton's hopes of retaining the Championship faded as games were lost in March and April 1910.
At Norwich, where they lost 2–0, the Cobblers played the first thirty minutes without their skipper McCartney — he had  missed his train.
Northampton finished fourth, after finally ending the Norwich jinx with a 3–1 home win in the last game of the season, which brought a visit by 800 members of Norwich Supporters Club.
To keep the supporters out of mischief during the morning, Chapman arranged tours of a local factory and brewery.
New players coming into the side in 1910 included half-back George Hampson, 21, from Oswestry, Frank Bradshaw, Sheffield Wednesday's international forward renowned for his fast solo runs, and right-back Fred Clipston, who cost £150 from Portsmouth.
With Lloyd Davies in a new attacking role, the combination took time to settle, and crowds had to wait until the 1911–12 season to see the old magic at work again.
Northampton finished third in 1912, with 82 goals, 41 against, maintaining the 2–1 average of the previous three seasons.
The league programme had not been free from the upsets that could arise from the organizational confusion of most Edwardian football clubs.
On 1 October, 1910, Northampton were at home to Coventry City.
Kick-off time was 3.30, but when the Cobblers took the field at 3.25, there was no sign of the Coventry party anywhere in the town.
Kick-off time passed, the crowd waiting patiently.
Chapman recalled his players from the pitch.
Over an hour later, the visitors finally arrived and both teams took the field — at two minutes to five.
The City party had left Coventry on the two o'clock train, which was cheaper  than the earlier ones but allowed no room for delay — and the engine broke down during the journey.
In the days before floodlighting it was obvious that a game starting at five o'clock could not possibly run its full course, but the referee went ahead, fearing trouble from a crowd that had waited over two hours.
Inevitably, the game was finally abandoned because of bad light.
In an effort to retain the goodwill of supporters, Chapman wrote to the Northampton Daily Echo :
SIR — I am desired by the management of the Northampton Town Football Club to convey their sincere thanks to the supporters  present at the County Ground on Saturday last for the exemplary patience shown awaiting the arrival of the Coventry team.
The cause of delay will be dealt with by the Southern League Management Committee in due course.
I feel assured, however, no one regrets the inconvenience and annoyance our supporters were subjected to more than the Coventry executive…
Yours, etc.
HERBERT CHAPMAN (Secretary)
For the replay in December, Coventry travelled by express train during the morning — and were beaten 4–1.
It was in the Cup that Northampton were now to make the headlines.
In 1910 they were drawn at home to First Division Sheffield Wednesday.
After losing centre-forward Lloyd Davies with a knee injury, the Cobblers soldiered on with ten men to earn a goalless draw.
For the replay, Chapman made one of his master-strokes, bringing McCartney out of the half-back line to take Lloyd Davies's place at centre-forward.
The result: a sensational 1–0 victory.
‘The match was won by absolutely unflinching work on the part of every player,’ Chapman commented proudly, as congratulatory telegrams flooded into his office.
Next hurdle was Nottingham Forest.
Again the Cobblers held them to a goalless draw after being reduced to ten men, but this time it was not through injury: half-back Manning was sent off after twenty-five minutes for tripping Forest's West from behind.
The Daily Echo protested that West was play-acting — he ‘rolled over and over as though in great bodily pain’, then played a ‘vigorous’ game for the rest of the match.
The paper reported that the referee regretted his decision.
And two FA officials were overheard to say that here was a case where, despite the laws forbidding it, the ordered-off player should be allowed to come on again.
Northampton lost 1–0 in the replay — but the best was yet to come.
In the fourth round of the 1911 Cup competition, Northampton faced those giants of Edwardian football, Newcastle United, away from home.
Newcastle were the Cup holders, had been in the final five times in seven years and were three times League  champions.
They did sometimes falter against lesser teams, and in particular had a habit of losing to Crystal Palace in Cup ties, but Northampton were still rank outsiders, especially as their League performances were in the doldrums.
The big day was February 4, and Chapman headed north with his team on the previous Thursday.
On arrival at Newcastle station he told reporters: ‘I hope my boys will give United a good game’— but beyond that he was ‘courteously discreet and silent’.
The visitors stayed at Tynemouth, where finishing touches were put to the plan of campaign, one of the main objectives being to beat the notorious Newcastle offside trap.
The 42,000 crowd saw two goals in as many minutes.
Newcastle took the lead after a quarter of an hour, but a shot from Northampton's Bradshaw was too powerful for the keeper to hold and it went over his head into the net.
There was an anxious moment for the Cobblers when Hampson had to be taken off, but he was soon back, and half-time arrived with the score still at 1–1.
As the game wore on Northampton showed no signs of tiring.
The razor-sharp accuracy of their passing pressurized and flummoxed Newcastle, reducing even the experienced full-back McCracken to kicking into touch.
‘Tapper’ of the Northampton Daily Echo wrote:
‘This game was very much like a game of chess, with human beings as pieces.
Though there was never-ceasing change, each movement was not a chance occurrence in a hotch-potch of bewildered uncertainty, but part and parcel of a pre-conceived plan, trimmed down or adorned to suit the particular circumstances of the moment…
‘I fancy it would have been a Palace final more worth watching than many a struggle at Sydenham…
‘The game presented a great contrast in styles.
Newcastle were always striving to keep the ball by those machine-like movements which only the cleverest exponents of the short-passing game can exhibit.
Northampton asked for no quarter and gave none.
They stood on no ceremony.
The defence infused a breathless energy into every move; they bustled the northern cracks into comparative impotence; they beat back this magnificent fighting line which  has been the terror of a dozen clubs as a break-water hurls back the lashing waves.
‘The forwards discarded seeking their end by devious ways.
They wove no fancy patterns but, given the ball, straight they sped for goal.
Just a brief run, enough to draw part of the defence towards the spot, and over it went with almost amazing accuracy to the other side of the field.
There the operation was repeated.
Backs of less experience than McCracken and Whitson would have been run off their legs long before this pair showed signs of flagging.’
Northampton came close to winning the game in the last five minutes when Walden drove a fierce shot against the crossbar, ‘making a mark which it will take a paintbrush to efface’.
The draw was hailed as a ‘magnificent achievement’ by the Echo , which spoke of this ‘historic day in the annals of the Northampton Town Club’.
But the euphoria soon turned sour.
In return for £900, Northampton, after consulting the players, waived ground rights for the replay and agreed to battle it out again at St James's Park.
The sum was arrived at only after some haggling, Newcastle at first offering £400 and Northampton asking £ 1,000.
It was not unusual to sell ground advantage, and the Town had special reason to accept the deal.
Cup fever had obscured disappointing results and falling attendances in the League.
At Christmas receipts were £500 below normal and the club owed £100 in rent to the County Cricket Club.
On top of that, the first £100 instalment of a £600 interest-free loan for building the new stand was due to be repaid, and over £ 170 was owed to tradesmen.
In all the club had debts totalling £4,000.
The Town wanted to avoid selling players and could not lightly disregard the opportunity of securing bigger receipts from a capacity crowd at Newcastle.
The club issued a statement explaining its move:
‘Should we accept the offer or run the risk of being compelled to transfer players?
Our policy has been to try to build up a great team and not to weaken our playing strength, and it was for this reason that we accepted the offer made.
We believe on reflection that our supporters will recognize that our action has been actuated by the one desire to maintain first class soccer in Northants.’
But they could not avoid an outcry.
Supporters attacked the decision as a short-sighted mistake, as the immediate monetary gain would be offset by low gates at home for the rest of the season.
The Athletic News added its criticism, saying that Northampton Town had a duty to its supporters and that a visit by Newcastle to the County Ground would have helped to popularize football in Northampton.
The Cobblers again fought well in the replay, but lost by a disputed penalty.
‘We were robbed out of the game,’ said an angry Chapman.
Progress in the Cup the next year was more successful, if less spectacular.
Northampton got to the fifth round for the first time after beating Bristol City (finalists in 1909) and then Darlington, in a replay at home.
Before their first game against Darlington in February 1912, the Northampton squad stayed overnight at the seaside resort of Saltburn, in the grip of winter.
They found the windows of their rooms frozen so hard they could not close them, and the players took their pre-match sleep with snow on the bedroom floor.
The Cobblers finally went out of the competition at Fulham.
By then Chapman's name was being linked with Leeds City, and in May 1912 he accepted an offer to take over as secretary-manager of the Yorkshire club.
His last move for Northampton was to beat several clubs to sign Nuneaton Town's inside-left Henry Smith.
Chapman's apprenticeship in football management was over.
In five years he had turned a struggling side into formidable Championship contenders capable of springing surprises on League giants in the Cup.
And the team's success created a new public for football in Northampton.
Annual gate receipts rose during the period from £1,55 to £5,309, and 1912 saw the first four-figure profit — just over £1,000.
This growth in revenue enabled a total of £2,500 to be spent on ground improvements.
It was the circumstances that made this achievement even more outstanding.
First, the club could not afford large-scale spending on players: the payment of £200 for Lloyd Davies in 1907 strained its resources to the limit.
In view of this, Chapman's  ability in getting maximum effort from the players available and spotting talent in young players was vital.
Second, Northampton was predominantly a rugby centre.
Town president Pat Darnell was himself a rugby fan until he wandered into the soccer ground at Leicester by mistake, and was converted.
Most towns and villages in the rest of the county had already turned to the association game by the turn of the century, but before 1907 their enthusiasm centred around their local teams.
Only when the Cobblers were doing well did county people go to Northampton, hence the club's languishing state before Chapman took over.
The dichotomy between the rugby capital and the soccer county was evident in February 1912 when Northampton had their replay with Darlington in the Cup.
Several factories in Northamptonshire, anticipating the drift to the County Ground for the mid-week game, closed down for the day, but in Northampton itself factory workers were allowed the afternoon off only if they made up for it in overtime.
This pattern of support was a dangerous one for the club.
If team performances slumped, as they did in 1910–11, attendances fell disastrously, sparking off a financial crisis.
It was as if Chapman were a captain trying to keep afloat on a treacherous sea in a small boat that threatened at any moment to spring a leak.
On Chapman's departure, the Northampton Independent carried a tribute to him which recognized some of the essential features of his managerial style:
‘As a team manager, Mr Chapman has been strikingly successful, and he unites with his keen business abilities a winning personality that makes him very popular.
A fine judge of a player, a skilled diplomatist, he has secured many good players for Northampton at very little cost to the club, whilst his tact and cheery optimism has resulted in his getting the best out of the men at his command.’
NEARLY PROMOTED
The news of Chapman's appointment was received in Leeds with eager anticipation.
The secretary-managership of Leeds City had become vacant on the retirement of Scott Walford at the end of the club's most disastrous season since it entered the Second Division eight years before, and the public looked with keen interest to see what effect the new man's ‘shrewd judgement and tactful management’(Yorkshire Post ) would have.
‘Leeds City can congratulate themselves on securing such a man as Mr Chapman,’ commented The Athletic News .
From Chapman's point of view, the appointment offered a higher salary, a move to his native Yorkshire and an alluring challenge similar to that he faced at Northampton in 1907, with the added prestige of League status.
His aim was clear: ‘I am here to get Leeds City into the First Division.
It is, of course, a matter of time, but if it is humanly possible, it shall be attained.’
It was an ambitious aim, for Leeds were in the ignominious position of seeking re-election, and Chapman spent the rest of May canvassing for votes.
Leeds were re-elected, with thirty-three votes, along with Lincoln City, at a Football League meeting on 4 June (which also heard that the League had raised £696 for the victims of the Titanic disaster).
Chapman took over at Leeds at a time when professional footballers were beginning to assert themselves as an organized body of workers.
A players' union (the present Professional Footballers' Association) was formed in 1907, after an earlier, unsuccessful attempt in 1898.
The union was recognized by the FA, but when it affiliated to the Federation of Trade Unions, recognition was withdrawn and players were told to resign from the union or be banned from football.
At a time of militant unionism in the   country generally, both the FA and the Football League feared disruption of the football programme if the players' union got involved with disputes in other industries.
The result was a threatened players' strike in 1909, which led the authorities to re-recognize the union.
It was in this period too that a club's control over a player was first challenged in the law courts.
In the case of Lawrence Kingaby v .
Aston Villa in 1912, the player claimed damages for loss of employment, because the club had put ‘too high’ a transfer fee on him which prevented him taking an offer from another club.
judgement was in favour of Aston Villa and it was not until fifty years later that a fresh legal challenge over contract terms was made, by George Eastham against Newcastle United.
Leeds City, or the Peacocks as they were known from the gold V-shaped band on their blue strip, climbed to a more secure position in mid-table in the months after Chapman took over.
But the side was as yet inconsistent, the combination unbalanced.
Of the attack the Yorkshire Post commented: ‘The present players will never blend, as their styles are so dissimilar.
Individualism is by no means to be deprecated, but cohesiveness should be the first aim of an attacking line.’
Disappointed supporters demanded to know why Chapman had not signed any new players since the summer.
It was not, he answered, through want of trying: clubs were either unwilling to sell so early in the season, or were asking too high a fee.
Even junior clubs were holding on to their players.
It would not, he admitted, be hard to find players who were ‘fairly good’, but they would not strengthen the team: nothing but the best would do.
Then in November came a golden opportunity.
Northampton Town, languishing since Chapman's departure and losing money at the rate of £30 a week, were open to offers for Fanny Walden.
Chapman jumped at the chance, but the Cobblers' supporters were determined that Walden should stay, and a ‘shilling fund’ was set up to thwart the designs of their former manager.
It worked, and by the end of the month the deal was off.
‘In no instance have I personally suffered so great a disappointment,’ Chapman confessed.
But he remained hopeful of securing  Walden in the future, for he ‘would be the making of the Leeds City team if only I could get him to Elland Road’.
The player did eventually join the Peacocks, but under unusual and unforeseen circumstances.
Chapman aimed to finish the season among the top five so that his players would qualify for bonuses under a new League scheme.
Promotion, he predicted, would come within two seasons.
In pursuit of this, he renewed his efforts to get new players, and was rewarded with two promising youngsters, outside-right Bainbridge, from Seaton Delaval, and inside-right Price, from Worksop.
But his first star signing for Leeds was James Speirs, at twenty-six Bradford City's top scorer and one of the best inside-lefts in the country.
Formerly of Glasgow Rangers, he captained the Cup-winning Bradford City side of 1911, but an ‘ incompatibility of temper’ led to his transfer for £1,400.
Chapman had kept a close watch on Speirs' feud with Bradford City, and moved in just at the right moment.
‘The enterprise of the Leeds City management in securing Speirs would have staggered those responsible for the club a few years ago,’ observed the Yorkshire Evening Post .
Another forward signed by the new manager was George Fenwick, 20, an outside-left who, since the start of the season, had scored 17 goals for Shildon, County Durham.
Chapman, said the Yorkshire Post , was ‘slowly but surely evolving a set of players from whom much may be expected in the future’.
He had, however, concentrated entirely on improving his forward line, neglecting a shaky defence.
The result was the extraordinary situation at the end of March 1913, when goals for equalled goals against at 56.
Leeds finished sixth, one place below Chapman's target.
Goals totalling 70 broke the club record, but goals conceded were also up, at 63.
Top scorer, with 26, was McCleod, whose play improved considerably with the introduction of new players, especially Speirs.
McCleod was widely regarded as one of the best centre-forwards in the country, and several clubs were interested in him.
Since coming to Leeds from Lincoln City for £500 in 1906, McCleod had scored 117 League goals in more than 200 games by the time a benefit match was  held for him in April 1913.
The game, against Nottingham Forest, was arranged the previous October when the player was guaranteed £350, although the target was set at £500.
McCleod scored the only goal, and takings were over £750.
‘Much praise’ was owed to Chapman for Leeds' improved performance, said the Yorkshire Evening News .
He was the ‘guiding light’ who ‘has done a tremendous amount of good work for the club; he has gained the confidence of everyone’.
Not least, he had gained the confidence of the directors, for his outlay of £3,000 for new players was offset by gate receipts almost double those of the previous season, producing £400 profit, the best since 1907.
Chapman acknowledged the ‘splendid support’ that had rallied to the club, but he regarded the Elland Road spectators, in common with other Yorkshire crowds, as too partisan.
He wished they would show more appreciation of the skills of visiting teams and more tolerance of mistakes by their own players.
‘To howl down a man just because he happens to be out of form one day is often sufficient to discourage him for all time,’ he told the Yorkshire Evening Post .
Barracking, one of Chapman's pet hates, was particularly active at reserve matches, and he declared that a close watch would be made for offenders.
The promises of Chapman's first season at Leeds were marred by a major blackspot, a shadowy portent of the catastrophe to come.
On 9 October, 1912 the Football League appointed a commission to inquire into alleged illegal payments by the club.
When Chapman had signed on new players in July, he had agreed to pay three of them the full yearly wage of £208 to the end of the next April.
But as two months had already elapsed since the end of the previous contracts, this would mean that for some weeks the players would be getting more than the permitted £4 a week maximum.
Aston Villa were fined for making similar payments, and Chapman realized the illegality of his own action.
He got the board to take the initiative in asking for a League inquiry, hoping that in return the sentence would be a light one.
The result was an unexpectedly heavy fine of £125 plus the expenses of the commission.
Chapman and two of the players were censured and all three players ordered to refund their excess  wages — which in effect saved the club over £ 1 00 towards the fine.
The commission, ‘while finding it necessary to admonish Mr Chapman and two of the players…also recognized the straightforwardness of Mr Chapman in reporting the matter.
He adopted an honourable course, which is greatly to his credit and that of the club.’
The sentence could have been much worse.
In 1904, shortly after winning the FA Cup, Manchester City lost its entire team as punishment for illegal bonus payments to players.
The secretary and some directors were suspended and most of the players, including the great Billy Meredith, went to arch-rivals Manchester United.
For Leeds City, however, the worst was yet to come.
An aftermath of the season was the award of another benefit match, for the outside-left Croot, who had been with the club seven years.
It was held the following April against Arsenal and gave Croot £250.
The benefit match was an essential ingredient both in Chapman's policy of raising the club's image in the estimation of the players and in his policy of attracting top-class talent to Elland Road.
‘It is important if Leeds City is to be made attractive to good footballers that the club should have the reputation of conferring good benefits,’ he told the Yorkshire Evening Post .
Chapman insisted that he was interested only in the best players, and he was prepared to go anywhere to get them.
At first, he was sympathetic to the ‘popular cry that the premier team has not tried to encourage and develop local talent’, and assured readers of the club programme that steps were being taken to foster such talent.
He suggested to the Leeds and District Football Association that they should field a representative side against Leeds City reserves, a game duly held at Elland Road, but he soon became disillusioned.
Fostering local talent, he said later, was ‘all very well in theory, but in practice it will not pay’, because the talent to make Leeds City a successful team did not exist locally.
‘I am rather inclined to think that the working conditions in this part of the country are opposed to the development of first class footballers,’ he said.
Factories in the West Riding kept young employees at work until the early evening, leaving little time and  energy for soccer practice.
Another reason for the dearth of soccer talent in Leeds was the predominance of rugby.
In September 1912 the Leeds and District FA expressed concern at the takeover of practice pitches by Rugby Union clubs, and urged senior soccer clubs to provide grounds for junior players.
Nevertheless, Chapman remained convinced that Leeds would become ‘as great a centre of Association Football as any city in England’.
It was a prediction that was to take half a century to be fulfilled — with Leeds United.
As Saturday in the Leeds of 1913 was a day of football — association or rugby — so Sunday was a day of religious devotion.
Chapman, along with many footballers, went to church regularly, but half-back and captain Lintott made a more positive contribution to Sunday worship — as a popular preacher.
‘A man of culture — he is a teacher in one of Bradford's schools — he has a ready command of language,’ and by his work, said the Yorkshire Evening Post , had raised the status of the professional player.
The idea of a preaching footballer strikes an odd note in more modern times, when players, though more educated and considerably richer than their forebears, engage in outside interests of a more commercial nature.
Arthur Bridgett, from Sunderland, another newcomer to Leeds City, was also a preacher.
Such activities, not uncommon among players, were the working-class answer to the ‘muscular Christianity’ of the nineteenth-century public schools and helped to make soccer more socially acceptable among the ‘respectable’classes.
In the summer of 1913 Chapman at last turned his attention to City's unsound defence.
Full-back Albert Unwin, 19, signed professional forms for Leeds, rejecting the attentions of Sheffield United, Middlesbrough , Bristol City and Tottenham — all First Division clubs.
Unwin had played in the South Bank team that had won the West Riding junior Cup in 1912 and the Amateur Cup the next year.
In August Chapman signed his former half-back George Hampson from Northampton, and although his previous visit to Northampton had failed to secure Walden — he went to Tottenham  in April for £1,750 — the developing form of Bainbridge at outside-right more than made up for the disappointment.
Other newcomers were amateur winger Ivan Sharpe from Derby County, who worked in a newspaper office, and centre-half Harry Peart, 23, from neighbours Bradford City, who excelled at turning defence quickly into attack with a well-placed header.
The team promised much as Leeds made another bid for promotion.
In this endeavour Chapman was to meet some brotherly rivalry.
Harry Chapman had taken over as secretary of Hull City alongside team manager Ambrose Langley, after injury ended three years as a Hull player.
In October Hull knocked Leeds out of the West Riding Cup and — with an under-strength side — inflicted the Peacocks' first home defeat of the season.
But Leeds looked set fair for the First Division, climbing to second place by the end of the year.
Chapman brought in more new players to maintain the challenge.
Inside-right John Jackson, 23, came from Clyde for £1,000, one of Leeds' largest outlays, and Fred Blackman, described by the Yorkshire Post as ‘possibly the most stylish and polished back in the Second Division’, was bought from Huddersfield Town.
The fee for Blackman was said to be over £1,000, and only £300 less than the existing Leeds record.
In the end the Peacocks finished fourth; Chapman's promotion bid had, only narrowly, failed.
It was during this season that Chapman made his first visit to Highbury, the new home of the newly-relegated Arsenal.
When Leeds City arrived for their meeting with the Gunners (which they lost 1–0), on 6 December, 1913, the Highbury ground was still only half-finished and a wooden stand on the east side, designed for 9,000 spectators, was still being built.
Chapman was particularly struck by the fact that the ground was just across the road from Gillespie Road Underground station, and could thus be reached easily from most parts of London.
This observation was to bear fruit in later years.
At home Leeds were in more trouble with the authorities, this time over a dispute with Fulham.
Leeds couldn't immediately pay Fulham their share of the takings for the match at Elland Road on Christmas Day, so Fulham retaliated by withholding  money from Leeds after the return match at Craven Cottage on Boxing Day.
At an FA inquiry in February, City pleaded that, because of a tram strike on Christmas Day, the crowd arrived late for the match and there were no police to stop them rushing the ground.
Some admission money had to be taken ‘on account’, so the club couldn't pay Fulham their due straight away.
Fulham were ordered to pay the overdue sum, amounting to £20 4s 5d, plus three guineas expenses, and Leeds were reprimanded for not taking money at the gates.
Chapman laid part of the blame for not winning promotion on the loss of two vital points at Clapton Orient in March, at a crucial stage in the race.
As the game was on a Monday, Orient insisted on a kick-off at 4.30, to stand a better chance of a good gate.
After some argument they agreed to 4.20, but the referee and linesman arrived five minutes late.
The game was further delayed when the referee ordered Leeds goalkeeper Scott to change his Jersey, in keeping with the League rule of 1909 that keepers must wear distinctive colours.
By the time Scott had changed his blue Jersey for something less like the blue and gold of his colleagues, the ten minutes' grace had been swallowed up.
By half-time it was obvious the rest of the game would continue in darkness, and to save time the referee ordered the players to stay on the field for an interval of two minutes only.
‘By a quarter to six,’ the Yorkshire Post reported, ‘it was practically impossible to distinguish players in midfield’and the teams were like ‘moving figures in shadowland’.
As the gloom thickened, Leeds, a goal up, suddenly conceded three in quick succession, and the game ended in victory for Orient.
The result stood because the referee, after consulting his linesmen, decided that Scott could have seen the ball coming at him.
A furious Chapman regarded the affair as an outrage, and assured the referee he would lodge an appeal against ‘this insult’.
The appeal, considered a fortnight later, was upheld and Clapton Orient were fined £25.
The incident goes a long way to explaining Chapman's later enthusiasm for floodlit football.
Ultimately, however, the underlying reason for the narrow failure to win promotion in 1914 was the inadequate reserve  strength at City's disposal: the reserves finished bottom in their competition.
A step in remedying the situation was taken in March when John Chaplin, a former Spurs, Manchester City and Dundee player, was appointed assistant trainer with special responsibility for the reserves.
Despite the Peacocks' less than perfect performances Chapman's achievement in two years was no less remarkable than that at Northampton in the same space of time.
He may not have won a championship, but he had taken Leeds from bottom of the table to fourth, their highest position ever, in a much stiffer competition than the Southern League.
Financial limitations and unwillingness to sell made new players increasingly hard to find, in an area where, as Chapman pointed out, industrial conditions were not conducive to home-grown talent, and where there was strong competition from rugby.
Yet against all these odds bigger crowds were coming to Elland Road, and the ground was smartened up to give it the image of a major sports centre.
A new flag was bought for the masthead and a scheme put in hand to cover part of the terraces.
The prestige of Elland Road was further enhanced when the Amateur Cup final was staged there in 1914.
More important, there were innovations behind the scenes, marking a new development in Chapman's style of management.
It was at Leeds that he carne to realize the value of a game of golf in relaxing his players, and in 1913 he introduced a day's golf each week as part of regular training.
Another, more startling, departure was the introduction of regular team talks, the idea for which came on a train travelling back from an away match.
Observing a heated argument among the players over a game of cards, Chapman thought that if they put as much consideration and earnestness into their football, their game could only improve.
Meetings were accordingly held each week to discuss both the previous game and the tactics to be used in the next.
With Chapman presiding, every player was encouraged to express his own opinion.
This was something entirely new in football, a marked contrast to the prevailing easy-going system where players were left to work out their own tactics.
In holding the talks Chapman was asking his players  to contribute to a joint effort, to become more involved with each other as a unit.
It was an appeal to intelligence as well as physical skill, and it had the effect of boosting self-respect, fostering a sense of loyalty, and raising a player's status above that of a mere paid servant.
IN WARTIME
The summer of 1914 started very much like any other, with Chapman passing the long sunny days playing cricket and golf with his players and keeping them in trim for the coming season.
But unknown to him the fate of Leeds City was no longer in his hands; it was being decided, along with that of every other club in the country, by a totally unrelated event in a faraway city in Eastern Europe.
The assassination of the heir to the Austrian throne in Sarajevo on 28 June set the European powers at each other 's throats, and in little over a month Great Britain was at war with Germany.
Words familiar to the football follower, like ‘victory’, ‘campaign’ and ‘tactics’, now had very different connotations.
Britain was the only country entering the war without compulsory military service.
As the football season approached, the question arose whether the League competition should be suspended so that players and officials could be free to volunteer for the war effort.
It was a situation organized football had never had to face before, and there was no precedent on which to base a decision.
Flying in the face of public opinion and patriotic fervour, the authorities decided to go ahead with games as planned.
The reaction was one of violent denunciation.
Newspapers said they would not report matches and carried a barrage of irate letters.
A Yorkshire Post reader suggested that the King should resign as patron of the Football Association.
At the same time the FA urged ‘players and spectators who are physically fit and otherwise able to join the Army’, and several players did so, but the Football League insisted that ‘in the interests of the people of this country football ought to be continued’.
The League's attitude reflected the traditional belief that the   ordinary citizen need not be affected by war.
Wars had been fought before by the regular Army, and this one, it was supposed, would be the same: it would be over in a few months, it not weeks.
So League teams kicked off in the usual way, while the guns blazed across the Channel.
After a few weeks newspapers lifted their ban on match reports, and while the war was waged on the front page, the struggle for League points gathered pace on the back.
Chapman, his players and fellow officials joined the civilian army and donated five per cent of their wages to the national relief fund, while Elland Road was used for military drill and firing practice.
In these circumstances it was hard to concentrate on football, and the standard of play fell.
Players were depressed by lingering public indignation at playing the sport in wartime, and gates slumped by as much as 50 per cent.
As a result, the Football League proposed a cut in wages and in October Coventry City players became the first to accept a reduction.
The League drew up a scale of reductions whereby players on £5 a week (the maximum) took a 15 per cent cut and these on £3–4 a 5 per cent cut, the money saved going into a fund to help clubs in financial straits.
The scheme was criticized by Second Division Clubs on the grounds that they had to share the onus equally with the better-off.
Leeds City players refused to accept the cuts, saying that such action should be voluntary.
Despite losing Lintott to the Forces, new Leeds players gave the Yorkshire Post confidence ‘that in the near future the various parts necessary to make a harmonious whole will be welded together’.
And before long Leeds were in the final of the West Riding Cup, their opponents being Hull City.
(Harry Chapman was no longer with the club, ill health forcing him to an early retirement.)
Leeds won the game, in pouring rain, before a crowd of a mere 1,000, by a single goal scored by Speirs.
The aftermath of the cup win was not without incident.
As the players left the field after a game at Bury, Speirs and a Bury player got into a violent argument, and when the Leeds players reached their dressing-room they found their way blocked by a hostile crowd of home supporters.
A serious incident was averted, however — although one ‘threatening individual’ was detained — and officials managed to clear a way through.
Both Leeds and Bury were angry at some of the referee's decisions in the game, and reported him to the League for ‘indifferent refereeing’.
Much more serious was the turn the war had taken.
As the rival armies became entrenched in the battlefields of France, the realization dawned that hostilities would last a lot longer than at first thought.
Lord Kitchener, who warned that the war would last three years and not three months, launched a recruitment campaign in September 1914 which by the end of November had created an army of some 100,000 volunteers.
The commanding Kitchener forefinger emerging from street hoardings put psychological pressure on all to enlist, including football spectators and players, and pointed to the eventual closure of League soccer.
Leeds' outstanding win of the season was a 6–2 victory at Hull, their first win there, their biggest ever away score and Hull's heaviest home defeat.
McCleod broke the club's individual record by scoring five of the six goals.
But the triumph was watched by only 5,000, half of whom were soldiers in uniform.
At the end of March 1915 the FA decreed that no wages were to be paid to players during May, June and July, and reduced the maximum wage further from £4 to £3.
An embargo was put on transfers until August.
At the same time the Football League introduced a plan for the maximum weekly wage to increase by ten shillings every two years, with an ultimate ceiling of £260 a year.
March also saw developments for Leeds City reserves, when the club resigned from the Midland League to switch to the more suitable Central League.
Application was made two months later, and, in accordance with the rules, Chapman resigned from the Central League management committee.
Leeds finished a poor fifteenth in the Second Division in 1915.
Wartime conditions had robbed players of the incentive to win promotion because of the uncertain future of League football, and caused a sharp fall in gates which made it virtually impossible to spend money on improving the team.
Set against wage reductions and the receipt of several hundred pounds from the League relief fund was an average gate yield of less than £200.
But other clubs  facing similar conditions had done better than Leeds.
And the factory hours and rugby support which militated against soccer in Leeds had been challenged with some success from 1912 to 1914.
A more likely explanation for the slump can be found in the shaky financial structure of the club, which made it hard for Chapman to act with any confidence.
For some time financial control had been in the hands of a receiver after the Leeds City company was wound up.
In August 1915 the receiver, Mr Coombes, decided he could no longer continue in charge of the club and offered to sell it to the Leeds Northern [Rugby]Union Club at Headingley, who were interested.
But Leeds City found a saviour in Mr J. Connor, secretary of the West Riding Football Association, who with four other local citizens decided to form a syndicate, with himself as chairman, to keep the club at Elland Road, and to set up a limited liability company.
Connor was seen as a ‘valuable acquisition’ and the ‘responsible and qualified adviser from a football standpoint which Mr Herbert Chapman has needed’.
As The Athletic News pointed out, City's future now seemed more assured, with the growing popularity of soccer in Leeds and a ‘progressive manager’ in Chapman.
That summer football waited anxiously for a decision on the future of the League competition.
Some players had taken jobs in arms factories, others had enlisted (as early as October 1914 some 70,000 players had already joined the Forces).
The authorities had no option but to suspend the League, replacing it with three regional leagues in which men could play as amateurs, receiving only a token payment plus expenses, wherever they happened to be stationed.
There were to be no Cup ties.
Leeds City, whose wartime league was to be the Midland Section, were not very hard hit by the dispersal of players.
Some, including McCleod, were working at local engineering firms, and Wainwright at a nearby khaki factory.
Price was working in Sheffield but was willing to help out from time to time.
But Speirs, the captain, was lost when he enlisted in Glasgow with the Cameron Highlanders.
Following Speirs's departure, Fanny Walden offered his services  to City while working with a nearby firm of motor engineers.
Tottenham were furious and protested to the League, only to be told that under wartime regulations it was perfectly in order.
Not to be put off, Spurs urged the FA to hold an inquiry — but to no avail.
Walden made his Leeds City debut in September 1915 at Derby, in a 3–1 win.
Chapman had at last got the player he had wanted for so long.
Leeds had a good start in the new competition, climbing to second place after a 7–1 win over Barnsley in October, in which Price got five of the goals.
In wartime conditions the fostering of local talent, which Chapman had abandoned as a main source of players in peacetime, became a necessity, and local football was boosted when Chapman arranged for City reserves to meet elevens from West Riding organizations.
By October local players were establishing themselves in the City reserves.
These reserve games were not without incident.
In a match at Elland Road Wainwright was given his marching orders for swearing after an offside decision — but refused to go.
The mortified referee ordered the game to end but then was persuaded to leave while one of the linesmen took over, a spectator taking the linesman's place.
Wainwright had nothing to lose by his insubordination as it was his last game for Leeds: he had enlisted with the Royal Garrison Artillery and left for Dover two days later.
Chapman lost another key player when McCleod, though still working in Leeds, decided to play for City's neighbours and rivals Bradford (Park Avenue).
His action was popularly resented as a poor show of gratitude for the benefit he had been given two years before.
Meanwhile the politics of war had taken a new departure.
Although Kitchener's recruitment campaign was bringing in more men than the Army could properly train and equip (by January 1916 two and a half million men had enlisted), public pressure was mounting for conscription.
In a last attempt to avoid this very un-English measure the Liberal Government introduced a scheme, organized by Lord Derby, whereby men ‘attested’ their willingness to serve if called upon.
In December 1915 Chapman, Connor and  most of the City players ‘attested’.
Conscription was finally brought in the following March.
The rest of the season saw more coming and going among players, with the balance tilted against City.
The international winger Sergeant George Wall of the 11th Black Watch and Manchester United offered to play for City but the taxi sent to collect him from the station waited in vain.
The soldier wrote to Chapman that, because of military duties, he couldn't play after all.
In February Chapman got a promise of help from Clem Stephenson, the Aston Villa inside-forward from Seaton Delaval, Northumberland, who was to play such a crucial part in the rise of Huddersfield Town.
In one game, against Nottingham Forest, Stephenson was joined by another player who was to take a leading role in Chapman's future — Grenadier Guardsman Charlie Buchan of Sunderland, whom Chapman met for the first time.
In March 1916 the Midland League programme was completed, and to fill the remaining weeks of what used to be the normal season a subsidiary tournament involving six clubs was organized, with Leeds City in the Northern Group of the Midland League.
Leeds did well, but it looked as though top points would be shared with Huddersfield as, on the last Saturday of the tournament, the Peacocks were away to Bradford City while Huddersfield, two points behind, were home to Bradford (Park Avenue).
But Huddersfield lost and Leeds won, to take the subsidiary league championship outright, with 15 points from 10 games.
It was to be the last triumph Chapman was to see at Elland Road, for in the summer of 1916 he took a managerial job at a munitions factory at Barnbow, near Leeds.
At the same time Walden joined the air section of the Royal Naval Reserves.
With his practical knowledge of mining engineering and his nine years as a football manager, Chapman was well equipped to deal with the demands of industrial management.
The Barnbow factory made shells, and Chapman became virtually its manager-in-chief, with some thirty sub-managers under him.
And just as in football he knew how to get the most out of his resources, so in the factory he used his skills to obtain maximum production.
By the end of the  war the factory had produced more shells than any other of its size, and at 25 per cent less cost, while the output of ammunition boxes had more than quadrupled.
On leaving Leeds City, Chapman recommended as his deputy George Cripps, a schoolteacher and one of his assistants.
He continued to advise the club from Barnbow.
At the end of the first month of the 1916–17 season City reached new goal-scoring heights, showing a ‘superiority over the opposition to an extent seldom met with in first class football’(Yorkshire Evening News ).
For Chapman the successes were marred by the death of his brother Harry, from tuberculosis, at the age of thirty-six.
A short time before his death Harry Chapman had left his Hampshire rest home to stay at Herbert's home in Oakwood, Leeds, and the care with which he was attended in his last days showed his elder brother's family loyalty and devotion.
Next-door neighbour Miss Gwendoline Wilkinson recalls: ‘It was wonderful the way Herbert Chapman looked after his brother.
I shall always think of him with admiration.’
Harry Chapman's wife had died the previous year, and the couple left three children.
Leeds City went on to clinch the Midland League championship in 1917 and next season won the ‘double’ of both Midland League and subsidiary tournaments.
They were also declared League champions in a new competition in which winners of the Midland and Lancashire sections played each other on a home-away basis.
City beat Stoke 2–1 on aggregate.
Sad to say, these successes were to be the prelude to the downfall of Leeds City.
DISGRACE
The storm clouds gathering over Leeds City broke almost a year after the end of the First World War.
In October 1919 an inquiry began into allegations that City had broken wartime regulations by paying players more than the permitted rates.
A joint commission of the FA and Football League ordered the accounts for the years 1916 to 1918 to be produced in evidence, and when these were not forthcoming expelled the club from the League.
Chapman and Cripps, together with Connor and three other members of the syndicate, were banned from attending football matches and taking part in football management.
It looked as though Chapman's soccer career was at an end.
At the time of the inquiry Chapman was no longer manager of Leeds City.
In the summer of 1918 he began to devote more time to the club in between duties at the arms factory in Barnbow, but, perhaps sensing that trouble was brewing, he suddenly resigned as secretary-manager on 16 December to go into full-time industrial management with Joseph Watson & Sons at the Olympia oil and cake works in Selby.
The possibility of returning to football later was then still open.
The Yorkshire Evening News spoke of him as the man whose motto was ‘keep smiling’.
‘No player, at a moment that mattered, ever saw Herbert Chapman with a long face.
Outwardly, at least, he was an optimist in the darkest moments.’
A week after Chapman's resignation George Cripps also left the club, after handing over the books for the previous two years to Mr J. W. Bromley, a former director.
Connor said later that Cripps pointed out unlawful payments recorded in the books to Bromley but promised not to mention them outside the club.
Bromley claimed that he then handed the books over to Alderman (later  
Sir William) Clarke, a solicitor, on condition they were not to be shown to anyone without the consent of himself and the syndicate.
In return the syndicate donated £50 to the Leeds General Infirmary.
In July 1919, the Leeds City full-back Charles Copeland, dissatisfied with his contract, reported the club to the authorities.
Bromley said he was willing for the documents to be shown to the inquiry, but the syndicate could not agree.
The commission had no choice but to expel City from the League for, as League President John McKenna explained, to have allowed the club to continue would have set a precedent for other clubs to withhold their books.
McKenna told the Yorkshire Post :
‘Leeds City could not be suspended as a club — we had no power to do that; but so long as they refused to give up those vital papers, we could have no way out save by expelling them.
‘The authorities of the game intend to keep it absolutely clean.
We will have no nonsense.
The football stable must be cleansed and further breakages of the law regarding payments will be dealt with in such a severe manner that I now give warning that clubs and players must not expect the slightest leniency…
‘Every member of the commission was sorry that Leeds had to be dealt with at all.
We recognized that they had gone through troublous times before.
‘We recognized that they were a new club, that they had obtained a good holding in a Rugby area and that the club had bright prospects, but our case was clear — Leeds were defiant, and could be defiant through one cause — fear of the papers giving away certain secrets.’
Leeds City's fixtures were taken over by Port Vale, while the players were auctioned at the Hotel Metropole in the strangest football sale of the century.
Leeds, bereft of professional soccer despite the Lord Mayor's gallant attempt to keep City a going concern outside the League, became the focus of attention of managers everywhere.
Within a week of the inquiry Chapman's former stars were snapped up at bargain prices totalling £ 10,150, the highest fee, £1,250, being paid by Notts County for McCleod.
Bainbridge went to Preston and Price to Sheffield Wednesday for  £ 1,000 each, while Hampson joined Aston Villa for £800.
It was the final ignominy in the short, troubled history of the club that nearly made it to the First Division.
Of the six men banned, Chapman was probably least involved, as he was away from the club when the malpractices allegedly took place.
Connor put the blame for the ‘hopeless’ state of the books on Cripps who, on Chapman's return in 1918, was allowed to remain an assistant but, because of his alleged mismanagement, was forbidden to travel with the team.
According to Connor, Hampson threatened a players' strike unless the travel ban was lifted but after a rebuke from Chapman acquiesced in the situation.
Cripps denied that the books had been improperly kept, saying that an accounts clerk had been appointed to look after them after his own health had broken down in 1917.
Chapman came back the next year, he said, because he had more time, not because the finances were in a muddle.
Cripps's loss to soccer was rugby's gain; he spent the next twenty years teaching that branch of football to schoolboys.
The truth about the wartime payments remained hidden with the documents, and the extent of Leeds City's guilt (if any) has never been discovered.
In any case, it must have been a question of degree.
Wartime rules stated that only token payment plus expenses were to be paid, but clubs, like any other employers, can choose to be as generous or mean with expenses as with wages.
It was widely believed that City were no more guilty than a great many other clubs keen to do well in the emergency competitions.
If this were so then these other clubs must have breathed a sigh of relief when City's books were not produced.
They elected Leeds United, formed shortly after the demise of City, to the Second Division in 1920, less than a year later, a move popularly interpreted among supporters as gratitude.
George Cripps's son wrote to the Yorkshire Post in October 1979: ‘The remarks of Mr J. McKenna make me smile when I remember some of the things which my father told me about the machinations by various members of the then Football League, which have certainly led me to believe that they were not so simon pure as the image they presented to the public.’
Chapman continued with his industrial work, but he had to  carry the stigma of the commission's verdict.
It must have been distasteful for a man whose principles were always of the very highest.
He was soon to clear his name, however, with momentous consequences for the soccer world from which he had been expelled.
THE FIRST CUP
His football career in ruins, Chapman stood at the threshold of a new decade in a cloud of uncertainty.
His job at Selby, though it had none of the glamour of his former work, at least enabled him to provide for his family of two sons, Ken and Bruce, and daughters Mollie and Joyce.
Late in 1920, however, the company was sold up, leaving him without work when the spectre of mass unemployment was looming on the horizon of the post-war economic boom.
Nor was there any hope of going back into football — unless the authorities could be persuaded to lift their ban on him.
An answer came from Huddersfield, where the Town Football Club were looking for an assistant to their secretary-manager Ambrose Langley, who had partnered Chapman's brother at Hull before the war.
Chapman's impressive record at Northampton and Leeds — and the fact that he was out of work — made him an ideal choice.
He was approached by the Huddersfield directors early in 1921 and the offer spurred him on to a determined effort to prove his innocence in the Leeds City affair.
The Football League were finally swayed by the argument that because Chapman was absent from Leeds City at the time of the alleged illegal payments, he could not have known about them.
They gave their permission for his appointment at Huddersfield Town.
The news went unreported in the Press, so quickly had Chapman become football's forgotten man.
Huddersfield Town had experienced a mixture of success and near-disaster in its relatively short life.
Nine years after entering the League in 1910, and shortly after the dissolution of Leeds City, the Town went through a financial crisis so serious that it was proposed to transplant the club to the vacant site at Elland   Road, Leeds.
But supporters responded well to a cash appeal and when J. G. Cock, the striker, was sold to Chelsea for £2,500 the continuance of the club in Huddersfield was assured.
In 1920 they were promoted to the First Division and got to their first Cup final, against Aston Villa at Stamford Bridge, where they were beaten 1–0.
Chapman brought to his new job his already extensive experience of industrial management, and Langley, reading between the lines, realized that such a dynamic personality would not remain an assistant for long.
Only a month after Chapman's arrival, Langley resigned and left for Sheffield where he took over a pub.
William Barr, the trainer, departed with him and the new secretary-manager got John Chaplin, his former trainer at Leeds, to come from Bristol Rovers.
Chapman's first move was to tell his directors: ‘You have talented, mostly young, players — they need a general to lead them.
I know the man and I think we can get him.’
The man he had in mind was Clem Stephenson, the Aston Villa inside-forward who played for Leeds City during the war.
If Chapman had become football's forgotten man, he was about to put himself, and his new club, in the public eye again, for on 16 March, 1921 Huddersfield bought Stephenson for a fee that was ‘probably the highest ever paid by a Yorkshire club’— £4,000.
(The national record in 1 92 1 stood at £4,600.)
The Yorkshire Evening News described the deal as ‘a rare stroke of business’.
It had been known for some time that relations between Stephenson and Villa were strained because of the player's insistence on living in his home-town of Newcastle, and several clubs, keen to secure him, were watching the situation closely.
Chapman, with perfect timing, anticipated events by arranging to meet Stephenson at Leeds, on his way home from Birmingham.
The player was adamant that if he was to play for Huddersfield he must be allowed to live in Newcastle.
Chapman agreed.
Stephenson, by now thirty-three, had joined Aston Villa in 1911 and soon established himself as a powerful forward.
Strangely, his only international appearance was for the English against the Scottish League in 1914.
He had a way of beating the offside trap  of defenders like Newcastle's McCracken by waiting until the ball was in his own half of the field before attacking.
He was an ex-miner, and this endeared him all the more to Chapman, who, being familiar with mining, knew and admired the strength and fighting qualities which life down the pit bred in a man.
The arrival of Stephenson revolutionized the Huddersfield side almost overnight.
Performances improved noticeably and gates began to top the 20,000 mark.
‘By his energy and enterprise,’ Chapman had ‘helped to bring the club into smoother waters, and put its affairs on a proper systematized basis,’said the Huddersfield Daily Examiner .
The Town was beginning to make news in other ways too.
In April 1921 they were invited to play in Paris against the Olympic Club there, a Belgian side and then Clapton Orient, who would be in the French capital at the same time.
It was Huddersfield's first overseas tour.
Later, attempts were made, initially without success, to bring a Scottish team to Leeds Road for a match in aid of the Mayor's fund for the unemployed.
The French tour went ahead in May as planned, but with a game against Red Star, the French champions, instead of the Belgian team.
The Huddersfield party arrived in Paris in the early morning after a journey of nearly twenty-four hours by train and boat, and spent the first day sightseeing.
They beat Red Star 2–0 and Clapton Orient 1–0, and Chapman sent a jubilant telegram to the Examiner reporting that the team had also won a ‘nice trophy’, the Bronze Lion.
It was Chapman's second foreign tour (after Northampton's German visit of 1909) and he became a firm advocate of overseas ventures, because of their publicity value and because they gave an opportunity of displaying the English soccer style to foreign audiences.
Back in Huddersfield, Chapman helped to form a third, junior team which in June 1921 entered the West Riding Amateur League.
The move was necessary in part because the limited finances of the club, stretched by the buying of Stephenson, made impossible the large-scale buying of ready-made players at high transfer fees.
The third team was put in the charge of Billie Balmer, a former Everton full-back, while Jack Foster, a former  Sunderland and Huddersfield centre-forward, was given the running of the reserves as well as acting as scout.
A proven judge of footballing talent, Chapman took great interest in the third team.
He took particular care of young players, seeing that they were well-fed and well-lodged and that they sent some money home to their parents each week.
To give all his players better club conditions he persuaded his directors to spend money on improving dressing and recreation rooms, and before long he could boast that the Town's facilities were the best in the country.
As a break in pre-season training in August 192 1, Chapman and his players went on a charabanc trip to Harrogate, where they enjoyed an afternoon game of bowls.
At the same time the manager's efforts to arrange a Scottish fixture led to an invitation from a Glasgow sports journalist for Huddersfield to play in Scotland.
The match, against Clyde, was a benefit for Frank Thompson, the Irish international and former Bradford City half-back.
It was played in October, and during their visit Chapman and his party went to Hampden Park and to the Glasgow Industrial Exhibition at Kelvin Park, as well as enjoying a sing-song at the Alhambra Music Hall.
Huddersfield won their match 4–0.
The pre-season period also saw more improvements for players, reporters and public.
The pitch was re-turfed, and the Press seats brought to the front of the stand, giving a better view.
Terracing opposite the stand was enlarged to hold 24,000 spectators.
And an indication of growing support was the much-improved sales of three-guinea season tickets, totalling £1,100.
The reward for this support was Huddersfield's first FA Cup.
The 1922 Cup campaign stated with a tough tie away to League champions Burnley.
Training was at Blackpool and involved the usual walks, rounds of golf, and Turkish and tonic baths, as well as a trip to the theatre.
Chapman's message to Huddersfield's supporters was full of his customary cheery confidence: ‘The team are having a fine time.
All are contented, happy, fit and well.
Never have I seen a happier set of fellows, and with an equal share of luck we shall not be defeated on Saturday.’
For seventy-five minutes, however, it looked as though luck had deserted them: Burnley were two goals up.
Then Huddersfield rallied, and the fiery centre-forward Islip forced his way through to beat the tiring Burnley defenders.
Half a minute from time centre-half Tom Wilson equalized to earn a replay.
A crowd of more than 35,000 flocked to Leeds Road on the Wednesday afternoon and several workshops had to close down.
One engineering firm had so many applications for time off that it warned absentees they would be suspended for three weeks.
In a deluge of rain, Huddersfield won 3–2.
The next rounds saw two more replays at Leeds Road, against Brighton and Blackburn Rovers, with more mills and businesses closing for the afternoon.
Then, with a win over Millwall, Huddersfield were in the semi-final, against Notts County at Turf Moor.
County were beaten 3–1, but the omens did not look favourable when the Town's mascot, a stuffed donkey, caught fire at the post-match celebration.
The flames were put out in good time and the donkey was said to be fit for the final, against Preston North End.
It was a proud day for the Huddersfield manager.
For the first time since the Southern League Championship of 1909 a major honour was within reach.
The run-up to the final was not encouraging.
Since December, when Huddersfield were among the top four, League results had slumped, bringing the Town into the relegation zone.
The team needed a confidence boost — and got one.
On the Saturday before the final Preston came to Leeds Road for a League match and were beaten 6–0.
The result confirmed Huddersfield as favourites for the Cup.
They had been in the final only two years before, whereas Preston's last appearance was in 1889.
The 1922 final, the third and last at Stamford Bridge, was dubbed the ‘Battle of the Roses’.
Huddersfield's jerseys carried the white rose of Yorkshire while Preston's sported the red of Lancashire.
The game was certainly a battle, with no lack of foul play, and it was appropriate that it should be won by a penalty.
Huddersfield's winger Billy Smith was felled on the edge of (some said just outside) the area, and he drove the ball home from the spot, despite the goalkeeper's efforts to distract him by jumping  up and down.
So it was that Huddersfield became the first club to win the Cup with a penalty.
An interesting feature of the game was the play of centre-half Tom Wilson.
Traditionally, the centre-half, under the offside law as it then was, played chiefly as an attacker, but even before the offside law was changed in 1925 to increase goal-scoring chances, and thus bring about a need for stronger defence, he was becoming more a third defender.
This was the part that Wilson largely took in the final, becoming a ‘great spoiler’, as the Examiner put it.
Already the defending centre-half was developing as a vital pivot in the balance of attack and defence.
It was the logical outcome of the tactics of drawing out opposing defenders originally outlined by Chapman at Northampton.
The change in the offside law, when it came, was merely the catalyst, not the sole cause, which produced the ‘stopper’.
The rough play in the final, the last in an undistinguished postwar series, which all ended 1–0, inevitably led to recriminations.
The FA, which usually refrained from comment on its Cup finals, was led to express its ‘great regret’ at the behaviour during the game, and hoped that ‘there will not be any similar conduct in any future Final tie’.
Huddersfield asked the FA to name names, but they declined and rebuked the club for not recognizing misbehaviour when they saw it.
The bickerings were forgotten in the scenes of wild excitement that greeted the Cup in Huddersfield.
In London the winners held their celebration dinner at the Hotel Great Central, Marylebone, where Chapman praised the Town for carrying off a major prize while still relatively young (the club was founded in 1908).
He said the secret of success was ‘a happy team and a happy board of directors’, one of the basic principles of his style of management.
as if to underline this the players each received a gold watch to commemorate their Cup triumph, despite a loss for the year of £1,700.
A 29,000 crowd cheered as Chapman led his team onto the Leeds Road pitch on the Monday after the final for a League game against  Middlesbrough .
The Cup was paraded round the ground at half-time, and Huddersfield won the match 2–1, to pull clear of  the relegation zone.
At a civic reception that evening Chapman announced that the club would not be satisfied until it had won the League Championship.
The season ended with a flourish.
Huddersfield won the Charity Shield, beating the new champions Liverpool at Old Trafford, and in the last week of May the team left for a tour of Denmark.
The new third team also augured well by winning the West Riding Cup and joining the Yorkshire Midweek competition, a move that provided better training grounds for the young players.
THE FIRST CHAMPIONSHIP HAT-TRICK
A measure of Chapman's success at Huddersfield was the support the club attracted.
The country was in the grip of economic depression, and in June 1921 there were more than two million out of work.
And it was centres like Huddersfield, whose main industries were mining, engineering and textiles, that suffered most.
In these cities it was not unusual for half the working population to be jobless, while the wages of those in work — including professional footballers — fell.
In 1921 the Football League lowered the maximum wage from £9 to £8.
The League also refused to allow concessions to unemployed supporters at the turnstiles.
In October 1921 the Huddersfield unemployed sent a deputation to Herbert Chapman asking for admission charges (raised from 6d to ls in 1919) to be waived or lowered for those with a dole card.
Chapman told them it was not a decision that could be made by the club.
Barrow, he said, had tried a concessions scheme but the League had banned it.
Despite this, the crowds kept coming to Leeds Road, drawn by the success Chapman had brought to the side.
The ground became more accessible after June 1922 when Huddersfield Corporation started running buses direct to the south-west end.
Another factor in this growing support was the relegation of Bradford City, which left Huddersfield as the only centre of First Division soccer in the West Riding.
This situation lasted for three years, until Leeds United were promoted in 1924.
Chapman's opening move in the quest for the League Championship was to sign a new goalkeeper.
It was said that he always got the man a club didn't want to sell, but when he signed Ted Taylor from Oldham Athletic he got the man the club might not have wanted to sell.
Chapman didn't want Oldham to know that   Taylor was the man he was after in case they refused to part with him.
Oldham had another ‘keeper, a local lad whom, the wily manager knew, the club really would be sorry to let go.
So, to be sure of his man, Chapman worked out his approach carefully.
He travelled to Oldham in a taxi with the Huddersfield director Dick Parker.
‘Suddenly,’ Mr Parker recalled, ‘he calmly turned to me and said he would not negotiate for Taylor at all, would pretend he knew nothing about him, and would go all out for the other goalkeeper.’
The ploy worked beautifully.
The Oldham directors resolutely refused to release their local man, and after several hours of talks Chapman asked: ‘All right, then, what about this other chap Taylor?’
Terms were agreed, and the Huddersfield pair came away with the player they had wanted all along.
It was at this time that Chapman made another of his ‘discoveries’.
He later remembered with special affection his signing of George Brown, then seventeen, in his native village of Mickley, Northumberland.
After travelling to the little mining village and speaking to Brown's mother, ‘I then set out to find him, having been told that he had gone to the pit with a barrow to fetch some coal.
I met a lad wheeling a barrow in the village street.
‘Are you George Brown?’
I asked.’
He was, and when the youth heard that Herbert Chapman wanted him to play for Huddersfield, ‘I remember how he dropped the barrow.
In fact, he was so eager to be off that he would have left it in the street if I had not insisted that he should take the coals to his mother.’
Brown went on to share Huddersfield's individual scoring record in one season with 35 goals in 1926.
In a seventeen-year career with Huddersfield, Aston Villa, Leeds United and Darlington his goal total reached 268.
At Huddersfield he developed into an expert practitioner of the art of inside passing, a tactic Chapman had first encouraged at Northampton and preferred to long centres from the wing.
This frontal assault on goal, he explained to the Examiner , was held to be a ‘more deadly, if less spectacular, method’ than the ‘senseless policy of running along the lines and centring just in front of the goalmouth, where the odds are nine to one on the defenders’.
Another inspired signing was centre-forward Charles Wilson  from Spurs.
After his inclusion in the side the Town rose from seventeenth place to third, where they finished the season, their highest position yet.
There was improvement too in the reserves, who finished fourth in the Central League, and the third team juniors won the Yorkshire Midweek League.
But Huddersfield lost the Cup in a replay at Bolton, the Wanderers, with their graceful and deadly striker David Jack, going on to win the trophy in the first final to be played at Wembley.
Huddersfield made up for their failure in the Cup by winning the League Championship in the next season, 1923–4.
The odds were often stacked against the Town's first League triumph.
Injuries and sickness wiped out half the regular first team early in the season, and the goal-scoring burden fell disproportionately on the left-wing triangle of half-back Watson, Stephenson (now captain) and Smith.
Despite this Huddersfield went to the top for one week in October, until a 1–1 draw at Liverpool, watched by prime minister Stanley Baldwin on his first visit to a football match.
They didn't regain top place until April, after a winter that saw a home defeat by strugglers Chelsea and another 'flu epidemic.
‘In these circumstances there is not much encouragement to lead one to believe that the team can re-assert their League claims very strongly,’ commented the Examiner .
But from April onwards it was obvious that either Huddersfield or Cardiff would win the Championship.
The final drama was played on 3 May, 1924, with Huddersfield home to Nottingham Forest and Cardiff away to Birmingham.
For the Town to win the Championship, they needed to win and Cardiff to lose or draw.
Huddersfield got their win, and all attention turned to the result from Birmingham.
It was, said the Examiner , ‘an unusual sight to see the crowd hanging about after the match instead of rushing for the tramcars.
The little room at the end of the paddock, where scores are received, became for once the centre of attraction.’
In the room a small group waited anxiously by the telephone.
‘Then suddenly the door was flung open and Mr Chapman dashed out with his face one huge smile and shouting ‘we've won!’
Birmingham had held Cardiff to a goalless draw and Huddersfield were champions.
They became the first club since the war to win the Cup and the League, and were the first to win the League on goal average.
The reserves were denied the honours in the Central League by the same process of calculation, but the third team won the Yorkshire Midweek League for the second year running.
The 1924 Championship finally established Chapman as one of the most famous figures in football.
He was featured in the Examiner's series of ‘Impertinent portraits’ of distinguished local citizens and hailed, like Napoleon, as the ‘organizer of victory’:
‘His have been the brains behind the team, his the directing skill that has paved the way to success.
Town is on everyone's lips today, and for the proud position which it occupies in public esteem it has very largely Mr Chapman to thank.’
Unfortunately, the season had not passed without a black mark against Huddersfield's reputation.
A goalless draw against newly-promoted Notts County at Leeds Road in September 1923 was afterwards described by the Examiner as ‘one of the most disgraceful exhibitions ever seen under the auspices of the Football Association’.
The trouble started with a violent clearance by the Notts full-back Cope, and continued with an argument between Islip and Notts' other full-back Ashurst.
Islip was sent off after bringing down the goalkeeper Iremonger (they were ‘probably two of the most hot-headed players in the League,’ said the Examiner ), then Mint of Notts County was also sent off for attacking Smith.
There were fouls galore, and the Town, to their credit, admitted the disgrace: ‘If what we served up on Saturday is football, well, the sooner its death knell is sounded the better; may we go further and say that never do we wish to see anything like it again.’
The club asked the FA for an inquiry, which was held at Sheffield, with Chapman attending.
Islip and Flint were suspended for a month, and Iremonger ‘severely censured’.
Chapman, incensed that anyone could sully the good name of Huddersfield, arranged for Islip's transfer to Birmingham, at an undisclosed fee said to be ‘staggering’.
While Chapman's team first reached the top of the table, in October 1923, a petition was sent to the FA asking for the ban on his former colleagues at Leeds City to be lifted.
The FA turned  down the request and repeated its demand to see the Leeds City books.
For Chapman, however, the Leeds affair was in the dim and distant past as he steered Huddersfield Town to a second League Championship.
In the close season of 1924 he signed outside-right John Williams from Rotherham at a ‘dirt cheap’ price of under £2,000.
Williams gave greater poise to the right flank, correcting the imbalance in the forward line which put too much weight on the left wing.
Like Fanny Walden, he was a small player who could upset opponents by sheer pluck combined with skill, and he soon became a popular figure at Leeds Road.
A novelty for the home crowd at reserve matches in 1924–25 was music from gramophone records broadcast through a loudspeaker.
An early programme included excerpts from Il Trovatore , a march by the Coldstream Guards Band and advertisements read by an announcer, including facts about ‘certain unnoticed qualities in beef juices’.
A novelty of another kind came in October when Billy Smith became the first player to score direct from a corner kick in the 4–0 home defeat of Arsenal.
The law governing corners had been amended earlier in the year to allow such goals.
Huddersfield began the season well, but lost the leadership in October.
They regained it in February, clinching the Championship outright this time, with a draw at Notts County, while the reserves won the Central League.
For the last match, at home to Liverpool, the Town players took the field as the band played ‘See the Conquering Hero Comes’, and were showered with streamers and confetti.
The League and Central League trophies, for the first time held by one club, decked with blue and white ribbons, were displayed in the directors' box and carried round the field at half-time.
Chapman had put the Town on a firm footing that would see them to a third championship the following year to become the first club to win the title three years in succession; and two years after that they were runners-up.
He had made Huddersfield a great club, and in so doing established himself as a unique figure, the first of the modern soccer managers.
All the hallmarks of his management policy, that were to bring such outstanding results at  Arsenal, were there at Huddersfield.
Everyone connected with the club was encouraged to pull together as one big family, and Chapman fostered the spirit of cooperation by consulting his directors on team matters and winning the confidence of the players.
‘No club in the country develops the get-together spirit more deliberately than the Champions, and the records show how the policy pays,’ observed the Sporting Chronicle .
But there was no doubt as to Chapman's overall control.
He had the last word, and everyone looked to him as the brains behind Huddersfield's phenomenal success.
He was, as the Examiner put it, the ‘Napoleon of football’, and ‘probably no manager has more power from the team selection standpoint’.
He made the players feel they belonged to a great club, where even playing in the reserves was all part of an important and worthwhile enterprise.
And the team talks he had first started at Leeds heightened their sense of involvement.
Chapman's appreciation of individual strengths and weaknesses meant that each man was played in the position that best suited and developed his talents.
The approach was one of human understanding.
‘It was Chapman's tact that won the players over to him,’ says Dick Parker.
‘He would always listen to a player's problems and offer help where he could.
He had no qualms about dropping players he thought were off form, but would talk to them individually to encourage them, or if he wanted to make a point arising from their game.
He never spoiled, nor allowed others to spoil, his players with too much praise, but struck a subtle balance between encouragement and discipline.’
As the Huddersfield Year Book for 1925–26 put it, he controlled his men in a ‘firm but kindly manner’.
In addition, he saw to it that the players had decent changing-rooms, and ‘expert and scientific training methods’ to ‘preserve and lengthen their careers’(Examiner ).
Such understanding was — by tradition — absent at other clubs.
When Sir Matt Busby was playing in Manchester City's third team, the manager would say only: ‘You will have to get sharp away.’
They were the only words ever spoken to me as a player that could remotely be termed coaching…nobody realized that a young player needed reassurance.’
At Spurs, amateur  centre-forward Billy Jones found the same aloofness in the manager: ‘He stayed in his office most of the time.
We hardly ever saw him.
The trainer took daily charge of the team, and on match days the manager just sat in the stand.
His name was McWilliam.
I can't even remember his Christian name.’
(It was Peter, a former Newcastle player who later became an Arsenal scout.)
‘Herbert Chapman had supreme control, unlike other managers then.
What he said was law, like Brian Clough today.’
Chapman stuck to his policy of going only for top-class players, for he knew the crowds would come to watch stars like Clem Stephenson and Charles Wilson, and with Huddersfield's limited supply of soccer enthusiasts it was essential to use every means to attract them.
Ground improvements and publicity were used for the same purpose, and so that football should reach as wide a public as possible, Chapman persuaded the Examiner to publish a Saturday sports edition, the first issue of which appeared on 10 January, 1925.
Above all, crowds came to watch Huddersfield because of the exciting football they played.
It had all the characteristics of the Chapman style — swift, direct, efficient.
Full-back Wadsworth's ‘remarkable accuracy’ turned defence immediately to attack by the way he could ‘take the ball from an opposing forward and send it to the forward he thinks will make the best use of the pass’(Examiner ).
Long, low passes confused the most dogged defences to create scoring chances.
At a time when goals generally were becoming rarer as the old offside tactics became more widespread, Huddersfield still gave the crowd plenty of them, As the Examiner observed, the ‘low passing and the long-field play of the Leeds Road team has become famous in the football world’.
Famous too was Chapman's assessment of talent in young players, whom he would watch after reading weekly reports from his four scouts.
The Examiner spoke of his ‘ability to discover players who will earn laurels for themselves and their club; indeed, his discrimination in the capture of budding players has been described as uncanny’.
Nevertheless, getting youngsters to adopt a professional attitude  was not always easy, as Chapman explained to a local young people's society in November 1924.
When he thought he had signed one player, he had a letter from him saying, ‘Dear Sir, I don't think I shall bother to turn out tomorrow.’
In his talk Chapman also stressed the importance of good crowd behaviour.
He wanted to see more ‘young ladies’ at matches because he thought they would ‘raise the tone of supporters generally’.
And he again attacked barracking: ‘Bad language, gambling and barracking are the chief evils of the game.
Professional players, like artists, are highly strung and affected by ill-considered ‘criticism’ from the crowd.’
Chapman valued good sportsmanship highly, and still liked to be a good sport himself.
In the summer of 1923 he turned out at inside-right for the local police in their fixture against the lawyers.
Sadly, the forty-five-year-old's rotund physique proved too much and he was forced to retire for an early bath.
At Huddersfield Chapman had amply demonstrated his skilled diplomacy in getting players for the club, as in the signing of Stephenson and Taylor.
Once he had decided on his man he moved in with a determination that usually beat the carefully-laid plans of other interested clubs, often to dramatic effect.
The story of how Harold Dennis, an outside-left from Newark, came to play for Huddersfield was told by the Worksop Guardian .
Worksop were keen to sign the player.
They ‘had a motor car placed at their disposal…and planned to arrive at Dennis' home [at Ancaster, near Sleaford]at 9.30, so as to have a glass that cheers, and then talk until midnight, the earliest time for signing.
They duly arrived at 9.30 in spite of torrential rain, wind, vivid lightning and unusually severe thunder.
‘But they counted without the cleverness of Herbert Chapman…
He arrived at three o'clock, and by 3.20 Dennis was in Mr Chapman's motor car en route to the home of the League Champions.’
Dennis had earlier said he would love to go to the Worksop club.
More drama was to come in May 1925, when Chapman signed Alex Jackson, the Aberdeen winger, at nineteen one of the youngest  internationals ever to appear for Scotland.
Jackson was restless at Aberdeen and had ambitions to play in England, but he threatened to return to America, where he had lived earlier, if he was not released.
Several English clubs were waiting to step in, but Chapman outwitted them all.
He was determined to get Jackson, to give poise to the Town's still unsettled right wing.
In his favour was Jackson's own desire to play for Huddersfield, but Everton and Liverpool were ready with offers.
The matter seemed settled when Chapman, after befriending the Aberdeen chairman, went to Hampden Park to watch Aberdeen play Queen's Park.
At a nearby hotel next morning a binding offer was made for Jackson's transfer to Huddersfield.
But then Sunderland came up with a new offer and Liverpool launched a fresh diplomatic offensive.
According to the Glasgow Daily Chronicle , Liverpool officials, ‘by a curious coincidence’, went to a junior cup tie at Parkhead, Glasgow, which was being watched by a group from Aberdeen that included Jackson.
The Anfielders did not have permission to approach the player, but this was granted at a dinner with the Aberdeen party that evening.
They were quite unaware that Herbert Chapman, two hundred miles away in Huddersfield, knew what was going on.
At 10 o'clock, as Jackson walked past Sauchiehall Street Station, a stranger spoke to him and led him away.
Two amateur detectives followed them, but lost the trail.
The player was then reported missing.
Jackson had been put up at a boarding house, to await the arrival of Herbert Chapman next morning.
‘How Mr Chapman got to know what had happened in 12 hours is a mystery to some people, for he was in Huddersfield when the Liverpool deputation had bade goodnight to their hosts from Aberdeen.
Nothing had seemed more certain than that Alex Jackson would be in Liverpool football next season.’
Chapman went with Jackson to visit the player's family at Renton, where he ‘magnetized the old people with the charm of his personality’.
It was there that Jackson signed for Huddersfield, at a transfer fee of £2,500.
Chapman was never to manage his most illustrious capture.
On  11 May, 1925 the following advertisement appeared in The Athletic News:ARSENAL FOOTBALL CLUB is open to receive applications for the position of TEAM MANAGER He must be fully experienced and possess the highest qualifications for the post, both as to ability and personal character.
Gentlemen whose sole ability to build up a good side depends on the payment of heavy and  exhorbitant [sic ]transfer fees need not apply.
The advertisement was a formality.
Arsenal asked Chapman to take the job and made an irresistible offer.
He had created successful teams in the relatively small soccer centres of Northampton, Leeds and Huddersfield, but the potential support from the vast population of London gave infinitely greater scope.
A move to the capital would give his two teenage sons greater career prospects.
And Arsenal were offering an unusually high salary for a football manager — £2,000.
The Huddersfield directors tried to persuade Chapman to stay, even offering him a salary to match Arsenal's.
But nothing could now keep Chapman and London apart.
IN COMMAND
Chapman's prediction that it would be five years before Arsenal won a major honour was not only, with hindsight, amazingly accurate; it was also meant to be realistic.
For when Chapman arrived in 1925 the Gunners were finding First Division survival a hard struggle.
Founded by munition workers at Woolwich Arsenal in 1886, the club enjoyed moderate success in the next decade, playing in the all-red shirts originally donated by Nottingham Forest.
As amateurs, they won the Kent Senior Cup in 1890 and the London Senior Cup the next year.
In 1893 they changed their name from Royal Arsenal to Woolwich Arsenal, adopted professional status and were elected to the Second Division.
The following year their home was established at the Manor Ground, Plumstead, and in 1904 the club won promotion to the First Division.
From then on fortunes took a downward turn: the Plumstead ground was situated in a remote corner of the capital and attendances were low.
Then, in 1913, the new chairman, Sir Henry Norris, negotiated the removal of the club to Highbury, in the more populous area of North London.
It was an audacious move.
Indeed, Bob Wall believes that ‘in many ways this was the most astute single decision ever taken by the club.’
That, however, was in the long run.
The immediate aftermath was relegation, with the lowest number of points (18) and goals (26) ever recorded by a First Division club.
After the Great War Sir Henry, an estate agent and former Mayor of Fulham, used his influence to get his club elected to the enlarged First Division, but Arsenal found it hard going, their best season being 1920–21 when they finished ninth.
In 1924 they narrowly missed relegation.
The club was the victim of dissension at the top which permeated down to the players and sapped their confidence: the familiar malaise among clubs under the old style of management.
At Highbury the trouble stemmed from the Canute-like attempts of Sir Henry Norris to halt the rising tide of transfer fees.
He forbade his manager, Leslie Knighton, to spend more than £1,000 on a player, at a time when £3,000 or more was normal.
The chairman, whose authority was supreme, was sure that the players Arsenal already possessed could, if properly deployed, produce a winning combination.
So the side was constantly reshuffled, no player remaining in any position long enough to find his form.
Team spirit was undermined.
Prejudice against small players led to another ‘edict’ from the chairman: he instructed his manager to buy no player under five feet eight inches tall.
Knighton defied him by signing ‘Midget’ Moffat from Workington.
Moffatt was transferred to Luton and Knighton resigned.
To fill the vacant position, Sir Henry, still nursing ambitions for the club he had guided and invested in for so long, wanted no one else but the outstandingly successful manager of Huddersfield Town.
The approach was made, Chapman accepted — and team control passed from the amateur chairman to the professional manager.
Sir Henry Norris was an archetype of the old-style football club chairman, combining a slight knowledge of the game with a great deal of money to put into it, and he fitted the popular image with a walrus moustache that quivered when he was angry, and a pince-nez that had the disconcerting effect of partially obscuring the direction of his gaze.
But by taking Chapman on board he accepted the limitation of his own authority.
For Chapman was successful — there was no arguing with that simple fact.
And the chairman was won over by the manager's charm, powerful persuasiveness and dynamism.
The veto on transfer fees over £1,000 was forgotten.
Almost as soon as he arrived at Highbury Chapman persuaded his chairman that the team needed Charlie Buchan, the long-shining star of Sunderland who, at thirty-four, was seen as the man to inspire  and lend experience to the faltering Arsenal attack.
Sunderland wanted £4,000 and their manager, Bob Kyle, said it would be worth it for the twenty goals Buchan was bound to score in his first season at Highbury.
The money-conscious Sir Henry seized on this point and suggested a £2,000 fee plus £100 for every goal Buchan scored in the next twelve months.
The deal was agreed, and the novelty of the terms put Arsenal in the headlines as never before.
The son of a Scottish blacksmith who had moved south from Aberdeen, Buchan had played for Arsenal as an amateur in the Woolwich days, until he presented an expenses bill for 11 s, and was suspended for extravagance.
In 1911, after playing professionally for the Southern League side Leyton, he was bought by Sunderland for £1,200.
He first met Chapman when he played a game for Leeds City in 1917.
The next meeting came when Chapman called at the player's sports shop in Sunderland to ask him if he would agree to move to Arsenal.
At first Buchan thought he was joking, and had to telephone his manager to get confirmation that his club had agreed to the transfer.
He recalled in his autobiography:
‘Slowly, I put down the receiver.
I was almost stunned by what I had heard.
It had never crossed my mind that Sunderland would be prepared to part with me so easily.’
Buchan said he would think it over, and agreed to the move when Chapman called back again next day.
’‘Will you give me your word you'll sign?’ he asked; and when I replied ‘Yes’, we talked of other things.
A lot of them concerned the Arsenal team and what I thought about them.’
Sir Henry Norris's old transfer limit was broken again with the buying of Bill Harper, Hibernian's international goalkeeper, for £5,000.
A former blacksmith and heavyweight boxing champion in the Scots Guards, Harper won several Scottish caps in the home internationals of 1923 to 1925.
But the chairman's readiness to provide the cash for Chapman's shopping was to prove his downfall.
An obstacle to Buchan's transfer was that he would lose income from his Sunderland shop, and the deal was delayed for two months while ‘under-the-counter’ terms were agreed to compensate him for this loss.
This was to come to light two years later when the Football Association appointed a commission to inquire into allegations that Sir Henry had offered financial inducements above the legal fees to attract players to Highbury and that he had diverted club funds to his private account.
The commission found him guilty, and he and a fellow director were forced to resign.
When the Daily Mail published the commission's findings, Norris took legal action against the paper, then dropped it in favour of a libel suit against the FA, to challenge the suggestion that he had acted dishonestly.
The case, heard in February 1929, revealed that, since his association with Arsenal began in 1910, Sir Henry had placed some £15,000 of his own money at the club's disposal (a bounty which could explain his campaign against rising transfer fees).
After more than ten years he decided that it was time he retrieved some of the money, so from 1921 to 1923 he put the wages of his chauffeur on Arsenal's expense account and in 1926 charged the club £125 for hiring, over two years, a motor car.
During the hearing, he claimed that Chapman and the directors knew of this and accused the manager of lying when he told the commission he did not know.
And his defence maintained that the FA had a grudge against him because he had openly criticized the transfer system.
Sir Henry said he wanted the money for the car hire as repayment for the £125 he paid to Buchan as compensation for the loss of his sports shop.
Chapman, he said, had begged him not to let Buchan go, but at the same time made it clear that, because of his previous suspension for alleged financial irregularities at Leeds in 1919, he preferred not to have anything to do with extra payments.
Asked why, knowing that such practices were illegal yet widespread, he had not made a stand against them, Sir Henry replied: ‘Because we should not have got the players.’
The court upheld the FA's verdict and Sir Henry left football for good.
His successor at Arsenal, Sir Samuel Hill-Wood, was content to leave Chapman with a free rein to work out his grand designs.
The manager's rule was now complete, a state of affairs that has continued ever since.
Writing in 1969, Bob Wall says:
‘One hears a great deal about interference from boards of directors in football and of managers not being allowed a free hand to run their teams.
That charge certainly cannot be levelled at Arsenal.
Our chairman, Mr Denis Hill-Wood [son of Sir Samuel], put it succinctly when he discussed the board's role with me a number of years ago.
‘Why pay experts to do a job if non-experts are going to be allowed to interfere?’ he asked.’
So Herbert Chapman established a pattern in relations between directors and manager which has become a feature of many of the major clubs, where the only veto on the manager's power is the sack if he fails to bring results.
THE TEAM TAKES SHAPE
It was not only Sir Henry Norris who was won over by Chapman's infectious optimism.
When the new manager arrived at Highbury he made administrative changes which deprived Arsenal's fifty voluntary workers — mostly schoolteachers acting as stewards and programme sellers — of various perks.
When the crowds had left after the second home match, Chapman met the helpers in the stand and asked them to take him on trust, asserting that the changes were in the club's interest.
Years later he could report that ‘we still have our fifty voluntary workers’.
Having installed himself and his family in a comfortable, modern house in Hendon, Chapman spelled out his aims in the programme for the first match.
They were ‘to make Arsenal Football Club one of the best football clubs from all points of view’ and to ‘employ, without exception, the very best type of player to represent the club…above all, he must be a gentleman both on and off the field; he must be a clever player, who can think out attractive, constructive tactics; and he must be wholeheartedly enthusiastic and keen to make progress in the game.’
Buchan fitted the bill perfectly; he was an experienced, thoughtful player who was always seeking to improve his performance and working out moves for the next game.
The delay in his transfer over his sports shop confirmed Chapman's estimation of him, for he admired players who sought to protect their own interests: ‘This is an indication to me that the player who makes this demand has intelligence.’
Buchan scored 21 goals in his first season, giving Sunderland another £2,100 under the transfer terms, £100 more than they had originally asked for.
Chapman switched Jimmy Brain from inside-forward to centre-forward to create a powerful new source    of goals, for Brain went on to score 31 that season, breaking the club's individual record.
The position of Bob John was stabilized at left-back, Billy Blyth was recalled to form the ‘three Bs’ halfback line with Baker and Butler, and Dr Jimmy Paterson, the amateur outside-right, was persuaded to make a comeback.
Chapman's opening campaign soon hit disaster.
In October 1925 Arsenal were defeated 7–0 at Newcastle.
Buchan, in the heat of the moment, threatened to leave the club after such a humiliation so near his old Sunderland home.
Characteristically, however, Chapman was to learn from the defeat, just as he had done twenty years before after Northampton's defeat by Norwich.
The result was a new combination which was to put Arsenal on top of the football world — and to change the course of soccer history.
The goal deluge at St James's Park brought home the need to counter the effects of the new offside law which came into force that summer and which reduced from three to two the number of players required to be between an opposing attacker and goal when the ball was last played.
The change was aimed at reducing stoppages for offside, which in the 1920s were the cause of much monotony as full-backs played further and further upfield.
The revised law opened the scoring floodgates.
In the last season before its introduction, 4,700 goals were scored in the League; during the next season the number went up to 6,373.
Chapman realized that to survive a team now needed three instead of two full-time defenders to cover the gap in the centre of the field.
Centre-halves had always played defensively at times, but now their role was to become primarily defensive.
So centre-half Jack Butler was given the job of staying by the penalty area to break down opposing attacks, helped by the full-backs marking opposing wingers and the wing-halves the opposing inside-forwards.
Defence-in-depth had begun.
Chapman took the defensive centre-half idea from a suggestion by Buchan, and it was Buchan who proposed another tactical innovation.
Pulling the centre-half back left a gap in midfield which needed a link man to pick up passes from defence and lay them on for the forwards.
Buchan offered himself for the job, but Chapman valued him as a goalscorer, and the link-man role went  to Andy Neil.
The other forwards were told to go fast, like ‘flying columns’, round the slow, old-style defences and if possible to make for goal direct.
It was a style of forward play Chapman had adopted at Northampton Town, based on long, low passing and direct assault.
The new tactics were drawn up quickly: two days after the Newcastle débacle Arsenal went to West Ham and won 4–0.
To boost the team's performance Chapman recalled veteran winger Jock Rutherford, then over forty, who had begun his League career with Newcastle in 1901.
From Blackburn Rovers he signed outside-right Joe Hulme, said to be the fastest footballer in the game and famed for his accurate centres while running.
Blackburn Rovers had paid York £250 for Hulme, but he cost Arsenal £3,500.
He was an all-round sportsman, playing cricket for Middlesex and excelling at golf, table tennis and snooker.
Arsenal finished the 1925–6 season as League runners-up with 52 points, five behind hat-trick champions Huddersfield, in the highest position ever reached by a London club (Arsenal's previous best was sixth in 1909).
Profits from gate receipts were £6,500, another club record.
And while goals for stood at 87 — almost double the previous season's total, goals conceded went up by only five, to 63.
That summer, as the country went through the turmoil of the General Strike, Chapman took his players on a tour of Europe — and nearly spent a night in a Paris jail.
There was a mix-up over payment for a meal at a café, and Chapman was hauled off by a gendarme to the police station.
The embarrassing affair was eventually sorted out and he was released.
Chapman strengthened his squad by buying Charlie Jones from Nottingham Forest.
Jones, a Welsh international who impressed the Arsenal manager with his fighting qualities and intelligent play, was to be the ‘flying-column’ on the left-wing, matching Hulme on the right.
Then came inside-forward Jack Lambert, 23, costing £2,000 from Doncaster Rovers and like Baker, John and Brain a former miner.
With Buchan inspiring the attack, right-back Tom Parker was bought from Southampton to give similar leadership to the defence, and was made captain.
After the successes of 1925–6, the team suffered from overconfidence and performances were disappointing.
Butler couldn't adapt to his new defensive role, and Chapman began to look around for a more solid defender, not necessarily a player with much technical skill, but one who could clear accurately under pressure, feeding the ball to an inside-forward.
In December he found Herbie Roberts, 21, an amateur wing-half from Oswestry, who cost a mere £200.
The defensive headers of the tall, red-haired Roberts soon made him a familiar figure at Highbury, and he was the first defending centre-half to earn the name ‘policeman’ or ‘stopper’.
His clearances to midfield turned defence immediately to attack.
They were taken up by the fast-running forwards to outplay and outwit the slow and often clumsy defensive play of oppositions who had failed to grasp the significance of the changed offside rules.
Speed was the essence of the system.
In 1927 Chapman added finesse to Arsenal's defence by buying full-back Eddie Hapgood — a former milkman — from Kettering Town.
He was nineteen, and had been rejected by his home-town club, Bristol Rovers.
He was to prove one of Chapman's finest bargains.
With his calm, smooth tackling and impeccable conduct on the field, Hapgood was to become one of the ablest and most respected players ever to captain Arsenal and England.
Bob Wall says of him:
‘He played his football in a calm, authoritative way and he would analyse a game in the same quiet, clear-cut manner.
Eddie set Arsenal players the highest possible example in technical skill and personal behaviour.’
A non-drinker and non-smoker, Hapgood's only addiction was physical fitness.
He was also a vegetarian, although the story goes that Chapman persuaded him to eat steaks after hearing that he sometimes felt faint when heading a ball.
The thirty-six-patch leather ball of those days was heavy, and headers had to be strictly from the forehead.
Anywhere else on the head, and even the strongest player could be knocked unconscious.
With the team still taking new shape, Arsenal reached the Cup final for the first time in 1927, their opponents being Cardiff City, one of the more successful sides of the decade.
City were  runners-up to Huddersfield in the League in 1924 and losing Cup finalists the following year.
The team they fielded in the 1927 final included eight internationals.
But Chapman's team-building made Arsenal the favourites.
Contrary to normal practice, ‘the most discussed football official of recent years’, as the Daily Mail described him, had his team training at Highbury in the week before the final, rather than at a country or seaside resort (Brighton was later to become the favoured Cup training ground).
‘The men are not deviating by one hair's breadth from the ordinary system of training,’ he told the Daily News .
‘To alter that system, even for a Cup final, would be folly, and for that reason we think there is no place like home and Highbury for keeping the minds and bodies of our players in perfect tune.’
In goal for Arsenal was Welshman Dan Lewis, displacing Bill Harper, and Butler was back at centre-half in place of Roberts.
In the Wembley dressing-room on the day, as the 92,000 crowd sang ‘Abide with Me’ in the newly-introduced programme of community singing, the players donned their new football shirts.
The shirts were presented for the occasion by Buchan — and they were to be Arsenal's downfall.
After seventy-three minutes of a disappointingly dull game, Lewis pounced on a shot by Cardiff's Ferguson only to find that the sheen of his new Jersey caused the ball, with its polished leather, to slip from under him towards goal.
He tried to stop it but succeeded only in propelling it across the line.
He told the Daily Mail later:
‘I got down to it and stopped it.
I can usually pick up a ball with one hand, but as I was laying over the ball, I had to use both hands to pick it up, and already a Cardiff forward was rushing down on me.
The ball was very greasy.
When it touched Parker it had evidently acquired a tremendous spin, and for a second it must have been spinning beneath me.
At my first touch it shot away over my arm.
I sent my hand after it and touched it.
I may have sent it quicker over the goal line with this touch, but I think it would have reached it in any case.’
This, perhaps the most tragic of all goals seen at Wembley, sent the Cup out of England for the first and last time.
Lewis was so  upset by accusations that he had let his fellow Welshmen win that his immediate reaction was to vow never to play again.
Total receipts for the final were £21,000; as a comparison with more modern times, receipts for the 1976 final totalled £420,000.
Runners-up in the League and then in the Cup — there remained only three more years for Chapman to complete his five-year plan.
Buchan, nearly 37, was approaching the end of his playing days, and in 1928 left to become a sports reporter.
To replace him, Chapman decided to go for David Jack of Bolton Wanderers, the England inside-forward.
Famed for his grace and artistry, Jack played in the first Wembley Cup final in 1923 and again three years later.
Bolton had made it clear that Jack was not for sale, but Chapman, who in twenty years of football management rarely failed to get his man, was determined.
It was said of him that he always got the player that a club didn't want to sell, and the Jack transfer was a classic case in point.
He finally persuaded Bolton to sell, but the asking price was an unprecedented £13,000, twice the previous record.
A week later, after two more meetings, the Bolton management was invited to London and entertained at the Euston Hotel.
Bob Wall, engaged in his first big transfer deal at Arsenal as Chapman's assistant, takes up the story.:
‘We arrived at the hotel half an hour before our appointment.
Chapman immediately went into the lounge bar.
He called the waiter, placed two pound notes in his hand and said: ‘George.
This is Mr Wall, my assistant.
He will drink whisky and dry ginger.
I will drink gin and tonic.
We shall be joined by guests.
They will drink whatever they like.
But I want you to be careful of one thing.
See that our guests are given double of everything, but Mr Wall's whisky and dry ginger will contain no whisky and my gin and tonic will contain no gin.’
‘When the Bolton pair arrived, Chapman ordered the drinks.
We quickly downed ours and he called for the same again.
The drinks continued to flow and our guests were soon in gay mood.
‘Finally, when Chapman decided the time was opportune for talking business, they readily agreed to letting him sign Jack — and for £10,890, which we considered a bargain.
‘Never did ginger ale and tonic water leave two persons so elated.
When we were safely in our taxi on the return journey to Highbury, Chapman exclaimed: ‘Well, that's your first lesson in football.
You now know how to conduct a transfer.’’
Jack, 29, had proved a hard bargainer himself — which raised him even higher in Chapman's estimation.
He was well aware of his rights in a transfer, as his father was manager of Plymouth Argyle.
When Chapman called at Jack's house for his consent, the player demanded various concessions and phoned his father for advice.
The Jack transfer was the first to command a five-figure fee, despite the fact that Arsenal were continuing to propose limits on transfer fees, which led to accusations of hypocrisy.
Chapman genuinely believed that, in the interest of the game, fees should be limited, but while the proposals went unheeded he was quite prepared to spend as much as possible to secure the best players.
For he insisted that anything less was next to useless.
He knew too that Arsenal's resources, swollen from early successes, gave him a big advantage in the transfer stakes: ‘We can pay £2,000 more for a player than any other club.’
The critics, in labelling him a big spender, also ignored his ability to spot bargains like Roberts and Hapgood.
For Chapman, however, Jack was no less of a bargain, the record fee a small price to pay for a player of his class.
Looking back on the deal, Chapman believed that ‘one of the best bargains I ever made was the most costly one.’
Jack's début, on 20 October, 1928, saw Arsenal's first victory at St James's Park for seventeen years, when Newcastle were beaten 3–0.
The linking midfield role still needed to be filled.
A number of players had been tried, but none came up to the subtle demands of the job.
What was needed was a foraging inside-forward who could pick up passes from defence and create scoring chances for the other forwards.
Chapman's search for the right man ended in 1929 when Preston put on transfer at £9,000 their ‘Wembley Wizard’ Alex James, the Scottish international who had been the bane of England at Wembley the year before, when Scotland won 5–1.
(A team-mate on that occasion was Alex Jackson, Chapman's last sign at Huddersfield, who scored three of the five goals.)
In view of the nature of the job waiting for him, the buying of James came as a surprise to observers.
For this exuberant individualist revelled in the goal-scoring limelight and hardly seemed the right choice for a midfield link man, laying on scoring chances for others.
Chapman was sure of his assessment, however; and though James was just as fussy about the terms of his transfer as Jack had been, he found the bright lights of the big city too attractive a prospect to refuse Chapman's offer.
The final touch to the forward line came with seventeen-year-old Cliff Bastin, costing £2,000 from Exeter City, who was to be the last in a long line of Chapman discoveries that began with Fanny Walden twenty years before.
The manager spotted the youngster at Watford, while checking on one of the home side's players.
He was struck by Bastin's cool, calculated style, and set out hotfoot for Devon.
Negotiations with Exeter, for whom Bastin had signed professionally only weeks before, were successfully concluded, but Bastin himself, showing remarkable maturity for his age, saw his training as an electrical engineer as a sounder career prospect than Arsenal.
He preferred the slow, peaceful life of the Devon countryside to the frenetic bustle of the metropolis: playing for Exeter seemed better than the likelihood of being very small fish in the big Arsenal pool.
Recalling his first meeting with the Arsenal manager, whom he described as ‘plump, rubicund and genial’, Bastin writes:
‘There was an aura of greatness about Chapman.
I was impressed by him straight away.
He possessed a cheery self-confidence, which communicated itself to those around him.
This power of inspiration and the remarkable gift of foresight, which never seemed to desert him, were his greatest attributes.’
Chapman called at Bastin's home and tried to convince him of the spectacular career he would have at Highbury.
‘He cast me in the role of a sort of footballing Dick Whittington, and took down the vases from the mantelpiece to represent my stepping-stones to fame,’ Bastin recalls.
At length, after consulting his mother, the reluctant player finally agreed — on condition that he could continue with his electrical engineering studies.
The youngster's inclusion in the side earned him the name ‘Boy  Bastin', as seventeen-year-olds in League football were much scarcer than now, and Bastin was in a class of his own with the fierceness of his shot, as a teaser of defences and as an expert penalty-taker.
The nickname stuck after 1930 when he became the youngest player to appear in a Cup final, and by 1931, before his twenty-first birthday, he had won Cup, Championship and international honours.
(The pre-war record for the youngest player in League football, incidentally, is held by Geldard of Bradford, who was fifteen when he appeared in a Second Division match in 1929.)
Chapman now felt he had a team capable of winning something, and he was determined that the 1929–30 season would be Arsenal's, to keep his promise of five years before.
Only Baker and John remained as first team regulars from the pre-Chapman era, the rest having been replaced at a cost of £40,000, the most prolific spending spree soccer had seen.
The season began badly.
League performances slumped disastrously, and there was even talk of relegation for the first time since Chapman took over.
His whole buying policy looked to be a failure.
James in particular, the man earmarked as the lynchpin in the tactical plan, was not living up to expectations.
Instead of making chances for his colleagues, the Scot, as predicted, couldn't get out of the habit of making for goal himself, so the attack was stifled of passes.
In an effort to halt the slide, Chapman went to the Arsenal purse again for £6,000 to buy David Halliday, Sunderland's prolific goalscorer.
Halliday was planned for centre-forward, where Brain, Lambert and Jack had all proved unsatisfactory.
Bastin was switched from inside-to outside-left, to become the left wing's ‘flying column’.
But when the Cup ties came round, Chapman made another, more dramatic decision — he dropped Alex James, the man intended as the team's dynamo, and sent him home for a complete rest.
Without him Arsenal beat Chelsea in the opening round, but then faced a crisis when Birmingham forced a draw at Highbury in the next round.
Chapman's decision for the replay was a master-stroke.
Only three days before the match he called at James's home, and strode into the bedroom, where James was still in bed.
‘Get up  Alex,’ he said.
‘You're coming to Highbury for training because you will be playing in the replay.’
He had calculated that a call to arms at such a short notice would bring out the fighting qualities in his ailing general — and it worked.
Arsenal were through to the next round, and it was the turning point in the club's history.
James displayed the long-awaited tactical skill needed to vitalize the team formation drawn up nearly five years before, and with Lambert finding new flair at centre-forward, one of the most famous attacking lines of all time had been forged.
James's recall finally established the system of defence linked to attack by a midfield forager which was the key to the successes of the next decade.
The Arsenal machine had been perfected, and the 1930 Cup triumph was to usher in a glorious future.
THE NAPOLEON OF NORTH LONDON
Chapman at Highbury was monarch of all he surveyed.
At a time of economic depression, gates were booming as Arsenal's reputation for first-class entertainment grew, and profits reached £27,000 a year — a handsome sum for those days.
Like Napoleon, to whom he was often likened, Chapman was the organizer of victory.
‘Breaking down old traditions, he was the first club manager who set out methodically to organize the winning of matches,’ observed the Daily Mail.
Most managers, before and since, have held the organizing of victory to be impossible.
Bob Wall recalls: ‘Chapman probably planned many of our wins.
He would tell a player, ‘Never mind what the other team does — this is what you are going to do.’
He believed his tactics would win, regardless of how the opposition played.
Sometimes it didn't work, but usually it did.
Most managers today would say victory cannot be planned, and that all that is possible is to analyse the opposition.
Chapman's approach was unique.’
The approach was a reaction to the days when teams took the field without any overall plan of how they were to set about winning, when the only initiative that came from management was to encourage friendships in the team so that players were more ready to discuss tactics among themselves.
The team discussions Chapman introduced at Highbury played a big part in the planning of campaigns.
At 9.30 on a Friday morning the players would arrive at the ground for training, then at mid-day would congregate in the manager's office to discuss the next day's match, as well as analysing the previous week's.
Chapman, as we have seen, first held these sessions during his days at Leeds City, but now, instead of the diagram he used then, he had a magnetic table marked out as a football field, with little toy   players that could be moved around on it.
With a detailed report on the opposition at hand, everyone would give his views of the game, suggest ideas and illustrate points of play.
Gradually the plan would be evolved, and the meeting would end with every player fully aware of the role he was to play.
‘I am convinced that much of the success achieved by the Arsenal has been through the team quickly sensing a weakness in the opposition,’ Chapman commented.
This ability was sharpened by these players' meetings, which were a unique feature of football at this time.
There was no room for slackers: absolute concentration and dedication throughout the game was demanded.
It was one of Chapman's rules that even when the ball was on the other side of the field, a player must always be anticipating the next move.
The outpouring of so much mental energy on the planning of victories often led Chapman to suffer acute anguish during a game, for unlike Napoleon, he was powerless to lead his men once battle had commenced.
It is an experience familiar to all great managers since.
When Arsenal met Hull in the Cup semi-final in 1930, and were 2–0 down with ten minutes to go, Chapman's ordeal on the bench grew to a fever-pitch of intensity.
‘So far as I knew I had attended to every trifling detail, yet every plan, every hope, seemed to be going wrong.
I cannot tell you my thoughts as I sat on the stand and watched the Arsenal playing far below their proper form.
All I was conscious of was that everything had miscarried, and in my isolation, I was powerless to do anything.
If only I could have gone out there and helped to put matters right.
Believe me, it is far harder at such times to sit and look on than to be in the middle,’ he told Sunday Express readers.
Frank Cole of the Daily Telegraph wrote of Chapman: ‘If you sat near him at a big match…you realized the intense earnestness of the man.
His face would go ashen grey as he lived every moment of the play.
And when things were going against his men he seemed to be suffering mental agonies.
I have never seen such concentration.’
Chapman's absolute authority over the team and his concern for their performance on the field was highlighted by the firm rule  he laid down for match days.
Former Arsenal and England fullback George Male recalls: ‘The only people allowed in the dressing-room before a match were the eleven players, the boot man, the trainer and the manager.
No player not appearing in that particular game dared put his face round the door.
Even the chairman wasn't allowed to look in without Chapman's permission.’
Similarly, at the weekly team talks, only the teams of the last and the coming match were admitted.
But it wasn't only the team over which Chapman held dominion.
His official title (one used at most clubs) was secretary-manager, and as such the administration of the club was as much a part of his job as team management.
(In later years, as paperwork increased, the two roles were separated, Bob Wall, Chapman's former administrative assistant, becoming secretary in 1956.)
Wall recalls:
‘No member of the staff was permitted to leave the building unless he had telephoned Chapman's office at six o'clock and enquired: ‘Is it all right for me to go now, Mr Chapman?’
‘We all had a very great respect for him.
I suppose too, there was a tinge or more of fear in our approach to him.
We knew that jobs were not easy to obtain…we couldn't afford to risk getting the sack.
‘Yet Chapman was a great man.
If he put up a scheme, you would be willing to follow him to the ends of the earth to ensure its fulfilment.
You always felt that what he said was right.
‘He never thought of himself.
Arsenal FC was his creed.
He was a hard, yet scrupulously fair person to staff and players and he remained constant in his attitudes until he died.’
In his showmanlike way, Chapman wanted Highbury to become the greatest club ground in the world, a new kind of football mecca, with a big crowd capacity and as futuristic in design as the new West Stand, built at his suggestion to replace the old wooden stand erected in 1913.
The new stand was completed in November 1932 at a cost of £45,000 and formally opened the following month by the Prince of Wales.
It was dedicated by the Reverend Norman Boyd, Chapman's vicar at St Mary's, Hendon, who acted unofficially as the club's chaplain.
The stand contained 4,100 seats, installed at a cost of 2d each, and incorporated the latest in spectator comfort.
In design it was the shape of things to come, the forerunner of the big, luxury stands at Goodison Park, Anfield, Stamford Bridge and other grounds of today.
Chapman also put in hand plans to cover the north terrace and rebuild the East Stand.
Both schemes were realized after his death.
Another innovation made in 1932 was a huge 45-minute clock which Chapman had installed at the north end of the ground so that players and spectators could see at a glance how much time was left for play.
It put him — not for the first time — on the wrong side of the Football Association, which saw the clock as undermining the referee's authority, and ordered its removal.
Not to be denied, Chapman arranged a compromise in the form of a 24-hour clock, which remains, in its new position on the south bank, a familiar feature of Highbury.
Ground improvements were just one part of Chapman's plan to make Arsenal the most talked-about club in the kingdom.
In 1932, he invited to his office a representative of the London Electric Railway to discuss the Piccadilly Line Underground station opposite the north end of the ground.
Chapman had first appreciated the crowd-pulling potential of a station practically on Arsenal's doorstep, giving the club a quick connection with most parts of the capital, when he came to Highbury as the visiting manager of Leeds City in 1913, and it now fired his imagination.
There was only one thing wrong — the name.
Only the initiated knew that Gillespie Road was the stop for the Arsenal.
The name had to be changed, but it would not be easy.
The transport authorities did not alter the names of their stations lightly, because of the huge expense and inconvenience involved, including the reprinting of thousands of tickets, direction notices and maps.
After a long preliminary chat with the man from the LER, Chapman decided it was time to press home the point.
‘Whoever heard of Gillespie Road?’ he exclaimed.
‘This is Arsenal around here!’
His visitor returned to his headquarters, the adjustments were made, and on 5 November, 1932, Arsenal arrived on the London transport network.
Another innovation connected with transport was for travel to away games.
Journeys were usually made on the Friday, except for the relatively short trip to Birmingham, made on Saturday morning.
In 1930 one of the railway companies was persuaded to reserve a carriage, with restaurant, exclusively for the club, this ‘Arsenal carriage’ being shunted onto the train for the journey.
Novel, efficient and audacious, it was typical of Chapman's concern for his players' comfort.
For as the carriage was always at the front or back, it could be kept private from the rest of the train.
In more resent times, with motorways covering much of the country, the luxury coach, complete with colour television, is the preferred method of transport.
Nothing was left untouched where a change would put the club in the public eye, improve the team's performance or, preferably, both.
The playing strip, for instance, underwent several changes.
The colour of the team's socks, until 1927 black with thin red and white stripes, was altered to a more distinctive blue and white so that the players could recognize their colleagues more easily without looking up.
Chapman favoured a red and white sock to match the club colours, but when this was tried the red dye ran when the socks were washed.
It wasn't until 1970 that modern textile colouring made the now familiar red and white sock possible.
A more successful change was the abandoning of the course-knit, lace-up jersey in favour of a shirt with buttons at the neck and a turn-over collar.
The new shirt appeared at the start of the 1932–3 season, with another, more startling change — white sleeves.
By then, Chapman considered that the all-red jersey looked ordinary, out of tune with the club's distinction, so he decided that in line with Aston Villa, until then the club with the greatest prestige and tradition behind it, the sleeves should be of a different colour to the rest of the top.
Another experiment which, like the 45-minute clock, was nipped in the bud by the authorities, was the numbering of players.
The idea was not new.
It had been advocated countless times, but prejudice against it held sway, and it was argued that identifying players would pander to their individual egos.
Then, in  August 1928, Arsenal took the field at Hillsborough wearing numbers on their backs, while on the same day, Chelsea, at home, were doing the same — at Chapman's suggestion.
His view was that numbers would speed up moves by helping players identify each other more quickly, but the Football League was outraged and  forbade a repeat.
The intrepid manager had to content himself with numbering his reserve teams.
Five years later the Football Association adopted numbering in the Cup final, using numbers 1 to 22, but Chapman was not finally vindicated until 1939 — five years after his death — when the League made it compulsory, primarily for the benefit of spectators.
Chapman's appetite for new ideas knew no bounds.
‘I would borrow one from a programme boy at Highbury, if it were a good one,’ he said.
But he never made changes solely for their publicity value.
He had a passionate concern for the welfare of football in general, and was always on the lookout for ways to make it more efficient, more attractive and more popular, although naturally he wanted Arsenal to be in the forefront.
Some ideas he rejected, such as the liquid developed at Derby County for making pitches usable in all weathers.
Accompanied by Bob Wall, he went to Derby during the harsh winter of 1933 to watch the solution being sprayed onto a comer of the pitch.
The liquid dispersed the frost, but within an hour the ground was freezing again.
Chapman was interested only in something that would last three hours.
The white football he regarded as another non-starter.
Designed to counteract poor visibility on murky winter afternoons, it had been used in Scotland and by the visiting South Africans in 1924 before Arsenal adopted it for a public trial match three years later.
Chapman could see no advantage in it and Buchan dismissed it as a ‘stunt’.
The manager sought a more effective answer to the frustrations and injustices caused by inadequate light in winter — floodlighting.
The early, nineteenth-century experiments in artificial lighting, including that held in Sheffield in the year of Chapman's birth, had been forgotten, and it was left to the Europeans to develop the idea of floodlit football.
Chapman did not realize the possibilities until he visited Belgium in 1930 and watched a match  played in Brussels during a thunderstorm:
‘The field was illuminated by lights fixed to five standards running down one side behind the spectators.
From each standard the rays of twenty powerful lamps were thrown across the pitch at different angles, and as they intersected and spread they did not leave a dark or even a dull patch…
I wished that the public at home could always have such a good view.’
The players told him after the game that the lights did not trouble them as much as sunlight.
Later he visited Austria at the invitation of his friend Hugo Meisl, the Austrian team manager.
After watching an international match, he was taken to a forest clearing where a game between two amateur sides was lit by ear headlights.
He became convinced of the future of floodlit football, and on arriving back at Highbury gave poor Bob Wall just one month to get hold of ‘lanterns’ for the practice ground.
A railway company came to Wall's aid and before long a trial was held under floodlit conditions.
Chapman saw that floodlighting, by enabling games to be played in the evening, would win people away from the rival attractions of dog racing (’ it does not make the slightest appeal to me’) and the speedway.
Despite the cold, he believed that people would be prepared to watch football at night.
In any case, the cold could be overcome by heating the stands.
He had floodlights built into the West Stand — but once again the FA stepped in.
The Association feared that if floodlighting caught on, clubs would be drawn into spending too much money, and it banned the new lights at Highbury from being used for official matches.
For the rest of the decade they shone only on training sessions and ground maintenance work, and it was not until 1951, some twenty years after Chapman's enthusiastic advocacy, that the first official floodlit match was held, between Southampton and Tottenham reserves at the Dell.
Floodlighting was finally allowed for Cup ties from 1955 and for League games from 1956.
Another technical advance Chapman saw on the Continent was the ten-yard semi-circle to ensure that players kept their distance during a penalty kick.
In 1929 he asked permission to introduce  the semi-circle at Highbury, but was refused.
Four years later the England selection committee saw the semi-circle during their visit to Switzerland and Italy, and wondered why no one had called for its use at home.
The new marking was introduced in England in 1937.
Most of Chapman's suggestions ultimately became standard practice, but one of his favourite hobby-horses, although still discussed, has never materialized.
This was the introduction of goal judges.
It was not a new idea, but in Chapman it found its most ardent champion.
In the Sunday Express he said that goal judges ‘must come’ to give more help to referees in avoiding errors of judgement.
‘We owe it to the public that our games should be controlled with all the exactness that is possible.’
It was ironic in view of this that a hotly-disputed goal was to cost Arsenal the Cup in the 1932 final.
For greater control of the game, Chapman also advocated two referees to eliminate the small, unnoticed offences.
The repeated frustration of his attempts to introduce changes led to an impassioned plea in the Sunday Express for more freedom of action at club level: ‘I appeal to the authorities to release the brake which they seem to delight in jamming on new ideas…as if wisdom is only to be found in the council chamber…
I am impatient and intolerant of much that seems to me to be merely negative, if not actually destructive, legislation.’
Not all of his ideas, however, went without immediate reward.
In January 1931, after Aston Villa had held Arsenal to a draw in the Cup at Highbury, he decided, for the replay, to make use of new rubber studs to overcome the slipperiness of the icy pitch at Villa Park.
The new studded boots gave his players poise and confidence and were a vital factor in their 3–1 win.
Nevertheless, rubber studs did not immediately come into general use because the process of changing them ruined the soles of the boots.
Chapman's revolutionary ideas extended also to the running of the national team.
During the 1920s and '30s England pursued an isolationist policy, withdrawing from FIFA, the international controlling body, in 1928, and basking in the complacent belief that they were still the supreme soccer power.
Chapman saw the danger signs in the efficient running a such  national teams as Austria and Holland.
England were beaten by Spain in Madrid in 1929, and in 1932 Austria came to Stamford Bridge and only narrowly lost 4–3.
‘We were wrong to laugh at the idea of Europeans mastering football,’ said Chapman in the Sunday Express after the game.
‘Three years ago, when I said British superiority would be challenged, it was said I exaggerated.
Now it has come true.’
His own rise to fame at club level had demonstrated the superiority of management by one man over management by a group, but the England team was still selected by a dozen officials ‘expressing their views as to the merits of players without proper regard to blend and balance’.
Selection, he believed, required the expert knowledge of a man close to the players, but the idea of one England team manager was inconceivable even to Chapman.
He recommended that the selection committee should be cut to three.
A more revolutionary proposal of his was that England players should train together regularly, an idea derived from his visit to Holland, where the national players came together for coaching once a week, and were given lectures and ‘homework’ exercises.
But he despaired of the idea catching on in England: ‘We could never, I fear, get the youths of this country to go to all this trouble to perfect their play.’
England training took another twenty years to get organized.
Yet Chapman saw that the future of English football ultimately depended on the young, and he was particularly concerned to win youngsters over to soccer and away from rugby, a concern heightened by the fact that his two sow, Ken and Bruce, were distinguishing themselves in the rugby code.
In 1933 a scheme was launched for classes to be held for schoolboys during the autumn term under the management of the Corinthians, the amateur club, with Arsenal as sponsors and Chapman taking classes in basic skills, positional play and training.
Professional players were to give practical instruction.
Chapman was keen on the plan because he had seen the advances made on the Continent, where such classes were already established.
The first team produced by the Arsenal-sponsored scheme did not disappoint, and he urged the introduction of professional coaching into youth clubs  and both the public and local authority schools.
‘Chapman thought deeply about an infinite variety of subjects associated with the game,’ Bob Wall writes.
‘He possessed the gift of seeing ahead of his time.
He was able to visualize how soccer could benefit from adopting ideas which, in their infancy, seemed to most other people to be merely the outpourings of an eccentric mind.’
Despite his impudent experiments and opinions, Chapman was highly regarded by the FA, which often sought his advice on domestic and international matters.
Nevertheless, he only once travelled with the England party, to Rome in 1933, when he gave the team a tactical talk before their clash with Italy.
Apart from meeting Mussolini, he remembered the occasion chiefly for the panic at half-time when he temporarily lost the key to the locked dressing-room.
As club manager, however, he was widely travelled and widely respected on the Continent, spreading the name and prestige of Arsenal in his imperialist fashion.
Arsenal's main continental venture was the series with Racing Club of Paris, the first game taking place on 11 November, 1930 (when Arsenal won 7–2) at the instigation of Chapman and Jean Bernard-Levy, the Paris club's president.
As the fixture was in aid of disabled veterans of the Great War, it was held close to Armistice Day each subsequent year.
The series gave Chapman and his players their first experience of air travel, a venture which in the early days of flying took some courage.
Alex James and David Jack in particular were reluctant passengers.
Chapman received tokens of esteem from foreign clubs and countries, including a decoration from the French Government and a hand-painted Dresden china service from the Austrian FA.
Hugo Meisl described Chapman as ‘undoubtedly the leading man in association football throughout the world’.
In 1932, amid growing fears that English players would be lured away to foreign shores, the rumour circulated that the Parisians had made an offer for David Jack.
It was denied, but a Paris official asked: ‘Do you think we could persuade Mr Herbert Chapman to join us?
He is the man we would like.’
It could not be long before the football emperor was in truly  royal circles He met King George V, Queen Mary and the Prince of Wales, and often discussed points of play with the King during Cup finals.
His prestige received a further boost in the late 1920s when the Sunday Express invited ‘the famous manager of the Arsenal Football Club’ to contribute a weekly column, a degree of journalistic attention unprecedented for a football manager.
The column was a popular feature and was revived several times.
And it was not only during the football season that the club enjoyed publicity, for the Arsenal cricketers were regular contenders in the London Evening News Cup, with Chapman as wicket-keeper.
Although Chapman was by now a famous man, and his name was familiar to thousands who had never attended a football match, on a social level he remained as affable and unassuming as the next man.
As a youth, the Reverend A. Hunt Cooke used to sit behind Chapman and his family most Sunday mornings at St Mary's Church, Hendon.
‘We used to say good morning to each other and he always smiled at me,’ he recalls.
‘He seemed a kindly person, not in the least severe.
He was just an ordinary, home-loving man, although of course in his profession he was far from ordinary.’
Chapman was a sidesman at the church and a good friend of the vicar, the Reverend Norman Boyd, who was a regular guest at Arsenal's home matches.
Chapman was devoted to his family of two sons and two daughters.
Asked what was his greatest hour, he replied: ‘When my son qualified as a solicitor.’
TOP OF THE GREASY POLE
After winning the Cup in 1930, with the forward line of Hulme, Jack, Lambert, James and Bastin the most powerful the game had yet seen, there was every reason to hope for the League title next season.
The hope was realized — but in a style that must have exceeded even Chapman's wildest dreams.
Arsenal won their first five matches and did not lose until the tenth.
Sheffield Wednesday and Aston Villa challenged hard, but fell away in the spring.
Arsenal were home and dry.
New records had been set with almost every triumph Chapman had ever engineered, but none equalled those of Arsenal's 1931 Championship.
Not only were Arsenal the first southern club to win the title, but their 66 points were six better than the previous high of Sheffield Wednesday the year before: 28 out of 42 games were won, only four lost, and wins, draws and losses were evenly divided between home and away; the goals total, 127, was one less than Aston Villa's all-time high of the same year.
The 66 points were not equalled until thirty years later, when Spurs won the Double, and not surpassed until 1969, when Leeds United made 67.
Top scorer was Jack Lambert, who topped by seven Jimmy Brain's record for the club of 31 goals in 1925–6.
The composition of the team remained virtually unchanged throughout the season, and its consistency was proof of the soundness of Chapman's machine.
Cliff Bastin's verdict on the season's triumph was unequivocal: ‘This Arsenal team of 1930–31 was the finest eleven I ever played in.
And, without hesitation, I include in that generalization international teams as well.
Never before had there been such a team put out by any club.’
Arsenal's mastery of the First Division was already making   them the best-loved, best-hated club.
The critics levelled the charge that Arsenal's successes were based only on their ability to buy players, and called them the ‘Bank of England’ team.
They failed to see that money came from success, not the other way round — Chelsea, for instance, had also paid large sums for players without creating a championship team — and that the vital factor was the genius of the manager in charge for getting the most out of his players, whatever they cost, and for buying the right man.
Arsenal became the subject of more ill-considered criticism than any other club, a fate which has more or less persisted.
The practical key to Arsenal's rise was the balance effected between defence and attack, to meet the new conditions of the changed offside law.
With their in-depth defence the Gunners could now safely sustain an enemy onslaught and within seconds send the forwards away to take advantage of the depleted numbers at the opposition's rear.
As Chapman observed: ‘Although I do not suggest that the Arsenal go on the defensive even for tactical purposes, I think it may be said that some of their best scoring chances have come when they have been driven back and then have broken away to strike suddenly and swiftly.’
He realized the delicacy of the balance, and so hated to make team changes.
‘When they are necessary I try to arrange that they cause as little disturbance as possible.’
Drastic changes only unsettled the men, and if the side was not playing well, ‘the moderate course is always the best’.
The essence of Arsenal's style was speed, with intermediate passing reduced to a minimum and every move subordinated to the aim of scoring.
It lacked the sophistication of a complex buildup like Tottenham's, say, but for sheer excitement it was unsurpassed.
With Alex James as the pivot picking up clearances from defence and passing immediately to the front-runners, Arsenal could have the ball in their opponents' net only seconds after being packed in their own goal area.
As Bernard Joy has observed, ‘it was twentieth century, terse, exciting, spectacular, economic, devastating.’
And for an audience badly in need of escape from the misery of financial crisis and economic depression, at its worst in 1931, it was an exhilarating spectacle.
Sir Matt Busby, who as a Manchester City player often appeared against what he calls ‘the magnificent Arsenal of the early Thirties’, describes the key role played by Alex James (whom he knew and idolized as a boy in the Glasgow suburbs of their youth): ‘James was the great creator from the middle.
From an Arsenal rearguard action the ball would, seemingly inevitably, reach Alex.
He would feint and leave two or three opponents sprawling or plodding in his wake before he released the ball, unerringly, to either the flying Joe Hulme, who would not even have to pause in his flight, or the absolutely devastating Cliff (’’ Boy'') Bastin, who would take a couple of strides and whip the ball into the net.
The number of goals created from rearguard beginnings by Alex James were the most significant factor in Arsenal's greatness.’
Arsenal dominated because of their new tactical formation.
The full-backs spread out to mark opposing wingers, instead of inside-forwards as under the old style, while the half-backs marked the inside-forwards instead of wingers.
The halves played close in front of the defending centre-half, so the defence formed an ‘M’ figuration, retreating under attack to build a tight defensive structure.
The inside-forwards, James and Jack, held back to fill the gap in midfield, so the forward line formed a ‘W’.
James's role, in fact, was not unlike that of the attacking centre-halves of the pre-1925 era.
Under the new system the centre-half's only occasion for going up-field was to force the attack to make up goals lost.
Conversely, the forwards were expected to fall back to help the defence under pressure.
Chapman favoured direct attack.
‘The quicker you get to your opponent's goal the less obstacles you find,’ was his motto.
There was no room for the trick that was merely ‘showy’.
‘I want the best possible football, but…it must be purposeful, it must be effective.’
He rejected the customary function of wingers of going down the line and crossing the ball.
Instead, he wanted his wingers to beat the defender on the inside and go for goal themselves.
It was not a system that stifled individual skill.
There was plenty of that in James's clever footwork and deceptive body swerve, Jack's artistry, Hapgood's neat, precise tackling and Hulme's fast  running.
But such skill served the team as a whole.
Chapman insisted that his players were not slaves to a system, but merely followed the ‘fundamental principles of teamwork’.
Having steered Arsenal to a Cup victory and then to a record Championship, Chapman was at the pinnacle of his career.
Success, of course, brings new problems and with Arsenal at the top, the next task was to keep them there.
Like Disraeli on becoming prime minister, Chapman could say he had climbed to the top of the greasy pole.
He knew the danger of backsliding and kept watch on the average age of the team, which he believed should be reduced each season, and on the form of each individual in it.
If a player was not performing well the remedy was a spell in the reserves.
In Chapman's view, the foundation of Aston Villa's long history of success was their ability to plan ahead and prepare for the departure of key players.
He warned against overdependence on a single player who might be difficult to replace, and was thus well aware of how hard it would be when Alex James retired.
This accounts for the attention he gave to the reserves, or ‘spare men’ as he liked to call them.
At Huddersfield, a strong reserve force had been a vital factor in the Championship run, and Chapman soon set about building a similar force at Arsenal.
As early as April 1927 an Arsenal team containing several reserves won 3–0 at Aston Villa, to end a series of poor results by more regular teams.
The reserves won the Combination that year, retaining the championship until 1931.
In 1930 they scored 132 goals, five more than the first team in their record Championship year.
For the rest of the decade the reserves never fell below third place, and were champions a further five times.
For the 1931–2 season Chapman planned a triumph even greater than those of the preceding two years.
The Cup and League Double had eluded the most ambitious clubs ever since Aston Villa became the second club to achieve it in 1897, in a less competitive era.
Chapman considered that to win the Double, Arsenal needed to be leading the League by a substantial margin before the Cup came round.
But in their determination to score, the team lost the tactical balance that had served so well before.
The forwards kept up persistent pressure, crowding the opposing goalmouth, while wing-halves Jones and John abandoned their defensive positions to join in the attack, leaving the rear exposed.
Points were dropped and three defeats over Christmas, which left Arsenal trailing five points behind Everton, made the Double look like something of a pipe dream.
Chapman's response was to inquire after Grimsby marksman Ernie Coleman and Sheffield United's record goal-scorer, Irish international Jimmy Dunne, both possible successors to Lambert.
His overtures were not immediately successful, but a shrewd buy was Oldham's reserve goalkeeper Frank Moss.
According to Bob Wall: ‘What impressed Chapman even more than the sureness of his hands was Frank's physical courage.
He remained utterly fearless throughout his playing career with us, although towards the end of it he was constantly dislocating a shoulder.’
Another journey Chapman made at this time was to Scotland, to watch Neil Dewar of Third Lanark.
Because of the growing publicity surrounding his movements, he decided to lose himself in the crowd, going in through the turnstiles and watching the player from the terraces.
In the Cup the amateurs Darwen (11–1), Plymouth Argyle (4–2) and Portsmouth (2–0) were disposed of to give Chapman another clash with his old club Huddersfield, away.
He saw it as a tough hurdle, for Huddersfield were still going strong and his knowledge of their methods was matched by their familiarity with Arsenal's.
An element of surprise was needed, so Roberts, the ‘stopper’, was told to join the attack.
It worked.
Huddersfield were caught out as the red-haired centre-half rushed forward to meet the cross from a comer, and headed Arsenal into the semi-final.
The tie, against Manchester City at Villa Park, was a classic illustration of Chapman's belief that a team can attack for too long.
A City onslaught, fed by passes from wing-half Matt Busby, kept Arsenal pinned in defence until, near the end, City launched a final, determined offensive.
Suddenly a clearance found Bastin, who sped up-field to exploit City's depleted defence and join forces with Lambert, the only other red shirt in the opposition's half.
After a quick exchange of  passes Bastin scored and the roar of the crowd had hardly subsided when the whistle signalled the end of the match.
Swift attacks like these, combined with the defence-in-depth system, fed the ‘lucky Arsenal’ myth, which grew as the Gunners won game after game after having the smaller share of play.
But luck doesn't win cups and championships — policy does, and if there was luck, it was just as likely to go against Arsenal, as events were to show.
The ‘lucky’ tag stuck, however, for years after and is still used by people ignorant of its origins.
In a fresh effort to secure Jimmy Dunne, Chapman arranged to go to Sheffield with his chairman and vice-chairman — in secret, or so he thought.
To his amazement, the ticket collector at Euston wished him success in his mission, and on his arrival at Sheffield the porter at his hotel pleaded: ‘I hope you're not going to take our Dunne away.’
That his quest was common knowledge astounded and dismayed him.
He was shadowed everywhere in Sheffield, and he looked back on the experience as his most annoying transfer hid — particularly as it turned out to be one of his rare failures.
Consolation came when Ernie Coleman finally joined Arsenal at the end of the season, for a fee of £6,000.
Arsenal were in the final, but Chapman poured cold water on hopes for the Double.
Intense competition made the Double impossible, he said, and to achieve it a club would need a League lead of at least eight points by the semi-final.
(In 1971, Arsenal won the Double after being six points behind leaders Leeds United at the time of the semi-final.)
Arsenal were three points behind Everton.
Chapman may have been seeking to ease the pressure on his players, but if he did entertain hopes of the Double, they were dashed when James injured a knee at Upton Park over Easter.
At that stage Arsenal were a point behind Everton, with a match in hand.
The loss of the Scotch wizard had, as Chapman put it, ‘an unfortunate influence on the team’; Arsenal did not win another match before the final and Everton increased their lead to seven points.
In the four games after the final, then played in April, Arsenal took seven points, but Everton won the title by two points.
Chapman's consolation was that Arsenal had twice beaten  Everton during the season.
With James out of the running for the Cup final against Newcastle, Chapman called up George Male for his first Cup tie.
Male had joined Arsenal in 1929.
He had been playing centre-half for Clapton, alongside Denis Hill-Wood, son of the then Arsenal chairman, when he got a telegram from Clapton's secretary Harry Kordell.
‘It told me to meet him by the Princess Alice in Forest Gate,’ he recalls.
‘When I got there Mr Kordell was with Herbert Chapman and we went into a Lyons tea shop, where I signed amateur for Arsenal.
‘I continued to play for Clapton and Arsenal, and signed professional in 1930 — on my twentieth birthday.
But I still had doubts about giving up my job at Lloyds insurance firm, so for another year (they were yearly contracts then) I was allowed to keep the job, training two nights a week and playing in the reserves.
At the end of the season Chapman called me in and said it was time for me to decide one way or the other.
I decided to go full-time with Arsenal.’
In the 1932 final Male was at left-half, while Bob John took an unfamiliar place at outside-right, Bastin moving inside to take James's place.
After eleven minutes it looked as though the changes would work, when John headed into the net from a centre by Hulme.
Throughout the first half Arsenal had most of the play, and Newcastle were held, until a cross from Arsenal's goal line caught out the defenders and United's Allen, unmarked, headed home.
The most controversial goal ever seen at Wembley had been scored.
Whether the ball was over the line before it was crossed by the Newcastle inside-right, Richardson, remained a matter for argument for years after.
George Male is adamant: ‘The ball was over.
I was there.
I saw it,’ and Chapman backed his players' view: ‘I could not see clearly from my position, but Arsenal, almost to a man, stopped playing and I do not think they would have done that unless they had been satisfied that the ball had been out of play,’he told the Sunday Express.
Photographs later showed that the ball had been dead before it was centred.
Typically, Chapman did not blame the referee for standing by  his decision to allow the goal.
At half-time he tried to encourage his players by reshuffling his forwards, but they never regained their form.
Another goal by Newcastle completed Arsenal's fall between the two stools of Cup and League, and gave United the distinction of being the first team to win a Cup final after being a goal down.
Rumours that the Football Association had ordered a replay made it necessary for secretary Sir Frederick Wall to issue a statement confirming the result.
Chapman made no excuses —‘I say frankly there are none,— and agreed that Newcastle deserved to win because of their superiority in the second half.
He could not but point out, however, that James's absence had given Newcastle added confidence.
And he defended his players.
Asked why Hulme, with an open goal before him, did not move up further to be certain of his target before shooting, he answered that the man on the field did not have as clear a view of the situation around him as did the spectator and was not always aware of how much time he had for his moves.
In view of the circumstances of his team's downfall, perhaps the most ironic touch about the final was that Chapman had said in the Sunday Express a week before the game: ‘I know nothing of the art of clairvoyance, but I should feel happier if someone would foretell me the vital incident which is almost sure to decide the match.
It is usually something trivial, a little human error which is so  forgivable in all the excitement of the occasion, which settles it.’
Despite the double disappointment of 1932 Chapman decided against a large-scale restructuring of the side.
True, the team was not getting any younger — the average age was approaching thirty — but the manager was a past master at recharging faltering spirits, and in an emergency there was always the strong reserve force to call on.
Only one major adjustment was needed, to replace the captain, Tom Parker, who was nearing the end of his playing days.
Chapman's solution was inspired: to turn wing-half George Male into the new right-back.
The full-back partnership of Male and Hapgood flowered into one of the most effective in the history of the game, appearing regularly for England in the 1930s.
Tom Parker  left to manage Norwich, and in later years became assistant manager of his original club, Southampton.
Bob Wall says of him:
‘Tom was built in the substantial mould of the pre-war fullbacks.
He was strong and his resources of stamina enabled him to play just as forcefully in the final ten minutes of a game as in the first ten.
‘I think what appealed to everyone about Tom was his utter reliability.
Somehow he always seemed to give a thoroughly professional performance — quiet, controlled and extremely efficient.’
Arsenal started the 1932–3 season as if determined to erase the unhappy memories of the previous spring.
A 9–2 win over Sheffield United on Christmas Eve gave them the League leadership.
On their way to the top the Gunners, in their new red and white shirts, had given the crowd plenty of thrills, including a classic contest at Villa Park where they were beaten 5–3 after twice being in the lead, and a 3–3 draw at home to Derby in which Roberts twice headed into his own net.
But over-confidence took a hold after the leadership was attained, points were dropped, and when Arsenal were drawn away to Walsall, of the Third Division North, in the Cup, Chapman himself fell victim.
With such lowly opposition he saw no cause for worry in the injured Hapgood, the off-form Hulme and the ‘flu invalids John, Lambert and Coleman.
Unfamiliar names from the reserves appeared in the line-up on 14 January — Tommy Black at left-back, Norman Sidey at left-half, Billy Warnes at outside-right and Charlie Walsh at centre-forward.
Only Sidey had ever played in the first team.
To Chapman's horror, Arsenal were a goal down fifteen minutes from the interval, to deafening cheers from the home supporters that could be heard for miles around.
The first of the great giant-killing acts was in progress.
Arsenal experienced some fierce tackles, but the most crucial came from one of their own men, Tommy Black, who was booked for a foul — in the penalty area.
The offence was the result of a bitter feud between Black and a Walsall forward.
As Cliff Bastin later recalled: ‘Relations between these two had gradually been becoming more and more strained, until it ultimately  came to a point at which the question was which of them would be the first to vent his feelings on the other.
Unfortunately for us, it was our man.’
The penalty gave Walsall their famous 2–0 win and Chapman, swallowing his pride, went into their dressing-room after the game to congratulate them.
‘Never have I seen Herbert Chapman look so miserably unhappy,’ says Bastin.
‘He made a brave, desperate, but unavailing effort to cheer us all up.
‘Never mind, boys,’ he said, ‘these things do happen.’
But we were all inconsolable, and so, for that matter, was he.
I think he felt the blow more than any of us.
Here was the team which he had come to when it was struggling pathetically at the bottom of the First Division; the team which he had made one of the greatest in the history of football, beaten by a fifth-rate side.
Napoleon must have felt like that in Russia, 120 years before.’
The purge was quick to follow.
Chapman set high standards of behaviour on the field and Black's foul was unforgivable.
He was banned from Highbury, then transferred to Plymouth.
Walsh was transferred to Brentford and Warnes to Norwich.
Only Sidey remained as reserve.
It was a reaction reminiscent of that following Huddersfield's stormy League encounter with Notts County ten years before, when Chapman transferred the suspended Islip.
On the Sunday after the Walsall débacle, Alex James telephoned his manager to offer his condolences.
Chapman was painfully aware that he had underestimated the task at Walsall.
The only consolation was that Newcastle and Sheffield Wednesday, whom he had predicted would still be in the Cup along with Arsenal, had also fallen at the first hurdle to lesser teams.
He put on a brave face to Sunday Express readers: ‘I hope it will be believed that the Arsenal can take a licking as well as any other club.
It is true that it was a dreadful blow, and that we were bitterly disappointed, but we offer no excuses.
There were none.’
Besides, it was not the first disappointment.
‘Could anything be worse than to be beaten in two Cup finals?’
For decades after, Walsall remained the famous name in giant-killing folklore, a kind of perverse tribute to Arsenal's greatness, but with other, more recent, spectacular Cup exits, notably that of  Leeds United at the hands of Colchester in 1971, the Walsall ghost may finally have been laid to rest.
Arsenal's poor performances in January 1933 sparked off a minor panic among supporters, and Chapman was even called upon to deny the widespread rumour that the new West Stand was to be dismantled and re-erected at Tottenham, the ultimate ignominy.
But the Cup defeat brought out the team's fighting qualities, and a resurgence took them to the League Championship with 58 points, four ahead of Aston Villa, and with 118 goals.
At the celebration banquet, Chapman pondered, as ever, on how to keep Arsenal on top, and looked forward to another championship the following year.
THE HIGHBURY FAMILY
The French boxer Georges Carpentier made his name by winning the world heavyweight title in 1914 at the age of twenty.
Herbert Chapman saw the key to the boxer's success in the relationship with his manager Descamps, a relationship not of boss and worker, but of partners, combining managerial guidance with sporting skills in a common cause.
Chapman always admired this partnership, based, he believed, on mutual respect and understanding, and liked to view his own position at Highbury in the light of it.
For although his authority was supreme, he preferred to regard himself not as a dictator but as a partner, acting together with directors, players and everyone else in the club in a common purpose.
He was the first football manager to appreciate the importance of such harmony and to put it into effect.
It was a lesson learned from hard experience at other clubs, and one clearly illustrated by Arsenal's own past, in the troubled days before Chapman took over.
He believed that ‘a club should be like a big family, with all members of it sticking and pulling together under one head’.
His philosophy of management was neatly summed up in his reply when asked what he would do if he were a referee, a prospect he likened to being ‘thrown to the lions’:
‘It is not good that one should seek to display authority by adopting an aggressive attitude.
My aim would be to fit myself into the game unobtrusively…
But there would never be any doubt about my firmness and authority.’
While he believed that football had grown too complex to be a mere ‘director's hobby’, Chapman set out to foster harmonious relations at the very top, by acting in a spirit of co-operation with his directors, keeping them fully informed of team matters, and    taking their suggestions into account.
In a later age the policy was taken up at Manchester United by Sir Matt Busby, who wrote: ‘Look at the top when analysing clubs who have lasting success and there you will find the original cause of the happy effect.
There was never a club with an unhappy chairman and an unhappy board that achieved lasting success at anything.’
With his players, Chapman's aim was to inspire confidence in themselves and a sense of loyalty to the club.
The weekly team talks improved their motivation and heightened their involvement, and weekly rounds of golf helped them to relax.
‘Get them out golfing and they'll forget all their troubles’ was his maxim.
He set great store by what he regarded as the dignity of the athlete, treating his players as human beings instead of mere paid servants, which was how most other players were regarded elsewhere.
He wanted footballers to have a respectable place in society, breaking away from their traditional cloth-cap image, and expected his own players to adopt respectable standards of dress and behaviour.
They were to be worthy members of the Arsenal family off the field as well as on.
Younger players in particular were expected to be clean-living.
‘Do you smoke or drink?’ was the first question Chapman asked the seventeen-year-old Eddie Hapgood.
Even among senior players, outside pursuits were tolerated only so long as they did not affect a player's performance or make football of secondary importance to him.
The ‘temptations’ of the jazz era in London's West End, especially to Cup finalists, were a real danger, and Chapman constantly reminded his players that ‘they only count as long as they retain their form on the field’.
A source of worry in this respect was Alex James, with his taste for night clubs, but it never seemed to affect his game to any great extent.
Looking to his players' financial welfare, Chapman got the go-ahead from the League to launch a savings scheme whereby £ 1 or so from each man's wages was kept in the Arsenal ‘bank’ to earn 6 per cent interest, the scheme covering junior players as well.
It was a wise move at a time of economic depression, when a player could earn £8 a week at most in the winter and £6 in summer.
The scheme was scrapped when the maximum wage was abolished, in more inflationary times, thirty years later.
Chapman insisted, too, that his players should have decent club conditions, and the Highbury dressing-rooms were rated the best in the country at a time when most clubs were content to provide only the most spartan of facilities for changing and cleaning.
George Male remembers:
‘I was most impressed with club conditions at Highbury in those days.
No detail was overlooked in making changing-rooms clean, comfortable and convenient, especially where players’ feet were concerned.
For instance, the commonly-used coconut matting got muddy very quickly after a game and was hard to clean.
So it was done away with and another material substituted that could be washed down every day.
The floor was heated too.
‘We noticed the difference when we visited away grounds.
Aston Villa's changing-rooms were the next best to Arsenal's, but most others were pretty bad.
At Leicester, for instance, the changing benches, bath and lavatory were all in the same room.’
Matching the model club conditions in its advanced thinking was the first-class training headed by Chapman's right-hand man Tom Whittaker.
Whittaker, who grew up in Newcastle, joined Arsenal as a wing-half in 1919, later becoming a full-back, but a knee injury while on an FA tour of Australia finished his playing career.
He became assistant to Arsenal chief trainer George Hardy, and set about making a special study of anatomy, massage and electrical treatment.
By 1925 Whittaker had become an expert in his field and Chapman was immediately impressed by his knowledge of football injuries.
Hardy, in contrast, with his traditional ‘sponge and bucket’ approach to treatment, was not the man for Chapman, who wanted an up-to-date training and medical department that could deal with injuries quickly and effectively.
When, during a home game in February 1927, Hardy shouted from the touchline to a player to move up-field, Chapman chose to regard it as a breach of his authority and arranged for Hardy to move to Tottenham, where a vacancy had conveniently arisen.
He called Whittaker to his office the following Monday morning and made him chief trainer, waving aside protests of inexperience and of  indignation at Hardy's sacking.
Under Whittaker sports medicine at Highbury acquired a fame that has become something of a tradition.
With a combination of every kind of scientific equipment and a psychological ‘mind over matter’ approach, he got players fit again in a fraction of the time it took other trainers.
In the 1930s top personalities from the wider sporting world took their bruises and broken bones to Highbury.
And they still do.
As Cliff Bastin has said, ‘Tom's healing powers were truly phenomenal.
People from all walks of life came to Arsenal Stadium for treatment under his magic hands.
One was Bernard Gadney, the famous rugby international.
He came down to Highbury on crutches, so grave was the extent of his injury.
Some of the most eminent surgeons in London had assured him that his playing days were over.
He came to Tom as a last, desperate resort.
The following year he was captain of the England rugby team…
‘Men who, under any other pair of hands, would have remained on the injured list for three or four weeks, Tom would have fit again in three or four days…
‘Without Chapman it is more than probable that his great natural gifts would never have achieved realization.’
Chapman said of Whittaker: ‘If trainers were transferred like players his fee would be beyond price.’
Whittaker got the recognition he deserved when he was invited to accompany the England team to Canada in 1931.
Such was the enthusiasm Tom Whittaker inspired that players willingly trained five days a week, which was not then the fashion.
Training was geared more to general fitness than particular skills, and centred on running and skipping to improve speed and stamina.
It was not until the 1950s that greater attention was paid to ball control, and weight training was introduced to improve physical strength.
In the 1930s, training at Highbury consisted mainly of laps round the field, with assistant trainer Billy Milne or Tom Whittaker himself looking on — and using the occasion away from the treatment room to have a quiet smoke.
But the amount of training was not laid down.
As George Male explains: ‘Each  player knew how much training he was capable of, and did it.
After all, it was our job to be fit if we wanted to keep our place in the team.
And Tom Whittaker realized that — he didn't have to tell us what to do.
If Alex James just ran up and down the pitch a couple of times and said, ‘Right, that's my lot for today’, Whittaker knew the reason he couldn't do any more was because his legs were covered in bruises, as they frequently were.
But if anyone wasn't pulling his weight, Herbert Chapman soon got to know about it.’
As well as the basic running, experiments were tried with more mechanical devices.
Shortly before the 1927 Cup final, a series of bars with a football tied to them was installed in the St John's College training ground adjacent to the club, so that players could practise kicking at the bars and trapping the ball as it rebounded at awkward angles.
It sharpened body swerve, movement and anticipation, and led to an immediate improvement in results.
Another new technique was ‘head tennis’, in which equal sides of six or seven players used their heads as racquets.
With Whittaker as trainer, it was no surprise that Arsenal players established a reputation as the fittest in the country.
The only major variation in training was during the first ten days before a new season, when players were not allowed to kick a ball.
Instead, to strengthen leg muscles after the long summer break, daily walks along the streets of Islington, dressed in ordinary clothes, were the practice, the distance being increased each day.
To relieve tensions in the week before a Cup tie, players were usually taken to Brighton, where the routine was golf on Monday morning, followed by sea-water baths, more golf, training sessions at Brighton FC's ground and (compulsory) cinema visits in the evenings.
Acutely aware of the sensitivities of his players and the pressures they faced, Chapman's long-standing hatred of barracking from the crowd became even more pronounced at Arsenal.
He described criticism of Alex James in his first weeks with the club as ‘one of the meanest things I have ever known’ because it was made before James had time to adjust to the midfield linking role.
This bitter hatred of barracking was reinforced by an incident in his office.
He recalled: ‘It was signing on time.
A youth came into the office, and I put the form before him to sign.
To my amazement he covered his face with his hands and burst into tears.
‘I'm no use to anyone in football and I had better get out,’ he said.
‘The crowd are always getting at me…
I hope I shall never kick a ball again.’
Yet, at twenty, he was a player of the highest promise.
I knew that he had been barracked at times, but I did not realize that he was so sensitive…
I persuaded him to re-sign.’
After a successful return the crowd again got at the youth and Chapman decided to let him go, ‘though it meant sacrificing a player who, I was convinced, had exceptional possibilities of development’.
He proposed that barrackers should be thrown out of the ground if they did not respond to an appeal for fairness over the loudspeaker.
Chapman regarded it as his prerogative to deal with players who were not measuring up, and he could be ruthless if he thought they justified it, as in his treatment of Walsh and Black after the Walsall débacle.
On one occasion he called a player into his office, took his hat from the hat-stand and threw it on the floor.
‘Call yourself a footballer?’ he cried.
‘Why, you couldn't even kick that.’
And, of course, the player dared not!
Then there was the time Joe Hulme asked if he could stay for the weekend in his native Lancashire after an away match at Bolton.
Chapman said it would depend on how well he did on the Saturday.
Hulme scored twice in a handsome win and confidently expected his leave to be granted.
‘What about the three goals you missed?’ was Chapman's response.
Hulme didn't get his weekend, and was ordered to train for a third team match the following Wednesday.
Such action was not taken out of spite.
Chapman's handling of players was based on a calculated appraisal of each man's temperament, and in Hulme's case he obviously considered that a sharp rebuff and a spell in the third team would boost his determination to improve his game.
With another player it could have been different — as it was with George Male:
‘We had played Everton away,’ Male recalls, ‘and were on our way to the station after the game — with a police motorbike escort.
So we didn't have to go all the way to Lime Street, Liverpool, Chapman, with his characteristic attention to such details, had arranged for the train to make a special stop at Edgehill Station, to give us a better chance of getting home the same night.
‘As it happened, the kick-off was late — there was no fixed time then — and we were hard-pressed even to get to Edgehill in time for our train home, so in the rush we put our coats on over our playing kit for the journey.
‘We made it, and Chapman and I were the last on to the train.
Suddenly, as we were boarding, he tugged me by the sleeve and said quietly: ‘You'd better pull your socks up, or you'll be playing for your place.’
‘I believe he had been planning that warning for some time.
I suppose he thought I was not giving of my best, and as I was known as a rather shy, reserved sort, he had decided that a quiet word at an informal moment would be the best approach.
And I think it did me good.’
Chapman's accurate assessment of Male's qualities was shown too when he switched him from wing-half to full-back.
He turned on his considerable persuasive powers to convince the player not merely that the full-back position was right for him but that he would be the best full-back in the country.
Similarly, he saw that Bastin should move to outside-from inside-left because there was less danger that the youngster would be knocked about on the wing.
But when he called him into his office he didn't mention this as a reason for the change.
Instead, he told Bastin he was a natural winger.
He ‘possessed an almost hypnotic power of convincing.
By the time I left his office, I felt as if I had been an established outside-left for years,’ Bastin later recalled.
‘A shrewd student of character’, he would ‘treat each person as an individual, possessed of his own peculiar strengths and weaknesses.’
In any case, Chapman considered that a player should not regard his position as fixed, believing that ‘adaptability should be the aim of every footballer’.
As an example of Chapman's passionate concern for his team's welfare, Bastin tells the story of the coach journey to Leeds Station after the Cup semi-final of 1930.
‘Our coach was caught in the  centre of an enormous traffic jam, and it looked as if we would be lucky to get to the station only an hour or so behind schedule.
This wasn't good enough for Mr Chapman.
He stuck his head out of one of the windows of the coach, and roared protests at the policemen who were desperately trying to cope with the traffic confusion.
He continued to do this at frequent intervals, much to the detriment of his imposing and hitherto impeccable black Homburg hat.
‘Eventually, Mr Chapman's efforts brought their reward.
Our coach was escorted through the traffic by a score of motor-cycle policemen: and we caught our train.’
Although Chapman was, as Carruthers of the Daily Mail put it, ‘a hard and exacting master’, his psychological approach, his obvious understanding of each player's ability and temperament and his general good humour earned respect and loyalty.
He was not a ‘blustering bully’, says Cliff Bastin.
‘Chapman, who gave few words of praise and fewer of blame, inspired awe and respect, rather than fear.
He had complete command of us all.’
His régime would now be regarded as a kind of benevolent paternalism, and most players today would be unlikely to tolerate some of his harsher reactions.
But Chapman's players accepted it, and the mass unemployment of the 1930s is usually pointed to as an explanation for this.
As Bob Wall has noted:
‘This fear of losing one's job manifested itself when the new contracts were being considered around April 1 each year.
At that time of the season all the players, even the stars, were looking into the assistant secretary's office almost every day, asking if there was any news of their contracts.
All of them carried an innate fear of not being offered fresh terms for the following season.’
But perhaps there is a deeper explanation for acceptance of Chapman's firm rule, one rooted in the social conditions of the time.
As George Male puts it:
‘Times were hard for many people.
Most of us were brought up to accept discipline, and to discipline ourselves.
We didn't have much, so we learned to make the most of what we did have, and if a man was lucky enough to have a job he put everything into it.
As a footballer you had a regular wage and people looked up to you.
No player was going to let that go.’
At a time when a skilled worker earned about £2 a week, a footballer could earn up to £8.
And Male confirms: ‘There was certainly big competition for places.
I remember playing in a reserve game with six internationals at Coventry before a 25,000 crowd.’
The only player who was prepared to argue with Chapman was Alex James.
When he came to Arsenal, James told Chapman in no uncertain terms that he didn't like his plan to make him a scheming inside-forward.
He would question aspects of training and tactics, and in May 1931 refused to re-sign.
But Chapman accepted that the short, stocky James was one of football's great characters, an outstanding individualist who liked to do things his own way, like living it up at West End night clubs until the early hours.
Even on the field he had his own personal trademark — flapping shirt sleeves and long, baggy shorts, which served both as a landmark for his colleagues and to help keep out the cold he felt so badly.
And it was the long shorts that allowed him to wear waist-to-ankle underpants during a game without anyone noticing.
Cliff Bastin said of his celebrated partner: ‘The first thing that struck me about Alex was his terrific self-confidence.
Nobody had greater faith in the qualities of Alex James than Alex James himself — not even Herbert Chapman, and that is saying something.’
And Bob Wall says of him: ‘I think he took a mischievous delight in baiting Herbert Chapman.
Alex always was something of a rebel at heart…
Chapman gave Alex far more  latitude than any other player.
He was shrewd enough to appreciate that here was someone who needed to be coaxed, not coerced.
... Alex loved a verbal fight…but he was generally canny enough not to go too far.
He knew that, ultimately, he had to toe the official line because, like any other player, he couldn't afford to be put on the dole.’
Chapman himself was not averse to playing a trick or two on his lively player, like the time he arranged a winter ‘cruise’ for him.
James turned up at the docks expecting a luxury liner, only to find a cargo ship and a deck-hand's job waiting for him.
When the ‘cruise’ to Bordeaux was over he was good-humoured enough to laugh at the joke with the rest of Highbury.
Notable among other characters in the Highbury family of the  early 1930s were goalkeeper Frank Moss, renowned for his physical courage against charging centre-forwards, Tom Parker with his calm, almost placid professionalism, Eddie Hapgood, the fitness fanatic, the phlegmatic Cliff Bastin and the jocular Joe Hulme.
David Jack was not only an elegant inside-forward, he was an elegant man, always impeccably dressed, his main weakness being cigarettes.
As writer of a weekly newspaper column, he was allowed his own room in hotels, and from the corridor could be heard above the typewriter coughing away as he smoked one cigarette after another.
In his early days at Highbury he was painfully aware of being labelled the first £10,000 footballer.
His first game for Arsenal was a nightmare, and before the 1930 Cup final he told Chapman how anxious he was Arsenal should win, so he would justify his record fee.
But Chapman said later: ‘If we had lost at Wembley, my opinion of Jack and his value to the Arsenal would not have changed in the slightest.
I should still have thought that in securing him from Bolton Wanderers I had made the best bargain of my life.’
Many and varied then were the personalities behind Arsenal's phenomenal success, and studying them constantly was the tireless brain of soccer's Napoleon, forever working out how to get the best from each of his players.
It was a human approach to football management in stark contrast to conditions beyond the boundaries of Arsenal Stadium.
Chapman's mind worked day and night on motivating not only his players but everyone involved with the club, on keeping Arsenal in the public eye, on planning their victories, and on improving the game in general.
It was typical of his thorough approach that after Arsenal won 7–1 at Wolverhampton, he spent nearly two hours at the team talk analysing what led up to Wolves’ one goal, much to the dismay of the players, who expected only a brief meeting after such a handsome win.
As George Male points out: ‘It was done to foil any over-confidence we may have had for the next game, for he knew the opposition would go all out against us after our big win.
He reminded us that if we hadn't scored at Wolves we would have lost the game.
Today's players would laugh at such a fuss.’
So seriously analytical was Chapman's mind that he would rarely comment on a match until several days later, after he had studied every move.
Present Arsenal chairman Denis Hill-Wood says: ‘If we asked him after a game what he thought of so-and-so's performance he would say, ‘Ask me on Monday.’
He would only give considered opinions.
His approach to everything was meticulous, and his decisions were usually the right ones.
Even now, Bob Wall and I, when thinking over a problem, ask ourselves, ‘What would Herbert Chapman have done?’
Perhaps, as Cliff Bastin remarked, ‘He should have been prime minister.’
THE LAST CAMPAIGN
Arsenal, having won the Cup and two Championships in four years, could not go on for much longer with the same team, and in 1933 Chapman's major concern was to find replacements to keep the club on top.
As successor to David Jack, he earmarked Ray Bowden, Plymouth Argyle's stylish winger — on the recommendation of Jack's father, who was still Argyle's manager.
At first Bowden was unwilling to go to London, but he changed his mind after an assurance that he would be free to return to Devon to attend to his business affairs when necessary.
Chapman caught the midnight train to Plymouth and the deal was settled.
Later he went to Torquay to sign the speedy winger Ralph Birkett as eventual successor to Hulme.
When the veteran Lambert moved to Fulham in October 1933 Chapman launched a fresh offensive to sign Jimmy Dunne from Sheffield United.
This time he succeeded, and the striker came to Arsenal for £8,000.
The deal was agreed on a Friday night and Dunne was rushed to London to make his début against  Middlesbrough the next day.
Replacements were also needed for wing-halves Jones and John, and Chapman opened negotiations for Bradford's Jack Crayston, a long-throw expert, smart dresser and fitness fanatic, and for ex-miner Wilt Copping of Leeds United.
League performances recovered from early-season reverses to wrest the leadership from newly-promoted Spurs by the New Year, Arsenal leading by four points.
Despite the chill he caught on New Year's Day 1934 while watching a game at Bury, Chapman decided to go to Sheffield the next day to watch the Wednesday, Arsenal's next opponents at Highbury.
He had studied closely the threat posed by a reorganized Wednesday side but   insisted that his own presence at Sheffield would be of psychological value to Arsenal on the Saturday.
When he carne back from what was to be his last visit to the city of his youth his high temperature had worsened and he was advised to rest by the club doctor.
But the reserves were playing next day at Guildford: an opportunity to see them play was too good to miss.
Returning from Guildford to his Hendon home, he had finally to accept his deteriorating condition.
He went to bed, but it was too late — pneumonia had set in.
His family were encouraged by signs of a recovery on Friday, but at three o'clock the next morning, 6 January, 1934, two weeks short of his fifty-sixth birthday, Herbert Chapman died.
The news was received at Highbury with shock and disbelief.
No one had realized the seriousness of the illness, and the players only heard about his death from newspaper billboards on their way to the ground.
George Male was walking to Upton Park tube station when he saw the bill: ‘Herbert Chapman Dead.’
’ That was the first I knew about it,’he recalls.
‘I couldn't believe it.’
At the same time, in Huddersfield, Chapman's former colleague Dick Parker, who had heard that the Arsenal manager was ill, was on his way to the Leeds Road ground.
‘As I turned the corner I saw the flag flying at half-mast and the meaning of it came like a flash.’
A minute's silence was observed before the afternoon kick-off, after which a stunned Arsenal managed to hold Wednesday to a draw.
The funeral four days later befitted an emperor.
In cold January weather a crowd of 2,000, kept on the pavement by a police cordon, lined the streets to watch the cortège, draped in the imperial splendour of red and white, move from the Chapmans' home in Haslemere Avenue to Hendon Parish Church.
Cars, coaches and lorries brought more than 240 wreaths, most in red and white, many of them from abroad, and some in the shape of a football pitch.
Inside the church was a congregation of 800, including many representatives from British and foreign football organizations, but none were more moved than the players and officials of the club Herbert Chapman had brought to greatness.
The service was conducted by the vicar and Chapman's friend, the Reverend Norman Boyd, who spoke of the sportsmanship of  this ‘outstanding personality of the football world’.
‘Football,’ he said, ‘is a game.
And in a game nothing matters so much as the spirit in which it is played.
The dangers of professionalism are obvious, and against them Herbert Chapman steadfastly set his face…victory can be purchased at too great a price.
In standing out for true sportsmanship on the field Mr Chapman, loyally backed by his players, set a standard which has raised the sport he loved to the highest level, and has won for him the gratitude of sportsmen the world over.’
The parish magazine later recorded that the crowds outside the church kept within ‘the bounds of reverent remembrance’ for the burial, but the Reverend A. Hunt Cooke, Chapman's young acquaintance at St Mary's, remembers the scene as a ‘shocking affair’.
‘There were people climbing all over the graves with cameras.
Mr Chapman would not have approved.’
The magazine, acknowledging Chapman's faithful work at the church, also paid tribute to his character and standing in the football world.
‘At St Mary's he will long be remembered for his quiet, firm, and kindly but unassuming manner, apart from his service as a sidesman and his reputation in the country…
He was a true friend to sport, and cared no less for the manner in which success was achieved than for success itself.
His team played splendid football, as clean as it was clever.’
THE LEGACY
The results he achieved in his lifetime won Chapman universal acclaim, lifting the obscurity surrounding the office of football manager.
But a greater tribute to his genius were the results that continued to be achieved after his death by the two clubs he had put on such solid foundations.
After completing their Championship hat-trick in 1926 Huddersfield remained a strong League side for another ten years, while making a further three appearances in the Cup final.
But it was Arsenal, where Chapman had spent his longest period as manager, who held the limelight in the last years of peace.
‘Arsenal always win something’ went the saying after they won the Cup for the second time in 1936.
The year before they had taken the League title for the third time running, becoming the second, and last, club to do the hat-trick, after a season that saw Highbury's record crowd — 73,295 for the game against Sunderland in March 1935.
Director and journalist George Allison kept the honours coming as manager, supported by Tom Whittaker and assistant manager Joe Shaw.
Allison completed negotiations, begun by Chapman, for Crayston and Copping, but his most illustrious buy was Ted Drake from Southampton in May 1934.
Dunne, Chapman's last attempt to find a successor to Lambert, proved to be past his best, but Drake more than made up for lost time, scoring 42 League goals in 1934–5, a club record for a single season.
His most famous scoring feat was all seven goals in the 7–1 win at Aston Villa in December 1935.
With Alex James continuing in midfield, Arsenal carried all before them, but the day of reckoning came in the summer of 1937 when James retired.
The loss of such a man at most other clubs   would have spelt disaster, but Chapman had foreseen the danger and the solid foundations he had built at the club enabled Arsenal to win another League Championship the following year.
Bryn Jones was bought from Wolves as James's successor in 1938 but war intervened to cut short his career.
Tom Whittaker took over as manager after the war, adding two Championships and two Wembley appearances — one successful — to the honours list.
He was the last manager with first-hand experience of Chapman's methods and after he died in 1956 there set in the lean period which lasted until 1970.
It says much for the resilience of the club, however, that for most of this period a healthy League position was held (lowest finishing place was fourteenth in 1966) and Chapman would be proud to know that, nearly fifty years after his death, Arsenal are the longest surviving member of the First Division.
Arsenal's tours abroad were eagerly awaited on the Continent throughout the 1930s.
The series with Racing Club de Pan-s whetted the appetite for overseas adventures, and Arsenal soon became the most widely known and respected club in the world, a model for emerging soccer nations.
The Gunners' services were regularly sought by the England selectors, and between April 1933 and November 1948 the England side for full internationals always included at least one Arsenal man.
In November 1934 the record was set when seven Arsenal players were in the side that met Italy at Highbury.
Chapman's influence on the subsequent development of football is all-pervading.
Managers are more than ever in the public eye; the scientific approach, in tactics, medical treatment, ground improvements, is commonplace; floodlighting, numbered players, the ten-yard semi-circle are taken for granted.
And by creating a successful team in the South, he wrested the dominance of the League from the northern clubs, putting the competition on a more truly national basis.
No one man changed football more in this century than the would-be colliery official who drifted by chance into soccer management.
Yet, because of a prevailing conservatism among the sport's administrators, most of these changes took at least twenty years to come about.
And though at Arsenal the manager continued in the  role of club supremo cast by Chapman, elsewhere — with few exceptions — it was still the directors who had general control.
Major Buckley had a colourful career as manager of Wolves in the 1930s, but it was not until Sir Matt Busby's brilliant reign at Manchester United that the commanding role of manager after Chapman's example was firmly taken up outside the bounds of Highbury.
Sir Matt writes of the time he became United's manager, in 1945:
‘In those days the manager had the title and usually everybody else made the decisions.
Directors chipped in with their ideas of picking a team, and niggled when, umpteen people having poked their noses and opinions in, a team emerged and inevitably differed from their several choices.’
More serious was the decline in English football in the years after Chapman's death.
Chapman is often condemned as the instigator of this decline: he ‘invented’ the stopper centre-half, it is said, and so fathered the growth of negative, defensive football.
Yet his team could not fairly be described as negative.
One of its surviving members, Joe Hulme, wrote in the Arsenal programme in 1974:
‘How I long for a return to wingers, all-out attack — and entertainment.’
And he condemned destructive, point-saving tactics, the very tactics so mistakenly attributed to his former manager.
The fault lay with other clubs who responded to the devastating effectiveness of Arsenal's attack merely by turning their centre-halves into stoppers, while failing to grasp that a sound defence was only the springboard to attack and not an end in itself.
They over.
looked the subtle balance effected by the genius of James.
But even if they did not, the style demanded players of exceptional calibre — who were becoming increasingly rare — and a manager capable of moulding them into an effective outfit; in this no one measured up to Chapman.
The future was glimpsed by Carruthers of the Daily Mail,who wrote of Arsenal after their 1933 Championship:
‘If it were thought that other clubs would try to copy them, their example might, I am afraid, be unfortunate.
There is only one Arsenal today, and I cannot conceive another simply because no other club have players fitted to carry on the same ideas.’
The consequences were indeed unfortunate.
Negative football spread as more clubs switched to defensive centre-halves at the expense of attack.
Yet Arsenal, accused of being responsible for this perversion of their own style, kept their place among the goal-scoring vanguard despite the tightening of defences everywhere.
Former Arsenal players, notably Joe Mercer and, today, Terry Neill, have carried on their taste for forward play into the realms of management.
While English football, bereft of Chapman's innovating spirit, persisted in its negative outlook, Continental countries developed the ‘classical’ Arsenal style with that enthusiasm Chapman so often warned about.
His warnings were not finally heeded until 1953 when England fell to the Hungarians at Wembley.
Once Chapman had gone there was no one with his dynamism and far-sightedness to carry on where he left off.
‘It remains to be seen whether or not there will be disciples who will carry on his work of popularizing football, making it attractive to the shilling-paying public,’ commented The Times in its obituary.
It was to be a long time before any disciples appeared to revitalize the game, and even after Busby, Shankly, Clough and others the cry still goes up (not always reasonably) that football is too negative.
Yet Chapman had his answer for the pessimists: if the game was becoming more defensive it was up to managers and players to do something about it.
‘Defence has been perfected to a remarkable degree,’ he said, ‘and I have heard it suggested that through its further development football may be brought to a state of stalemate…it will be a sorry reflection on forwards if they have not the intelligence, the inventiveness to devise means by which they can carry their attack to a successful end.’
Huddersfield's Clem Stephenson had the ability to beat the offside trap of the old-style full-backs; that it was possible to beat the stopper Chapman showed by pointing to the example of Robert Gurney.
Gurney, who scored 205 goals in his fourteen years with Sunderland, worked out a way of drawing the centre-half with him while collecting the ball from the wing then suddenly laying it back to the centre for another forward.
All that was needed was skill combined  with imagination.
‘Insufficient regard is paid to the demands of the public.
Give them what they want and you will get their support even in these difficult times,’ was Chapman's eternal advice, and it still rings true.
Times have changed, but they are still difficult.
Pull Chapman forward to the 1980s and he would revel in the challenge.
For a confidence boost, all he need do would be to look back on his management days at Huddersfield, where the Town scaled the heights in defiance of the most adverse conditions.
‘In the face of what they have accomplished, no club should ever despair.’
He said that in the early 1930s, and he would say it again today.