

Part One: The tackle and the techniques
Tackle
In each chapter dealing with a species you will find I have recommended various types, sizes and strengths of rods, reels, lines, hooks and all other sundry items.
Here, I am going to discuss tackle in more depth in the hope that it will help you to choose the best.
Whatever I have recommended, you should always bear in mind that to a great degree tackle is a personal affair.
Guidelines can be laid out, but your own taste will decide what you will use, and this is especially true where rods are concerned, e.g. when long-range legering for all species other than carp and pike I favour a rod between 11ft and 11ft 6in. in length, a test-curve of a little over 1lb, with a fast-taper action.
Such a rod casts long and accurately; picks up a long line without maniacal exertion, and remains soft enough in the tip to retain the necessary shock-absorber effect.
Not many years ago I would have considered this rod as too stiff, robbing me of the enjoyment of feeling and seeing a good fish put a decent bend into it.
At that time I used an 11ft rod with a test-curve of ¾lb and an all-through, very supple action.
I argued continually with another angler who swore by 11ft, 1½lb test-curve rods with a poker-like action.
He referred to my rods as stepped-up fly rods, and his I called tent poles.
We both had a point but neither would concede to the other.
My argument was that he might as well use pit-props for his fishing, for he couldn't possibly gain any enjoyment from playing fish, or handling such a rod with no more than a 4lb line.
He replied that it didn't matter a damn about that as long as he got the fish on the bank.
We lost touch for a couple of years and then we met at the Coventry Specimen Group Stag Night and found that each of us had conceded to an extent and were now using almost identical rods.
I was using stiffer rods and he was using softer ones.
The point of the story is that when I was using softer rods and he favoured stiffer ones we both caught, relatively speaking, no fewer fish than we do today.
We are simply happier and more confident with our present choice of rod.
If you prefer a rod different to the one I have recommended; one which you use successfully and are happy and confident with, then stay with it until you feel like a change yourself.
My recommendations are no more than guide-lines based on my own judgment and personal preference.
Cheap reels are not worth a second thought.
You will have nothing but trouble with tangled and damaged lines, broken parts, and will never be able to cast and retrieve line with any efficiency.
The expensive reels are not expensive in the long term, but each model has its points of merit.
Some have more efficient clutches, some have better bale-arm mechanisms; better finishes or smoother gears.
Some have bale-arm rollers and skirted spools.
Some have wide spools which make for longer casting.
Consider all the pros and cons and choose accordingly.
But remember that the best reels, as in most things, are not cheap.
More than a decade ago you could have chosen the best nylon line from those manufactured as easily as sifting maggots from casters, there were so few good ones and so many bad ones.
Today, there are more good lines than bad, and the choice amounts to little more than personal preference.
The most important point to look for in a line — apart from the obvious one of reliability throughout its length — is suppleness.
The more supple a line the more  natural a bait will behave in the water.
Other considerations are the least diameter for a given breaking strain; anti-kink properties; elasticity and colour.
Most waters have dark bottoms, and a brown or tan line is most suitable.
Elasticity is important: I do not always prefer a line which stretches the least.
For short-line fishing I like to have a line with some stretch; it complements the shock-absorber effect of the rod.
For long-range fishing you can do without the  elasticity, for picking up a long length of line and planting a hook is difficult enough without any ‘give’.
You should bear in mind, too, that the lines with the least stretch are less supple than lines with a lot of stretch.
The answer here is to use the ‘stiff’ line on the reel, and a hook length of supple line.
Also, some lines sink faster than others, so choose one type for legering and another for float fishing.
It has always been a source of amazement to me that anglers who are prepared to pay upwards of £100 for a rod and reel moan plaintively about the price of perhaps the most important item of tackle: the hook.
Always inspect each hook closely before you use it; test it for breaking or bending; reduce or remove the barb where necessary, and work on it with a fine oil stone until it is as sharp as you can get it — this should not actually be necessary with the new chemically sharpened hooks.
Now that we have lead-free split-shot, which is more expensive than lead shot, more care goes into its manufacture and there should be few problems.
Floats should be inspected for good finish, secure rings and concentric shape.
Recommended shot capacity is usually wrong; a consequence of mass production.
Use a large landing net, somewhat larger than the size of fish you hope to catch.
How dreadful it would be if you hooked a big fish only to lose it through poking around with an inadequate net.
Micro-mesh nets are best, both for the welfare of the fish and your own good temper, for wide-mesh nets have a nasty habit of ensnaring leger weights and shot.
Keepnets too, should be large, not necessarily in length but in width.
Much of the damage caused by keepnets is due to most of them being too narrow, so that as the fish lashes its tail back and forth the mesh brushes the protective mucous off and gradually wears the fin away.
A wide net helps to prevent this happening and also allows the fish to turn round if they want to.
Better still, put them straight back, or, if you wish to retain the fish for a photo, use a keepsack.
A good tackle box is essential.
Look for one that allows good organisation of all your bits and pieces, and gives easy access to them.
It makes life a lot simpler.
Baskets for carrying your tackle box, reels, bait, flasks, sandwiches, etc., and for sitting on, are, I suppose, fine if you fish for only two or three hours at a stretch.
Much more and you are well on your way to back-ache and a good candidate for lumbago, not to mention being downright uncomfortable, and your fishing will suffer as a consequence.
Most pleasure anglers, especially regular night-anglers, use a rucksack to carry their gear and a bed-chair to sit or even lie on.
For shorter sessions or for a wandering style on rivers, a combination chair/rucksack, fold-up stool or chair, are better.
There are two types of rod hold-all.
The most common is the one with a large, single pocket for the rods and two or three smaller pockets for umbrella, rod-rests and bank-sticks.
The other type is the roll-all, which opens out to allow you to slot the rods and other items into small pockets stitched along the bottom with tape ties to hold them in place.
As the name suggests, you simply roll it up and strap it round.
The roll-all is kinder to rods, especially the rings, but if you are absent-minded like me, they can tax your patience.
I have an annoying habit of packing and then finding something I have overlooked, usually a rod-rest or bank-stick, which means having to undo three straps and unrolling the roll-all.
It may not sound much, but if it is raining and you are wet and tired, it becomes a big job.
With the hold-all you simply drop the item into the appropriate pocket and are away without delay.
Choose one that incorporates plastic tubes to protect your rods.
Disgorgers are a minor but very important piece of tackle.
For deeply hooked fish, the tubular, slotted type are best.
For larger hooks, a good pair of curved surgical forceps cannot be bettered.
You will also find them useful for other jobs that need a small locking clamp.
There are so many bite indicators for use when legering you would think there was something extremely complicated to the simple action of a fish pulling on the line.
There are some really weird contraptions which have more levers, joints, and other paraphernalia than a Swiss watch.
I have tried most of them, apart from the downright ridiculous ones, mainly from curiosity, but still find that a simple clip-on bobbin, or a good butt indicator, is best.
If you fish either of these in conjunction with an Optonic bite alarm, it makes for efficient, relaxing fishing.
A clip-on bobbin with a Betalight is used at night, with the Optonic of course.
For carp fishing at extreme long range, I use the needle-type, monkey-climb indicators, again with an Optonic.
I occasionally use a quiver-tip on stillwaters, but it is an indicator I find most valuable on rivers, except at those times when the fish are being very finicky, when I will touch-leger.
(See chapter ‘Touch Legering’, page 12.)
There will come a time when you will want to fish with two rods, which means you will have to buy another rod and reel.
Do not make the mistake of buying makes or models of tackle other than the ones you already have.
I know that buying additional tackle gives you the opportunity to try something different, but it is not a good idea.
When you have used a certain rod for any length of time you become accustomed to its ‘feel’.
Where once you were making a conscious effort to cast long and accurately and were aware of the amount of punch you needed to put into the strike, you will find that with experience you begin to do these things quite naturally.
If you buy a different second rod you will have to learn this all over again, but more important, when you are fishing with both rods you will never work with them instinctively.
Each time you pick one up you will be checking which rod it is and adjusting your actions to suit that particular rod.
Sometimes you have to strike very quickly, such as when fish are finicky and you have to respond to twitch bites.
In this case you have no time to check which rod you are striking with and it could lose you fish if you strike too hard with the stiffer rod and break off, or too gently with the softer rod and fail to sink the hook.
It is not quite so important to duplicate the reel, but it is still wise, if only for the fact that your spare spools are interchangeable on both reels.
Any angler who specialises in big fish always weighs his fish.
There is never any respect for an angler who says he ‘estimated’ the fish at such and such a weight, for his catches will always be regarded with suspicion, to say the least.
Anyhow, it is only natural that an angler specialising in better quality fish should  want to know exactly what they weigh.
For this you need a good spring balance, and most anglers, myself included, use a dial scale, which weighs up to about 30lb in 1oz divisions.
You can get a metric version if you wish, but despite the conversion of practically everything to metric, metric scales in fishing are as rare as rocking horse droppings.
Spring balances that weigh in excess of 30lb are available for those anglers who expect, or at least hope, to catch carp and pike heavier than 30lb.
Along with a spring balance you also need a weighing sling.
These are specially designed to cradle the fish securely in a comfortable position without wiping away a great deal of their protective mucous.
They are inexpensive and well worth buying to ensure fishes' welfare.
I have covered all the major items of tackle that warrant discussion, but before this chapter is concluded I think that a comparison of end tackles is worth looking at.
For most of my stillwater legering, except for carp, I favour a fixed paternoster rig.
I prefer a paternoster for several reasons, some of which are fairly obvious, such as long and accurate casting and the simple way it copes with soft mud and weed.
I also prefer it because I believe it is more sensitive than a link-leger and gives me a better chance of hooking fish.
There is a mistaken impression amongst many anglers that when a fish bites on a link-leger it pulls the line through the swivel.
This is only true when the fish has taken up all the slack of the link and has met considerable resistance from the lead.
In many instances, when a light lead is being used the fish will begin to move the lead before the line starts to run.
With a paternoster, the fish will move the line to the indicator before it feels the lead.
Whenever I have argued this point with other anglers they inevitably say that all you need to do is use a long link and a short hook-length when link-legering to obtain the same effect.
What they are saying, in effect, is change from a link-leger to a running paternoster, for whenever the lead is leading the hook it is a paternoster.
Match anglers favour a ‘paternoster’(as they call it) with a long hook length and a short bomb length, which, really, is a fixed link-leger.
The paternoster I use is the genuine article, which entails a long bomb length and a short hook length.
The match angler's fixed link-leger is less sensitive than a fixed paternoster as can be appreciated by studying Fig. 1.
The long hook length, however, of the fixed link-leger, is the best one to use when fish are feeding ‘on the drop’.
(For details of the hair-rig and bolt-rig, see the chapter on Carp.)
Touch Legering
There are a great many misconceptions about touch legering, stemming mainly from the conclusions drawn by anglers who have never tried it, or who have tried it and failed to catch fish.
Touch legering means, quite simply, that you hold the line and feel for bites instead of relying on some kind of visual indication.
Touch legering, like so many things worth doing, needs to be practised before you can expect to be proficient.
I would not expect an angler to hit, or even see, every bite he has on a swing-tip the first time he uses one.
Nor do I expect an angler to recognise every bite he feels the first time he tries touch legering.
After a while you learn to recognise the difference between a leaf brushing against the line and a fish gently mouthing the bait, just the same as you are now able to tell the difference between bites and false bites when your usual indicator moves.
Once you have mastered touch legering you will always be grateful you took the time and trouble to learn, for you will meet situations where, because of this experience, you are the only person catching fish on certain days when the fish are not biting boldly enough to give a good visual indication.
I have heard a lot of silly arguments from anglers who cannot be bothered to learn touch legering.
Their favourites are: ‘It's useless in winter when your fingers are numb with cold.’
‘I couldn't sit there all day holding the rod and feeling for only one or two bites, which is all you get on the water I fish,’ and, ‘I'd like to see anyone catch fish from my local cut when touch legering.’
Touch legering.
These arguments stem from ignorance and the mistaken impression that touch legering is advocated as the answer to all legering situations.
It is not, any more than the swing- and quiver-tip are not the answer to everything.
One thing is certain though; if I had to choose between touch legering and swing-tipping for all my fishing, the swing-tip would be second choice.
Yet some anglers think that the swing-tip is God's answer to all indicators.
The times when I see a swing-tip being used on a fast river, with the tip fully straightened, and therefore its usefulness cancelled out, is unbelievable.
There are three ways of touch legering.
One is to hook a loop of line pulled from between butt-ring and reel over your finger.
The second is to lightly grip this loop of line between finger and thumb, and the third is to hook the line over the index finger of the hand holding the rod (See Fig. 2).
I have tried them all and find that the first method suits me best.
You may favour a different way, but try them all and see.
Actually, my middle   finger is more sensitive than my index finger, so this is something else you must discover for yourself.
Ideally, when touch legering, the rod should be pointing directly at the bait, so that the line does not have to travel over any angles.
If this is not possible, as is so often the case when fishing a near bank swim, don't worry; you will still feel the bites at the same time you see the rod-tip move.
Touch legering is not simply just a good idea because it is a sensitive way of detecting bites; it can also be extremely useful when the fish need slack line after mouthing the bait.
If you are holding a loop of line from the reel, and you feel a bite, you can feed this loop to the fish until you know it is time to strike.
No mechanical indicator can tell you the right time to strike, at least in this situation, but your sense of touch can, once you have enough experience to know what you are feeling for.
When you decide to  practise , do not choose a difficult water, or difficult fish, where you are likely to have to wait a long time for a bite.
Choose an easy water, where the fish are not too big and therefore fairly easy; a place where you know you can get a lot of bites.
You can  practise on the bigger fish with all the variations of bites that go with them, after you gain some experience of the basics with smaller fish.
Finally, make sure the fish are feeding first by catching one or two with your usual indicator.
It is pointless to  practise touch legering if the fish are not biting.
Night Fishing
I am often asked why I go night fishing, and it is too easy to say it is because my chances of catching big fish are greatly increased at night.
I do not think they are; not in the night itself anyhow.
It would be more accurate to say I have caught more big fish in daylight than in darkness, but that a lot of my daylight fish came as a result of fishing all night.
It sounds paradoxical I know, but I will explain.
When I go for a night session I make sure to arrive well before darkness, usually around 7.30 p.m. or 8 p.m. in summer, when dusk does not fall until 10 p.m. or so.
By the time I have  laid my groundbait, tackled up, and generally settled in it will be turned 9 p.m.
There are two known periods when fish tend to feed more than any other time in the summer months.
These are dusk to around 1.30 a.m., and from first glimmer of light to an hour or so after sun-up.
By arriving early in the evening I can fish both periods, and it would be time-consuming and much more tiring to get out of bed in the middle of the night to arrive at the water before first light and to stay until 1.30 the following morning.
Night fishing entails about twelve hours at the water to fish the best times.
Daytime fishing entails at least twenty hours, probably more, to fish the best times.
I could not do this and fish efficiently.
Most anglers who do not night fish settle for either evening or morning, rarely both.
Newcomers to night fishing are always surprised to find how cold it is at night, especially those few hours before and after dawn.
It is thoroughly bone-chilling on nights of the full moon  when there are cloudless skies.
A touch of ground frost is not uncommon, irrespective of how blazing hot it has been during the day.
Always take at least one heavy, woollen pullover with you, and a warm waterproof jacket.
It needs to be waterproof, for hot days bring mist-shrouded nights, heavy with dew.
You can get wetter than if you had been in a winter shower.
Waterproof trousers and a pair of good boots or waders are essential too.
Myself, I prefer a one-piece suit.
Mine is quilted, waterproof and very warm.
A one-piece suit also has the added advantage of keeping your pullovers pulled down over your back, leaving no gaps for the cold air to creep in.
I would not be without it now.
Electric bite alarms are useful for night fishing, and many night anglers I know would not fish without them, and no matter what they tell you to the contrary they are mainly used to wake you up when you have a bite!
They do have other uses of course, such as giving you an early, audible warning of a bite you have not yet seen, and allow you to attend to other things like pouring a cup of coffee and watering the horse, without the risk of missing a bite.
If you must use a light to illuminate your indicators then make it a dull, red one.
A bicycle lamp with the glass painted red is ideal.
The more you can avoid using lights, especially bright ones, the better chance your eyes have of adjusting to the darkness, making every move you make easier and more pleasing.
I would strongly recommend, where club rules allow, that you take a small stove and tea-brewing equipment.
A fresh brew of tea, especially in the early morning, makes one hell of a difference to your well-being.
The better you feel, the better you will fish and the more you will enjoy it.
But by all means take a flask of tea or coffee to drink during the first few hours, but flasked drinks always taste stale after ten or twelve hours.
Arriving early for a night session is a good idea for several reasons, not least those I have mentioned about having plenty of time to tackle up in daylight, bait the swim, and settle in comfortably.
I always like to take my time when I go fishing, to tackle up and bait the swim in a relaxed, easy-going manner.
If I rush it unsettles me for the whole session, and I invariably feel  as though I have not done something right.
Very often I sit in my chair for ten minutes or so as soon as I arrive at the water, just relaxing and taking in everything around me, appreciating my surroundings and thinking about what I am going to do.
Thereafter it is surprising how much better and easier I do things, with a greater feeling of being in control of the situation.
Pre-baiting the mere the evening before fishing.
After tackling up and laying your baitboxes, landing net etc, around you, and sinking your keepnet in deep-enough water, you should still have a reasonable amount of daylight left to assess your surroundings.
This is very important in a swim you have never fished before; on a known swim it reaffirms your acquaintance.
You should check the rushes, bushes and tree branches, if  any, behind you and establish just where you have to stand to cast without snagging when you lay the rod back.
You should cast several times in daylight to get a feel of the power you need to put into the cast to reach the swim.
But you should cast to the swim using a silhouette marker on the horizon, thus giving you practice for when you have to use the same silhouette for guidance in darkness.
I never go fishing without a watch.
Noting the times when you get a bite or catch fish is especially useful for night fishing, for you soon learn which are the productive periods and which are the dead times.
From this you can then judge when you can risk sleeping for an hour or two and so be much fresher for the more likely feeding times.
I am not too fond of fishing on my own at any time, and I really dislike it at night.
It is not a question of being frightened of the dark (although it can be pretty spooky on an out-of-the-way water), it is because I enjoy good company and a long night becomes more enjoyable with someone there to chat with; to share the pleasure of catching big fish, or the lesser pleasure of blanking.
One of my best catches of big bream, five to 11lb 1oz and only one less than 9lb at 8lb 14oz, came when I was fishing alone.
With a companion I am sure I could have doubled the catch.
The fish were feeding ravenously, and several times when I was landing or unhooking fish the indicator on my other rod went sailing up.
You may think that instead of increasing my catch I would have had to share what I caught with a companion.
I do not think so, for the fish were feeding too well, but I can honestly say I would not have minded sharing what I caught anyway.
Enjoying my fishing, including the enjoyment I would have derived from seeing a friend catch, is more important to me than compiling a longer list of big fish than anyone else.
The long lists of ‘doubles’(usually carp) that some anglers publish each season do not impress me at all.
It is not as though they are paid a bonus for this production-line fishing.
A companion on a night fishing session can be a great help too.
Many times you will be glad of the extra pair of hands, such as when you need both your hands to play a big fish to the net  that your mate can hold ready.
Think, too, of the extra pleasure when you can do the same for him.
You are not match fishing; you are there to help each other and share the pleasure of each other 's fish.
It has been said that it is unsporting to receive help from another angler when you catch a fish.
Well, I do not fish for medals, I fish for pleasure, and while my mates like to net my fish as I like to net theirs, I care very little about petty-minded, selfish ‘rules’.
An added bonus of fishing with a mate is that both of you will no doubt be fishing with an experimental bait or method on your second rod, so this means you can learn twice as much without having to fish with more than two rods yourself.
Again, if you fish with a regular mate you can cut down on what you have to carry.
You need only one landing net, one keepnet, one set of scales, etc. if you fish close to each other.
Night fishing can be enjoyable in its own right, even without the added attraction of fishing at the most likely times for fish to feed, but only if you go about it the right way.
Learn a lesson from a lad I know, who did just about everything wrong.
He went to fish a water he knew nothing about, and arrived in darkness.
He threw in a bucket of groundbait, a pint of maggots, and fished all night without a bite.
When it broke daylight the next morning he found he had been fishing on a sandbar which shallowed up twenty yards out.
His bait had been lying in three inches of water!
Punt Fishing
Fishing from a punt opens up a whole new world.
You will find you have access to swims you once only dreamed about and it becomes possible for you to float fish in swims which can only be fished with leger tackle from the bank.
Before I discuss the technique of punt fishing, however, let me describe what kind of punt is ideal, and then you will know what to look for if you are about to buy one, or know what to plan if you are a good D.I.Y.
man and intend building one.
My friend Eric Barnes built the punt we use and the basic design is hard to beat.
The length and width will depend on how many will be using the punt at any one time, but always remember that they are not the easiest things to row, especially in rough water, so make a length of about 14ft your limit, with a width of about 4ft 6in. maximum.
It should, of course, be flat-bottomed, and should be carpeted.
No, don't laugh; the carpet deadens the noise and vibration caused when objects are dropped, and believe me, a noise emanating from a punt is well magnified through the water.
A punt is like a floating drum.
The carpet will inevitably get wet, but so what, you will have waterproof boots on, won't you?
And a wet carpet still does the job it was meant for, which also includes the fact that it provides a soft base on which to unhook fish, preventing to a great extent the removal of mucous and damage to scales and fins.
We have covered around the edge of the punt with pipe insulation, which again cuts down noise and helps to preserve rod varnish.
It was a simple matter of slitting along the length of the  tubed insulation and sliding it onto the edge.
And at two strategic points along each side of the punt are metal tubes into which can be slid umbrella poles or bank-sticks.
Along the edge of the carpet are half-inch laths; these prevent your chair from sliding off the edge, which is not only noisy but quite hazardous, too, if you should lose your balance.
If you do, or intend to do, a lot of punt fishing, I would suggest that an outboard motor is a wise investment.
Rowing a flat-bottomed punt in rough water, against a strong wind, is nigh on impossible on your own, and a back-breaking task even for two.
Now, apart from the noise and pollution, a petrol-driven outboard is usually unnecessary for punt fishing, for we rarely use a punt to reach very distant areas.
The answer is an electric outboard motor.
It runs off a normal car battery and has ample power to drive the punt at a greater rate of knots than you are likely to need, unless you are going to troll for pike; and then you would be better using a boat rather than a punt.
The electric outboard I use is made by Shakespeare.
It has five forward and five reverse speeds, is highly manoeuvrable, and weighs less than the battery that powers it.
One charge of the battery lasts for hours, even at top speed, and, of course, it is silent and pollution-free.
Another wise investment is a life-jacket, for no matter how strong a swimmer you may be you cannot swim if you are well wrapped up against the cold.
In any case, you can buy lifejackets now that look little different from normal fishing waistcoats, so what is the point of being without and risking your life?
Anchors for the punt need only be heavy weights.
The hook type do not work in the soft silt of most coarse fish waters.
We use big plastic toffee bottles filled with concrete, with an eye-bolt sunk into the top.
You need an anchor at each end of the punt, on a variable length of rope so that you can fish at any depth of swim on the water.
But better still, if you decide you are going to fish the same one or two swims each time, is to set up permanent anchors.
These are simple to prepare.
All you do is rig up a normal  anchor, i.e. heavy weight, and rope.
At the other end of the rope tie on a plastic, tightly-capped bottle.
The distance from bottle to anchor should be about 1ft deeper than the depth of water.
Leave another yard or so of rope above the bottle.
Drop the anchors overboard in the correct position and the bottles will float, holding the anchor rope on the surface and ready to tie to the punt every time you fish that swim.
On shallow swims it is better to sink two rigid poles (scaffolding poles are ideal), for with any rope-anchored system there is always a certain amount of swinging, especially when there is a strong wind.
Another advantage of being able to tie the punt to stakes so that it remains still is that you can then leger fish, which is otherwise impossible to do correctly due to the punt swinging around and giving false bites.
Impossible, that is, if you rest the rod on the gunwales of the punt.
But there is another way, and that is to use very long, extending rod rests (I use telescopic landing net handles) so that you can position the rod to one end of the punt, but within reach.
Or, you can have the rod rests one either side of the gunwales so that the rod lies across, but clear of, the punt.
When legering from a punt you don't want to be messing about with indicators that require two hands to set.
Movement in a punt should always be kept to a minimum.
The best type, therefore, are swingtips, quivertips, and butt-indicators, which are permanently fixed to the rod and line and require no setting other than turning the reel.
Finally, remember that fishing from a punt gives you a tremendous advantage.
So, use it to the full and explore all those spots you could never reach from the bank.
Record Fish
Many people are of the opinion that record fish lists exist mainly to bolster the egos of the captors of these huge fish.
This sort of attitude does angling no good at all.
Record fish lists exist purely as historical records.
They are necessary to register the heaviest fish of each species ever caught on rod and line; when they were caught; where they were caught (although usually vaguely); and, finally, by whom.
Unlike most records of sporting achievements, to appear in a record fish list is no measure of an individual's skill.
The simple truth is that most captors of record fish were never heard of before their historical catch and have never been heard of since.
It is important, however, that we keep accurate records, though it is not so important we make rigid rules that can preclude the recording of a well-authenticated fish simply because a rule was not strictly adhered to.
It is for this reason we currently have the ludicrous situation of two record fish lists, one run by the National Anglers Council, which is a record of fish that were claimed in accordance with a set of inflexible rules, and one that is run by the National Association of Specialist Anglers, whose record fish appear according to individual merit, this merit being judged by highly experienced specialist anglers who know a ‘con’ when they see one and who would reject a claim if there were any doubt as to its truth.
N.A.S.A.
members are more concerned than anyone else that all record fish lists are genuine historical records.
The outcome is that in recent years the N.A.C. list has been ignored by serious anglers who are aware of the N.A.S.A.
list, to the extent that in many instances the weights recorded for each species in the two lists are quite different.
Perhaps the best example is Chris Yates' carp of 5½lb on the N.A.S.A.
list and Dick Walker's carp of 44lb on the N.A.C. list.
The late Dick Walker actually demanded that his fish be removed from the N.A.C. list, for he knew, as did everyone else, that his 44-pounder was not the largest carp ever caught on rod and line in Britain.
Here is the N.A.S.A.
National Coarse Fish Record List, which is recognised as the official list by most anglers, particularly the specialist angler.
PART TWO: THE FISH
Barbel
One of my favourite species is the bream, not for his superior fighting power, for he does not test my tackle to any great degree, but because he tests my thinking power to the limit.
At the opposite end of the scale is the barbel, and while he does not require to be outwitted to the same extent as bream, he does make landing him extremely difficult.
His sheer aggression on the end of a line makes him, too, one of my favourite species.
You have only to look at the shape and solidness of a barbel to see where he gets his speed and power.
He could be described as an aquatic Concorde.
The drooping snout and the torpedo-like body, coupled with big fins and muscles like Charles Atlas, make him one of the best, if not the best, fighting coarse fish.
The barbel takes his name from the four long whisker-like barbules that hang from his snout.
These fleshy appendages are used to detect and taste food amongst the weed and debris on the bottom of a river.
Though they are basically bottom feeders, there are times when they will feed at mid-water and sometimes at the surface.
Such occasions are not the rule though, for their whole design suggests a fish that is more at home when his hollow belly is gripping the bottom and the surging current is pushing down on his drooping snout and coursing past his streamlined body.
The biggest authenticated barbel caught in Britain on rod and line weighed 16lb 1Oz, and was taken from the Hampshire Avon by a salmon angler.
It was caught in the coarse fish closed season and did not qualify for record status.
The official record is 14lb 6oz.
Some well-respected names in fishing reckon they have seen barbel bigger than this, as much as 20lb in fact.
I reckon, however, that a barbel is a specimen when it weighs more than 7lb, though a 7lb barbel from the Severn is obviously a more rewarding catch than one of the same weight from the Hampshire Avon or Dorset Stour where the average weight is higher.
Barbel can be caught in huge numbers, a 100lb net not being especially unusual from a prolific barbel river like the middle reaches of the Severn.
But the presence of a lot of barbel is not the only reason why large numbers can be caught at a sitting.
These fish are especially prone to ‘conditioning’; you can switch their minds onto a certain item of food and if you keep that food trickling through their swims over a long period they will continue feeding, with only short breaks, until that food runs out or some other disaster happens to move them.
Even hooking and losing fish in the middle of a shoal does not put them off when they are feeding ravenously.
Their minds are so preoccupied with feeding they ignore all but a monumental catastrophe.
Yet it is as though some unseen power is switching them on and off.
The usual pattern is that you take several fish one after the other, and then nothing for perhaps an hour, then several more fish in quick succession, and so on, until either you run out of bait or you have caught the whole shoal.
But you should not make the mistake of thinking it is always as easy as that.
More often than not you have to work hard for a few fish.
Even so, I have noticed that the feeding pattern still follows the usual course in that you catch barbel for a spell (maybe only one or two fish) then nothing for a spell, and so on .
It very rarely happens that you take several fish in one period and then nothing for the remainder of the time you spend on the water.
You will have gathered from what I have said that barbel really are a true shoal fish, and it is true to say that, as is the case with all true shoal fish, they school together with fish of like size.
This means that if you begin catching barbel in the 3lb to 4lb class you are unlikely to take any barbel very much bigger — or smaller — while that shoal remains in the swim.
But this does not indicate that the particular swim where you are catching 3lb to 4lb barbel will only produce fish in that size range, for once that shoal moves out it is not unusual for another shoal to move in, be they bigger or smaller.
What you must beware of, however, is using all your bait on a massive shoal of small barbel.
These fish in the 1lb to 2lb class can be a hundred or more strong in a shoal, and if you begin catching this size of barbel it is likely they will remain in the swim, feeding off and on, for as long as you have bait to keep them interested.
As the size of barbel in a shoal becomes larger, so the number of fish in that shoal will be fewer.
So if you begin catching barbel in the 4lb or larger bracket it is well worth sticking it out until they move on or you have caught most of them.
When that happens there is a chance that the larger barbel will move in.
Once you have conditioned barbel to feed ravenously they are ridiculously easy to catch, assuming of course that you are using tackle which is adequate enough to handle these tremendously hard-fighting fish.
The tackle should be compatible with the size of fish you hope to catch and the type of water you are trying to pull them from.
Obviously, you will need much heavier tackle when fishing in snaggy water than you will in open water.
Even so, barbel hooked in open water can tax tackle to the limit and it is foolhardy to take any chances with them.
Normally, and especially when the barbel are feeding with wild abandon, barbel bites on leger tackle are unmistakable, un-missable, and downright savage.
A rod that is propped at 45° to the water, quivering slightly as the current pushes against the line, will suddenly slam over as though it has been struck with a sandbag.
Woe betide anyone who is foolish enough to leave his rod unattended when barbel fishing.
It is not unknown for barbel to pull a rod into the water with a speed and viciousness that has to be seen to be believed, even when the angler has only glanced away from his rod for a few seconds.
Rod-bending bites, although more common when barbel fishing than any other kind, are not the only sort of bite that these fish give.
At the opposite end of the scale is a bite that is very difficult to detect if you are not conversant with the art of touch-legering (see pages 14–17).
There is no pronounced tug of any kind, just a tremor coming up the line that feels as though someone is drawing a hacksaw blade across it.
The strange thing is that these bites are not difficult to hit once you have detected them.
The rod-bending bites are merely the start of a run, and it is this first powerful run, which began as soon as the barbel picked up the baited hook and gained momentum within seconds, that is the crucial time for losing fish.
It is almost impossible to stop this initial run without tearing the hook out of the fish's mouth, and yet you must not let the barbel have all his own way.
If you do he will head straight for the nearest snag and you will be extremely fortunate to pull him out again.
In my experience the most effective way to resist his attempts to snag you is to heave at him with as much side-strain as your tackle strength will allow.
A straight over-the-shoulder pull is ineffective, for the barbel is built to resist forces which act directly, head-on, against him.
Your only chance is to pull at him from the side, which may steer him away from the refuge he seeks.
If you do manage it, the fight is by no means over.
As the song says, it has only just begun.
Time and time again he will charge for the snags which are in range, including some of which you may be unaware, or others you may think are out of range.
Each time you should apply side-strain and try to steer him away from them.
This is no time for delicacy and posing, it is time for strong-arm stuff which would bring looks of admiration from a shark angler and cause a tiddler snatcher to cringe in fear.
Even when you think you have beaten him you should always be wary of a final fling, which invariably they can find the strength to muster.
Your reflexes should always be in fine tune so that you can react appropriately to whatever action the barbel tries to take.
Show him who is boss, or he will undoubtedly show you.
A very careful choice of rod should be made for a fish that fights as hard as barbel.
Whilst it needs to be a powerful rod the emphasis should also be on the action.
A rod which is too stiff is useless when it cannot react to a sudden, savage pull.
One that is too supple will be equally useless when you need to apply swift, instantly effective side-strain.
It is wise to remember that the basic requirement of a rod, apart from the obvious ones of enabling you to cast and retrieve, is to act as a shock-absorber for the line.
If the only consideration were strength then we need to look no further than a light pit-prop, for there is no freshwater fish swimming that could bend or break one of those.
If we had superhuman reactions then perhaps we could manage with a rigid pole, for we would then be fast enough to ease off when the fish made a sudden plunge.
But we mere mortals need a rod that will give when this happens; a rod that will absorb the shock the instant a powerful fish pulls against the line.
Since most barbel fishing is with the use of legering methods involving the rod tip as a bite indicator, some consideration should also be given to this.
A combination of these requirements can be found in a rod that is supple in its top half, but not too supple in the bottom half.
The top section will then be suitable for bite indication and provide the shock-absorber effect; the bottom half will provide the power needed to turn a hard-fighting fish.
A carbon-fibre rod, two piece, and a length of 11ft is my ideal.
Barbel inhabit all kinds of swims in a river, from the fastest run to the slackest pools.
Big barbel though, have a distinct preference for swims that combine three factors: a fairly slack piece of water adjacent to a fast run, and especially where these two preside over a dense weedbed or some other kind of refuge such as a hole, steep ledge or sunken tree.
The barbel will not be far away from the snag, and the closer you can fish to it with safety the better your chances are of catching these big fish.
There are times when barbel are so preoccupied with whatever business they have at hand, whether it be feeding, spawning, or just browsing, you can stand on the river's edge right over the top of them and watch them without them taking fright and scurrying off.
If you can get so close to barbel, with or without them knowing it, you should take the opportunity to study how they use the available cover to sneak under; how they move like silent wraiths across the bottom, and how they rake over the gravel on the bottom with their barbules.
It is interesting to note that when they do discover some titbit amongst the bottom debris, they very rarely charge off with it as they normally do when picking up our hookbaits.
There is no doubt that their super-sensitive barbules detect our lines just as easily as they detect food, but, fortunately for us, they usually accept our offerings in spite of the obvious danger they have felt, though the same danger compels them to take the bait ‘hit-and-run’ style.
(The detection of lines, hooks and resistance  is probably the reason why most other fish usually bolt off with the bait.)
You should always take every opportunity to study fish, be they barbel or any other species, when you come upon them unawares in their natural environment.
You can learn so much from simply watching their actions and reactions that it is always worth sacrificing fishing time to spend an hour or so studying their behaviour.
If you are fortunate enough to have with you one or two baits, and you can flick these to the fish without scaring them off, it is interesting to see how, or even if, they respond.
If they do respond you may be able to see if they approach it with caution or with carelessness.
Better still, if you are in a position to present these baits on tackle to fish you can see, then you may learn more about fish behaviour in one hour than you would in a season of fishing ‘blind’.
One thing you will notice at times when you are watching the barbel is the extraordinary way they flip belly-upwards to take food that is more than a foot or so off bottom.
Sometimes, it is this flash of white belly that gives them away when you are roaming the river bank trying to spot them.
Trotting a bait down at the same depth you have seen them turning very often pays off with a fish or two.
Another thing I have noticed when the barbel are doing this somersaulting business is that there is very often a number of chub below the barbel.
I know that many anglers swear that barbel dominate a swim and force the chub to evacuate the area when they commence feeding.
In the general run of life in a river this may be very true, but many times I have been able to take barbel and chub from the same swim simply by altering the depth at which my bait is fishing.
Nor has it always been the chub which were taken from the bottom; several times the barbel have been on the bottom and the chub hovering above them.
Barbel fishing in the early days, and I am talking to more than a hundred years ago, was very popular amongst the gentry, who used to employ a man to bait a swim with thousands of lobworms over a period of days, sometimes weeks.
In these swims, on either the Thames or the Trent (which were the only barbel rivers in the country at that time) the barbel used to  gather in huge shoals which the lucky angler decimated, usually with a trotted lobworm from a boat moored across the river.
I cannot help but wonder how much more he would have enjoyed catching those fish if he had baited the swim himself.
Subsequently, barbel fishing went through a slack period when interest was lost through an increased enthusiasm for game fishing.
More recently, interest revived when barbel became more widely distributed and anglers began to throw aside the class barriers and choose a quarry on its own merits rather than choose a fish by virtue of the fact that is has, or has not, an adipose fin.
We have now turned almost full circle, but instead of employing someone to bait the swim, we have turned to a choice of mechanical devices which do a similar job.
These are the bait droppers and swimfeeders.
They are practical inventions that distribute bait along the bottom of the river bed.
The bait dropper is normally used independently of the rod with which you are fishing, and the swimfeeder is used as part of the end tackle to which your baited hook is attached.
Before the advent of swimfeeders and the preoccupation with maggots, casters and hempseed, anglers used a variety of baits and methods to make their catches.
These included worms, bread, cheese and meat baits, of which sausage meat and luncheon meat were the most popular.
The method of fishing these baits was either with a float or some variety of the link-leger.
Good catches of barbel, and many big ones, were taken, but nothing like the catches that swimfeeders, in the right hands, are capable of providing, much more often.
Swimfeeders are plastic tubes from two to four inches long and an inch or so in diameter.
Some have a built-in weight strip to provide the weight to hold bottom when the feeder is empty, or a means of attaching a weight of your own choice.
The plastic tube is perforated with holes slightly larger than the thickness of an average maggot.
There are two basic types of swimfeeder; the open-end which, as the name suggests, has both ends open so that you can use deadbait such as casters and seed baits inside it and block the ends with mud or groundbait.
The second type is the block-end which has removable lids, one of which you take off while you fill it with live feed such as maggots.
The swimfeeder is attached to the line in the same way you would attach a link-leger, with a swivel, ring, or loop of line that runs on the main line.
Or you can simply slide it onto the line through a hole that runs through the centre of the ‘feeder.
It is usually stopped from six to fifteen inches from the hook, but this can be increased or decreased for special situations that demand either a longer or shorter tail.
The purpose of the swimfeeder is, generally speaking, to distribute loose feed around the baited hook.
A better description of its use is that it automatically loose feeds the swim with a high degree of accuracy and efficiency.
The usual manner of groundbaiting and introducing hookbait samples to the fish is to throw a handful of feed onto the surface of the river to a spot where, in the angler's judgment, the feed will sink in good time to trickle through the fishing area.
The snag is that small dace, bleak, and other small fish that feed at or near the surface, can devour much of this loose feed before it reaches bottom.
Again, throwing by hand, throwing stick or catapult, is only as accurate as our individual capabilities and means that we not only have to throw accurately, but also cast accurately — and we must do this in both instances every time we retrieve for another cast.
It should also be noted that loose feeding by hand or throwing device almost always involves a certain degree of ‘spread’.
A scattering of maggots or whatever that hits the surface in, say, an 18 inch circle (which is the least ‘spread’ you can hope for) will spread far more than that by the time the current has had its way with it and it reaches bottom.
A bait dropper, as opposed to a swimfeeder, has limitations.
To a certain extent it still relies on your dropping the bait on the same line that your tackle is lying.
It is useless if you are fishing any distance from the bank, or even close to the bank but a distance downstream, for in this instance it may attract fish past your baited hook and to the source of the feed.
It is also an independent feeding method which involves a separate rod and line to lower the dropper in, or, if used with the same rod and line with which you are fishing, takes up precious minutes of time when your hookbait could be in the water; valuable minutes when the barbel are mad on feed.
The swimfeeder acts like a magnet.
If cast accurately each time you fill it, it progressively distributes the loose feed down a narrow path through the swim.
It draws fish to itself, the source, where your baited hook is lying.
The essential thing is accuracy, for swimfeeder fishing is not the willy-nilly method of fishing that some anglers would have you believe.
Without accuracy you will succeed only in forming several paths of loose feed across the river, which is defeating the whole object of the swimfeeder principle.
If you are not using the swimfeeder as it should be used then you may as well tackle up with a link-leger and feed by hand.
You cannot put a time on how long it takes for a swimfeeder to empty.
This will vary according to the feed you are using; the type of swimfeeder; the size and number of the perforations in it, and the type of swim where you are using it.
Obviously, the stronger the current, the more quickly the swimfeeder will empty.
But when you begin fishing, if it is a swim you have never fished before with a swimfeeder, it is essential that you find out how long it takes to empty so that you can set up a rhythm of casting and feeding.
If you think the ‘feeder is emptying too fast it is a simple matter to block up a few of the holes with a piece of sticky tape.
If it is emptying too slowly you can burn some of the holes a bit bigger with a cigarette end or cut them into wider slots with a knife or pair of scissors.
Once I know how fast my ‘feeder is emptying, or have made it empty at the pace I require, I cast very frequently for the first twenty minutes or so — as fast as the emptying of the ‘feeder will allow — and then slow down only just enough to keep a steady trickle of feed through the swim.
Once the barbel begin feeding I regulate the filling and casting of the swimfeeder according to how well the fish are responding.
Another little trick I use when I first begin to fish the swim is to throw just two handfuls of feed, well-spread, across the river.
My intention is to let the barbel in all areas know that there is free feed about in the hope that they will then begin to search for the source.
The source, when they find it, is my swimfeeder which I have been casting and retrieving quite frequently since those initial handfuls.
I have noticed, once the fish have begun feeding and I have set up a steady rhythm with the swimfeeder, that the crucial time for getting bites is up to thirty seconds after the ‘feeder has hit the surface.
This is the deadly period when you can most expect a good take.
I am convinced that this is because the barbel are so conditioned to seeing this plastic larder pop through the surface and spread good things to eat along the bottom, they are waiting for it to happen.
I have heard many anglers say that they dislike swimfeeders because they cause too much disturbance when they hit the surface, but I reckon this disturbance becomes part of the attraction once the barbel have associated the splash with food.
I am so convinced that this is a fact I often only half-fill the ‘feeder so that I can cast more often and take advantage of the extra number of casts and splashes and those thirty-second deadly periods.
To prove my point, it is a well-known fact that barbel quite often grab the ‘feeder itself, sometimes even before it has reached bottom.
Indeed, I have heard of some anglers who deliberately attach a big hook to the ‘feeder and catch plenty of barbel on it.
There is nothing illegal in this method, to my knowledge anyway, but I avoid it because to me it seems like cheating.
I rather suspect it could lead to a lot of foul-hooked fish, which is another thing I deplore when done deliberately.
Having sung the praises of swimfeeders I must point out that I do not think they are the be-all and end-all of barbel fishing, specially for the very big ones.
Not that ‘feeders do not tempt big barbel, but they are extremely cumbersome objects to have on the line when playing these powerful fish in weedy or otherwise snaggy areas.
More often than not it is the ‘feeder that becomes stuck when the barbel charge through a thick weedbed or the like.
I have lost so many big barbel on the Hampshire Avon, Dorset Stour, and the Severn through this that I have been ready to dispense altogether with swimfeeder fishing for big barbel.
But because they are so efficient at tempting big barbel to bite in the first place I keep trying different ways of fishing with them to try to overcome the problem.
The snagging of the swimfeeder itself is not the only difficulty.
If it were I am sure we could find a way to beat it, such as having a weaker link to the ‘feeder so that it will break away when snagged.
No, perhaps the real problem is the fact that we have to use such small hooks when using the swimfeeder with maggots or casters, which are the two baits with which ‘feeders are associated.
Although barbel are so stupid when they are feeding ravenously, they are not so stupid they cannot learn a few tricks of their own to enable them to feed in the face of apparent danger.
One of those tricks is simply to take a lip-hold of the maggots without the hook being inside their mouths, which they do quite easily when the hook is a substantial one.
This compels us to use increasingly smaller hooks as the barbel become aware of the dangers, and more skilful in their lip-hold tactics.
The use of small hooks seriously restricts the strength of our tackle.
If we need a line strength of, say, 8lb, to enable us to deal adequately with big barbel we are discarding this potential strength if the line is tied to a size 16 hook.
There is no hook of that size manufactured that has the strength to withstand the pull of an 8lb line, which is thicker in diameter than the hook itself.
The ring or the spade-end would need to be out of all proportion to the size of the hook.
You will meet this problem in its most discernible form on rivers, or stretches of river, which are heavily match-fished.
The reason for this lies with the majority of match anglers being brainwashed into using gossamer-fine line and tiny hooks, no matter what the species or situation demands.
I have sat on the opposite bank of a river to where a match was being fished and seen barbel breaking line time after time, and the reaction has always been the same: the tying on of a hook of the same size to the same line that barbel had already treated with the contempt it deserved.
This has happened when I have been catching plenty of barbel, with no breakages, and the matchmen have asked me what I have been using.
When told of my 6lb line, or whatever it was, the reply has usually taken the form of, ‘Six pound!
I don't carry tow-rope with me.’
Then back they go to continued breaking off on match-winning fish with their totally inadequate lines.
Where the merit is in such a situation is beyond me.
No amount of hooked and lost fish will ever equal one on the bank.
But it is this silly attitude towards using appropriate tackle that is the main factor contributing to the barbel's demand for increasingly smaller hooks.
The more fish that are hooked and lost on inadequate tackle means an even more delicate approach is needed to hook these fish again, obviously with the same result, only faster.
It is a long term problem of course, but it creates a vicious circle that only ends when you discard the circle entirely and approach the situation from a completely new angle.
The answer is to use a hair-rig (a full description of which appears in the carp chapter), which allows us to present the bait on a fine hookless line, backed up with a big hook with which to play the fish.
If small fish are a nuisance, you will find it tedious to have to keep gluing fresh bait to the ‘hair’.
One way round this is to tie a tiny hook to the hair and to bend inwards slightly the hook point — enough to prevent fish from being hooked but not enough to make hooking bait too difficult.
I generally fish with a short hair for barbel, about ½ inch, but soon lengthen this if I get a few bites and don't hit them.
If it still happens, then try a smaller main hook, which will be lighter and more easily sucked into the barbel's mouth.
Another alternative is to use a bait that can be fed via a swimfeeder, but is big enough to be used on a substantial hook.
Sweetcorn and other, similar, seedbaits fit the bill perfectly, and I have had some good catches on sweetcorn on the Severn and the Avon.
Other seed baits I have used successfully on the Severn are tares and maple peas, but I have not used the latter two very often and do not yet know if they are going to be consistently successful.
Another thing I have tried, which may turn out to be an even better proposition than sweetcorn or the like, is swimfeeder-fed luncheon meat.
What I do is chop the luncheon meat into cubes just big enough for a size 8 or 10 hook and mix them with damp groundbait.
Used like this in an open-end swimfeeder you can feed the swim with the same accuracy and effectiveness as you can with swimfeeder-fed maggots.
The only drawback is the expense if you fish for long sessions and take enough meat to feed continuously.
The methods described so far are suitable for popular waters where it is a case of choosing a swim and staying put for the whole session, which means you must attract fish into your swim and induce them to feed.
We cannot always rely on the fish already being there and feeling hungry too.
The swimfeeder and baits suitable for it are ideal for this purpose.
If, however, we have opportunities to fish midweek when most other anglers are at work, or fortunate enough to have access to a good piece of barbel river which is less frequently fished, then the best way of catching a big barbel is to stalk one.
We can wander over all, or most, of the river bank and either look for the fish themselves or for swims where they are likely to be.
If we spot the fish we can cast directly to them with strong tackle and a big bait, or we can move from swim to swim until we find where a big barbel or two are feeding.
One swim I know on the Hampshire Avon near Ringwood can only be fished on a quiet day, when few other anglers are around.
Unhappily, such days do not come too often, for I live a long way from Ringwood and it is a very popular river in that area.
But I found a pretty deep hole where an extremely thick weedbed forms a roof over part of it.
It is under this roof where some really big barbel lie.
The only trouble is that it lies quite close to a footbridge and as soon as anyone walks across it I can guarantee I will not get a bite for at least an hour afterwards.
You can see that on busy days it is just not worth fishing there.
In midweek, however, the stretch is reasonably quiet and I can conceal myself behind a clump of rushes and cast a big piece of luncheon meat on a link-leger rig right in the deep hole and let the current roll it under the roof.
The first time I fished it I hooked a very big barbel which I estimated at 11lb to 12lb.
As soon as the hook went in it charged across the river into a weedbed on the other bank, where it decided to sulk and play at immovable objects.
So I gave him a yard of slack line and decided to wait it out.
Within ten minutes he was on the move again but came towards me very fast and swam into the weeds that formed the roof over the hole where I had hooked him in the first place.
Pulling at him would only have pulled him deeper into the weed.
So I gave him slack line  and waited again.
After half an hour I was still waiting, so I gave him an experimental pull and the hook came back minus the barbel.
Since then I have done something I should have done in the first place: found a gap in the rushes only ten yards downstream where I can heave into the fish without pulling them into more weed.
It is a simple matter of keeping the rod high above the rushes while I manoeuvre downstream.
I have had several barbel out of the swim since then, but not yet had another chance at a really big one.
Maybe you only get one chance at a fish like that — a particular fish anyway — and I blew my chance through not planning what I was going to do after I had hooked him.
Serves me right, but it always serves as a reminder too, whenever I fish a new swim.
An 8lb 4oz river Severn barbel Graham Marsden took on swimfeeder maggot.
Bream
A look at the fish
The first thing we notice about bream is the distinctive shape, and we wonder how a fish with such a deep body can weigh so little.
A 5lb bream is a big fish, and when viewed alongside, say, a 5lb chub, we are curious as to why the bream is only equal in weight.
This prompts us to take a closer look at the bream, so we pick it up and immediately feel the narrowness of the belly where it rests in the crease of our fingers.
Looking down at the fish we lose sight of its great depth and instead see how thin it is across the back.
Now we know why the bream weighs less than a side-on view suggests it should.
I read somewhere that this slenderness was to allow bream freedom of movement between stems of marginal growth such as reeds, and for many years I accepted this as fact.
But the more I fished for bream and studied their behaviour the more I began to question the correctness of this theory, for I became aware that sizeable bream are rarely taken near to the margins.
At least thirty yards out is the norm, and very often it is more like fifty yards.
One of the few occasions big bream spend any length of time in marginal weed is the two or three weeks in spring or early summer when they spawn.
I am sure their bodies were not designed for a two- or three-week period out of the fifty-two weeks in a year, however important that period may be.
I feel certain the purpose of the slimness stems from the natural instinct to shoal in a compact body.
Imagine for a moment what easy pickings a huge shoal of small bream are to a  pack of marauding pike.
Because of the slimness of their bodies it means a shoal of bream, particularly when resting between feeding times, can pack quite tightly together and become a much smaller target than they would present if rotundly shaped.
Not only that, but the compactness also means the bream are surrounded by an almost unbroken ‘fence’ of lateral lines; a natural radar system to provide an early warning of an impending attack.
The circle of radar is especially useful when you consider that most of their lives are spent in open water.
The shape of bream, and the size and shape of their fins, can teach us a lot about their way of life.
The dorsal fin is like a yacht sail; tall and similarly shaped.
On the belly, reaching towards the tail-end of the fish is the anal fin.
This anal fin is extremely long, having from twenty-six to thirty-one rays.
The great depth of the body, lacking the rotundity found in other species, would make the bream a very ungainly fish without these exceptionally long fins on the back and belly to balance, stabilise and allow it to swim on an even keel.
These facts go a long way towards explaining why the bream is not generally recognised as a hard-fighting fish.
The relative thinness of the body lacks strength, and the great depth, even with the stabilising dorsal and anal fin, cause it to be too easily thrown off balance.
The initial thump when the hook drives home, and the first short, sharp run are strong enough, but that, usually, is all, at least in comparison to cylindrically-shaped fish.
The only other thing you have to be wary of when playing bream is their ability, whether intentional or otherwise, to glide in an arc on the end of your line rather like a kite in a strong wind.
If you do not flip him off balance he can quite easily crash right into the marginal weed some distance along your own bank.
The exceptionally deep body also gives us an indication of the action of a bream when feeding, and this knowledge will help tremendously when interpreting the action into terminal rigs and the timing of striking the hook home.
Because the body is deep it means the bream cannot simply sidle up to a bait, suck it into its mouth and move on, all in one motion.
What happens is this: it is swimming along on a near-horizontal plane when it spots a morsel of food, which it can see  quite comfortably directly below it in shallow-enough water because its eyes are tilted downwards to allow for this facility.
On sighting the item it gives a flick of the tail and anal fin and tilts towards it.
A 9lb 3oz bream taken by Graham Marsden from a Cheshire mere.
How close it approaches a food item is dependent on several factors, because the bream, in common with other bottom feeding fish, has the facility of extending lips which it uses to suck and blow a food item to clean it before consuming it.
A heavy bait, therefore, has to be tackled from a shorter range than does a light one; a comparatively clean bait — a worm for instance, lying on sand or gravel — has only to be ‘vacuumed’ a few times, if at all , before the bream swallows it.
But a piece of bread lying in almost liquid mud will demand a more prolonged cleaning process.
When a bream sucks a bait to its lips the unwanted material is taken into the mouth and filtered off through the gills.
At the end of the suck the lips close momentarily and often the bait is inside the mouth when this happens.
If the strike has been timed to perfection — that split second before the bait is ejected — then the fish is usually hooked.
The strike, however, can very rarely be timed to such an accurate degree.
This is why, with baits that differ in size, weight, and where on the bottom they lie in regard to cleanliness, we have to use various permutations of length of bite indication, that is to say, the amount of free line we allow it to take before striking.
Two or three maggots on a small hook lying on clean sand may only require an indication of an inch or two before the strike can be made.
A piece of bread flake on a muddy bottom may need a foot or more, and the indication allowed to yo-yo several times before we can be anywhere near sure of hitting them.
Yet again, a big, comparatively heavy bait such as a lobworm, on a clean bottom may require only a few inches, for the sheer weight of this bait means the bream has to position himself quite close to it for the suck to be effective.
There are circumstances, of course, when the bream will dispense entirely with vacuuming and simply mouth the bait straight off the bottom.
Knowing well a water and its bream, and the way they treat different baits in different conditions in different swims is the only reliable answer.
Even then, bream being bream, one cannot always be sure.
Shoals
Bream are strictly shoal fish, and the size of a shoal depends  upon many things, but it can generally be taken that the bigger the bream the smaller the shoal.
In waters where bream breed prolifically, spawning every season to a lesser or greater extent, the shoals of small bream — skimmers as they are commonly called — can run into thousands.
In due course the numbers will be drastically reduced by natural mortalities, disease and predators being the chief causes.
Even then a shoal can be many hundreds strong.
These are waters which do not, as a rule, produce big bream, for with so many mouths to share the available food there is only enough to maintain them at a low body weight.
The stronger fish will perhaps reach 4lb.
Then there are waters which do not provide the same good spawning facilities; maybe a lack of shallows and plant life in which to lay eggs and milt.
Here we may find the bream average 5lb or so, with a top weight of around 7lb.
The shoals could still number a hundred or so.
Next we have fisheries, such as the Cheshire meres, which are ideal environments for producing really big bream.
Lack of, and inadequate spawning sites; an abundance of rich, natural food; and a good head of predators — usually eels — to prey on what little spawn is laid, is the necessary formulae.
The fortunate survivors find themselves with a wealth of food and very little competition in which to grow to their maximum potential.
The shoals rarely exceed fifty, and are more likely to number less than thirty.
In later years, when natural mortalities and old age have taken their toll, we may find the shoal is reduced to a dozen fish or fewer.
But these will be the veritable monsters; a small, compact shoal of double-figure bream which have to be located with absolute precision before we stand any chance of catching them.
Bream shoal together according to size.
Very rarely will you catch a bag of bream of various individual weights.
If you are steadily catching 4lb and 5lb bream it is wishful thinking to hope that the next one will be an 8-pounder.
And, of course, it applies the other way too.
If you are catching 7lb and 8lb fish you have little chance of catching anything under 6lb at that time.
There are occasions when you get an odd fish that weighs a  couple of pounds more or less than the average on that day, but to expect this to happen is foolhardy.
If you are catching 6-pounders and want to catch 8lb bream, then move to another swim, or fish that swim at a different time.
It is the only sure way — as long as the water holds bigger bream.
This shoaling in like sizes is established at a very early age, and there is good reason for it.
Bream have strong predatory instincts (more of this later) and it would not be safe for bream of only 2 or 3 inches to join a shoal of bigger bream.
There are some bream waters which have poor spawning grounds and a lack of natural food to enable the existing stock to put on excess weight.
This is where you find that no matter where and when you fish on that water, the bream are so alike in size that catching them becomes tedious after a while.
One such water is Hitae Loch in Scotland.
I used to fish there with some friends several years ago and we rarely caught less than 100lbs in a session.
Every one of the bream we caught weighed within 2oz of 4lb, the biggest at 4lb 2oz and the smallest at 3lb 14oz.
It was like pulling them off a duplicating machine, and after a while, when we realised we had little or no chance of catching anything bigger, it became so boring we never went again.
The poor spawning facilities were responsible for the lack of smaller bream, and the lack of an excess of natural food made sure a successful brood did not grow to specimen weight.
Poor spawning sites and an abundance of food is the combination for giant bream; one is practically useless without the other.
A shoal of bream, whatever the size of individual fish or number of fish in a shoal, behave as one.
I cannot do better than compare a shoal of bream to a troop of soldiers: a compact, neat, orderly and efficient body of fish that patrol a water when the business of feeding is foremost in their minds.
This affinity of a shoal of bream to a troop of soldiers can be taken a stage further.
Every troop has a leader and, putting it simply, the leader uses his initiative and the troops under him behave according to his directives and examples.
I am not saying that a bream leader dishes out orders to his underlings in the same way that an army commander does.
The leader of a bream shoal merely leads the way and sets a pattern of  behaviour that the rest of the shoal follow.
Where he goes, and what he does, the rest do likewise.
I have watched a shoal of bream in shallow water for many hours.
I had a clear view of them from a branch of a tree that overhung the water, and I watched them on several occasions.
There were sixty-three of them.
This shoal of bream had a leader; the same leader each time I saw them.
I could identify him easily because he was the only two-tone bream in the shoal.
The fact that he was a two-tone fish probably had nothing to do with his leadership.
Nor did his size, for he was no bigger (about 5lb) than many of the other bream in the shoal.
Why he was chosen as leader I do not know, or if in fact a leader is chosen or simply assumes command.
Perhaps, and more likely, he was a particularly aggressive fish.
Watching the shoal from the tree was a revelation.
The only disappointment was that I never did see them feeding, for I could have learned such a lot in those short but interesting hours.
I have seen individual bream feeding, with the rest of the shoal out of sight, but never part of a shoal feeding together.
The shoal I observed from my perch on the tree did not swim in any particular formation.
At times the leader was flanked by several fish on either side, but more often than not he was in front by a length or more.
Every move he made was duplicated by the rest of the shoal at exactly the same speed and with absolute precision.
It was necessary for me to ensure that this fish was in fact leading the others.
I found how to do this by accident.
I had taken a couple of slices of bread up the tree with me, with the intention of feeding small pieces of pinched flake into their midst to see if they would accept them.
They wouldn't.
But when these small knobs of hard bread landed over the leader's head he would veer to one side with the rest of the shoal following, to a fish, a split second after.
If the pinches of flake were thrown over any other bream's head then that fish would veer to one side, but only the bream immediately alongside him would react, and then only to get out of the way.
When the bread balls hit the water over a bream that was near to the leader, then the leader would react after that fish and then, and only then, would the remainder of the shoal follow suit.
I did this simple but effective experiment many times over several days.
It confirmed, and I had long suspected as much, that bream do in fact have a leader.
I sometimes wonder what happens to the rest of the shoal when the leader is caught and retained in a keepnet.
Do they go into some kind of limbo; leaderless, lost and lacking direction?
Or does another fish quickly take over and assume command?
Could this be the reason why, at times, when we are compiling a good catch, the fish suddenly go off; as suddenly as switching off an electric light?
Could we have possibly caught the leader, leaving the shoal bewildered and with sudden loss of appetite?
Patrols
Every bream water has at least one set of imaginary tram-lines which a shoal of bream — or the tram, to maintain the metaphor — follow religiously.
These routes, or patrols, are known in bream fisher's jargon as ‘heats’.
They are invisible paths along the bottom of a fishery which the bream have chosen as their feeding routes, and they adhere to them as though every other area of the water was barren.
The beats are almost always found well out from the margins.
Fifteen yards can be taken as a minimum, and forty yards to fifty yards as an average.
They do not cover any particular area of the lake bed, but generally take in both deep and shallow water, where both are found.
Nor do they follow any specific pattern on the bottom, such is circles or straight lines.
They can take any shape and cover vastly varying distances.
The width of the beat will, of course, depend on the size of the shoal.
A shoal of small bream that runs into many hundreds will cover a lot of lake bed, possibly as much as fifty yards.
A small shoal of big bream may patrol a beat no wider than five yards.
Why bream beats are most often quite some distance from the margins is difficult to say.
I feel certain, however, that it has something to do with predators; the human kind included.
I am sure they feel much safer in open water, where their surrounding radar system of lateral lines can be used to utmost effect.
The usual lairs of sniping pike, marginal rushes and  other bankside vegetation, are too much of a threat to their comfort.
I am sure too, that this safety-first instinct has a lot to do with the fact that big bream are rarely caught from small bays, those semi-circular enclosures which are so appealing to the angler's eye, and such deadly traps for the use of a pack of predators.
Because really big bream are too much of a mouthful for even the biggest pike does not mean that a big bream has lost its natural, cautious instinct.
An increase in size means an increase in caution, logical or not.
Rolling Bream
When bream patrol their feeding routes they frequently display themselves at the surface.
The frequency and extent of the roll varies from day to day and from one set of conditions to another.
The usual roll can be likened to the surface activity of a porpoise; a smooth, slicing motion, where the top of the head, then the humped back, and finally the tip of the caudal fin, cut through the water with considerable elegance and beauty.
When bream are rolling in this manner it is quite easy to miss them if your eyes are not glued to the water all the time.
The action is so smooth and the water displacement so little, hardly any evidence of a disturbed surface, even in calm conditions, remains.
Bream do not always roll so smoothly though.
There are times when they almost entirely break surface and re-enter the water with a resounding slap of their tails.
At the other end of the scale they quite often roll just beneath the surface, and if the water is choppy you will not know it is happening.
If the surface is calm, and you are watching carefully, preferably with binoculars, you will see a slight vortex at the surface due to the water displacement beneath.
Sometimes you may spot an occasional dorsal fin when it pops out like a miniature yacht sail.
I have deliberately refrained from referring to the movement as a ‘pre-feed’ roll, as it is commonly termed.
It is inaccurate, for it implies that bream roll only before feeding.
This is quite untrue, for bream roll both during and after feeding, as well as before feeding.
That the rolling performance has some connection with feeding there is no doubt, but to what extent is difficult to say.
I  have heard it said that when bream break surface it is simply to obtain the extra oxygen available there.
This could well be so, but an increase in oxygen is coincident with an increase in appetite, so one could well go with the other.
What clouds the issue is that I have caught hundreds of bream, of all sizes, and from a variety of waters, when the surface of the water has not been broken once by a fish.
I also know of several productive bream waters where the bream never show themselves at all until they are being brought to the landing net.
I often wonder if the rolling activity at such times is happening well below the surface; so far below that there can be no visible signs of disturbance, even in calm water.
I cannot say with any degree of certainty that this is happening, but the rolling performance is part of the bream's basic instincts, and therefore I cannot believe that certain members of a species abandon entirely a basic behavioural activity.
I feel sure they must be rolling in the upper layer of water where there could be more dissolved oxygen than in the lower layer, but so far below surface there is no visible evidence.
If this is true, then why don't they roll right at the surface like 80 per cent of other bream?
I cannot pinpoint any appreciable difference between the ‘non-rolling’ bream waters and the rolling' ones.
It is a veritable enigma, and the answer to it would probably not put more fish into my net, but would greatly satisfy my curiosity.
Nevertheless, the greater majority of bream waters hold bream that do roll at the surface sometime in the course of feeding.
We can use this knowledge to our advantage when trying to locate the beats.
But we must be sure that what we are seeing is a true feeding roll and not just any surface activity, for bream do frequently appear at the surface when feeding is far from their thoughts.
A true feeding roll is always performed in the same direction by each rolling bream.
Which ever direction the bream are following, it is in that direction the bream will roll.
When a big shoal is feeding dozens of bream can be seen rolling at the same time, all facing the same way.
As fish are sinking back through the surface, other fish will be appearing through it, so that there is constant activity.
It is as though the bream were connected to  sticks with several people stood on the bottom pushing one fish up as they pull another one down.
When the fish are very big, and the shoal small, only one or two bream will make an appearance at any given time.
But do not judge the size of a shoal by the number of fish you see rolling, for it could be a big shoal with just a few fish rolling, or a small shoal with all the fish rolling.
If ever you see bream at the surface moving in several different directions, or merely lying with their backs or just the tip of their dorsal fins out of the water, or cruising sedately along, then they are not rolling or feeding bream.
Do not make any judgments from bream behaving in this way, for they can mislead you as to where the beat is.
When bream are resting they can be anywhere, and usually anywhere but where the patrol route is.
Bream layers
There is a popular theory that bream shoal in layers.
That is, you can have a shoal of bream of one size at or near the bottom of a water, and a shoal of bigger or smaller bream above them.
It was Peter Stone who popularised the theory, and then went on to prove its validity by float fishing at different depths and catching big bream from one depth and smaller ones from another depth.
So for me, bream layers do exist, if only in rivers, for Peter says he has yet to prove whether they exist in stillwaters.
I do not believe they do exist in stillwaters, for I am sure I would have found some evidence of the layer theory during the time I have been catching hundreds of stillwater bream.
I have caught fish ‘on the drop’ with leger tackle, and I have experimented with float tackle at different depths, but I have never found the slightest evidence of bream shoaling in different size layers in stillwaters.
For the sake of discussion, however, let us assume that bream layers are a fact in rivers and non-existent in stillwaters.
Let us ask ourselves why this should be so.
Remember that most shoals of sizeable bream, say fish of more than 3lb, patrol beats well out from the banks.
The only place that is well out from the banks on a river is the middle  section.
If a stretch of river holds more than one shoal of bream that patrol the same beat, then the only way they can pass each other when feeding on the same beat at the same time, is for one shoal to pass over the other.
It is very unlikely that the shoals would mix, for each shoal, once it is established, becomes a very individual, self-contained unit which does not allow outsiders into its ranks.
Graham Marsden slips an 8lb bream back into the mere.
It may be that in rivers there are times when two or even more shoals rendezvous at a point along a shared beat and pass each other— whether travelling in the same direction or not — by swimming over the top of whoever has arrived first.
When these shoals meet it is very likely to occur over a groundbaited area which has stopped one shoal in its tracks, and the other shoal pauses over the top to intercept the crumbs which are sent swirling upwards from the feeding shoal on the bottom.
The situation does not occur on stillwaters because there is enough water well out from the banks to allow the beats to be separated, if only by a few yards.
There is also plenty of water  for the shoals to be feeding at the same time in widely separated places.
It is true, too, that it is easier to harvest a large netful of bream from a river than it is from a stillwater.
The fact that several shoals are compelled by circumstances to amass in a swim at the same time may be the explanation as to why it is easier to make a big catch from a river.
The only time you will find bream layers in stillwaters is in small or narrow lakes and canals where there is too little room for more than one beat, and small waters are not suitable for growing big bream anyway.
Choosing the right water
Most quality bream waters have at least three things in common.
They are fifteen acres or more in size; they are understocked — compared with other waters; and there is an abundance of natural food.
To say they are under-stocked is perhaps somewhat inaccurate.
It may be more true to say that they are not over-stocked, which is a different matter entirely.
They contain the right number of fish, of any species, and maintain this correct balance over a number of years, enabling the residents to grow to their maximum potential size.
One of the few times you will find big bream in waters which do not match up to the points I have mentioned is when they are the result of a recent stocking operation.
But the enrichment of the water with such an injection of quality fish does not last long, for the new residents suffer from disorientation and malnutrition.
Soon after, perhaps only a matter of weeks, they are dead, or dwindling rapidly in size as they absorb their own body fats.
Bream do not transfer successfully even to a water equally as rich as the one they came from.
Some of the most famous big bream waters in Britain are the Cheshire and Shropshire meres.
They are rich in natural food and do not encourage over-breeding.
Flooded gravel pits and huge reservoirs are also ideal environments for big bream, notably the Tring group of reservoirs in Hertfordshire, and the Oxford T.C. Pit and Queenford Lagoon.
I am convinced, however, that there are many more big bream waters dotted about the country than we suspect.
Even in Cheshire, neighbouring Shropshire and Staffordshire, home  of the current British record of 16lb 6oz, previously unknown sources of these fish are discovered quite often.
It is true that the quality of most waters runs in cycles; a few years of mediocre fish followed by a few years of quality fish.
This is because every so often the fish enjoy a particularly good spawning year, when temperatures, spawning facilities, and lack of interference from predators all contribute to an abundance of surviving spawn and fry.
The following years are the period in the cycle that produce bags of medium-sized fish.
A spate of poor spawning years eventually produces the big fish period in the cycle.
What I look for when searching for a ‘new’ big bream water are the points I have mentioned: fifteen or more acres of water, and rich feed.
The waters to pay particular attention to are the ones which have produced bream in the past, even big bags of medium-sized fish, but have produced nothing like it in recent years.
Very often you will find that the bream have not disappeared entirely, but that the stocks have diminished to such an extent only a comparative few bream are left to enjoy the rich pickings.
These remaining few have invariably grown much larger than was previously possible when there was so much competition for the available food.
Once a water has attained this excellent balance of only relatively few big bream, it is surprising how long it can maintain the balance for a number of years afterwards.
Locating the patrol routes
Visual vigilance are all you need to locate the beats on waters where bream frequently roll at the surface.
The best time of all to visit a water is one hour before dawn to an hour after the sun has risen.
This is the time when bream roll most often.
Choose a spot on the water which gives you a complete view of the whole area of the lake.
Take a pair of binoculars with you so that when you spot surface activity in a distant area you can use them to confirm or otherwise that it is bream which are the cause.
Make sure, too, it is a feeding roll you are seeing and not any other kind of activity — though it is unlikely to be anything other than a feeding roll at that time of day.
Take particular note of every spot you see a bream roll, and after a few visits you will  be able to form an accurate picture of where, how long, and what pattern the route forms.
Although it is possible to take bream from most areas along their beat, there are areas, known as hotspots, which are infinitely more productive than anywhere else.
There is usually some characteristic along the route — perhaps a ledge or an especially rich bed of bloodworms — which has a special attraction, but quite often it is a turning point, or the terminal point, of a beat which is the hotspot.
When you have noted the area where the bream cease to roll and do not appear again in the immediate vicinity, the terminal point will be a few yards further along in the direction they were travelling.
If you see that they cease rolling and then begin rolling again some yards away in a different direction, then the area between the change is the turning point.
The terminal or turning point are the areas where you should begin to search for the hotspots.
On waters where the bream are not seen to roll, location is decidedly more difficult, and the areas to begin trial and error experiments will vary from one water to another.
In lakes which have both deep and shallow water, with a distinct shelf that divides the two, then this is a good place to begin.
In any event, your first priority should be to plumb the depths of the lake, taking note of ledges, holes, ridges, hard- and soft-bottomed areas, and any other features that could prove attractive to bream.
There are some waters that lie in valleys where the wind has little if any influence on the water, apart from a scurrying ripple that makes little difference to the temperature layers, dissolved oxygen, or food distribution.
But in open, or partially open waters, where a wind is capable of creating a choppy surface and influencing the below-surface conditions, it is wise to fish into the wind.
More often than not, an east or north-east wind is cold and detrimental to good fishing, so you will invariably find that you will do better fishing into a west or south-west wind, particularly where attractive bottom features can be reached from the north or north-east bank.
However, to say that one bank, or one wind direction, is always better than another does  not make much sense.
All other things must be equally attractive.
Preparation and pre-baiting
How much preparation is needed depends on the water.
Very often the swim you have chosen will not need any modification whatsoever, but on lakes where the banks are swampy and surrounded by a wide belt of rushes some preparation in the close season is necessary.
Obviously, cutting or breaking down a path through the rushes and laying planks over the swampy ground is the first priority.
When you have made safe access to the margins you must then decide whether to simply lay a number of planks to take a chair and your tackle, or to be more elaborate and build a proper stage.
My way would be to lay planks and make do with these until I had confirmed that it was in fact a good swim.
Then I would build a stage.
Planks laid over the flattened rushes restrict your movements to a great extent, for any small, sudden movement is greatly exaggerated by the planks over the unstable, boggy ground.
A stage with four or six legs, holding the platform about 2½ft above the surface to allow for fluctuations in water level, is far better in the long term.
It is more comfortable and less likely to transmit movement through the water, although great care should still be taken.
Pre-baiting for big bream is essential.
Remember that bream, in order to grow big, live in waters rich in natural food, and pre-baiting is necessary to wean them off it enough to accept your offerings.
Free feed in this instance is not to attract them to our swim, for if we have chosen wisely we will already be fishing on the patrol route which they follow regardless of groundbait being present or not.
Regular pre-baiting is needed to teach the bream that there is a tasty alternative to bloodworms, daphnia, crustacea, edible plant life, and other items that constitute natural aquatic food.
In order to educate bream the alternative food should be readily available.
It is no use whatsoever introducing bait at irregular intervals, for the lesson we are trying to teach them  will not sink in if we give them time to forget in between each baiting session.
Bait should be introduced as often as possible, at least every other day, but every day is much more effective.
In fact, if I had the time and money I would pre-bait every morning and evening.
Doug Sturmey and Graham Marsden hold bream of 9lb 4oz and 9lb 3oz taken from a Cheshire mere.
There is no time limit for pre-baiting.
Mine starts at least two weeks before I begin fishing and continues, albeit less frequently, for as long as I am fishing that water.
How much to put in depends on the population of fish, including other species, for you cannot prevent roach, perch, tench and carp etc., from feeding on your offerings.
The amount to use also depends on the type of food, for some feed is more filling than others.
This is something only you can judge, but most of the waters I fish respond well to a half-bucket of  groundbait and up to a pint of maggots and/or fifty or sixty worms.
The alternatives are up to a pint of seed bait, such as sweetcorn, a pint of casters, etc.
For other baits, and for different waters, it is a case of suck it and see.
If you intend to night-fish, which is usual in order to fish evening and early morning as well as the night itself, then you should aim to introduce your bait in the evening at least two hours before you expect to catch fish.
It is important to adhere to this time on every baiting session.
You are in fact indulging in a kind of brainwashing technique which, if taken to its ultimate, if this were desirable, could result in the fish feeding out of your hand.
Choosing the right bait for a particular water is important too.
There is no such thing as the best bait for bream, only the best bait for a water.
I have often read such things as bread being best for bream, or maggots, or worms.
This is fallacy, and simply stems from the fact that the angler who sings the praises of one bait uses that bait, and consequently catches more of his fish on that bait than any other.
You can, of course, say that a certain bait catches more bream than any other, but what you really mean is that a certain bait is used more often than any other on the waters with which you are acquainted.
If pre-baiting is carried out conscientiously, bream can be taught to take practically any edible matter, but there is little chance of success if almost all other anglers on that water are using something else, especially if it is the same alternative food.
Several of the big bream waters I fish respond best to maggots, but this is only because maggots are continually thrown in by everyone who fishes there.
It does not mean that maggots are the best bait for bream.
Practically every angler throws in bread groundbait, whatever hookbait he uses, so it is always a good bet that a bread bait will be successful.
On the other hand, where maggots are regularly fed into the water in swims which bream frequent, it very often happens that they take over completely and all other baits, including bread, are ignored almost entirely.
So choose your hookbait, and consequently the bait with which you will be pre-baiting, according to what is used most often on that particular water.
You can use your favourite bait, if you have one, when you fish a water which is little fished by anyone else.
You can always experiment with alternative baits on a spare rod.
Pre-baiting and baiting on the night you fish should, whenever possible, be carried out from a boat.
Since most, if not all, big bream swims lie some distance from the bank, groundbait which has to be thrown needs to be packed quite tightly in order not to break up while in flight.
Whatever kind of mix you use to facilitate rapid dispersing when it sinks, thrown bait will not spread anywhere near as efficiently as a loose feed which can be spread accurately from a boat.
The feed should form a circular or elliptical pattern.
Ideally it should be laid in a fine carpet and not in higgledy-piggledy lumps that bream can break down to easy mouthfuls.
Finely spread bait means they have to work hard for a meal and therefore remain in the swim for the maximum length of time.
The mix I use is 50%, white and 50% brown crumb, with enough water to make it light and fluffy.
From a boat it can be squeezed enough to get a grip on it, and when it hits the water it sinks in a big brown cloud.
On top of the carpet of groundbait I then scatter several handfuls of maggots or casters and/or worms, or whatever hookbait I have decided to use.
If my chosen hookbait is bread then I make sure to use mashed bread in the groundbait mix.
The use of a boat also brings another advantage.
You can place a marker at the edge of the swim which, at forty yards or more range, is a tremendous aid to accurate casting and ensures that groundbait always goes in the same spot.
All you need for a marker is a Fishing Gazette pike bung or a piece of polystyrene tied to a stone with a length of line about 12 inches longer than the depth of swim.
Tackle
Tackle for long-range leger fishing, which is what big bream fishing is mainly about, should be well balanced.
The rod, in order to pick up a long length of sunken line, should be a minimum of 11ft long, and a maximum of 12ft or it becomes unwieldy.
Its action should be stiff enough to cast accurately and not to ‘give’ too much when striking, but it should  still retain enough of its shock-absorber effect to cushion the resistance of a slab-sided bream when first struck into.
My ideal is an 11ft 4in, fast-taper action rod with a test-curve between 1lb and 1¼lb.
Most of the action is in the top half of the rod, which is enough to cushion the strike, but is fairly stiff for the rest of its length to give me good casting and striking.
It is not too unlike a match rod, in action that is, except that it is slightly more powerful throughout.
With this I use a fixed-spool, skirted reel, and there is really no other kind worth considering.
Line needs to be chosen with great care, for when long-range fishing any faults in the line will quickly become apparent.
It should be supple and as thin for its breaking strain as possible.
It should have no flats, kinks or frays, and its elasticity should be minimal.
Its stretchability should be low to assist hook penetration when striking over the great distance, but a certain amount of stretch is needed as a safety margin to assist the cushioning effect of the rod.
An ideal compromise between the two, based on the sharpness of your own reflexes, should guide your choice.
And choose a line that sinks quickly.
You could compensate for a too-stiff rod and poor reflexes — reflexes which you need for easing off when the hook bites into a lip — by using a stronger line.
But this means extra weight to punch the tackle out the required distance and also a greater effort, which inevitably leads to inaccuracy.
It also means that you will very often have to use a heavier indicator because of the increased drag imposed on a thicker line in windswept water.
The line I use more often than not is 3lb b.s., but I would not recommend this to anglers with no experience of long-range legering.
A line of 4lb or even 5lb b.s. is safer to begin with.
I do sometimes go down to 2½lb, but although I have never been broken on it I never feel as confident as I ought.
Every time I have to strike my heart is in my mouth, and although I do not consciously hold back when I strike, I wonder if I am doing so without being aware of it.
I use spade-end hooks in sizes 10's, 12's, 14's, 16's and 18's.
Chemically sharpened whisker barb hooks are best, especially those by Drennan or Kamasan.
The weight of the Arlesey bomb, of course, depends upon many things: distance you need to cast, bait you are using (bread presents more resistance than maggots for instance ), line strength, and conditions — windy or calm — on the day.
I use a ¾oz bomb more often than any other, but have ¼oz, ½oz, and 1oz and even 1½oz for when they are needed.
Terminal tackle
There are two main types of terminal tackle, the link-leger and the paternoster, of which there are several variations of each.
A more detailed comparison of the two is discussed on pages 12–13.
My preference when fish are feeding hard on the bottom is for the fixed paternoster which, due to the lead being at the extreme end of the line, casts further and more accurately than any other set-up.
It is also a very useful rig for fishing over soft mud and weed.
The distances between bomb and hook link, and hook and link can be varied to suit different depths of weed and different volumes of mud.
There are many and varied versions of the link-leger designed to combat the same problem.
Two popular ones are the fledger and the balsa-bomb.
Each has its disadvantages and advantages, but each incorporates a running swivel on the main line which, when fished in waters subject to algae particles, can foul up and obstruct sensitive bite detection, and neither makes for accurate, long-distance casting.
The fixed paternoster has none of these disadvantages and many advantages which are discussed in the chapter on tackle (page 7).
On waters which cannot be baited from a boat, and where swims are too distant to be fed by catapult, the use of a swimfeeder to distribute loose feed around the hookbait is often a deadly method.
Where the bottom is weedy (ordinary soft weed, not algae) you can incorporate a cork or piece of polystyrene into the feeder to keep it on top of the weed (see Fig. 3).
Techniques
I invariably use two rods, one to experiment with baits and methods, and to cast in different areas in and around the swim.
Some anglers use three rods, but I have found that at least one of   these tends to be neglected.
Very often it is this rod that gets a bite.
My first rod is used to cast to within a yard or two of a predetermined spot; a spot which I know from past experience is a productive one.
In every bream swim there is one very small area which will produce more bream than all the rest of the swim  put together.
If you take special care to note landmarks on the far bank, use a swim marker to aid judgment, and make sure you have noted the exact spot, every time you cast you will soon have this area firmly implanted in your mind.
Of course, you vary the cast at first , until you discover the hotspot, but if you have not noted each cast fairly precisely you will not know where the fish came from when you do catch one.
When you catch a fish, or get a strikeable bite and miss it, you should cast a bait back into the water as quickly as possible.
More often than not a shoal of big bream, particularly a small shoal of very big bream, does not remain in a swim for long.
You should take full advantage of every minute they are present and feeding.
It may happen only once in twenty-four hours, and often even less frequently.
The bigger the fish the less often they feed.
If you fish with a friend, then begin in separate swims until you know which swim is the productive one.
Once you know, then both of you should fish that swim.
I see little point in presenting the bream with more groundbait than is necessary, and anyway, if both of you catch fish then you are doubling the pleasure, or if your mate catches and you are unlucky, you can enjoy his success and net the fish for him, which is a pleasure in itself.
At night I use a pair of betalites for indicators, fitted with clips that hold gently onto a loop of line pulled down between butt-ring and reel.
Attached to the bottom of the betalite, which is encased in a plastic tube for protection, is a length of braided terylene tied at the other end to my back rod-rest, so that when I strike the indicator pulls off and drops to the ground.
This line is also useful for pinching on swan shot when I need a heavier indicator.
The front rod-rests hold Optonic alarms.
The only light I use at night is a small torch which I can grip in my mouth while using both hands to bait up, sharpen or change hooks, or make any other adjustments to my tackle.
The advantage of not having a light on all the time to illuminate the indicators is that my eyes adjust to the darkness and when it comes to casting or playing fish I am not completely blind.
In daylight I use exactly the same set-up, except that the betalite bobbins are changed for a daylight type that show up brighter.
When the fish are well on feed I will put one rod away  and change to a butt-indicator which allows me to fish more quickly and efficiently.
This is important when the fish are in the swim and perhaps ready to bite as soon as they see the bait sinking through the water.
The butt-indicator remains on the line and is always ready to indicate a bite from the moment your  bait enters the water.
On such occasions you cannot afford the time, no matter how little, to set up a clip-on bobbin.
Bream taken by Graham Marsden in a single session: 8lb 14oz, 9lb, 9lb 1oz,9lb 8oz and 11lb 1oz.
The amount of line I allow a bream before striking is usually from nine to twelve inches.
Bites usually begin with a slight tremble, or lift of half an inch or so, and then a steady but determined rise that continues until you strike or the fish lets go of the bait.
This is the right amount of line to allow a big bream before striking in normal, average circumstances.
A big bream is a very deep-bodied fish and would have to stand almost tail to surface to pick a bait direct from the bottom with its lips, which I know they do when they are in that kind of mood.
But I am convinced — from what I have seen and what my commonsense tells me — that more often than not they simply tilt towards the bait at a slight angle and suck it to their lips from distances up to nine inches, a process of vacuuming which they may repeat several times before attempting to swallow the bait.
The muddier the bottom the more likely they are to suck and blow the bait to clean it.
Of course, it may be true that bream only rarely suck from as much as nine inches distance, but I always allow that much on the assumption that they do.
Better, I reckon, to allow more than is necessary, than too little.
I do not what to be striking my hook away rim the fish before it has even reached its lips.
If the fish sucks from three inches and moves my indicator that much, and then bodily moves my indicator another nine inches I am not going to complain.
There are times when it is essential to strike at half-inch twitch bites.
This is when the bream are feeding very confidently, usually on maggots which they are picking up directly from the bottom, much as a chicken picks up corn one grain after another without having to move too far to do it.
In this instance it is wise to have no more than a 4-inch drop on the indicator and sit with your hand hovering over the rod.
An 11-pounder I caught came to such a bite, and four others around 9lb on the same day to similar bites.
The strike should be a firm, fast, straight-back-over-the-shoulder action, with your reflexes alerted to respond to the sudden resistance you feel when you hit a big bream.
The moment you feel it you should stop the strike and allow the fish  its initial run, which is short-lived but quite strong.
After that it is a simple matter of pumping and reeling it to the net.
You should be ready, however, for those awkward bream that decide to use their vast body area like kites.
It is just like having a child's kite on the end of your line in a strong wind.
As I mentioned earlier, they glide round in an arc and it is a hell of a job to prevent them from plunging into the weeds some way along your own bank.
After the first plunge you should endeavour to pull the fish off balance, which is usually not too difficult with these deep but narrow-bodied fish.
I have caught bream which have fought exceptionally well, but these have mainly been fish between 5lb and 7lb from deep, clear water lakes like those found in Ireland.
Some bream I have hooked have fought like big tench; strong, powerful runs all the way to the net.
But these really hard scrappers have come on short lines when float fishing, and a short line makes a lot of difference to how a fish fights when the elasticity is negligible.
A big bream should be weighed immediately it is caught, for these fish can lose a lot of weight in a short time in a keepnet or keepsack.
I have weighed quite a few bream as soon as I have removed the hook, and again several hours later, and while they always lose some weight, there is no specific loss in terms of so many ounces per hour.
It varies considerably from fish to fish.
The biggest loss I recorded was 11oz in a 9lb 5oz bream which had been in a keepnet for nine hours.
The least was 2oz in a 9lb 1oz fish kept for eight hours.
Let me add that the latter incidents were many years ago.
I no longer retain fish for such long periods.
The only snag to weighing fish immediately is that you should, as I have already mentioned, get your bait back in the water as quickly as possible when the bream are feeding.
The best way is to get your mate to weigh it while you re-bait and cast, providing he is not otherwise occupied.
When I am fishing on my own I only weigh them straight away if they appear to be over 9lb, and leave the weighing until I pack in if they appear to be less.
When I have a shoal of feeding bream in the swim I cannot rest easy.
I am constantly ‘working’ with my second rod while keeping a watchful eye on my other rod which is cast into the hotspot.
The second, or spare rod, is never left to fish for itself for more than a couple of minutes.
If the bottom is not too weedy I constantly twitch the bait along the bottom a few inches at a time.
If the bottom is too weedy for this I continually re-bait and cast.
I do not cast directly over the swim, but several yards beyond it and draw back to the swim before the bait can settle, covering all areas of the swim and many spots out of it.
It is uncanny how many bites I get only seconds after casting or immediately following the bait being twitched along the bottom.
Bread is an excellent big bream bait on most waters, for even when anglers are continually baiting with maggots they usually throw groundbait in too.
It is true though, that where waters are absolutely saturated with maggots, even bread comes a poor second.
I usually fish four or five maggots on a 12 hook; two or three grains of sweetcorn on a 10 or an 8.
For bread the hook is a size 10 or 8, and for a bunch of two or three brandlings, or a big lob, the hook is a 10, 8 or 6.
I sometimes go down to an 18 when maggot fishing or a single brandling or grain of sweetcorn on a 16, but it is not very often such refinements are necessary.
Feeding times for bream, on most waters, are extraordinarily predictable.
On several of the meres I fish I can tell to within a few minutes when I will get bites.
You can do the same if you note the time every occasion you get a bite or a fish, and fish a water for long enough.
You learn too, which swims are more likely to be productive at any particular time.
Some are best in the evening, some around midnight, some for two or three hours following dawn, and others at various times during the day.
When you find you have only a few hours to spare you can choose the best swim for that particular period.
Float fishing for big bream
Up till about 1980 I had little experience of float fishing for big bream, and I don't recall ever having read anything on the subject.
Perhaps one can assume, therefore, that it is a subject few people know anything about.
It was my view that float fishing would not be a good idea  anyhow, for I did not know of any big bream swims close enough to the bank for a float cast.
I also considered that big bream were far too shy to tolerate the presence of a punt, with all the inevitable disturbance that punts cause, so relatively close to the swim.
A boat is like a floating drum and any noise and vibration are magnified through the water.
In the last few years I have done a lot of float fishing from a punt for big bream and I can state quite categorically that, if it is done correctly, it can be a most deadly method of catching bream.
Before you read any more about float fishing for bream from a punt I would advise you to read the chapter on punt fishing on page 21.
Locating the feeding routes of bream is no less important when float fishing from a punt than when legering from the bank.
The only difference is a distinct advantage: on large waters a punt will enable you to fish swims which are not within casting range of the bank.
Very often a bream feeding route will run along the bottom of a distinct ledge, or shelf.
Such is one of my favourite swims: the top of the shelf is 2½ft deep and then it rapidly drops away to 8ft at the base.
It gives me a tremendous advantage in that I can moor the punt about 15yds back from the top of the shelf, in the shallower water, out of sight of the bream.
Another advantage is that a hooked bream can be persuaded — with a little not-too-gentle pulling and guidance — to fight it out in the shallower water and therefore not disturb the remainder of the feeding shoal.
However, the rest of the shoal will not be disturbed too much anyhow, for in spite of what I used to believe, and what many anglers still believe, that big bream are too shy to be caught with such tactics, they will ignore almost anything if you have fed them correctly.
Correct feeding means loose feeding with a so-called multiple particle bait, and in this category are maggots and casters.
Casters are the better of the two for the reason that they sink and remain still on the bottom until they are eaten.
Bream also love them.
The ability to loose feed is a tremendous advantage that fishing at close range (within the firing distance of  catapulted maggots and/or casters) gives us.
Apart from the lack of noise and disturbance, which balls of groundbait normally cause when carrying hookbait samples to distant swims, there is the added, and greater, advantage that loose feed can be introduced on the ‘little and often’ principle.
A great many big fish anglers think that ‘little and often’ applies only to match angling when the target is small fish.
This is nonsense, for it will work with any species and size of fish.
The idea is to introduce a generous helping of loose feed in the first instance.
This will attract the fishes' attention and encourage them to feed.
By then introducing smaller helpings of loose feed at regular intervals it keeps the fish interested and, more importantly, it gradually preoccupies them with that particular item of food.
Once fish become totally preoccupied, to the extent that they will ignore all other baits, including natural food, they become so intent on feeding they also become almost oblivious to many of the danger signals, i.e. noise and the disturbance of hooked shoal-mates, that would normally have them scuttling to the four corners of the pool.
Feeding little and often with loose feed sounds like a simple exercise that requires no great thought or expertise.
However, it is something for which one develops an instinct, or feel, over the years.
It is not simply a matter of firing a dozen or so casters into the swim every few minutes; it is a case of knowing just when to step up the feed, when to slow it down, and when to cease feeding altogether.
It all revolves around correct timing, and this depends on the reactions of the fish at the time.
Basically, you step up feeding when the number of bites increases, and slow it down as bites slow down.
But that is simplifying it too much; for it is like learning how to ride a bike: you can read about the technique, but only lots of practice will give you a feel for it and the essential balance you need.
As far as tackle is concerned, it is very important it is as light as possible and balanced.
I use a 2½lb main line, either straight through or to a 2lb hook length.
If you married that to your usual 1¼lb test-curve legering rod, you would not get away with it very often.
You would break off far more times than you landed a fish.
I use a Shakespeare 13ft match rod, which enables  me to play big fish on light tackle without undue fear of breakage.
Actually, with a match rod and light line you do not really play a fish in the normal way, but rather you guide them, manipulate them, into the landing net.
Remember though, you can only do this in open water; if there are snags around you can bet the bream will head for them, and there is no way you are going to stop a big bream on 2lb line.
An excellent bait for bream when the swim is carpeted with casters is one or two redworms, depending on size, tipped with maggot or caster.
I fish such a bait on a 14 hook, or go down to a 16 if the bream are being finicky.
For some reason bream will still take a redworm even when preoccupied with casters, but there are times when the preoccupation becomes so acute you simply have to use casters on the hook.
In this case I begin with two on a 16, and if necessary go down to one caster on an 18.
On the very rare occasion I have fished a single caster on a size 20 hook.
I have now settled for two types of float for bream fishing.
When I'm fishing from the bank, and the water is choppy, there are few floats better than Drennan ‘Driftbeater’.
It is an excellent float for beating drift and registers lift bites like no other float can.
It is important, however, that the float is set up correctly, which is with a large shot on the bottom.
This should be at least an AA, if not an SSG.
The shot should also be no more than four inches from the hook (see Fig. 3).
The principle is that the bottom shot holds the float down almost to the sight-bob, then the rod is placed in two rests and the line is tightened until only the sight-bob remains above surface.
When a fish sucks in the bait it lifts the bottom shot off the bottom and so allows the buoyancy of the float to take over, resulting in the antenna rising out of the water like the sword Excalibur.
It is a wonderful thing to see, and somehow gives you a greater thrill than seeing a conventional float slide under the surface.
When I'm boat fishing I use a plain, bodied waggler, which I shot down to a quarter inch or so off the surface.
I use the shotting pattern seen in figure 3.
The shot sizes are variable according to casting distances and amount of pull on the water.
The shot sizes given are one example only.
Bream weather
One particular weather condition has more effect on bream fishing than any other; wind.
Wind has three effects on water.
It increases the amount of dissolved oxygen; raises or lowers water temperature; and distributes, to a degree, food.
Of the three dissolved oxygen is the most important factor, but we can ignore none.
Let me describe what I regard as the best conditions of all for bream fishing.
The water temperature should be between 60 — 65°F — the exact figure is not too important providing it is steady or slowly rising.
It should be a cloudy night, or day, with at least the threat of rain, if not a light drizzle.
There should be a strong, warm, westerly or south-westerly wind making the surface choppy.
Give me all those conditions on a big bream water and I will stand by my rods all night or day.
The worst kind of bream weather is, obviously, just the opposite.
Full moon and a cloudless night, falling water temperature and flat calm surface.
If I am daft enough to tackle up in those conditions I usually go to sleep and hope I wake up to a change for the better.
There are, of course, many weather conditions between the two extremes when you have a chance of catching bream.
Anytime a westerly or south-westerly wind is blowing, for example, means you must be in with a good chance of making a catch, even if other conditions are not equally as good.
A cloudy, but flat calm night, with a steady or rising water temperature is promising too, especially if the night is muggy.
Even in a cold east wind, fishing prospects should not be rejected out of hand if the previous weather conditions have been extremely hot.
A lowering of the water temperature, especially with the influx of dissolved oxygen the east wind is thrashing into the water, can be a good thing.
This is a case when the west bank could be the best bet, providing the bream have a beat in that area.
In any event, relate the prevailing weather conditions to the conditions over the previous few days, and make your decision of if, or where, to fish on that basis.
The ‘perfect bite’ enigma
There are occasions, usually occurring when the weather conditions are near perfect for bream fishing, when you will go through a period of having bite after bite, all looking perfectly hittable in the classic bream style — slow and determined — and when you will become extremely frustrated because you miss every one.
The first few occasions I experienced this enigma I put it down simply to the fact that I was fishing too far out and the bream were brushing against the line and giving me ‘line’ bites.
I have learned since that this is not always the case.
I have noticed that this frustrating experience usually occurs in promising conditions when you expect to catch fish, and when these bites begin they last for unusually long periods and happen very frequently.
To get thirty bites in two hours is not unusual.
Nor is it unusual to miss them all.
What I think is happening is that a big shoal has moved into the swim; a very hungry shoal of bream that behave very much like chickens.
You know the kind of thing I mean: the chickens dart into the mêlée, pick up a morsel of food, and then charge off to eat it in comparative quiet.
All wild creatures behave in the same way when presented with a cache of food and plenty of competition for it.
They move in, grab, and run.
The bream pick up a bait by simply sucking it to the edge of their lips, and then move away from the main shoal to consume it.
All we are doing when we strike is to pull the hook and bait away from their lips.
When I first realised that most of the bites were not simply ‘line’ bites (and you can test this easily by casting in a baitless hook) I tried every conventional trick in the book to hit them.
I tried smaller hooks and baits; lighter leads; finer lines; a lighter, or no bite indicator; and opening the bale-arm of the reel and allowing them to take several yards of line before striking.
The only thing that worked with the odd fish was the open bale-arm, but more often than not the bream dropped the bait before I struck.
If I struck earlier, I missed it.
The next time it happened I reversed the procedure.
Bigger hooks and baits and heavier indicators brought more success  than anything else I had tried.
Not outstanding success, for I was still missing nine out of ten bites, hut enough to suggest I was on the right track.
So I asked myself why less sensitive tackle should be more successful than anything else.
There Was only one conclusion I could come to: heavier baits and indicators were too heavy for the bream to carry away with the bait sucked to the edge of their lips, so they had to grip with their lips to manage it.
The next logical step was to present the bream with a small hook and bait which would be more likely to be right inside their lips when they began to carry it off, but to still retain the heaviness so that they could not manage it with a mere suck.
A very heavy indicator was tried with promising results.
But what was happening now was that the bream were frequently dropping the bait before I could strike.
So I went back to alight indicator, pulled down only a few inches, which was enough to allow the bream to suck the bait to their lips, and then I paused for a few seconds while I watched the line from the rod-tip tightening in the water.
Once the light indicator had reached the limit of its travel the bream had to grip the bait to stop it pulling away from its lips.
The line tightening in the water told me they had done so, and I struck before all the bow had been taken out of the line.
A simpler way, and often very effective, is to fish with a conventional indicator system, then allow the bream tot take line against an unchecked reel, i.e. with the reel handle revolving backwards.
It was not the complete answer to the problem, and I doubt if anyone will find it, but it works better than anything else I know.
But please, make sure it is the ‘perfect bite’ enigma before you try any of the methods I have recommended.
It may simply be a normal problem which a minor tackle or bait adjustment can deal with.
the real thing can be recognised by the incredible number of bites you get in such short time.
Predatory bream
Bream that eat small fish are not a separate and distinct class of fish, or size of fish, set apart from other bream.
All bream, mature bream that is, will devour a small fish as and when the opportunity arises and they have the inclination to do so.
This  happens most often when massive shoals of fry from that year's spawning present themselves as an easy meal to a shoal of bream.
Any natural food creature, and you can include small fish in that category, can cause bream and other usually non-predatory species, to become preoccupied with that item when there happens to be an abundance of them.
The preoccupation will last until the larder is almost bare.
Apart from the occasions when bream are preoccupied with full larders of fry, there are times all through the year when they will eat a small fish, just the same as there are times when they will chomp a lobworm.
You should not fall into the trap of thinking a fish bait is something special; a bait of extraordinary properties that will tempt a super-specimen bream where others will not.
There are more 3lb and 4lb bream caught, accidentally or otherwise, on small fish, than there are double-figure bream.
The capture of two 10lb bream from Grafham reservoir on fish imitating lures was treated as though the incidents were especially significant; that lure fishing could be regarded as a specially good method for catching exceptionally big bream.
It would be interesting to see how many big bream could be taken from Grafham if bait and bottom fishing were allowed.
When fly and lure fishing only are allowed on a water there is no other way that fish can be caught.
It does not make lure fishing better than other methods.
Fishing for predatory bream with imitation or real fish should be regarded as an opportunist method to be employed when you happen to see bream chasing fry, or when you have tried all conventional methods and failed; or simply when you fancy your chances with a fish bait.
There will be times when a fish bait will be the best way of catching big bream, but it will never be the best way all the time, or even most of the time.
Black, bronze and two-tone bream
Several years ago I wrote a controversial article in a fishing magazine concerning black, bronze and two-tone bream.
It was entitled, ‘Do We Have Two Breeds Of Bream?’
The title was not mine, and the word ‘Breeds’ in the title suggested  something different to what the article purported to say.
The colouring of bream varies enormously, ranging from a silvery whiteness, through several shades of bronze, to near blackness.
In most waters they are the classic golden bronze to which the common bream owes one of its names.
With most other fish the tone of the colouring can be directly related to the environment they inhabit: light colouring in light sand and gravel-bottomed, shallow waters; dark colouring in black mud-bottomed and deep waters.
Bream do not always conform to this pattern.
There are instances where black, bronze, and silver-sided bream are found in the same water.
The facts are these.
I have found all three colourings of bream in light-bottomed waters, in dark-bottomed waters, in shallow waters, in deep waters, and in waters with both dark and light and deep and shallow areas.
All three are caught from the same swims, although not necessarily at the same time, and in every case there are two-tone specimens.
Whether they are black/white or light bronze/dark bronze two-toners, the dividing line is always in the same position.
For many years it was accepted that two-tone fish (it occurs with other species, but rarely) are the result of winter hibernation, the dark portion of the fish being the part that is buried in bottom mud.
In the article ‘Do We Have Two Breeds Of Bream?’
I took it upon myself to suggest that two-tone bream are simply another variety of common bream (not another breed) just as black fish and bronze fish in the same water are varieties of the same species, and as mirror and leather carp are varieties of the same species.
I have had no reason to change my mind.
Here are two more facts to think about, discovered since I wrote the article.
I have caught two-tone bream in winter, and not during a mild spell when hibernation could have been interrupted.
A few hours after death a two-tone bream reverts to one colour, the lighter shade.
Hibernation?
Parasitical interference with colour-changing mechanism, or simply another variety of common bream?
What do you think?
Carp
Carp are a cult fish.
There are carp study groups, carp catchers groups, and all other manner of carp worshipping bodies.
It is not surprising really, for carp are beautiful fish, they grow to large size, fight very hard, and are not too difficult to catch.
When Richard Walker shattered the carp record with a 44lb common carp from Redmire Pool in 1952 it triggered off the carp craze that dominates the big fish scene today.
No fish has captured the imagination and been dreamed of by anglers more than the carp.
The tales of wrist-breaking fights with leviathan carp are legendary, and the ghostly, mist-shrouded waters that provide a backdrop for these real or imaginary scenes only add to the mystique that anglers love.
Redmire itself is one such spiritual water and is the altar where every devoted carp angler would like to worship.
It is spoken of in breathless whispers, and woe betide anyone who blasphemes the sacred place.
I have not seen Redmire myself, only pictures of it; pictures always taken when the mist is rising, with a low sun providing back light to add to the eerie effect.
‘Here is peace and  tranquillity ,’ the pictures seem to say.
‘Come and fish me, the carp are yours for the taking.’
But Redmire, apart from its almost unique ability to grow exceptionally big carp (it produced the current record of 51lb 8oz), is much the same as a lot of carp waters.
Rain can thrash its surface, wind can chop it up, and the carp still have to be outwitted; probably even more than on a water where the natural food is less abundant and the carp are smaller and therefore not so cautious.
There really is too much mystique attached to carp fishing, most it promoted by anglers who would like you to think that carp are much more difficult to catch than they actually are.
Carp are no different from any other big fish.
In some waters they are extremely hard to catch, in others the are ridiculously easy.
A lot of the misconceptions stem from the days when catgut and braided nylon was the stuff you tied your hook to; when nylon monofilament was something new and therefore not to be trusted.
These days line is, in some cases, less than half the diameter than it was for a given breaking strain.
Since there are more carp and more carp fisheries around today, and so many anglers fishing for carp, it is inevitable that the number caught is higher than it has ever been.
The thing to remember is this: modern tackle, fancy baits and productive waters do not make a carp angler.
A successful carp angler still has to know his fish.
You cannot attack an ‘enemy’ unless you know where in his environment you can find him at any given time, and the best techniques, properly applied, are needed to bring about his downfall.
Carp are basically bottom feelers.
The very nature of their mouths says so.
paradoxically, however, surface feeding is part of their nature too.
But it must be pointed out that there are some waters where carp rarely, if ever, feed at the surface.
There seems to be no logical or apparent reason for this.
A water where they feed both on the bottom and at the surface can be outwardly identical to one where they feed only on the bottom.
Carp are capable of growing and thriving in both small and large lakes.
The space they have to grow in seems to have very little to do with the size they can achieve.
The main factor that governs their potential size is the amount of natural food and the competition, or lack of it, from other species, and competition from each other.
Obviously, the fewer carp competing for the available food the better the chance of reaching a worthwhile size.
I have noticed, too, that a lake with sand, or part sand, bottom, nearly always grows big carp.
Maybe this is because a sand-bottomed lake does not provide first-class spawning facilities and maintains a well-balanced stock of carp.
Climatical conditions also dictate the number and size of carp.
The north, due to fewer hours of less warm sunshine, and more severe winters, does not have as many or as big carp as the south.
However, our recent spate of hot summers and mild winters seems to be redressing the balance somewhat.
Carp feed on anything edible they can find, animal or vegetable.
They will consume enormous numbers of tiny creatures like daphnia, or several large mussels; a large quantity of algae and, at times, one or two small fish.
Carp are not a true shoal fish like most other coarse fish, vet you may see several fish in a group feeding over the same area.
This, though, is simply a gathering of independent fish in an area that offers enough food for all of them, such as a baited swim.
It is more usual to see individual carp, or just one or two together.
Also, unlike bream, big and small carp will feed in the same area at the same time.
Another idiosyncrasy of carp is their unpredictable feeding times.
By that I do not mean than one cannot pin them down to set feeding patterns on specific waters.
I mean that you cannot say that carp are generally nocturnal feeders, or morning feeders, or whatever.
On most waters you have a chance of taking carp at any time of day or night.
Of course, there are times when your chances are much greater, such as the early morning, which will, more often than not, produce more carp than the afternoon.
Where, say, tench are concerned, you can confidently expect tench in the early morning and know your chances are practically non-existent in the afternoon, which is the case on almost all tench waters.
Prevailing weather conditions dictate if and where in a lake carp will feed.
It is not enough simply to take into account the conditions at that particular time.
They must be related to the conditions prevailing over several preceding days.
If, for instance, there has been a cold wind blowing for several days and the water temperature has been well down for the time of year, then the wind ceases and the sun brings a sudden warmth to the water, you can almost guarantee that the carp will begin to feed.
On the other hand, if the weather is already hot and the water temperature is 70° F. or more, then the wind suddenly springs up and brings a drop in water temperature and  a rise in the amount of dissolved oxygen in the water, you can also expect fish.
You can also expect the fish to feed along the shore towards which the wind is blowing.
Here, the wind will be having the most effect, blowing the cooler and more comfortable water to that side.
Carp fishing has changed very little in some respects, yet in others it has changed dramatically.
The two areas where the greatest change has taken place is in baits and approach.
At one time it was assumed that the best approach was one of stealth and caution, particularly as the most productive place to fish was invariably no more than a rod's length away from your own bank.
There are so many anglers fishing for carp today, not all of them recognising or caring that carp can be frightened very easily, it is now more usual to ignore the area immediately in front of you and cast, with specialised tackle, as far as possible.
In other words, you do not creep into the ‘enemy's’ camp, but bombard it from a distance.
On many public waters this long-range approach is a necessity, for the dedicated carp anglers are fishing alongside casual anglers who neither know or care that cautiousness and quietness are the essence of good fishing, at least where big fish are concerned.
It is a pity, for much of the pleasure of carp fishing is this tuning-in of a highly developed hunting instinct.
To approach a lake with delicacy and quietness, to blend in with the background and, once the bait is in the water only a rod's length out, to sit there with bated breath, using every available piece of cover.
It is amazing what an acutely exciting feeling is engendered when you know, or anticipate, that the carp are only a few short yards from where you sit.
It is not the same when you do not have to whisper to your companions and you can only dream of the carp as tiny dots sixty yards or more away.
But do not despair.
If it is still more important to you to enjoy your fishing, using methods and approaches more akin to your liking, than it is to catch big fish at the cost of a great deal of enjoyment, then there are still a few waters where you can use ‘classic’ tactics.
The carp will probably not be as big as on ‘long-range’ waters.
If they were, these waters would have been invaded before now.
A 10lb carp, however, is still a big fish, and  if your sense of values is not impaired, then such fish can give tremendous pleasure.
For the moment, let us ignore the modern specialised approach and concentrate on tackling a typical carp lake which will allow you to fish it in whatever style you choose.
It is the coarse fish close season and there are six weeks to go to 16th June.
I have found a five-acre lake which has both deep and shallow water and I have heard that it holds a good head of carp averaging 8lb to 14lb with a distinct possibility of a 20-pounder.
Apart from that I do not know anything about it.
The first weekend I spend a few hours in a boat making a note of the various depths, the location of weedbeds, and any shelves or basins which could prove attractive to fish.
If it had been impossible for one reason or another to use a boat on the water I would have done the best I could with a plummet and noted what I could see from the banks.
The second and third weekend I get to the lake just before daybreak armed with a pair of binoculars and settle down for a couple of hours in a spot which gives me a good view of all, or most, of the water.
If I am lucky, and the weather is compatible with fish-spotting, I should see signs of the carp when they push through weedbeds and hump through the surface, or mudclouds and bubbles when they root in the bottom.
At the end of the third weekend I should have an idea of a good swim to fish.
I have seen carp rooting in several places but more in one area than any other.
I know there is a shelf in the area that runs parallel to the bank about three yards out, and that the water is eight feet deep at the bottom of the shelf.
I have seen carp humping the surface over the top of this ledge and even leaping clear of the water on occasions, and at one point along the bottom of the shelf a dense mudcloud was invariably evident.
My next step is to decide what I am going to use to pre-bait with over the next three weeks.
I do not see any reason for using anything special, so I choose to bait with two items, bread and worms.
Both are as good as anything on a water which is not over-fished.
Ideally, I would have liked to have baited on a little and often basis, say a couple of dozen lobworms and one mashed loaf  every day.
But time and expense means I have to economise and therefore I choose to bait every other day except for the last three days when I will bait on each of them.
I have already decided that I will fish the water at night, at least to begin with, and this will allow me to fish the three best periods: dusk, darkness and dawn.
That decided, I bait the swim every other day at approximately the same time in the evening, for this will teach the carp that there is food available from a certain time.
After the first week they should have grown used to the idea that on some evenings the pantry will be bare.
But that should not stop them from checking all the same.
On the evenings I bait the swim I spend an hour just sitting and watching the swim after the bait has been introduced, looking for signs of carp moving into the area.
I do not see much to encourage me at all, but this does not worry me for it could be much later when they arrive, after I have left for home.
Also, one Sunday morning, I took the boat over the swim and stirred the muddy bottom and there were no signs of breadcrumbs in the mudclouds that billowed to the surface.
Of course, I cannot be certain it is carp and not some other species eating the bait, but I know it will be fun finding out when the 16th arrives.
There is another job to be done three days before opening night.
I need to clear a narrow path through the rushes and also through the lilies that border the margins.
I have not done this before for two reasons.
The first reason is that I did not want to advertise to anyone interested that a new swim had been create and cultivated.
The second reason is that I wanted to educate the carp into finding bait in the area before I alter the character of the swim in any way.
Not that I will be changing anything in the immediate area of the shelf at the base of which the bait lies, but I thought it better to give the carp a profound liking for the swim before even one stalk of rush or one lily pad was removed.
I cut a path through the rushes which allows enough space for two rods, and room each side to wade to the water's edge.
This will give me better control over any fish I may hook, for they will no doubt try to charge into the lilies on either side of the swim.
On the eve of the opening of the new season I arrive much earlier than necessary, even though I cannot begin fishing until  midnight.
But I want to take my time over tackling up and savouring the prospect of the sport I hope to enjoy.
The two rods I piece together are rather special to me.
They are Richard Walker's Mk IV design of 1½lb test-curve, but they were very expensive rods at the time I bought them for they are made of cane called Palakona.
I get tremendous pleasure just from handling them.
They feel like an extension of my arm, with a sweet action down their 10 ft length which is supple enough to cast free-lined baits and give me a feel of a fighting fish, yet with power to spare when I have to bend it into the run of a big carp.
These rods are designed to match lines from 6lb to 12lb.s.
It is 10lb line I thread through the rings from my fixed-spool reels.
I cannot for the life of me understand anglers who use those lifeless, poker-like, stepped-up carp rods coupled with lines of 12lb or less.
It is totally pointless to use extra-heavy rods at short range which cannot do the job they were designed for if they are not used with lines of the appropriate length.
What is the point of having the ultra-powerful weapon if it is not armed with the correct ammunition?
It is like using an elephant gun to fire air-rifle pellets; inappropriate, inaccurate and completely point of having an ultra-powerful weapon if it is not armed with the correct ammunition; it is like using an elephant gun to fire air-rifle pellets; inappropriate, inaccurate and completely unbalanced.
Onto one line I tie a size 2, straight-eyed, forged hook, which has been carefully honed with a fine carborundum stone to razor sharpness, and the barb reduced to a bare minimum so as not to impeded penetration but still retain a degree of holding power.
A size 6 hook is tied tot eh line on my second rod and this also receives attention from my sharpening stone.
The set-up with the smaller hook is completely free of lead, which is known as a free-line rig.
I do not need any lead because the size 6 hook will hold a lobworm which is quite capable of being cast a short distance, and able to sink under its own weight.
The rig with the link-leger, made up of a ½oz bomb and a swivel (see Fig. 3 on page 61).
I need the weight on this tackle because the bread flake I am going to use will not cast or sink so easily under its own weight.
My front rod-rests are fitted with electric bite alarms and I couple these with tubes of silver kitchen foil as indicators.
The  electric bite alarms will give me the initial warning and the silver foil will give me a visual guide to what the carp are doing with the bait.
My large, triangular landing net is stuck net upwards in the mud to the left of the gap in the rushes where it will be handy to get at and easy to catch hold of in the dark.
I place my chair to the left of the swim so that I am hidden behind the wall of rushes and have a good viewpoint of both rods.
Around my chair, but out of kicking range, I lay out my bait box of worms, a loaf, my pack of sandwiches, and a flask of hot coffee.
There is nothing to do now but wait, and believe me, midnight seems like a week away.
Nor is the waiting made any easier when, at 11.00 p.m. two carp roll over my swim within minutes of each other.
At precisely midnight I lightly prick a lobworm onto the size 6 hook, making sure the hook is only an inch away from the tail-end of the lob, for I have found that I hook more carp when the lobs are impaled in this way.
It is wise, too, not to stick the hook in more than necessary to cast the lob without it throwing off.
This way it will stay lively for long periods and look much more natural to the fish.
Nothing looks worse, and does a poorer job, than a worm which has been stuck on the hook several times and looks as though it has been tied in a knot.
Fish do not find worms that look like that and hooks lose so much of their penetrating power.
I cast and make sure the worm lands three or four yards further than the baited area, which allows me to pull it back to the swim and sink the line at the same time.
I repeat the action with the other rod, only this time there is a large piece of flake pulled from a new loaf on the size 2 hook.
A tube of silver foil folded over a loop of line pulled down about eighteen inches between bite alarm and reel.
I sit back in my chair, full of anticipation and confidence, and barely even notice the chewings and scurryings of rats in the rushes.
At 12.30 a.m. the bite alarm on the worm rod emits its warble and the silver foil jumps two inches toward the rod and then stops.
I watch the foil carefully.
It moves another two inches and stops, then another two inches and stops, and continues  like so until I pick up the rod and strike.
I hit into something that feels heavy at first and then comes in quite easily under the pressure I apply.
An eel of about 1lb swings out, which luckily is only lip hooked and comes off with no trouble.
So much for worms, at least in darkness.
So it is bread on both rods, except that I make a paste for the free-line rod so that I am still offering a bait on a weightless rig.
I cast in and try to shrug off the disappointed, deflated feeling that has come over me since the anticlimax of the eel.
At 1.15 a.m., however, the bite alarm on my flake-baited rod shrills out its sudden warning, the silver foil smacks the rod and at the same time I grasp the cork butt and drive the hook into a lip.
The reel screams as line is snatched from the slipping spool and then suddenly everything goes slack, giving me a sinking feeling that the hook hold has failed.
But no, I wind as fast as possible and catch up with the fish which is swimming toward me.
I feel the resistance seconds later, when the fish plunges into the lilies to the left of the gap 1 have cut into them.
For several minutes I pull and give line in turn as the fish sulks and flaps its tail at the surface.
I make no impression on it and all the time I am afraid that its flapping tail will come down on the taut line and snap it like a dry twig.
My only alternative is to give it slack line, laying the rod in the rests and hoping it will swim out of its own accord.
I do this, and reel my other rod in so that if the carp does give one another chance there will be no other line to get in the way of my landing it.
Within four or five minutes, yet seeming like an eternity, the line begins to peel off the open spool, slowly at first but beginning to pick up momentum as each second passes.
I lift the rod and click the bale-arm over with a flick of the reel handle, then wait for the rod-tip to bend.
Knowing that the carp will not have as much energy as when I first hooked it, I pile on the pressure in no uncertain terms, and the fish swings round and immediately makes for the same lily bed it took refuge in previously.
But this time I am prepared for it and wind the reel — a fast-retrieve model fortunately — as fast as possible, dipping the rod-tip to the surface of the lake on my right and applying a massive dose of side-strain.
It works, and the fish flips over onto its side for an instant and  I heave desperately to keep it coming.
either the fish is completely exhausted or given no time to gather its power, for I direct it straight to my landing net and it slips inside quite easily.
It is a beautiful leather carp L) f 14¾lb.
But now to reality, for the ‘classic’ carp fishing days are all but dead.
There are so many carp anglers, all fishing with high nutritive value (HNV) boiled baits, attached to hair- and bolt-rigs, usually at long range, you cannot afford to persist with the old baits and rigs and expect much success.
Once a water has received a regular supply of HNV baits, and the carp have been hooked on special rigs, they are rarely caught on any other bait or method.
I must deal with baits first, for baits specially for carp have become a totally separate entity from baits for any other species.
I thought I would never believe it at one time, but I now accept, along with every other carp angler, that carp can differentiate — given time — between a bait that is no more than a tasty morsel of carbohydrate and one that consists mainly of ingredients with a high nutritive value
It was Fred Wilton who devised the theory that if carp were offered HNV baits over a long enough period, i.e. through extensive pre-baiting, they would eventually recognise that they were good for them, and seek out these baits in preference to low protein types such as bread, worms, potatoes or, indeed, even natural food.
Since the early days of HNV baits, however, when relatively few anglers were using them, the popularity of carp fishing and the massive increase in carp waters have rendered pre-baiting with HNV baits redundant.
Virtually all carp anglers are using HNV baits; therefore, they will be part of the carp's natural diet on popular waters and require no familiarising phase.
The ingredients for HNV baits are available in almost every tackle shop, as are recipes to produce balanced mixes.
There are also dozens of mail order outlets where every high protein ingredient, vitamin, appetite stimulator and flavour known to carp anglers are stocked.
However, I will not waste space by giving a list of ingredients and several recipes, for the simple truth is that do-it-yourself bait-making is becoming a thing of the past: we are now into pre-packed carp baits, boiled balls of  various sizes from mini (6mm) to maxi (18mm), preserved or frozen, and ready to slide straight onto hook or hair-rig.
That was another thing discovered: carp seemingly preferred baits that had a tough, leathery skin, which is achieved by rolling the HNV paste into bait-sized balls and boiling them for up to two minutes.
Boiled baits, or boilies as they are popularly known, were not devised with that purpose in mind, however, but to deter smaller fish from nibbling the bait away.
It was thought that if the balls of soft paste were boiled, long enough to toughen the outer surface, but not for too long so that the inner remained soft, there would still be plenty of flavour left in the bait to serve its purpose, and sufficient toughness to make it extremely difficult for a smaller fish to take the bait in smaller portions.
But, the real advantage of a boilie is that it is so tough (the carp do not know it is soft on the inside) that a carp takes the bait by sucking it straight back to its pharyngeal teeth in its throat.
It does this with a strong suck and, since the bait is usually on a hair-rig, the hook is also drawn well into the mouth.
So, the major reason why the modern carp angler is successful lies with the fact that the boilie, the hair-rig and the bolt-rig marry together so well; they are complementary to each other.
So-called multiple particle baits have also become part of the modern carp angler's armoury.
In fact, they became popular before the advent of the boilie.
There are many occasions when a particle bait will outfish any other.
A multiple particle bait is any small particle bait that can be fed into the swim in large quantities.
The most well-known ones are maggots, casters and sweetcorn.
Where carp fishing is concerned it is mainly seed baits that are used for particle fishing.
These include hemp, tares, peanuts, tiger nuts, black-eyed beans, maple peas, chick peas, and many others.
Particles in the seed bracket usually have to be soaked and boiled before use.
So, please check this out before you use any as bait, otherwise the carp may suffer and even die due to uncooked particles swelling in their stomachs.
Particle baits are very useful when the carp are preoccupied with natural food.
Most natural food is found in large quantities of tiny items, so the idea is to confront them with larger  quantities of small particle baits than can be used on the hook.
When I refer to ‘large quantities’ I mean only that they are large in comparison with the amount of other types of bait one would normally use, i.e. 1lb of tares represents many thousands of particles, whereas 1lb of groundbait is a small amount.
I cannot give you the exact quantities you should use, for it will vary from one water to another according to the carp population.
Any particle should be fished in the same way you fish with maggots or casters: feed a generous quantity into the swim initially, then little and often as the day wears on, the total quantity obviously varying according to how well the carp are feeding.
Most particles can be fished on any conventional float or leger rig.
The very small ones, however, such as hempseed, are best fished on the hair-rig, i.e. with several grains of hemp superglued to the hair.
Let's have a look at the hair-rig.
All it is is a half-inch to three-inch length of supple nylon or braided terylene (the hair) attached to the bend or eye of a strong hook.
The hook is attached to a conventional rig, or a bolt-rig, of which more later.
I have said that this is ‘all’ a hair-rig is, but now I will describe the principle behind it and then you will realise that it was one of the major advances in technique for many years.
With some fish, but particularly carp, a situation was apparent whereby they refused to accept a bait on strong tackle, but could not be landed on tackle fine enough to fool them.
What was required was a fine line that was supple enough and strong enough to do both tasks.
Carp refused to accept a bait mounted directly on strong tackle because they had learned through the experience of being caught that dangerous (hooked) baits behaved differently from those that were not dangerous (free, unattached baits).
They learned that if they blew and sucked a little at all baits before they accepted them, the safe ones moved easily and the dangerous ones did not.
Obviously, the weight of a big hook, and the rigidity of a heavy line, prohibited movement in a hooked bait.
So, an enterprising chap by the name of Len Middleton came up with an idea that would present the bait on fine, supple line (the hair), and yet still have a strong hook attached to a strong, somewhat rigid line.
The hair-rig was born (see Fig. 4).
The principle is that the hook bait is free enough to behave very similarly to loose fed baits, but that the carp suck it in so strongly they also suck in the large hook.
The advent of the boiled bait, not too long before the hair-rig, married very well to this new technique, for it later became apparent that the success of the hair-rig owed a lot to the fact that it was generally used with boilies.
Boilies actually encouraged the carp to suck them back to their pharyngeal teeth in order to crush them; this in turn ensured that the large hook entered well into their mouths.
Another problem when carp fishing was twitchers.
No, not some fanatical carp angler frightened of someone looking in his bait box, but carp that mouthed a bait and spat it out before the angler could strike — if he'd seen the bite, that is.
Twitch bites have always been a problem, and the best answers have been to scale down tackle and bait to encourage a better bite, or to hover over the rod and attempt to strike and hit the twitch bite.
Neither method was very successful.
Twitch bites, contrary to what some anglers think, are the product of very confidently feeding fish, unlike the carp that runs off strong and fast with a bait.
The ‘runners’ are carp that have realised the bait is suspicious and bolted off with it in fright.
Twitchers are simply moving easily from one bait to another; sucking, blowing, tasting as they go.
It was theorised that if you could panic the twitchers, and turn the twitches into runs, that would be the answer.
Hence the birth of the bolt-rig (see Fig. 4).
The bolt-rig generally incorporates a hair-rig, or at least some kind of rig that entails the exposure of most of the hook point and gape.
The next most important feature is a heavy weight; at least a 1½oz bomb, but more likely a bomb of 2oz, and up to 3oz.
A yard or so up the line from the bomb a swivel or ring is tied in as a back stop.
The bolt-rig works like this: the carp picks up the bait by sucking it into its mouth, but on the outward journey, when it  blows to eject it, the hook point (which is bare in a hair-rig remember) pricks the carp's mouth.
This panics the fish, which immediately bolts, comes up against the heavy bomb which pulls the hook in some more, and then the back stop hits the bomb and penetration of the hook is complete.
Another way is to use a fixed bomb so that the carp has to drag the bomb as it runs, also ensuring the hook pulls home.
You can see then that the boilie, the hair-rig and the bolt-rig all complement each other; hence the phenomenal success of the combined technique.
Another significant change in carp fishing technique has been in surface fishing.
Not too long ago there was only one recognised bait, and that was bread crust.
This was fished either freelined or anchored from the bottom.
Now we have a whole array of baits, which are mainly dog and cat biscuits, such as Munchies and Chum Mixer.
What I do is place two or three handfuls of biscuit into a polythene bag, then mix about 20ml of a favourite bait flavour into half a cup of lukewarm water.
I pour this over the biscuits, seal the bag, leaving a pocket of air inside like a balloon, and shake vigorously.
Do this the day before you intend to fish, and give them a good shake every time you walk past them.
If you get it right, and it is not difficult — the ratio of water to biscuits is not critical — the biscuits will turn into lovely, spongy balls of flavoured bait.
You can even colour them by mixing a food dye into the half cup of water.
They turn out a little patchy, but it does not seem to matter to the fish.
Other baits that can also be good on their day are certain seeds, such as sunflower.
And don't neglect casters — they can be excellent.
Techniques have changed to some extent in that there are now a number of excellent buoyant legers on the market which allow anchored floaters to be used to more effect.
More significant are the new controllers, an excellent model called a ‘Suspender’ being produced by Gardner Tackle.
It resembles a rather gangly float, being a plastic tube with a ball of polystyrene and a brass balance at one end.
What it does is lie at half cock and suspend a floating bait onto the water's surface.
The advantage is that there is no line, visible to the fish, coming  from the bait, either on the surface or going down to the bottom.
Believe me, this is a major step forward, because carp that have been caught on floating baits before know exactly what to look for.
Some are so cunning they can knock a bait off the hook with their tails and then take it almost in one movement.
The ‘Suspender’ gives floaters a new lease of life.
Along with the search for the ultimate magic bait, another change in carp fishing techniques on over-exploited waters is the striving for extra distance.
The increase in carp-scaring activity around the banks has forced the carp to feed at the greatest distance from the activity, and the angler who can cast the furthest, within reason, stands the best chance of success.
But do not fall into the trap of doing something I saw recently.
Two anglers on opposite banks were casting three-quarters of the way across.
Fishing for carp at long range is, on some waters, essential for success.
Bankside activity has reached such a pitch, even at night, that the carp will not come near the margins.
Distances in excess of eighty yards require special tactics and techniques.
The ideal rod is a fast taper carbon, or carbon/aramid, 12ft in length and with a 2½lb test curve.
The reel line should be as light as you can get away with; perhaps as low as 6lb in open water but 8lb is more sensible, specially in the new extra thin nylons.
The line should slightly overfill the spool.
A shock leader of about 20ft is essential, and should be 12lb to 15lb test.
A bolt-rig, incorporating a 2oz to 3oz bomb, although not essential, is nevertheless a very successful method for this extreme long range fishing.
Obviously, you need a heavy bomb to cast the distance, so you may as well use bolt-rig tactics that will take a great deal of sag out of that great length of line when you clip up to the rod.
Line clips and foam rubber stuffed into the butt ring are, respectively, a means of applying tension to the line and sustaining it.
This allows the carp no slack whatsoever and no opportunity, therefore, to shed the hook.
When casting, I have the bomb hanging about three feet from the rod-tip (if you always keep this distance the same you have a better chance of casting consistently) with my right hand around the butt and reel seat, and the line looped over my index  finger.
My left hand lightly grips the rod-butt at the bottom.
(The reverse, of course, for left-handed anglers.)
I stand with my feet about eighteen inches apart, with my left foot forward of my right so that I can easily swivel from the hips from looking parallel to the bank through to facing my ‘target’.
I imagine there is a pivot through the rod-butt midway between my hands, like grasping opposite spokes of a wheel with the axle in the middle.
I hold the rod parallel to the ground over my right shoulder, with the butt pointing at the target, glance at my rod-tip and tackle to make sure everything is free, then look at the target and keep my eye on it while I push with my right hand and pull with my left.
If you make sure the butt points at the target in the initial stages, and the tip follows through in a straight line, you will acquire both distance and accuracy after only a short period of practice.
Never try to force it, or you will cast anywhere but where you want to.
In the last few years several books have been written solely about carp fishing.
It is not surprising, for there have been a great many developments aimed at putting more carp on the bank.
I have touched on some of these developments in this chapter, but cannot hope to describe the whole picture in detail.
I have not even been able to describe all the various tackle items now available for carp fishing.
The only way I could have done real justice to the subject would have been to cut down on other chapters, and that would have made it more of a carp book than anything else.
I did not want that.
The other species are too important to neglect.
Two books that will give you all the details you could wish for on carp fishing are The Carp Strikes Back by Rod Hutchinson (Wonderdog Publications) and Carp Fever by Kevin Maddocks (Beekay).
I think it is a pity that so many anglers are devoting their whole fishing careers to the one species.
Anglers who take this path — usually young, relatively inexperienced anglers who have been drawn into the cultish scene — rarely devote a lifetime to angling, as do most all-round anglers.
The pity is that they are missing so much; for instance, they will never know what it is like to fish a small stream, or any river except perhaps  a sluggish canal-like one.
It is not surprising that many give up fishing at an age when they should be at their peak, with a true set of values and the all too rare ability to enjoy themselves even when fish are not being very cooperative.
It is not unexpected because an angler with an active brain, as applies to most specialist anglers, has not got enough challenge with one species.
There is not sufficient, no matter how good or difficult are the carp waters he fishes, to sustain his interest for a lifetime.
And by the time he realises it, his love affair with fishing is over, and he can never recapture that truly magical feeling again.
So, think wisely before you devote all your time to carp — or any other single species.
Chub
I have a very soft spot in my heart for chub.
They were the first big fish I tried to catch when I decided to be more selective with my fishing, and when I did catch a big chub on my first attempt it set the scene for my present angling outlook.
Had I been a little less successful in catching chub or, worse, met with a complete blank, then Heaven knows if I would have continued specimen hunting.
I might have returned to match fishing, which never gave me the same enjoyment, even when I won, that a big fish always does, and, I hope, always will.
In retrospect, I know now that I could not have chosen a more co-operative species than the chub with which to begin a vocation in big-fish angling.
If one never forgets that chub are, in Isaac Walton's words, ‘the most fearfullest of fishes’, then the rest is comparatively easy.
Chub are one of the most obliging fish because they are almost always hungry, and their appetites stay tuned, although to a lesser degree, even when the weather is at its most severe at each end of the scale.
A big crust on the surface when the sun is beating down will be taken with relish, and a tiny morsel of crumb on the bottom will often tempt a chub even in a snowstorm.
But before you go rushing off to the river to catch a netful of chub, bear in mind that I have said only that chub are easy to catch compared to most other species.
Chub do have their days when the old grey matter works overtime and you will have to put on your own thinking cap and go through a whole array of angling techniques, usual and offbeat ones, before you hit on the right one to catch him.
Even then you may have to use that extra bit of guile before you have one in the net.
Chub are a confounding fish.
At times you can easily ‘con’ one into your net, and at other times you find they are less gullible.
They confound you because there are times when conditions are compatible only to a warm bed yet you end the day with a netful of fish.
Then there are times when conditions are so ideal you would almost expect to catch fish on a baitless hook, but the net remains idle.
A day I had on the Severn some years ago exemplifies the contrariness of chub.
I took a friend with me who had caught chub only from the river Dane where the average size was 1½lb.
On the Severn, at least on the particular stretch we fished, the average size was around twice that weight, and my friend was looking forward to catching a 4-pounder, which was double the weight of his previous best.
I, being the eternal optimist, almost guaranteed him one.
(I have learned my lesson since, and now, never, ever, promise anyone they will catch fish.)
It was winter and we made an early start, travelling the seventy-odd miles in darkness so as to arrive with time to tackle up and be fishing as the last dregs of darkness dripped away.
In the Welsh hills, where the Severn still looks like a river and not the characterless drain it is in the middle and lower reaches, there was ice on the road, and this slowed us down considerably.
It was daylight when we arrived.
I proposed that we fish the same swim, which was large enough to accommodate both of us without the risk of crossed lines.
The current was strongest along the far bank and gradually lessened in strength until it reached a couple of yards from our bank, where it was almost slack.
I tackled up with a simple running bullet stopped two inches from the size 6 hook.
Bait was a piece of crust from a new loaf.
I cast a third of the way across and then allowed the current to roll the tackle round until the bait came to rest just on the edge of the slack.
My mate was still trying to tie a hook on for, unlike mine, his fingers were numb with cold.
‘Come on,’ I said.
‘The river looks great, we should have a few today.’
I was about to take the line and hook off him and tie the knot, when my rod-tip dipped.
I struck, played the fish, and netted a good chub of almost 4lb.
I slid it into my keepnet, re-baited and  cast to the same spot.
I took the line and hook off him and immediately had to drop them again so that I could strike, play and land another chub of about 3lb.
Incredibly, the same thing happened twice more, the last fish topping 4lb.
The situation had become embarrassing, so I laid my rod in the rest, with the hook hanging from the butt-ring, and tied on my mate's hook for him.
We never had another bite.
Conditions looked perfect and could not be faulted.
The water was running at normal winter level with just a tinge of colour.
It was cold but not too cold, and dammit, I had caught four fish with hardly any effort; fish that had taken a big crust with a savage bite that suggested they were very hungry.
We tried every likely swim for a mile up and downstream, combining every conceivable method.
It was as though the river had suddenly died; as though a mysterious lethal pollution had struck and wiped out all life.
There was no apparent explanation.
The air and water temperature had risen since the early morning frost; the water level and colour remained the same.
But that is chub fishing.
It had happened before, it has happened since, and it will happen again.
It would do me no harm to accept it for what it is: an idiosyncrasy of chub, and stop trying to find out why.
But I cannot accept mysteries and I like to find the reason behind them.
There is always a reason, and searching for the answer is part of the fun.
The next time you are along the river and you spot a shoal of chub, or an individual fish, see how close you can get before they, or it, take fright.
Very often, when I take a walk along the river in the close season and see a shoal of chub sliding in and out of the streamer weed, or merely lying near to the surface, ready to suck in a floating insect, I imagine I have a rod with me and I want to catch one of those chub.
If there is any amount of bankside vegetation the task is somewhat easier than on an open bank.
Using the cover of the bushes or whatever, I crouch as low as possible and manoeuvre myself into a position where I know I could cast to them, not forgetting to make a note of a landing site, for it is useless to hook a fish if you cannot play it to the landing net.
If it is an open  bank then Red Indian tactics are called for; a snake-like slither across the grass flat on your stomach.
You will have spotted the chub, or signs of them, from some distance up or downstream, because you will not have been able to approach them upright on an open bank without them spotting you first.
When you see them, move back from the river until the edge of the bank shields you from the fish.
When you draw level, drop down onto your belly and slide to the edge of the bank until you can slowly raise your head to pinpoint their exact position.
Slowly lower your head, slide back a yard or so, and then cast to the fish, or imagine you are casting if you have no rod with you, without allowing the rod-tip to show over the edge of the bank.
It is good practice and you will soon learn how careful you have to be not to scare them — and the bigger the chub are, the more careful you have to be.
Remember too, that the chub do not have to see you to take fright.
A heavy footfall, the cracking of a twig, or the mere vibration of a toe dragging on the grass while you are crawling on your belly can often be enough.
Walking the river, without tackle, in the close season is a good thing for many reasons.
Not only can you  practise approaching chub swims without scaring the chub away, you can also learn where to find them.
If the stretches of river you fish for chub are those featureless, barren reaches, with hardly any changes in the pace of the current, or depth; no vegetation; where everything is much of a muchness, then you are unlucky in that the only way you can locate fish is to fish for them, or rely on what other anglers can tell you.
I much prefer to find my own swims, not because I think I can find better swims than anyone else, but because I get a great deal of satisfaction from being able to study a piece of water, select a swim as a likely chub haunt, and then find that I am right.
Walking the river in the close season, when the bankside and aquatic vegetation has blossomed and the water is running clear and low, is the best time for actually spotting the chub as they go about their daily business.
This is the easiest way to locate them if you are careful in your approach.
You will be able to see the lush green streamer weed swaying in the current, and if you look carefully, letting your eyes adjust to the movement of the current and weed, preferably with the use of polaroid  spectacles, you may see one or more black shapes that suddenly emerge from under the green ribbon, hover for a few seconds in the open water and then just as suddenly disappear back into the weed.
If you are well  practised in a careful approach, having learned the art of blending yourself into the background and moving with the silence and stealth of a hungry alley-cat, then you will soon be close enough to identify them as chub.
You will be able to see them opening and closing their huge mouths as they intercept items of food which the current is bringing to them.
You will be able to study them at length and note at what depth they are feeding.
Are they hovering around midwater, or near to the surface?
Or are their blunt heads dipping to the bottom and sucking food from the sand or gravel?
If you find yourself close to a shoal of feeding chub, take advantage and watch.
Take in every little movement they make, watch how they immediately gulp down some items of food, when at other times they will suck and blow it out several times before consuming it.
Watch how they move right up to a certain morsel and pick it up with their lips, or how they move no closer than several inches to another and then draw it to the edge of their lips with a mighty suck.
See their gills distend with the movement and the flurry of pectoral fins that give the subtle shunting manoeuvre.
Note how the smallest fish in the shoal make sudden, unthinking darts in the current.
See how they grab at objects whether they are edible or not and then spit them out, only to grab at an identical item soon after.
Compare this to how the largest fish move relatively slowly, selecting their food with the discrimination of a gourmet; the subtle approach, the gaping of the cavernous mouth that does not, at times, close over the food but blows it out to rid it of foreign matter.
See how, sometimes, the largest fish will hover at the tail-end of the shoal, while his tasters — or so it seems — accept almost every likely-looking morsel, only to leave some morsels alone as though there was something special about them, and fit only for the King.
See how the King sometimes lies near to the bottom, feeding carefully and non-competitively, while his underlings vie with each other for the mid-water scraps.
Remember what you have seen when you are fishing.
When  you are experiencing a certain kind of bite which you are finding difficult to hit, try to relate the bite with what you have seen the chub doing or; your close season excursions, then decide from there what course of action would be best to hit the fish.
Do you need to hit the bite straight away because the chub are grabbing?
Do you need to give some free line because the chub are sucking the bait in from a considerable distance?
A 5lb½oz river Severn chub for Graham Marsden
Chub fishing with natural baits, such as slugs, snails, small fish, crayfish, shrimp, prawn and worms, takes some beating during the hot, low-water, summer months.
Chub feed on them extremely fiercely, and even small ones give bites to rival a ravenous barbel.
Big black or brown slugs are positively deadly.
I collect a dozen or so from the dewy grass in the early morning and set off for a few hours' chubbing, knowing I am going to catch several fish, providing, of course, the weather and water conditions are  favourable.
The very fast, shallow water, often no more than a foot deep, is the place to fish for summer chub.
Here they have sought out the well-oxygenated water where the streamer weed grows thick and the natural food breeds in profusion.
The chub flit in and out of the weed like silent ghosts, grubbing for food, seeking shelter from the bright sun, and sometimes just playing around for the sheer hell of it.
I tackle up with a through-action carbon rod, 11ft long, a fixed-spool reel carrying 5lb b.s. line to which a size 2 hook is tied direct.
No float is used, nor any weight, for the big slugs are heavy enough to cast the full width of most rivers, and to hold bottom in most weedy swims.
The hook should be honed to a needle-sharp point, and the barb reduced to enhance penetration.
You stick the hook through the slug about a half inch from one end and then cast to a spot where the current will carry the slug beneath the roof of streamer weed, then place the rod in a rod-rest and watch it very carefully.
I he reason you need to watch the rod carefully is not because bites on slugs are hard to see, but because you risk losing the rod if you do not keep your eye on it.
The chub take slugs absolutely savagely, as though they have not fed for a week and their very lives depend on seizing that particular specimen.
It is as though someone has swung an invisible sandbag at the rod, it curves over so fast and far, and so suddenly.
Many times the chub take slugs so viciously they rip them clean off the hook, and the only thing you can do to improve matters is to thread the line through the full length of the slug with a baiting needle, attach the hook and pull it back so that one end of the slug is lying in the bend of the hook.
Then pinch a small shot on the line at the other end to stop the slug from sliding up the line.
Another effective way of catching summer chub is by fly fishing.
I have caught chub on wet and dry fly, particularly on mayfly, but my experience of fly fishing for chub is so limited I would not propose to offer advice on the method.
I have heard, however, that large, white, moth-like artificials are especially good at night.
Now let us take a step in time and move from summer to autumn, the time when the lush weed is still present and the water still runs clear at not much more than summer level.
It is the end of October and the water temperature has dropped several degrees in the past few weeks, the minnow shoals are less numerous and the chub are fighting fit.
I am going fishing.
Come with me.
It is a river I know well, but a stretch I have never fished before, and when I see it I wonder why.
Seen from a helicopter it would look like a little lad's still-wet scribble on a sheet of green paper, winding and erratic; drawn with a shaky hand.
Character oozes from it, and I am content to spend some time studying its many features before I set up a rod.
I walk upstream; upstream because I can wade to the other bank if I need to and any disturbance will not carry far against the current.
I come to a bend where the outside is undercut and deep and the bank is riddled with a conglomeration of sinewy roots from a huge old tree that leans threateningly over the water, its leafless branches almost touching the smooth surface.
The blackened roots reach down into the water itself, like the arms of a negro tickling trout.
The undercut cave is dark and mysterious but the lightness of the sandy bottom becomes apparent as I look across the bend, the water becoming shallower as I scan across to the inside of the bend.
Black silhouettes move out of the darkness and change into blunt torpedoes, dark and slow-moving as they glide over the sandy bottom.
Then, as one, they slink back into the darkness, seeking privacy and safety in the womb of the undercut.
I watch intently for a half-hour, seeing how often the chub move out of the darkness and into the light, and that the time spent there is more or less the same on each occasion.
Two minutes is the most time they spend in the lightness, and four to six minutes in the darkness.
I wonder if it will pay to feed maggots over the sand to persuade the chub to spend more time there, and then to trot a bunch of maggots to them.
But I discard that idea, for the water is too shallow over the sand and once a fish is hooked the fishing would be finished for a long time while the rest of the shoal got over the scare.
I may not even hook a fish, for the disturbance of  retrieving a float through such shallow water, so close to the fish, would be sure to scare them.
Anyway, there may be some bigger chub in the undercut, content to lie there, feeding on the scraps that trundle round the bend.
I tackle up my 11ft carbon rod again.
This rod is supple in the tip, but becomes powerful as it bends towards the butt.
It was designed for lines of 4lb to 8lb b.s., but feels best when married to a line of 6lbs b.s.
With 6lb line I can bend into a fish and know that there is some bend remaining; that I have not used all of the shock-absorber effect of the rod.
Before I thread the rod with a line from the fixed-spool reel 1 hesitate and look again at those blackened roots that reach into the undercut.
Finesse will not be the order of this swim.
No, those roots demand bully-boy tactics; the chub given no quarter; make or break; muck or nettles; call it what you will.
The chub in this river, however, are no monsters, nowhere near approaching the record of 8lb 4oz.
There are some big ones, but a 5-pounder would be exceptional.
I choose 6lb line and feel confident that it will be sufficient to hold any chub in this river.
Anyway, I will risk it, not because I want to give the fish a chance; I do not believe in giving any fish a chance, I go to the races when I want to gamble.
The only reason I like to use the lightest line possible is so that my tackle, and consequently the bait, will behave as naturally as possible.
The lighter the line the less stiff it is, and the more supple the line the more the bait will behave naturally according to the nuances of the current.
I want my bait to lie right in the labyrinth of roots, for this is where the better fish will be dining.
It will be tricky casting, for I have overhanging branches to contend with, which leave a gap of six inches only between them and the surface for the tackle to pass through.
Even if I cast through this gap accurately, the speed of the cast must be faultless too, for the gap between the branches and the roots is a mere two feet: too far and I am in the roots, too near and my bait will not be lying where I want it.
Any errors could ruin the fishing, for if I snag on the overhanging branches or the roots, the subsequent pulling to free the tackle, or to break it, will not go unnoticed by the chub.
I decide to play it safe, so I tackle up with a ¼oz bullet stopped only 1½ inches from the number 4 hook.
Bait will be a  piece of crust about half the size of a matchbox, torn from a new loaf.
My idea is to cast as close to the branches as I dare, then allow the current to carry the bait into the roots.
The current, although only slow, should be able to do this easily in the first few seconds before the crust becomes totally waterlogged and is still buoyant enough to counteract the weight of the bullet.
I have stopped the bullet close to the hook for two reasons, the first being that crust is light and buoyant to an extent even when soaked, so the closeness of the bullet will stop it from rising off the bottom any more than the 1½ inch distance of the plastic leger-stop from the hook.
The second reason is the snagginess of the swim.
If the distance between bait and bullet was, say, 12 inches, then I would have 12 inches of line that would be out of my control.
As it is, I have only 1½ inches of line to wrap around a branch or root.
I have tackled up well back from the water's edge.
I take my combination tackle bag and seat and walk carefully towards the river, then place the seat near to the water but behind the cover of a hawthorn bush.
Then I fetch my rod, landing net, loaf and rod-rest.
I slide the rod-rest slowly into the sand, making sure it is positioned to that I can sit comfortably with the butt of the rod in my right hand and the tip pointing at the roots.
After sticking the hook through a crust I make an experimental cast across the river, well away from the swim, choosing a dock leaf as my target on the far bank.
This is just to remind me of the feel of the rod and the weight of the tackle I am using.
I am pleased to see the bullet land only six inches from the leaf.
Re-baiting with a new crust I cast towards the branches, but my subconscious fear of snagging makes me cast a couple of feet short, but I decide to leave it and see what happens.
The tackle and bait roll easily along the bottom, too easily in fact, for it was not necessary to lift the rod-tip at any time to encourage the roll.
Within seconds it stops and I can tell from the direction of the line that the bait is lying in the thick of the roots.
I decide to leave it; perhaps the safest way of retrieving it without snagging is with a fish on the end.
With the rod in my right hand and the line between butt-ring and reel looped over the middle finger of my left hand I wait impatiently for a bite.
I don't have to wait long.
A steady  pressure tries to pull my finger to the rod, so I go along with the movement for a few inches and then strike.
I miss it!
But I was so confident I would feel the solidness of either chub or root my reactions are not prepared to stop at the end of the strike.
The bullet goes flying over my head and lands in the field behind me.
My annoyance at missing the fish turns to relief when I realise I am not snagged in the roots.
I change the ¼oz bullet for one of ½oz, re-bait and then cast.
This time my cast lands exactly where I want it, just short of the overhanging branches.
The bullet rolls momentarily and then comes to rest, but a slight lift of the rod-tip inches it round a little more, and then another lift until I am satisfied the crust is lying just short of the roots.
I lay the rod in the rod-rest with the butt on the sand so that my line is entering the water at 45 degrees.
Then I pull a lump of flake from the loaf and pinch off 10p piece-size pieces and squeeze all the air out of them.
One by one I toss them into the slow current about eight feet from the roots.
Watching the pinches of flake sink out of sight into the roots I only see the rod-tip curve over out of the corner of my eye.
I grab the butt, with my fingers curled around the reel seating, and strike.
There is an unrelenting solidness for a split second, and then a massive surge as the chub plunges for the roots.
He fails to make it, for I make an equally massive surge with the rod in the opposite direction.
He comes away from the roots and I swing the rod over to my right, parallel with the water, to keep him low and prevent him from splashing at the surface.
Everything goes as planned and I soon bully him into the landing net, and from there the hook is removed and he is slid into my big, knotless keepnet, where he can lie safe and recover while I try to catch him some company.
He weighs about 3½lb.
I catch three more chub from the swim, weighing from 2lb to 4lb 2oz, before the swim goes dead and I decide to move on and try somewhere else.
Only fifty yards further upstream I find a smooth glide along my own bank that looks as though it should hold a few chub.
I move back from the river, walk the length of the glide and then, after swapping from leger to float tackle on my 13ft match rod, insert myself between two slender willows at the head of the run.
There is no room for a chair, so I crouch between the willows and hook a plummet onto the size 18 hook.
Lowering the  plumment into the swim a rod's length out I find it is almost five feet deep at that point.
I set the float two inches shallower, and then lay the rod down while I spend five minutes trickling maggots down the run.
The float is a bodied peacock waggler, nine inches long, with an all-black body and a white and dayglo orange tip.
It is locked with two swan shot.
The line has been changed to one of 2lb b.s., and on this I have pinched 3BB shot midway and a number 4 shot nine inches from the hook.
I have changed to lighter line because the swim is snag-free and I will be able to trot with greater control with this thinner and easier-running line.
I make several trots down the run without so much as a tremble of the float.
So I wet the line with spit and slide the float and locking shot another foot deeper.
(If you fail to wet the line you create heat when you slide the float and shot along it, which could damage the line.)
Now the float is dragged under halfway down the run, so I slide the float and locking shot three inches shallower and find this is just right.
I lay the rod down and spend another two or three minutes feeding maggots into the swim.
Before I try another trot down I remove the two old maggots from the hook and impale a single fresh one, being careful not to burst it with the size 18 hook which, although sharp, is rather thick in the wire for maggot fishing.
My second trot sees the float dip sharply beneath the surface about two-thirds of the way down the swim.
I sweep the rod back as much as I can in the confined space and, although the fish is rather small at about 1¼lb, it kicks up quite a fuss and there is nothing I can do to stop it splashing.
Before the swim dies I take seven fish, all small chub up to 2lb.
I am not surprised they are all small ones for a big chub would not tolerate the disturbance caused when each fish was played through the swim.
Still, I marvel at how eagerly and easily a chub will bite, considering how shy they are in all other respects.
Before I move on I note that I could have fished the swim from the other bank, although there was no shallow-enough water nearby to ford the river.
Casting into the gap between the  willows would have been difficult but I would have taken a bigger net of fish, with a couple of sizeable ones maybe, for I could have hauled each fish out of the swim immediately it was hooked and kept disturbance down to a minimum.
I bear this in mind for my next visit and reflect that I am already learning and making mental notes about this hitherto unfished — by me at any rate — stretch of river.
A chub of 4½lb taken by Graham Marsden when touch-legering.
Much of the next couple of hundred yards of river are fairly shallow and fast and would be good points to fish in the height of summer when fish look for these places for the extra oxygen available there.
At this time of the year, late autumn, sufficient oxygen is available in all areas and the chub prefer more water over their heads.
Another five minutes' walk and I find a slow piece of water that looks extremely chubby.
Especially so, since there is a big dead tree lying half in the water with a huge rubbish raft  collected around the trunk.
Chub love such places and I feel confident that here is where I will catch a big one.
I study the swim, working out in my mind the best way of tackling it.
As I look at the water I hear a distinctive slurp as a chub sucks some morsel through the surface; then I see the rings rippling away from the spot where it happened.
It is in the sweep of water that curls around the trunk.
I lay my tackle down, being careful not to cause any vibrations, and creep down to the water's edge some fifteen yards upstream of the tree.
From the loaf I have taken with me I tear off several pieces of crust and toss them one by one into the current, which carries them over the spot where the chub surfaced.
The first three crusts are ignored, and then one disappears in a tiny whirlpool caused by the powerful suck of a sizeable chub.
I take about four minutes to retackle the 11ft rod, re-thread the 6lb line and grease it well to make it float, and tie on a size 2 hook — a simple free-line rig that should do the job.
My chair and everything apart from the rod, landing net and loaf, are left up the bank.
Crusting for chub is an art that requires concentration and constant attention to the performance.
I would have no time and no desire to sit down, and a rod-rest is out of the question.
I put a big crust on the hook, dip it for a couple of seconds at the edge of the river to give it casting weight, and then swing it into the current.
It is ignored for cast after cast, using a new crust each time of course, but I am not surprised for I am having great difficulty keeping the line from bowing, for the current is slightly faster between the crust and the bank.
Every time I flick the rod in an attempt to mend the line the crust pulls off course and washes into the rubbish raft instead of curling round the edge of the tree trunk.
If I had some weight near to the crust I could mend the line without pulling it off course.
So I pinch a swan-shot four inches from the hook and impale an extra-large crust.
The bigger crust, once soaked, will give me more weight, as will the swan-shot, and the crust is big enough to support the weight of the shot.
It works.
I can control the crust easily now, and on the third cast the water erupts as a nice chub takes the bait.
It weighs 3¾lb.
I have to wait a while before I get a second chub, but it is  worth it for this one weighs 4lb 10oz and fights like a demon.
So long did I have to wait, however, for that second chub, I decide to dispense with floating crust and have a shot at legered crust again.
That raft looked mighty inviting.
I re-rig with the ½oz bullet and then cast right to the edge of the raft.
Down the crust goes and drifts under the floating roof.
I place the rod in the rest and begin to feed pinches of flake into the current in a spot which will carry them under the raft.
Nothing happens for quite a while, then the rod-tip trembles, so I hold the rod in one hand and the line in the other.
Touch-legering is not necessary, or so I think when the line is snatched from my fingers and the rod slams over from a vicious bite.
But I miss it!
How, I don't know.
When it happens again on the next cast I turn the air blue with some choice words.
On the next cast I touch-leger again, only with a fairly long loop of line pulled out from between butt-ring and reel (see pages 15–17).
When that bite comes again I go with it, paying out line as the fish pulls.
When all the line is used up I strike, and the solidness that stops the strike in mid-sweep is a tremendous feeling.
I pull hard, but the fish pulls back even harder.
The line whistles like a taut bow-string in a fierce gale and I suddenly feel apprehensive.
Will the line hold?
I pull harder.
To hell with it, I'll go down fighting, it will break me on my terms if it breaks me at all.
The fish gives a little, so I give a little , which is a mistake, for the fish takes advantage of my generosity and dives again for whatever refuge it seeks under the raft.
The next time it relents, I pull even harder and feel pleased with myself when it comes completely clear of the raft.
It seems to give up after that initial tug o'war, a common trait with most chub, and is soon safely in the net.
A beauty of 5lb ½oz.
On my way home I reflect on the pleasures of a good day's fishing.
I am already planning to catch more and bigger ones the next time I come.
The next time I will be armed with some experience of the stretch, and experience is one of the deadliest weapons there is.