

STRUCTURE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT IN ENGLAND AND WALES
Historical Background.
Historically local government in England and Wales is a fascinating subject and from its study it will be found that local government whilst not quite as we know it today, existed for centuries before the first parliament was ever convened.
In fact some of our more ancient cities and boroughs have Charters still in existence granted in Saxon times giving to local areas powers which were in effect autonomous government.
Indeed the only method of granting local government to a locality until the early part of the nineteenth century was by a Royal Charter and grants of franchise to corporate bodies and to individuals.
All this was swept away by a new principle which was introduced in the early part of the nineteenth century, namely, that a local authority could not carry out any function unless strictly authorised by statute.
Parliament as the law-making body does not take part in the local administration of its laws.
Indeed it is one  of the features of our constitution that the legislature and the administration are separate.
Thus throughout the history of local government, units of local administration were formed to carry out administration in localities.
These were, in the main, the counties.
In early times the Shire Reeve, or Sheriff, was responsible to the Crown for the administration of the county.
Later Justices of the Peace were appointed and as time passed they were given administrative as well as judicial duties to perform.
These Justices of the Peace were forerunners of our present county councils.
The Justices sat in session quarterly and these ‘Quarter Sessions’ dealt with both judicial and administrative matters.
On the formation of county councils in 1888 the administrative functions of Quarter Sessions passed to the county councils leaving only the judicial functions of Quarter Sessions to the Justices.
There are, however, traces still remaining of administrative functions,e.g. Justices still have powers relating to the diversion of highways and footpaths, and in respect of nuisances.
Apart from the counties a number of urban areas had grown up and many of these had been granted Charters of Incorporation giving them varying powers of local administration.
The Municipal Corporations Act 1835, repealed all former constitutions of borough councils and provided a standard formula for the constitution of all municipal corporations, namely a council elected by the burgesses or citizens, the aldermen elected by the  councillors (the aldermen being one-third of the number of councillors) and a Mayor elected by the aldermen and councillors.
These chartered towns did not cover the whole of the urban areas of the country and in the year 1848 the Public Health Act created Local Boards of Health.
The Public Health Act of 1875 which may be regarded as a landmark in the advancement of local administration, gave to these Boards a code of powers in relation to public health and other matters, and established urban and rural sanitary authorities.
This was followed by the Local Government Act 1888 which established county councils and county borough councils.
By the Local Government Act 1894 the urban and rural sanitary authorities were reconstituted as urban district councils and rural district councils and parish councils were created for rural parishes.
That structure was consolidated in the Local Government Act 1933, under which Act it remained the system of local government until the Local Government Act 1972.
Whilst these local authorities were developing in form, other bodies were set up to administer special functions.
These included the Turnpike Commissioners, Guardians of the Poor, Education boards, Highway boards, Isolation Hospital boards, Improvement Commissioners, Lighting Commissioners, Burial boards and other bodies.
These were all set up to administer one particular function and because of this, they are known as ad hoc bodies.
‘Ad hoc ’ is a Latin phrase meaning ‘to that’; in other words these bodies were appointed  to devote their activities ‘to that’purpose, or for the specific purpose for which they were appointed.
These bodies were popularly elected and responsible direct to the electors.
So many bodies doing so many varied local duties created a lack of concerted effort and so Parliament gradually absorbed these boards into the local  government machine by transferring their functions one by one to the local authorities.
In this way local authorities became the only publicly elected bodies for the area having accumulated all the powers of ad hoc bodies.
In recent years the pendulum has swung back.
One after another, the functions of local authorities have been transferred to ad hoc boards of a different type from those of the nineteenth century.
These functions have been transferred not to popularly elected boards, but to boards the membership of which is nominated by the Ministers of the Crown.
An example of this was the transfer of local authority hospitals.
Those hospitals which formerly had been the responsibility of Boards of Guardians and later of the local authorities, together with the development of those hospitals which the local authorities brought about, including maternity hospitals, passed to the State under the National Health Service Act 1946, and are now managed by selected and not by elected authorities.
A further example is the transfer of responsibility for those who need financial support.
National  Assistance which followed on Poor Law Relief has a long history.
At first, the parish was responsible for its poor, then came the union of parishes and then the Boards of Guardians followed by the local authorities (county and county borough councils).
Now responsibility for social security has passed to the State itself, administered by the civil service.
Central administration tends to be heavily bureaucratic and it is interesting to speculate whether the deserving would be better served and the abuses of the modern system better curbed if the administration was returned to more local control.
So today local government is constantly changing its functions.
However, there still remains an important field for public administration by local elected councils.
Whilst local authorities are losing certain duties, at the same time others are being added and developed.
Local Government Today.
The basis of the modern system of local government was created by the Local Government Act 1972 which took effect on 1st April 1974.
All the then existing councils, with the exception of parish councils in England, ceased to exist, and were replaced by the following:—
(1)Counties.
For local government purposes, England (excluding London) was divided into 39 non-metropolitan counties and six metropolitan  counties, all with county councils.
Most of the non-metropolitan counties retain the well known names, such as Cornwall, Cheshire, Hampshire, Kent and Norfolk, but there were a number of new names, varying from the attractive ‘Cumbria’ to the much disliked ‘Humberside’.
The outstanding feature of the new county system, as compared with the one before the 1972 Act took effect, is that the counties absorbed the hitherto independent county boroughs which thereupon ceased to exist, a decision which, in retrospect, some now think was a mistake, since the county boroughs were effective multipurpose authorities.
The six metropolitan counties in the major conurbations,i.e. Greater Manchester, Merseyside, South Yorkshire, Tyne and Wear, West Midlands and West Yorkshire were abolished, together with the Greater London Council (see post ) by the Local Government Act 1985, most of their functions being transferred to the district councils (see below).
Wales was divided into eight counties i.e. Clwyd, Dyfed, Gwent, Gwynedd, Powys, Mid Glamorgan, South Glamorgan and West Glamorgan.
Again there is nostalgic recollection of some of the former county names e.g. Pembrokeshire.
(2)Districts.
Both the non-metropolitan counties and the metropolitan counties were divided into new districts which completely superseded the former  non-county boroughs, urban districts and rural districts.
Each new district has a council.
A large number of these districts have since applied for and been granted Borough status in consequence of which the chairman bears the title of ‘Mayor’ or sometimes ‘Lord Mayor’.
There are fewer districts than under the previous system.
For example in Wales there are now less than a quarter of the district councils which were previously in existence.
(3)Parishes, Towns and Communities.
Before the reorganisation by the 1972 Act, the parish was part of a rural district for local government purposes.
Although the rural district councils were swept away, the 1972 Act retained all existing parish councils in England.
In addition some non-county borough councils and urban district councils under the previous system were given parish council status by order of the Secretary of State.
In Wales, former parish councils became community councils.
Several parish and community councils have given themselves the status of a town council, whereupon the chairman of the parish council has become known as the town mayor.
There are about 7,800 parish, town and community councils.
It is an important principle of local government that the smaller councils are independent of, and not subordinate to, the larger councils.
The 1972 Act did not complete the reorganisation.
Two permanent Local Government Commissions were set up — one for England, and one for Wales.
These Commissions have extensive powers for reviewing the structure on a continuing basis.
For example the Welsh Commission undertook a Special Community Review to create a proper community structure, because the 1972 Act simply designated all the former parishes, boroughs and urban districts as communities irrespective of size and population.
Thus the general pattern is that any place in England and Wales (other than the London Boroughs and some Metropolitan Districts) has at least two councils and possibly three, a situation which many consider to be wasteful in terms of administrative costs.
It is also confusing to the inhabitants in that it is often difficult to ascertain which council has responsibility for the particular matter which concerns them.
People seem to be able to identify easily with the small local council such as the parish or town council which represents an identifiable local community, such as a village or small town and also with their traditional county, but where areas have neither an identifiable community nor an historical association, problems can develop.
In some cases it is possible for a district to be equated with a large town, but in other cases a desire for districts to be larger has produced curious and often locally resented combinations.
The 1972 Act provided for the principal councils (i.e. the county councils and district councils) to have a number of major functions.
However the functions of one council may be transferred to another, and some functions are concurrent.
The functions which may be exercised by parish, town and community councils are nearly all concurrent functions with district councils.
Which authority exercises them depends on local arrangements.
Education (the most expensive local government function) is the responsibility of county councils or district councils in the areas which were formerly covered by metropolitan counties.
So too are personal social services, youth development and libraries (except in Wales where a district council may exercise library functions).
Planning is divided between county councils and district councils with the day to day administration of planning applications resting mainly with the district councils.
Highways and transportation are the responsibility of the county councils, with delegation of some functions to district councils.
Consumer protection and refuse disposal are the responsibility of county councils, as, too, are police and fire services, although some police and fire services are amalgamated over several counties.
District councils are responsible for housing, most environmental health, refuse collection, clean air, coast protection, markets, local licensing and cemeteries (sharing the latter with parish, town and community  councils).
County and district councils have concurrent powers in respect of museums and art galleries, country parks, conservation areas, footpaths, recreational facilities, local parks, and open spaces, sharing the last four functions with parish, town and community councils.
London Government.
Greater London, that is the Administrative County of London, virtually the whole of the former County of Middlesex and certain areas formerly in Essex, Hertfordshire, Kent and Surrey, is governed by 32 London Boroughs.
The Greater London Council which had powers for road traffic, housing, strategic planning, education for inner London, the main sewers and sewage disposal works, fire fighting services, certain civil defence functions, licensing of theatres and betting tracks, parks and open spaces and a number of other minor functions, was abolished by the Local Government Act 1985.
Its powers were distributed between the London Boroughs with some important exceptions e.g. education in inner London (for which a reconstituted and now directly elected Inner London Education Authority was created) and fire services.
Otherwise the London Boroughs are now multipurpose authorities, reviving hopes amongst some observers that the large towns of England and Wales might one day regain their ‘county borough’ status, leaving the county councils free to pursue their former traditional, more  rural, role in collaboration with the small parish, town and community councils.
London Boroughs are governed by a Mayor and Councillors.
The City of London has a completely separate constitution and is governed by a Lord Mayor, Aldermen and a Common Council.
Cities.
Cities have been created in the past by royal charter and by common usage.
It was at one period customary, where a town was the centre of the see of a bishop and where in consequence there was a cathedral, to classify the town as a city.
Sometimes there were charters, sometimes not.
It is curious that the title of the City of Ripon was confirmed by statute in 1865.
Another curiosity is that three parishes are cities — Ely, Ripon and Wells.
Whatever may have been the justification for the title of ‘city’ in the past such honour is now only conferred by Royal Charter.
Towns with populations of less than 200,000 are unlikely to receive such a charter although Cambridge, on account of its standing as a university town received city status by Royal Charter on the 21st March 1951.
City status adds no additional powers.
The mayor does not automatically become Lord Mayor  for that is the subject of a further grant from the Crown.
The new city does not necessarily have a bishop or a cathedral.
The mayor is known by courtesy as ‘The Right Worshipful the Mayor’.
RELATIONS OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUTHORITIES WITH CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
Parliament controls by statute the powers of local authorities.
During the last century a new principle evolved.
Instead of local authorities having the inherent right, or what in England is called the common law right, to conduct their affairs as they wished, it became established that local authorities could only do those things which Parliament had authorised them to do.
Indeed, all that remains today of the old inherent rights are the power to control the method of carrying out the functions which Parliament from time to time give to the local authorities and the power to make rules as to the conduct of the meetings of the local authority.
Parliament has even laid down some rules for controlling the meetings of local authorities.
Today the functions of a local authority almost invariably involve the expenditure of money and it is clearly established that a local authority may not spend money unless it has statutory authority to do so.
The law is now such that the courts will restrain a local authority from spending public funds on any purpose not authorised by law.
Some years ago, in  an action in the High Court, a Birmingham ratepayer succeeded in preventing the Birmingham City Council from granting free tickets to old age pensioners on the City's transport system because they then had no statutory power to do that.
Indeed in such a lawsuit it is the duty of the local authority to prove that they have the power rather than the person who challenges the action to prove that the local authority has no such power.
recent years by the introduction of the statutory right for any council to spend up to the product of a 2p rate on any matter which the council itself considers is for the benefit of the area or part of the area, or all or some of the inhabitants.
The system of government in Britain gives the Central Government considerable (though not unlimited) powers of ensuring the passage of statutes through Parliament, and consequently thereby controlling local government.
These controls are mainly financial.
Other methods of control, once considerable, such as the power to control the appointment and removal of principal officials were largely removed by the Local Government Act 1972, with further moves in the same direction in the Local Government, Planning and Land Act, 1980.
The controls now remaining may be summarised as follows:—
(i)
control of borrowing for capital expenditure,
(ii)
control of the amount of government grants and local authority revenue expenditure.
This is in practice the most important and most powerful form of control,
(iii)
control by general supervision e.g. reports, returns, request for information, schemes, directions,
(iv)
control of local legislation e.g. confirmation of byelaws,
(v)
control and fixing maximum rates e.g. for travelling and subsistence allowances (see Chapter 11,post).
Central Government's control of capital expenditure.
Most capital expenditure involves borrowing, and borrowing requires the approval of the Secretary of State.
A single block borrowing approval now applies for expenditure on all local authority services, except the police, probation and magistrates' courts services.
The Secretary of State has approved the following purposes as purposes for which local authorities may borrow money.
(i)
the acquisition of land (including buildings thereon),
(ii)
the acquisition of vehicles, plant, machinery, etc.,
(iii)
the reclamation and improvement of land,
(iv)
the construction conversion and improvement of buildings,
(v)
the renewal of vehicles plant, machinery, etc.,
(vi)
the making of grants or advances to bodies other than local authorities,
(vii)
the repair and maintenance of land and buildings.
There are, however, certain conditions on borrowing, the main one being that borrowing cannot exceed certain sums as prescribed by the Minister.
In the case of parish, town and community councils the Minister makes each year a block allocation of funds for capital expenditure borrowing, which is administered by the National Association of Local Councils.
Central Government's control of revenue expenditure.
The duty to carry out certain services is imposed on local authorities and as such services are of a nature affecting the whole of the country, for example, the police, or trunk roads, it has long been the practice for Central Government to assist the local authority financially.
In the past, many grants were specific,i.e. for a particular service.
Some of these remain, but most of the Central Government grant to local authorities is now in the form of the rate support  grant and a grant known as a block grant, which involves the Secretary of State deciding the total sum to be paid to all local authorities (after consultation with the local authority associations, and approval of the House of Commons) and its apportionment.
It is then left to the individual local authority to make the best use it can of the sum granted to it, under an overall obligation to maintain standards of services by comparison with those in other areas.
It can be argued that controls by Central Government are desirable to ensure that a uniform minimum standard of efficiency is obtained where the taxpayer at large is contributing through the national Exchequer to local services.
Otherwise in some parts of the country enterprising local authorities, having a high standard of efficiency, would collect more than their fair share of taxpayers' money from the Exchequer to the detriment of other taxpayers in the less enterprising areas of the country.
Local authorities to a very great extent are responsible for the present ‘grant control’ which is exercised by Central Government for, whenever in recent years the Central Government have asked them to carry out some new function the local authorities have countered the request by a demand for a Government grant to assist with the new service.
Unfortunately this has rebounded on local authorities since, operating under the principle of he who pays the piper calls the tune, Central  Government has been able to impose severe restrictions on local authority spending, not only by curbing the total amount of the grant, but also by penalising local authorities who exceed targets imposed by the Central Government.
Hence the notorious rate-capping.
Sadly this latter process, desirable as it might be to stem the antics of a few irresponsible councils, has spilled over into Local Government generally with the unfortunate effect that many responsible authorities have been greatly frustrated in their legitimate desire to provide adequate services in their area.
Such interference with local democracy goes well beyond what many observers consider to be the proper role of the Central Government in relation to Local Government.
It is tempting to speculate whether Local Government will only reassert its traditional independence from excessive Central Government control by finding some way of becoming much less reliant on Central Government grants.
Local Government Revenue.
Local authorities derive their revenue from three main sources:—
1.
From income from services provided, and from property owned, by the local authority.
2.
From rates derived from the occupiers of property.
3.
From Government Grants.
The first is self-explanatory.
Charges for recreational services are an example.
Government grants have already been discussed.
The question of rates is often insufficiently understood.
The assessment of the value of the occupation of property is made by an officer of the Civil Service — the Valuation Officer.
It is not made by the local authority.
The rate is the net amount required by the local authority to meet the estimated expenditure and is levied on the occupiers of all properties in the valuation list according to the assessment of each property.
The Government is now considering proposals to replace the present domestic rate, based on the occupation of property, which many consider to be inequitable, by some form of community charge levied on individual residents.
Such a system of ‘poll tax’ has already been introduced in Scotland.
The Precept system.
The term ‘precept’ means a demand by one body upon another for the cost of services  administered by the body making the demand in the area of the body required to meet the demand.
There is no system in England of precepts being levied by the Central Government upon local authorities by other bodies.
County Councils precept upon district councils, which are the rating authorities, within the area of the administrative county to meet the cost of those services which the County Council administer.
Parish, town and  community councils do likewise in respect of their services.
The Audit Commission.
There is another system of check upon the finances of local authorities by means of an audit of the accounts of the local authority.
This check is carried out by the Audit Commission, usually on an annual basis.
Although the Audit Commission is an emanation of the State, it operates independently of direct Central Government control.
The duty of the auditor is to see that the accounts have been prepared in accordance with the legal requirements and to see that proper accounting practices have been observed in the compilation of the accounts.
In addition he has a duty to consider whether, in the public interest, he should make a report on any matter arising out of, or in connection with the accounts, in order that the matter should be considered by the council or brought to public attention.
If he makes such a report, he must send a copy to the Audit Commission.
An auditor has no power himself to decide that a council has acted outside its powers.
The former powers of an auditor of disallowance and surcharge have gone.
If an auditor considers that any item of account is contrary to law, he may apply to the court for a declaration to that effect.
The court may order repayment of unlawful expenditure by any person responsible.
Any person who acts in  good faith will not, however, be required to make repayment.
Central Government's control by general supervision.
This may take the form of requirements for reports, returns and information or the holding of enquiries, or in a few cases the issuing of directions,e.g. by the Secretary of State for Education to a local education authority.
From time to time as new services become to be administered by local authorities Parliament requires that the local authority shall submit a scheme of its proposals to one or other of the Central Government departments for approval.
This is done to ensure that each local authority will reach a minimum standard of efficiency and carry out the service in accordance with the wishes of the Central Government.
Central Government's control of local legislation.
A local authority derives its powers from statutory authority.
The statutes from which it derives its powers are either public statutes or private statutes.
Public statutes are the will of Parliament for the whole country and apply to local authorities of each class alike, whereas private statutes apply to the local authority which obtains from Parliament the private statute.
To obtain this private statute it is necessary for the local authority to promote a Bill in Parliament  laid down by Parliament.
These provide, amongst other things, for public notice in the press of the detailed contents of the Bill.
The powers obtained under a local authority's private Act are generally known as ‘local Act powers’
Parliament has now recognised that local authorities should be left to judge for themselves what local  legislation is desirable, but in a tidying-up process all powers under local Acts in force on 1st April 1974 which were not preserved by subsequent general or local legislation automatically expired at the end of 1984.
There is a system of creating local laws known as byelaws.
These apply to the area of the local authority which makes them and apply to the conduct of people within the area of the local authority.
The power to make byelaws must be contained in an Act of Parliament.
Byelaws made by a local authority are not in force until they have been confirmed by the Secretary of State.
This means that in practice the local authority first takes steps to ensure that the byelaws which they propose to make will receive approval before making them.
The appropriate Government departments in most cases issue model forms of these byelaws and tend to oppose major departure from their standard forms.
State action to prevent illegal and unauthorised acts of local authorities.
Apart from the grants to a local authority over which the Central Government exercise control and such other controls as are provided by legislation, the Central Government is in no stronger a position to take action against the local authority than an individual citizen — both have the same right to go to the courts to prevent illegal expenditure by ‘relator action’ at the instance of the Attorney-General of the Crown.
He will take action in the courts equally for the State as for the individual against any local authority acting ‘ultra vires’, that is , beyond their powers.
The Attorney-General may proceed in the High Court for an Order to prevent the local authority carrying out its intended unlawful act.
Such an order can be swiftly obtained if necessary and can be operative within 24 hours of the decision of the local authority.
This order may be obtained whether the courts are sitting or not, if a ‘prima facie ’ case is make out to a judge of the High Court.
The Local ‘Ombudsman’.
A further control on local authorities is carried out by the local ombudsman (see Chapter 9).
The Relationship of Agency between the Central Government and local authorities.
In England this system has not been developed so much as in other countries.
The tendency has  public services on local authorities, the Central Government being in the background the whole time to ensure uniformity in the standard of service.
Certain functions are administered by local authorities as agents for the Central Government when the cost is wholly reimbursed,e.g. the cost of Rent Officers.
The council of every district and London borough must appoint an Electoral Registration Officer, who is responsible to the Central Government for the preparation of the register of electors.
In this respect these officers are the servants of the Crown and as such are disqualified for election to Parliament.
The manner in which the register of electors is compiled is laid down by Parliament in certain Rules and the Electoral Registration Officer must observe those Rules without any variation suggested by the council.
ELECTION OF A COUNCILLOR
On deciding to become a candidate for election to a local government body an individual must ensure that he is qualified to be a candidate.
To do this he must assure himself that, on the day he is nominated as a candidate, he is 21 years of age or over, a British subject or a citizen of the Irish Republic and either that his name is on the register of electors in the local government area for which he intends to stand as a candidate, or that he has resided in the area (or, in the case of a parish or community, within three miles of the area) for a period of one year, or that he has occupied as owner or tenant land in the area for one year, or that his principal or only place of work has been in the area for one year.
The candidate must be nominated in accordance with rules governing the election of councillors to county and district councils, and of parish and community councillors.
These are the Local Elections (Principal Areas) Rules 1986 and the Local Elections (Parishes and Communities) Rules 1986.
The rules apply the rules for parliamentary elections contained in Schedule 1 of the Representation of the People Act 1983, subject to such variations as are appropriate for local elections.
Here are set out for the benefit of a person intending to become a candidate a few of the many matters  which must be complied with in order that the candidature shall be declared valid by the returning officer.
1.
The candidate must be proposed and seconded and after being proposed and seconded he must obtain the signatures of eight assentors, except in the case of a parish, town or community council election where assentors are not required.
2.
In the nomination paper the candidate must set out his surname and other names in full and, his home address.
He may, if he so wishes, include a description up to a maximum of six words, which may include a reference to the candidate's political associations.
3.
When obtaining signatures to the nomination paper the candidate must obtain the signatures of the proposer and seconder first.
4.
Great care should be exercised by the candidate in seeing that those who sign the nomination paper are electors for the electoral area.
Indeed it is necessary after their names to state the electoral number including the electoral letter of each of the persons signing the paper.
A mistake in any of those numbers will invalidate the nomination paper.
Their signatures should tally with their names on the register.
5.
The candidate must also give his consent to nomination and at the same time that he gives his consent in writing he must state his qualifications to be a candidate.
A candidate who is new to this kind of thing may ask the chief executive or clerk of the local authority to prepare for signatures, a nomination paper.
This does not mean that the officer must obtain the signatures of the proposer, seconder, etc., but if advantage of this opportunity is taken, the officer is always willing to give assistance and advise the candidates as to the correct completion of nomination papers.
The candidate should obtain a free copy of the register of electors from the electoral registration officer for he is entitled to this by statute.
This will enable him to check up the elector's signature, number and polling district letter or letters on the nomination paper.
In practice, however, in the principal local authorities the political party organisations will oversee this process and manage their candidates' election campaigns.
After nomination the candidate is entitled to be present at the issue of postal ballot papers, to visit the polling stations and the candidate, the candidate's spouse (if any), and (except in parish or community elections) the candidate's election agent are entitled to be present at the count together with a number of counting agents.
A candidate is entitled to demand a recount in the event of a close voting.
It is customary for a successful  candidate after being elected to move a vote of thanks to the returning officer and his staff for their work in connection with the election, and this is usually seconded by an unsuccessful candidate.
This small act of courtesy is always appreciated and certainly adds to the prestige of the newly-elected councillor in conforming to custom.
A candidate's election expenses must not exceed the maximum permitted amount, and he and, where appropriate, his election agent must make a return of them and declaration in the prescribed form within due time, otherwise his membership of the council will be in jeopardy.
Declaration of Acceptance of Office.
The election of a councillor is the principal step towards taking an active part in the affairs of the council, but a second step is necessary.
He is required by statute, before he can act in the office of councillor, to make the declaration of acceptance of office.
If this declaration is not made within two months of the day of election and delivered to the chief executive or clerk of the council within that two months then the office at the expiration of the two months automatically becomes vacant and the local authority must declare the office vacant and signify the vacancy by notice signed by the proper officer of the authority and affixed to the offices of the authority.
The local authority have no discretion in the matter.
In the case of parish, town or  community councillor the declaration must be made before or at the first meeting of the council after his election, or if the council at that meeting so permits, before or at a later meeting fixed by the council.
The declaration must be in the form prescribed by the Secretary of State and can be obtained from the chief executive or clerk of the authority.
The chief executive or clerk of the authority will for the purpose of avoiding disqualification under this provision usually prepare the form in readiness so that as soon as the councillor is elected he may make the declaration as required.
Time off for public duties.
Under section 29 of the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978, an employer must permit an employee who is a councillor to take time off during working hours for the purpose of performing his duties as a councillor.
The amount of time off must be reasonable having regard to the councillor's responsibilities on the council, the circumstances of the employer's business and the effect on that business of the employee's absence.
Party Politics.
The number of non-party political members of principal councils has declined steadily in recent years and it is usual in the large towns and cities for the authority to be governed by one or more of the political parties acting on a group basis.
The largest party, or a coalition of parties, forms the majority group and the next largest party, or coalition, the minority group, sometimes termed ‘the opposition’.
The member elected as leader of the majority group usually becomes ‘leader of the Council’ and the member elected by the largest minority group ‘leader of the Opposition’.
It is not unusual for this situation now to be recognised officially, and many authorities have the positions of the leaders included in their Standing Orders, sometimes, for instance, making them ex-officio members of all committees and sub-committees of the Council.
In addition, the party groups often appoint Whips, whose job it is not just to enforce party discipline, but by operating what is referred to in Parliamentary jargon as ‘the usual channels’ can assist in the smooth running of the authority, by, for example , effecting agreements on nominations to committees or outside bodies.
The party groups meet on a regular basis and make collective decisions on policy.
ANNUAL MEETING
Election of Chairman or Mayor.
This is generally the first meeting which the newly-elected councillor will attend after his election.
It is the most important meeting of the year so far as the organisation of the council is concerned.
At this meeting, in county councils and district councils, the chairman (mayor) and vice-chairman (deputy mayor) must be appointed by the council.
In the case of parish, town and community councils, the chairman (mayor) must be appointed by the council and a vice-chairman (deputy mayor) may be appointed.
In London borough councils the mayor is elected by the council but the deputy mayor is appointed by the Mayor who is elected at that meeting.
The deputy mayor is not vice-chairman of the council.
That is why at any meeting of the council of a London borough when the mayor is absent a chairman has to be elected by the council to preside at the meeting.
That same rule applies to community councils, but at meetings of county, district, parish and English town councils, the vice-chairman in the absence of the chairman automatically takes the chair.
The principal committees of the council are also usually selected at this annual meeting.
Election of Committees
The selection of committees is an important matter and the newly-elected councillor, if he has any preferences, should make them known in some form either to his political group or to his acquaintances on the council.
So many different methods of selecting committees are in operation that no uniform method can be given here.
The newly-elected councillor should make it his duty to find out how committees are elected and this information will be readily obtained from the chief executive or clerk of the authority.
In many larger authorities sub-committees proliferate and are often quite powerful in their own right, having important delegated powers.
for example, most borough and district councils have a sub-committee adjudicating on planning applications.
Many councils at their annual meeting appoint co-opted members to serve on their committees, although other councils leave the selection of co-opted members to the committees themselves.
The system of co-opting members of the public to serve on council committees can be a good one, for in this way specialised knowledge, information and service can be recruited to the council's activities.
PROCEEDINGS OF THE COUNCIL
The work of the council is in the main carried out in committees of the council which are set up by the council usually at its first meeting after the election is over.
The smaller parish or community council may prefer to carry out all business through the full council instead of appointing committees.
Committees are of two kinds, standing committees and all other committees.
Standing committees are those which are convened regularly on such dates as are fixed by them.
The other committees are convened only when necessary to conduct the special business for which they are appointed.
The newly-elected councillor must not expect to be elected to the more important committees unless he has special qualifications for any committee.
for example, an experienced chartered accountant may well seek a place on the finance committee or a solicitor on the law and parliamentary committee.
No councillor can insist on serving on any particular committee, but equally he cannot be compelled to serve on a committee against his wish.
A council may remove any member from a committee at any time.
There are occasions when a councillor should not serve on a committee.
For example, a building  contractor whose company builds houses for the council should decline to become a member of the housing committee and so avoid innuendos which would otherwise follow.
Similarly, estate agents practising in the area should avoid the Town Planning committee.
See further the National Code of Local Government Conduct, para. 4 (Appendix D,post , p. 105).
There is a great deal to be learnt about committee work and the new councillor must expect to undergo a probationary period in some of the less important committees of the council.
In these days when party politics have entered so fully into local government, nominations to committees frequently come from the political groups of the council and it is at the group meetings of the council that a new member should stake his claim for membership of particular committees of his choice.
Delegation to Committees.
In local authority work today committee work has become so important that a great measure of power is given to committees.
There is a growing tendency for councils to give committees complete power to act on behalf of the council.
There are two schools of thought about this.
Those who believe in delegation say that the elected representative is presumably a responsible person and a committee of responsible persons should be entrusted with responsibility.
By doing this the  work of the council is expedited and the officers of the council are able to get on with the instructions of the committee without waiting for confirmation by the council of the decisions of the committee.
Those who do not believe in delegation to committees argue that each of them has been elected by the public to watch their interests and therefore they should each have a voice in the decisions of every committee.
Some councils therefore still insist on every committee decision being referred to the full council for confirmation or rejection.
In practice most councils adopt a policy of partial delegation, so that routine matters may be dealt with expeditiously by the committees, whilst matters of major importance and controversial issues are referred to the full council for decision.
The chief executive or clerk of the authority will send to each member of the committee an agenda some days before the meeting setting out the items to be discussed at the meeting.
A good committee member will attend regularly to follow the sequence of matters at each meeting.
He will not talk at the committee unless he has a genuine contribution to make to the discussion.
Nothing gives so bad an impression to the other members of the committee and to the officers present than a member who talks without having read his agenda papers, or who has missed an earlier meeting where the matter was fully discussed or who talks for the sake of talking on every subject.
The officers of the council attend the committees for the purpose of giving facts to the committee and of tendering advice arising out of their professional knowledge and experience.
If they feel that the committee is erring they have a duty to intervene and point out what they think is the best course.
To hold the view that an officer must only tender advice when it is sought from him is entirely erroneous, for indeed it is his duty to tender advice when he thinks it should be given.
For example, the chief executive or clerk would be at fault in allowing a committee to do something which is not authorised by law or which he knows to be illegal.
Raising matters in Committee.
Often upon the agenda of a committee wrongfully appears the item ‘Any other business’.
This is an item which should not be used.
The Local Government Act 1972 specifically states that the only business which can be transacted is that appearing in the summons convening the meeting.
There is a very sound reason for this provision.
Councillors should know beforehand what they are expected to discuss and a councillor may absent himself if nothing really concerns him on the agenda.
Likewise a councillor may leave the committee during its sitting.
In such circumstances it is improper to raise what may be an important matter which is not on the agenda sent with the summons.
That is why the law provides to the contrary.
If a councillor has any matter to bring before a committee he must give notice of it to the clerk of the  council.
Not only should he do this, but in addition he would be wise to discuss the matter with the chairman of the committee and the officer concerned.
A newly-elected councillor may have pledged himself in his election address to fight, say, for more open spaces for his electors.
After his election, if he is wise, he will go straight to the appropriate officer and consult him about the matter, for all sorts of considerations will apply: for example, the claims of other departments, town planning restrictions, the expense of the land and the like.
Some measure of agreement with the chairman and officers will meet with a much greater chance of success than a bold demand in committee for more open spaces.
It is a good practice for a member to give notice at one meeting that he wishes to discuss a certain matter at the next meeting.
This enables other members to consider the matter between the meetings and also enables the officers to investigate and report on the matter, if necessary.
Many authorities provide in their Standing Orders for the attendance of councillors at meetings of committees of which they are not members where they have a particular interest in certain matters on the agenda.
In such cases, they may be permitted by the committee to speak, but not to vote.
Raising matters in Council.
With certain specified exceptions, a motion can only be placed before the council by a notice of  motion which must be sent to the chief executive or clerk of the council within the time provided for in the standing orders.
Questions can, however, be asked at a council meeting in two ways.
First by giving notice to the chairman of the appropriate committee.
He will then answer them at the council meeting.
The second method is by asking the chairman of the committee questions on the report of his committee.
Always give the chairman of the committee and its chief officer notice of any question to be put at the council meeting.
You are much more likely to receive a complete and considered answer if you do this.
Committee Reports to Council.
The work of the committees of the council is always the subject of report to the council in some form, either as a report of what the committee has done under delegated powers or by the submission for the approval of the council of the recommendations of the committee.
In the latter case, as has been stated, each member will have the opportunity of making observations on the recommendations and of moving amendments at the council meeting.
It is always a wise procedure for a new and inexperienced councillor to watch the working of committees and council before venturing forward with some important proposals.
A lack of knowledge of the mechanics of the council may prejudice the success of a good proposal.
Admission of the Public and the Press.
The public have a statutory right to be present during council meetings and committee meetings.
The Press have the right to attend as part of the public.
Where a meeting is open to the public, the Press must, if they ask, be given a copy of the agenda and any supporting documents.
At council meetings and committee meetings the council (or committee) have power to exclude the Press and the public in certain circumstances.
Those circumstances are strictly defined as being first, where confidential information would be disclosed to the Press and public if they attended, and secondly where exempt information would be disclosed to the Press and public if they attended.
In the second case, a resolution of the Council must describe the nature of the exempt information relied upon.
Confidential information is that supplied to the Council by a government department on terms which forbid the disclosure of that information to the public, or information which by statute or court order must not be disclosed to the public.
Exempt information is as follows:—
1.
Information relating to a particular employee, former employee or applicant to become an employee of, or a particular office-holder, former office-holder or applicant to become an office-holder under, the authority.
2.
Information relating to a particular employee, former employee or applicant to become an employee of, or a particular officer, former officer or applicant to become an officer appointed by a magistrates court committee or a probation committee.
3.
Information relating to any particular occupier or former occupier of, or applicant for, accommodation provided by or at the expense of the authority.
4.
Information relating to any particular applicant for, or recipient or former recipient of, any service provided by the authority.
5.
Information relating to any particular applicant for, or recipient or former recipient of, any financial assistance provided by the authority.
6.
Information relating to the adoption, care, fostering or education of any particular child.
7.
Information relating to the financial or business affairs of any particular person (other than the authority).
8.
The amount of any expenditure proposed to be incurred by the authority under any particular contract for the acquisition of property or the supply of goods or services.
9.
Any terms proposed or to be proposed by or to the authority in the course of negotiations for a contract for the acquisition or disposal of property or the supply of goods or services.
10.
The identity of the authority (as well as of any other person, by virtue of paragraph 7 above) as the person offering any particular tender for a contract for the supply of goods or services.
11.
Information relating to any consultations or negotiations, or contemplated consultations or negotiations, in connection with any labour relations matter arising between the authority or a Minister of the Crown and employees of, or office-holders under the authority.
12.
Any instructions to counsel and any opinion of counsel (whether or not in connection with any proceedings) and any advice received, information obtained or action to be taken in connection with—
(a)
any legal proceedings by or against the authority, or
(b)
the determination of any matter affecting the authority.
(whether, in either case, proceedings have been commenced or are in contemplation).
13.
Information which, if disclosed to the public, would reveal that the authority proposes —
(a)
to give under any enactment a notice under or by virtue of which requirements are imposed on a person: or (b) to make an order or direction under any enactment.
14.
Any action taken or to be taken in connection with the prevention, investigation or prosecution of crime.
15.
The identity of a protected informant.
The above rules include sub-committees as well as committees.
However, in the case of parish, town and community councils, the power to exclude the Press and the public applies to council meetings and committee meetings only, and may occur where the council formally resolve to exclude the public on the grounds that publicity would be prejudicial to the public interest by reason of the confidential nature of the business to be transacted, or for another special reason stated in the resolution and arising from the nature of the business or the proceedings.
This power should be exercised most sparingly for it must be remembered that the public is entitled to know how the council is handling their affairs.
Secrecy breeds suspicion and then confidence goes.
Public Participation.
Many councils have adopted measures to encourage public participation.
In some cases part of a full council meeting is available for public questions.
In others, members of the public may be invited to address committees or sub-committees before decisions are reached on topics about which they hold particular views.
Standing Orders.
The rules which govern the conduct of the business of the council and its committees are called Standing Orders.
The chief executive or clerk of the local authority should always provide each newly-elected councillor with a copy of these which should be studied closely by the new councillor.
These orders will give him the rules for the conduct of debate and committee work.
They will tell him the rules for bringing motions before the council, for moving amendments, for raising questions, for length of speeches, rights of reply and the like.
A councillor who is a student of standing orders is always an asset to the council, but a councillor who is not becomes a burden and a handicap to debate, and frequently a disappointed and frustrated person.
It is one of the privileges of a councillor in a council meeting to see that other members obey standing orders.
A breach of standing orders can be challenged only on ‘a point of order’.
This privilege must not be abused by using it for something  which is not a point of order.
The council should not agree to standing orders being ‘suspended’ except in a real emergency otherwise the conduct of the council's business will be unnecessarily prolonged and the standard of debate lowered.
It is not essential for a small council such as a parish council to have standing orders, but even then it may be useful to have a ‘model’ set from the National Association of Local Councils for guidance if some difficulty on procedure arises.
‘Privilege’ of Councillors at meetings.
There is unfortunately a mistaken view held by many councillors that they are free to state what they wish in council meetings for they imagine that the council meeting is a completely privileged occasion.
There is in fact no special protection afforded by the law to members of a council who make defamatory statements at meetings of the council.
There are, however, certain defences to an action for defamation, and a member of a council may be able to bring the language he uses within the ambit of one of those defences.
Qualified privilege.
Qualified privilege may be claimed if the member of the council making the statement about a person can show that he made it without malice  and in pursuit of a public duty.
Thus if a member has a sound reason for believing that some malpractice is occurring in connection with the council's funds, he is under a public duty to inform the council.
If the statement he makes is found to be true it will not be defamatory (see Justification below).
If it is found not to be true, the member may claim qualified privilege if he acted without malice.
Express malice may defeat a plea of qualified privilege, and in this sense malice means, first, personal spite in the contents of the statement or, secondly, personal spite in the mode or extent of the publication.
Mere carelessness will not suffice.
Evidence of malice may be found in the statement itself —i.e. , if the words used are excessive and disproportionate to the facts.
It may also be inferred from the relations between the parties.
Evidence of malice in the mode of publication is illustrated by wider dissemination of the statement than is necessary, such as shouting for others to overhear, or sending an open postcard instead of a closed letter.
Mere dictation to a typist in the normal course of business is not evidence of excessive publication.
The privilege is limited strictly to matters of public concern and the publication must be for the public benefit.
So, speaking generally, statements made at meetings of local authorities are thus privileged.
This special defence does not extend to anything written or said which is not relevant to  the discharge of the duty or the exercise of the right which creates the privilege.
If, therefore, a person can prove that the statements or criticisms complained of went beyond reasonable or forceful debate and were defamatory (as for example, a torrent of defamatory invective), and were influenced by indirect or ulterior motives, he might well be justified in issuing a writ.
Fair comment.
Another defence to an action for defamation is that of fair comment.
This defence relies on alleging that the statement is a fair comment on a matter of public interest.
Honest criticism is essential and healthy, and is recognised as such by the law.
The elementary requisites of fair comment are:— first, the matter must be of public interest; secondly, it must be an expression of opinion based on proved facts; thirdly, the comment must be fair; and lastly, there must be no malice.
Justification.
Justification is another defence.
In this defence the defendant may prove the statement to be true.
It is a question for the court whether substantial truth is sufficient.
A defence of justification does not fail by reason only that the truth of every charge is not proved, if the words not proved to be true do not materially injure the plaintiff's reputation having regard to the truth of the remaining charges.
REPRESENTATION ON OTHER BODIES
A great deal of work is done by members of local authorities by serving as representatives of their authorities on outside bodies.
The newly-elected councillor will be expected to take his share in this important aspect of the councillor's services.
Thus a councillor may find himself co-opted on to a committee of another local authority, since such a committee may, providing it is not a finance committee, co-opt non-members.
Alternatively or in addition he may be co-opted on to other public bodies, such as hospital authorities, water authorities, etc.
Councillors on authorities other than education authorities may be invited to participate at some level in educational administration and in the case of primary schools, district and parish councils may have rights in respect of appointing governors.
In almost every town and district in the country there exist charitable funds and there is a growing tendency to invite local government representation upon their management committees.
In fact it is frequently the case that the chief executive or clerk of the local authority is also secretary of the charity.
It is important that this representation on outside bodies is fully maintained in the interest of the  people whom the councillor represents.
It is also important that regular attendance at the meetings of these outside bodies should be maintained in order to preserve continuity of co-operation between the local authority and the outside body.
The newly-elected councillor should welcome the opportunity of serving on these outside bodies for only by so doing can he obtain a full appreciation of the part which these bodies play in local administration.
In most cases allowances to members apply when the councillor attends such outside bodies.
The chief executive or clerk of the authority will tell the councillor when they apply to him.
RESPONSIBILITIES AND LIMITATIONS OF COUNCILLORS
The election to the office of councillor gives the councillor great responsibilities towards his electors.
In a democracy, the elected member is entrusted with duties towards all persons in his constituency irrespective of the fact that they may not have voted for him.
In some councils, the pressures of party political control may be very considerable, but even so, he should always bear in mind this overall responsibility.
This public duty must not be influenced by private and personal interests.
The Government and all local authority associations have agreed a National Code of Local Government Conduct for the guidance of councillors.
This is reproduced in full in Appendix D, p. 105,post , and should be carefully studied.
A councillor has no right to a roving commission to go and examine books or documents of a council because he is a councillor.
Mere curiosity or desire to see and inspect documents is not sufficient.
He should first seek the authority of the council or one of its committees.
He does, however, have a right to inspect the accounts at all reasonable hours.
The papers which he receives for council and committee  work are often confidential and he should not disclose the contents of those papers to outsiders.
If he requires information he should approach the chief executive or clerk of the council for it.
A councillor has no right to require an officer of the council to compile information for him.
This can only be done through a committee and then the information will be sent to all members of the committee.
He should not seek information from other local authorities except through the chief executive or clerk of his own council.
If he does attempt to do so he either receives a negative reply or causes the officer of that other authority to send a copy of the correspondence to his own chief executive or clerk.
The chief executive or clerk of a local authority is always anxious to assist members by giving and obtaining for them the fullest information for their work.
The councillor should not visit or inspect any of the buildings or works of the local authority without first obtaining the approval of the council or the appropriate committee.
A councillor who visits council properties and establishments without such authority is technically a trespasser.
He is advised also to contact the appropriate official of his intentions when he will receive all reasonable assistance towards his visit.
It should always be remembered that the official takes his instructions from the council and its committees only and not from individual councillors .
Here it would be useful to impress upon the new councillor the relationship  between the official and the council.
The official is engaged by the council for three main functions namely Executive, Administrative and Advisory.
The council decide the policy but the official carries it out, and the way in which he carries out the instructions of the council is in accordance with his recognised professional skill and knowledge.
Unless specifically instructed by the council, a councillor must not take part in the execution of works or actions ordered by the council.
He must not write letters on behalf of the council or sign public notices.
Those functions are the responsibility and duty of the official.
The official's duty is to have in mind the best and most effective and efficient means of carrying out the council's decision.
A councillor's actions may also be limited or curtailed by the party control exercised over him.
Where there is a system of control of council matters through caucus groups of members of the council, these groups determine beforehand what line of action shall be taken by the members of those groups when matters come before the council and its committees.
The disciplinary control exercised by these groups is usually powerful, for if any member breaks away and acts contrary to the decisions of the group on any important issue he will probably lose the support of his party at the next election.
The advantage of the group system is that it ensures that members of the respective parties put forward clear cut views at the meetings of the council.
The disadvantage is that the individual  councillor, if he is a member of such a group, may be required to sub-ordinate what he considers to be in the best interests of his electors to what his group so consider.
Further, the extension of this system might well reach the stage when directives are given from political headquarters as to the line of action which ought to be taken locally.
When that time arrives the discretion of the local councillor will be seriously limited, and it is also questionable whether such directives are in any sense democratic.
Prohibition of political Publicity.
It may also be noted that the Local Government Act 1986 specifically prohibits any council from spending money for party political purposes.
PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION
The honourable calling of a councillor must be of the highest worth for no councillor must lower himself or his calling by obtaining any illegal financial gain from his activities as a councillor.
All councillors should read carefully para. 7 of the National Code of Local Government Conduct (Appendix D,post , p. 105).
Two Acts of Parliament deal with the problem of corruption by members of local authorities.
The Public Bodies Corrupt Practices Act 1889, creates a two-edged offence namely, the receiving of a bribe and the giving of a bribe.
Although the existence of the statutes indicates certain offences which sometimes creep into public life, it is most gratifying to note that amongst the many tens of thousands of councillors serving voluntarily year by year in this country a prosecution under this Act is very rare indeed.
To quote that part of this Act so far as it affects a member of a local authority may be useful.
It reads:—
‘Every person who shall by himself or by or in conjunction with any other person, corruptly solicit or receive, for himself, or for any other person, any gift, loan, fee, reward, or  advantage whatever as an inducement to, or reward for, or otherwise on account of any member…of a public body…doing or forbearing to do anything in respect of any matter or transaction whatsoever, actual or proposed, in which such public body is concerned shall be guilty of a misdemeanour.’
That Act imposed a penalty of up to two years’ imprisonment, but this was altered by the Prevention of Corruption Act 1916, in certain cases to a maximum of seven years' imprisonment and a minimum of three years' imprisonment.
Those cases are where the matter or transaction in relation to which the offence was committed, was a contract or a proposal for a contract with, amongst others, a public body; or a sub-contract to execute any work comprised in such a contract.
In addition to these penalties the amount of any gift, loan, fee or reward may be directed to be paid to the public body.
The member is also liable to be adjudged incapable of being elected or appointed to any public office for five years from the date of his conviction and also to forfeit any such office held by him at the time of his conviction.
In the event of a second conviction for a like offence, a member is liable, in addition to the penalties already named, to be adjudged to be for ever incapable of holding any public office, and to be incapable for five years of being registered as an  elector or voting at an election either of members to serve in Parliament or of members of any public body.
The term ‘reward’ covers receipt of money for a past favour even if there was no prior arrangement or agreement.
THE LOCAL OMBUDSMAN
For the purpose of conducting investigations into complaints of maladministration against local authorities (other than parish, community, or town councils), local commissioners have been appointed.
These are often referred to as local ombudsmen.
A complaint must be made in writing to a councillor of the authority concerned for forwarding to the commissioner, although the commissioner may consider a complaint direct if he is satisfied that a councillor has been requested to pass it on, and has failed to do so.
Before investigating a complaint, the commissioner must be satisfied that the complaint has been brought to the notice of the authority, and that the authority has been given a reasonable opportunity to investigate and reply to it.
Maladministration is not defined, but it is usually taken to mean administrative action (or inaction) which has led to unfairness to a member of the public.
The commissioner will not investigate matters where the complainant has a remedy through a court or tribunal.
Following an investigation, the commissioner will prepare a report and may make recommendations.
If the commissioner finds maladministration  and the authority does not remedy it to the satisfaction of the complainant, there is no way in which the complainant can pursue the matter further.
A good deal of responsibility rests therefore on the local authority and the councillors to deal properly and fairly with any complaint, or finding by the commissioner.
DECLARATIONS OF INTEREST
It is a most important matter that a councillor should not take advantage of his position and use it for his own personal gain.
See the National Code of Local Government Conduct, para. 3 (Appendix D,post , p. 105).
The law on this matter is set out in sections 94 to 98 of the Local Government Act 1972.
These sections provide in effect that any member of a local authority having any pecuniary interest direct or indirect in any contract, proposed contract or other matter must declare his interest.
He must not take part in the consideration or discussion of the matter or vote upon it.
In the case of married persons living together, a spouse's interest is an indirect interest for this purpose.
Many local authorities in their standing orders provide that in such circumstances the member of the council should leave the meeting, but if the standing orders do not so provide, the member may not be required to leave.
There is no definition of pecuniary interest in the legislation.
It need not be a pecuniary advantage .
The rules as to disclosure, participation and voting do not apply to an interest in a contract or other matter which a member may have as a ratepayer or inhabitant of the area, or as an ordinary consumer  of water, or to an interest in any matter relating to the terms on which the right to participate in any service, including the supply of goods, is offered to the public.
The Secretary of State has also granted a general dispensation to members who are tenants of council houses.
If any member of the council or any nominee of his is a member of a company or other body with which the contract is made or is proposed to be made, or is a partner, or is in the employment of a person with whom the contract is made, he has an indirect pecuniary interest which he should disclose.
This does not apply to membership or employment in any public body,e.g. , an electricity authority.
Where the interest is that of a shareholder and the total nominal value of the shares does not exceed £1,000 or one-hundredth part of the total nominal value of the issue share capital (whichever is the less), the interest must still be disclosed, but the prohibition on taking part in the discussion and voting does not apply.
This is a matter which cannot be too carefully watched since failure to comply renders the member liable to heavy penalties.
The newly-elected councillor is advised to take advantage of making an omnibus declaration of any of his interests which may come into conflict with these provisions.
He can obtain from the chief executive or clerk of the authority an appropriate form and this will then save him from making repeated  disclosures at any time when any matter in which he or his wife is interested is being discussed.
It is the practice of many chief executives or clerks of local authorities to issue to all newly-elected councillors one of these forms of declaration.
If you don't receive one be sure to ask for one.
The completion of this form does not exempt the councillor from his duty to refrain from speaking or voting on the matter in which he has an interest.
Many larger authorities maintain a separate register of interests which is available for public inspection.
In one case a councillor was fined because he was a builder and discussed the matter of direct labour at a housing committee.
The Queen's Bench held that he had offended because in the future he might wish to tender for council house construction.
For the benefit of the reader sections 94 to 98 of the Local Government Act 1972 are set out in Appendix A at the end of this booklet and should be studied most carefully.
In addition to personal financial interests, there may be times when a councillor has a personal interest in a matter other than a financial one, which may influence his consideration of that matter.
Whilst the law does not require disclosure of  such an interest, as it does with the financial one, it may be prudent to indicate the existence of the interest and, because of it to withdraw from active consideration of the issue.
This course of action will avoid the possibility of the interest coming to light at a later stage causing the councillor to be the subject of criticism that his view of the public issue was thereby influenced.
Although such criticism may well be totally unjustified, if could be very embarrassing.
Reference may be made to the National Code of Local Government Conduct, para. 3 (Appendix D,post , p. 105) although it has to be said that that paragraph is not, in the author's view, well drafted since it fails to indicate with sufficient clarity the  difference between disclosing personal pecuniary interests (failure to comply being a serious criminal offence) and disclosing other interests (which is simply a matter of prudence, but involves no breach of law).
Employment by the Council
The law makes it quite clear that a member of a local authority may not be employed by that authority.
Section 116 of the Local Government Act 1972 reads:—
‘A person shall, so long as he is, and for twelve months after he ceases to be, a member of a local authority, be disqualified for being appointed by that authority to any paid office, other than to the office of chairman or vice-chairman.
This does not prevent an employee of one authority being a member of another, and this practice, particularly in London and the large conurbations, has increased greatly in recent years.
It has been the subject of some concern by those who feel that local authority officers should be completely divorced from party political connections.
ALLOWANCES TO COUNCILLORS
The law.
The rules for the payment of allowances to councillors are set out in ss. 173 to 178 of the Local Government Act 1972 and the Local Government (Allowances) Regulations 1986 (as amended).
These are set out in Appendix B,post , p. 82.
Attendance Allowance.
Attendance allowance is payable to councillors for the performance of an approved duty (for meaning of approved duty, see below).
It is the payment of such reasonable amount as the council itself determines, subject to a ceiling in the form of an amount prescribed by the Secretary of State in the Regulations.
The attendance allowance, being payable as of right, must be declared as income for tax purposes, but any expenses wholly and necessarily incurred in the performance of the duty (and not otherwise reimbursed) may be set off against it.
Financial Loss Allowance.
In the case of members of committees who are not entitled to attendance allowance because they are not councillors of the authority, there is, instead of the attendance allowance, a financial loss allowance in respect of any loss of earnings necessarily suffered, or additional expense incurred (other than travelling or subsistence allowance) in performing an approved duty.
A financial loss allowance is not taxable as income.
Such payment is likewise subject to a maximum prescribed by the Regulations.
A councillor may give written notice to his council that he wishes to receive a financial loss allowance instead of an attendance allowance.
He may revert to an attendance allowance by further written notice.
A councillor wishing to take advantage of these provisions should consult the Treasurer's department to ensure that he complies with the formalities.
Attendance at conferences or meetings.
An allowance in the nature of an attendance allowance (or a financial loss allowance) MAY be paid to a councillor in respect of his attendance at ANY conference or meeting which the council itself considers relates to the interests of the area (other than one called in respect of a trade or business, or which is wholly or partly political).
Approved Duty.
The normal method of recovering the amount due is by application to the proper financial officer of the council, on the appropriate form of  application as set out in the Regulations.
It must be made perfectly clear that the member of the council was engaged on ‘approved duty’ which is defined in section 177(2) of the Local Government Act 1972 as follows:—
(2) In sections 173, 174 and 176 above, the expression ‘approved duty’, in relation to a member of a body, means any of the following duties, that is to say—(a ) attendance at a meeting of the body, or of any of its committees or sub-committees;(b) the doing of any other thing approved by the body, or anything of a class so approved, for the purpose of, or in connection with , the discharge of the functions of the body, or of any of its committees or sub-committees;,(c ) where, in pursuance of a duty imposed on or a power granted to the body by any enactment or instrument (including a Royal Charter), he has been appointed by or on the nomination of the body to be a member of some other body prescribed for the purpose of this paragraph (whether or not that other body falls within any of paragraphs (ab ) to (f ) of subsection (1) above), the doing of anything as a member of that other body for the purpose of, or in connection with , the discharge of the functions of that other body.
Travelling and Subsistence Allowance.
In addition to the attendance or financial loss allowance, a member may also claim travelling and subsistence allowances necessarily incurred by him for the purpose of performing an approved duty.
A  member of any council is entitled to a subsistence allowance only if the place where the duty is performed is more than three miles from his usual place of residence.
The maximum rates of travelling and subsistence allowances are specified by the Secretary of State in Circulars (see Appendix C,post , p. 100).
The rates appropriate to these allowances vary from time to time, but the councillor will be informed of any change by the Council's Chief Financial Officer.
Travelling and subsistence allowances are not subject to tax.
Parish, Town and Community Councillors.
There is one exception to all these payments in that parish, town or community councillors are not entitled to receive payment when the duty which they perform is within the area of the parish or community .
RESIGNATION AND CEASING TO HOLD THE OFFICE OF A COUNCILLOR
Voluntary resignation.
A councillor resigns his office by notice in writing signed by him and delivered to the chief executive or clerk of the authority, except in the case of a parish, town or community councillor when it should be addressed to the chairman of the council.
The resignation becomes effective on receipt of the resignation by the recipient.
There is no statutory procedure for withdrawing such a notice, neither has the resignation to be reported to the council in order to be effective.
The purported withdrawal of a resignation is ineffective as the resignation is final when received by the proper officer of the authority or the chairman as the case may be.
Disqualifications for Office of Councillor.
A member of a council ceases to hold that office in the following circumstances:
First, on the normal termination of his period of office, unless he seeks re-election.
Secondly, the court may order him to forfeit his office if he is convicted for corruption under the Public Bodies Corrupt Practices Act 1889, and if he is convicted a second time under that Act he  may be adjudged incapable for ever of holding a public office.
Similarly a member convicted under the Representation of the People Act 1983, under the provisions relating to corrupt and illegal practices is incapable of holding office for five years.
Thirdly, he may lose his office by failure to attend meetings.
The law provides that if a member of a local authority fails throughout a period of six consecutive months to attend any meeting of the local authority he shall, unless the failure was due to some reason approved by the local authority before the expiry of that period, cease to be a member of the authority.
Approval cannot be given after the six-month period has elapsed.
Absence due to service with the Armed Forces during war or any emergency does not cause the office to be lost.
The attendance of a member at a meeting of a committee or subcommittee of the local authority is regarded as attendance at a meeting of the authority, but attendance at a meeting of a joint committee, joint board or other body will only count as attendance at a meeting of the authority when any functions of the local authority have been transferred or delegated to those bodies.
Fourthly, a member who has failed to make the declaration of acceptance of office (see ante , p. 28) automatically ceases to be a member.
Fifthly, a member who is adjudged bankrupt or who has made a composition with his creditors ceases to be a member.
Sixthly, a councillor ceases to be a member if he takes or holds any paid office or employment (other than that of chairman), the appointment to which is made by the council.
Seventhly, if within five years before his election or since his election he is convicted of an offence and has passed upon him a sentence of imprisonment (whether suspended or not) for a period of not less than three months without the option of a fine.
OFFICERS OF LOCAL AUTHORITIES
The local government officer is the servant of both the council and the public.
Although he is appointed by the council who pay his salary, he has nevertheless duties to the public to see that their rights are protected.
He should serve all political parties alike.
It does not mean, however, that he should not exercise his franchise and vote as he wishes at local government elections, but he should not be a party man otherwise his advice might be regarded as being tainted and the council as a whole, in the end, would cease to have confidence in his advice.
As an executive his functions must be exercised impartially and he must carry out the policy as decided by the council free from any political bias.
In this respect English local government differs from Continental and American local government where officials are appointed, not because of their absence of political views, but because of the strength of their political views, and officials in those countries, at one time, changed with the political parties, and indeed in some states in the U.S.A. change with ‘the Party’.
The principal officers of the local authority are those which the authority decides to appoint.
In the case of a small council such as a parish council, the only official may be the clerk.
Before the 1972 Act, it was usual for principal authorities to have a  fairly standard pattern of senior officials — a medical officer of health, an engineer and surveyor, a chief education officer and so on, but there has been a development towards different breakdowns of functions and new titles.
There has been a perhaps unfortunate tendency for grander and longer titles for officials.
It might be thought that the clerk of the council has a nobler sound than director-general, for example.
Chief Executive or Clerk of the Council.
He is the chief executive and administrative officer of the local authority, and it is to him in the end that the council must turn to see that the decisions of the council are executed.
He often acts as secretary of the local authority responsible for convening all the meetings of the local authority and its committees.
He is responsible for presenting to the council and its committees all matters of business which are brought to his notice, either from members of the public, members of the council or from the officers themselves, and of recording the decisions, either by way of minutes of the committees or of reports of the committees which are subsequently presented to the council.
There is no necessity to appoint a legally qualified chief executive or clerk.
The person appointed should be chosen for his administrative ability and a legal qualification, although extremely useful, is not essential.
The chief executive or clerk of the authority will from time to time report to the council and its  committees on all legislation which is new and which affects the local authority.
He will communicate to the council the decisions of government departments.
Indeed it is his duty, and his duty alone, to communicate with the departments of the government on all matters affecting the policy of the council.
It is his duty to be responsible for the safe custody of all the council's books of record, documents and title and the common seal.
He must have a full knowledge of the local Bye-laws, local Acts of Parliament and Standing Orders of the council, so that he may be in a position at any time to advise the local authority on their functions and powers.
He, or a deputy on his behalf, will attend or will be represented at all meetings of the council and its committees.
He is entitled as of right to be present at all meetings of the council, its committees and subcommittees.
As co-ordinator of the council's work he will be brought daily into contact with the council's officers to whom he should become guide, counsellor and friend.
When the council's officers work as a team the whole work of the staff will tick over smoothly.
Treasurer or Chief Financial Officer.
Even a small council such as a parish council has to have an officer responsible for the administration of its financial affairs although this duty may well fall upon the clerk.
His duties are to prepare  the estimates of expenditure for all committees of the council after the council have formulated its policy.
He must prepare for payment all accounts due from the local authority and must in his turn, collect for the authority all sums due from time to time to the local authority particularly in regard to the collection of rates.
His duties are not merely mechanical.
Finance in modern local government plays a very great part and the skilful treasurer with an appreciation of modern methods and legislation and by close study of money prices on the stock market can effect great financial saving to the local authority whom he serves.
His work has now become so specialised that men of the highest standard are required to fill this office.
He must control the spending of money by the local authority and draw the attention of the authority to proposed expenditure which is in excess of its estimates.
Other Officers.
The number and designation of other principal officers of a local authority will naturally vary with the functions which each class of local authority will be called upon to carry out.
The councillor should become acquainted with the principal officers from whom he can gain a considerable amount of information and help.
The Relationship between Councillors and Officers.
Councillors should be in no doubt that they and the officers of the local authority must work as a  team.
Their efforts are joint efforts.
Whilst the councillors determine policy, they cannot do this to the full without the constant advice and help of the chief officers.
Local Government is their profession and their life and they are most helpful to the elected members.
Use them, consult them, seek their advice and it will surprise the newly-elected councillor how much help and ‘know-how’ he will receive.
It may be useful also to refer to the National Code of Local Government Conduct, para. 5 (Appendix D,post , p. 105).
Many larger authorities now provide secretarial and other supportive services for members.
LOCAL AUTHORITY ASSOCIATIONS
It is quite natural that the differing classes of local authorities have banded themselves together to watch their respective interests.
There are five main local government associations.
They are:—
1.
The Association of County Councils (A.C.C.).
2.
The London Boroughs Association (L.B.A.).
3.
The Association of Metropolitan Authorities (A.M.A.).
4.
The Association of District Councils (A.D.C.).
5.
The National Association of Local Councils (N.A.L.C.)(for parish, community and town councils).
These Associations each have a full-time secretariat (except for the L.B.A. which is served by honorary officers) and function on similar lines to the local authorities themselves.
They have committees selected by the members which report to councils elected by the member councils.
They are very important bodies indeed and are recognised by central government as the mouthpiece of their respective councils.
Each body has a powerful influence in Parliament and is instrumental in introducing legislation into Parliament and in modifying each government's proposals on local government legislation.
Each also endeavours to influence the Secretary of State in his allocation of rate support grants.
If a local authority has any matter to propose for the good of local government in general or for any particular section of local government, this should invariably be done through the appropriate local authority association, for if supported by the association it will carry much more weight than the proposal of a single local authority.
The subscription to these bodies are heavy and the newly-elected member may be surprised by their magnitude.
They are essential to the well being of local government and must be supported to the full.
Each association holds an annual conference and supplies a free ‘counsel's opinion’ service to its member authorities.