

Part One
It was as if he had been waiting there for me all my life.
‘Do sit down.’
The inside of the dug-out soon became familiar.
I felt that I had known it for a long time.
This was an appointment which I had repeatedly put off but which at last I was being forced to keep.
A photograph of Hitler stared benignly over a table spread with a white cloth.
There were plates of biscuits and sandwiches and little slices of sausage.
Behind the table stood the tall middle-aged man who had spoken to me.
He wore naval uniform.
On either side of him were two younger officers who stood up when I was shown in.
There was an un-English smell of cigar smoke.
I began to think quickly.
This would be an interrogation.
I must take no notice of their politeness or kindness which was designed to trap me into giving information.
They might even try to make me drunk.
‘I expect you would like some brandy.’
I longed for some.
‘No, thank you very much.’
I found it impossible to answer brusquely as I had intended.
‘Then perhaps some tea.
I know all Englishmen like tea.’
‘Well, yes, I would like some tea.’
He shouted and an orderly came in.
He spoke to him in German.
The orderly went out
‘Although I do not speak English as well as I should, I did at one time know England well.
I have always liked Englishmen.’
Be careful I thought, this is the sort of thing you were warned against.
But again I found it difficult to be rude.
‘What part of England did you know?’
I asked.
‘I was at Oxford after the last war.
There I made many friends.
I used to go and stay with them in their homes — in London, in Sussex, in Devonshire…’
He seemed to have forgotten about me in the middle of his sentence.
‘…
But it is now a very long time since I was there.’
He stared at the table as if he were talking to himself.
His voice had a soothing hypnotic effect.
I remembered my original impression that this had all been prepared.
The two other officers were staring at me with a curiosity which I had at first thought similar to the curiosity I had found among the soldiers.
Now I began to suspect that there was something sinister about their observation of me.
‘I am afraid that these two officers do not speak English, but as you can see they are very interested in you.’
I tried to smile politely but I was beginning to feel frightened.
What was it they wanted from me?
Perhaps there was someone behind me who was just about to hit me over the head.
I turned round quickly.
There was no one there, only the little door by which I had entered.
‘Is there anything you want?’ he asked.
‘No, thank you.’
The orderly came in with a pot of tea.
I thought it might be drugged so I only pretended to drink it, putting the cup to my lips and setting it down again full after an interval.
The officer talked of Magdalen and Piccadilly and Haywards Heath.
‘I and many like me in Germany think it is a tragedy that we are at war with you.
What have we got to fight about?
You are not like the French.
You are the same family as us.
And yet we are fighting each other, each with barbarous allies.
The Germans and the English have plenty in common with each other, but what have you in common with the Russians or we with the Japanese?’
‘It is not a question of races but of ideals.’
‘But the Führer has always said that he has no ideological quarrel with England.’
‘I don't care what he says,’ I blustered.
‘Anyone can say they have no quarrel with people so long as they always get their own way.’
We began a series of recriminations about the events leading up to the war.
Occasionally he translated what I said for the benefit of the other two.
‘You are not drinking your tea,’ he said suddenly.
‘Do you not like it?
Perhaps it is not strong enough for you?
Englishmen, I know, always like their tea very strong.’
‘I'm sorry,’ I said, wondering how I could save face, ‘I suddenly don't feel very well.’
He jumped up.
‘You are not wounded, I hope?
They told me on the 'phone that you were not wounded.
Would you like to see a doctor?’
He seemed concerned for me.
But my hand had stopped bleeding some time ago and I could not reasonably pretend that I was wounded.
‘No, thank you.
I'm all right,’ I said.
‘Perhaps you are suffering a little from shock?’
I was grateful for this.
‘Yes, I think perhaps I am.’
‘In that case I will not keep you any longer than I can help.’
His manner changed.
The others began to look bored.
‘First of all your name, rank and number please.’
I gave them to him.
He repeated the words after me and wrote them down.
‘That is all I will say.’
He looked hurt.
‘Of course, you don't have to say anything you don't want to.’
He began to write again.
‘You were in a Hampden,’ he said.
‘You were shot down by flak.
Two of your crew are dead.
One is wounded.’
He looked up at me.
‘Let's see, what was he, the navigator or one of the gunners?’
‘I will only give my name, rank and number,’ I said pompously.
He stared at me before writing again.
‘It doesn't matter,’ he said, ‘I don't expect they will really want to know’
I felt that I had been very clumsy.
‘There,’ he said, putting down his pencil, ‘I think that will do.’
He reached for the telephone and when he was connected spoke down it briskly in German.
I heard the word ‘flak’ repeated several times, but otherwise understood nothing at all.
He hung up the receiver.
The two officers who had hardly spoken were beginning to fidget on their chairs.
One of them asked him a question.
He turned to me.
‘I am afraid you will have to spend the night in the men's guardroom.
It will not be very comfortable for you there, but we have nowhere else to put you.
However there is a bed and I dare say you are quite ready for it.’
He stood up.
‘Good-bye,’ he said, ‘and I hope we shall meet again one day in happier circumstances.’
‘I hope so,’ I said, because it was impossible to say anything else.
But I was distrustful and was still wondering what this was leading up to.
We all stood up.
‘These two officers will lead you to the guard-room.’
I was very tired but I knew that I must look out for a trap.
As we were going out through the doorway he stopped us.
He seemed embarrassed and stammered for the first time in his English.
‘I'm afraid it is my duty to search you before you go.
You see, you are my responsibility and I should get into trouble if you were not properly searched.’
This seemed reasonable.
I could not understand what he was so worried about.
I held up my arms as I had seen German prisoners do in news-reels.
He waved his hand.
‘No, no,’ he said, as embarrassed as before, ‘I will take your word.
Have you anything on you?
Any arms?’
‘No.’
‘Anything you might be able to use for escaping?’
I had forgotten all about my escape equipment.
This was a routine service issue collected by air-crews before every operation.
It consisted of a map, a compass, a small rubber water bottle and some French, Dutch and German money, all packed into a little tin box which was then bulging in the breast pocket of my battle-dress.
‘Any escaping materials?’ he repeated.
For the first time his face became serious and severe.
I did not answer.
For some reason it never occurred to me to lie or make any effort at all to save my invaluable little tin box.
‘What have you got in your pockets?
Please put everything on the table.’
A pencil.
A handkerchief.
A packet of barley sugar that had become very sticky.
‘Nothing else?’ he asked firmly.
The intolerable ‘honour’ system had won again.
I pulled the tin box out of my battle-dress and put it on the table.
‘Thank you,’ he said.
‘Good-night.’
It seemed to me that he was colder now, disappointed that I should have been found to have anything so hostile as escape equipment in my pockets.
We went out into the darkness.
The clouds had cleared and the cold stars flashed little blue signals for people of all countries to pick up and decode as they liked.
‘Komm,’ said one of my escorts.
‘Come please,’ said the other, ‘I learn English in school.’
We stamped in silence over the snow-covered dunes.
‘Why do you fly so low?’ asked the man who had learnt English in school.
‘Why so low?’
I shook my head.
They had a short conversation in German and seemed to disagree about something.
All three of us became embarrassed and stared at our boots.
Soon we were walking down a road between two rows of little sea-side villas.
They looked empty and forlorn as if they had not yet adjusted themselves to their premature change of life.
Very deliberately, and as if it were giving him great pain, the German who had said little began to speak.
‘Once,’ he said, ‘I was in Hamburg.
I saw what you do there.
All little houses.
All such little houses.’
He waved his hand up and down the road.
It was a great shock.
Of course I knew that, in its practical effects, our bombing was no more confined to military objectives than was that of the Germans.
I was even surprised to hear definite first hand evidence of any damage at all, military or not, for raids on Germany in those days usually seemed depressingly unsuccessful from the air.
But it was a shock to hear the exact tone of bitter resentment that I  had heard so often in England and felt so often myself.
I had always assumed that this sort of civilized dismay at barbarism was the monopoly of our cause.
For the first time I realized the humiliating narrowness of mind with which one has to be equipped in time of war.
A doubt grew into my mind: perhaps the whole certainty of purpose with which I was fighting the war was based on equally naive assumptions.
‘Why always the little houses?’ asked the German.
I began to argue with him.
I told him about Coventry and London and Plymouth and Bristol and the Polish towns and villages bombed without a declaration of war.
I told him about our own lack of any real bomber force until the Germans made us build one.
I told him about my sister who now had no legs.
‘Yes,’ he said ‘I know.
But I still do not see why the little houses.’
It was a relief to find that the narrowness of mind was common to both sides.
But it seemed to me that I had not properly answered his question and that he was really voicing the unthinking complaint of the people who lived in the little houses all over the world.
‘Krieg ist Krieg,’ said the other man.
‘Immer schlecht.’
And that was the end of my first interrogation.
For by now we had arrived at a big army hut by the side of the road.
There was a sentry in a steel helmet at the door.
The windows were lighted.
When the door opened a great smell of sweat and leather and stale cigar smoke rushed into the cold night air.
In the haze I could see figures lying on mattresses on the floor.
It reminded me of the London tubes during an air raid.
My entry caused a stir.
Men who had been asleep and were woken up by the noise did not appear to resent it but sat up on one elbow and stared.
I was given into the charge of an N.C.O.
‘Good-night,’ said the two officers simultaneously.
After they had shut the door the atmosphere shook for a moment.
The N.C.O. stared at me.
‘Pech gehabt,’ he said suddenly and broke into a grin.
The phrase rumbled in repetition round the room.
Someone showed me a mattress on the top of a two-tier bed.
Another gave me a slice of dark brown bread with a piece of sausage on the top which I ate because I did not want to hurt his feelings.
They stared at me as I ate.
The N.C.O. brought some blankets and I began to undress.
When he noticed that my clothes were wet he took  them and hung them in front of a large iron fire.
He commented on the smell of petrol that came from them and made an elaborate joke of not putting them too close to the flames.
I climbed onto my bunk.
A man came out of the haze and stood alongside looking at me.
He flashed the gold fillings in his teeth.
‘For you the war is over,’ he said and retired into the haze.
I lay on my back and tiredness came spinning towards me in widening circles as the white beach and whiskery grasses had come spinning towards me out of the night.
Fixed in the centre was the naval officer who had interrogated me.
He seemed to be very worried and he was stretching out his hands.
‘It is no use,’ I said to him, ‘I will only give you my name, rank and number.’
But as he came closer I saw that he was not asking a question.
His face was agonized and he was trying to tell me something.
I fell asleep.
In the morning a little aeroplane came buzzing across the blue window-pane of sky and alighted on the sugary beach.
We watched it from the guard-room.
‘It has come to take you away,’ said a German who spoke English.
I was glad.
I had a headache from the stale stuffy atmosphere.
I was bored with the arguments over the map.
(They showed me how deep they had advanced into Russia and I showed them what we were going to do in the West.
‘Aber, wann, wann, mein Lieber?’
‘This year.
Dieses Jahr.’
‘Ach, Quatsch.’
‘What does he say?’
‘He says, he does not believe you.’)
My sense of shame was beginning to swell.
I wanted to justify myself.
On the journey I would escape.
Outside there was the sound of wheels crunching over the snow and the creaking of a cart.
I was watching a card trick one of the soldiers was showing me and did not look up until the cart had almost passed the window.
It was being driven by a German wearing little black pads over his ears to keep them warm.
In the back of the cart were two long wooden boxes.
‘Ihre Kameraden,’ said a soldier who was sitting by the window.
I watched it disappear down the road.
The room was suddenly quiet.
I began to treasure its warmth on my cheek and the beat of the  blood in my veins.
I looked out over the empty white road to the sky and saw the morning sun sparkling.
I knew the joy of the world and wondered at it like a child.
The telephone bell rang.
The N.C.O. answered it and when he had hung up the receiver it rang again.
Soldiers were beginning to look at the clock and fumble with equipment, apparently preparing for a guard change.
Another routine day was beginning.
By the time the N.C.O. had reached for his helmet and buckled on his belt the room was almost empty.
He led me out into the snow and we crossed the island towards the beach.
‘Fieseler Storch,’ he said, pointing at the little aeroplane, but already my technical interest in such things had been packed into the past.
Two Luftwaffe officers in blue leather coats were standing beside it.
There was a lot of saluting as we arrived and I tried to appear defiant when they looked at me.
I had decided that I should take control of the aeroplane and try to fly it to England.
One of the officers showed me into the aeroplane and himself sat down in the pilot's seat.
I looked round for something with which I could knock him out after we had taken off.
A heavy iron bar lay on the floor beside my left hand.
My stomach was moving with excitement but I tried to look bored.
I should hit him across the back of the neck like a rabbit.
‘I like very much to fly,’ he said.
‘It pleases me.
I have done ten flights to England against ships.’
‘Ten?
Really?’
I said, feeling silly.
It was as if he had spoken a line from the wrong play.
The other officer climbed in and sat between me and the pilot.
I had forgotten about him.
I should have to knock him out too.
The propeller was swung.
The engine leapt, shouted, and was tamed, and in less than a minute we had taken off from the little beach and were circling the island.
I will wait until we are clear of the island, I thought.
I suddenly noticed that we were diving down again.
We were heading for a little cluster of figures round something on the beach.
As we flew closer and lower they looked up and waved and I recognized the pathetic twisted wreckage of T for Tommy.
We climbed again.
I should not be able to postpone my attempt much longer.
The man between me and the pilot loosened his belt and taking an  automatic from his holster turned round and sat facing me.
‘No funny stuff.’
he said in excellent American.
With a sense of relief I abandoned my idea of escape.
At the aerodrome in Holland they were expecting us.
We taxied towards the buildings and a little party of figures came to meet us as if they were welcoming a foreign diplomat.
But when we got out they stared and said nothing, and I followed the pilot up the lane they made.
Someone came quietly out of the crowd and spoke to the other officer, looking at me.
I felt as if I was a schoolboy who had done something wrong and was being taken to see the headmaster.
I had to wait in a corridor.
Memories of long waits in countless English corridors made it familiar.
Then the door opened and the headmaster was standing in front of me.
He wore riding boots and a monocle and his face was made shapeless by duelling scars.
His grey hair was cropped so short that at first I thought it was bald.
He looked at me with confident contempt.
It was easy to be defiant.
I put my hands in my pockets and leant back against the wall.
This was very much more simple than dealing with the naval officer.
The German's face became distorted with rage and anger, but he did not move.
We remained like this for about a quarter of a minute.
Then he walked back to his desk in the room and turned to face me again.
He yelled something so loudly that my ear-drums rang.
I walked in with my hands still in my pockets.
A clerk sat by the window.
I was beginning to think that the staring match would never stop when he suddenly sat down and began to finger some papers on the top of his desk.
‘Hampden?’ he asked, looking up at me again.
It was a tactical error.
‘Sorry,’ I said, ‘Name, rank and number only.’
He must have realized that his dignity was in danger for he said something in German to the clerk and never spoke to me again.
The clerk came over to me.
He was a gentle little man rather like the steward from the Bremen whom I had met the night before.
‘The officer says, will you kindly oblige by filling in this form?’
It seemed very unlikely that the officer had said this.
‘Sorry,’ I said briskly, ‘Name, rank and number only.’
‘All right,’ said the clerk wearily and showed me where these were  placed on the form.
A few minutes later I was led away to a cell.
I was glad when the door banged noisily behind me.
For the first time since I had been shot down I was alone.
Now, I thought, I shall be able to think this out: to find out exactly what it is that has happened to me, to see what effect it is going to have on my life, and how I am going to deal with it.
I sat down on the wooden bed.
There was a lot of straw in the mattress and it had been filled recently so that it was pleasantly responsive.
It no longer seemed important to me to think about escape.
Doubtless I should think out some plan later.
At the moment I had more fundamental problems.
This was the most overwhelming experience I had ever had and I wanted to understand it.
I swung my boots up onto the bed and stretched out full length.
First of all, I was not dead.
My turn to die had come and I had been inexplicably reprieved.
I remembered a phrase I had once copied down out of Don Quixote :
‘Julius Caesar, that valiant Roman Emperor, being asked what kind of death was best, ‘That which is sudden and unexpected,’ he replied; and though his answer has a relish of paganism, yet, with respect to human infirmities, it is very judicious’
I remembered the queer mixture of fear and belief with which I had read this and afterwards written it down.
Now I thought it was an equally good answer to what was the best kind of life.
I stretched with pleasure on the friendly straw.
This, then, was my first thought: I was not dead and I was glad I was not dead.
What next?
What did I build on this foundation?
Nothing.
I realized suddenly that this was all.
This thought contained all others.
The only important thing about the rest of my life was that it was there.
High up on the wall of my cell I could see where somebody had written his name with a pencil.
‘Flying Officer…’
I could not read the name but underneath, with a defiance which I found sympathetic, somebody else had written:
‘V. R.A.F. V.’
I decided to sit up and read the name.
But my body was reluctant to sit up.
The straw was comfortable and the cell was warm and I was alive.
Sleep covered me like an eiderdown which some invisible nurse had picked up from the floor and put back on the bed.
I awoke to see a German N.C.O. with a ginger moustache looking curiously round the open door of my cell.
He grinned and blinked shyly when he saw that I was awake.
He shut the door quickly behind him and came and sat on the small wooden chair in the corner.
For a few seconds he stared at me, still grinning and blinking.
I felt that I had to make some sort of social effort so I swung my legs off the bed and sat sheepishly on the edge.
He removed his peaked cap.
His bald head above the little blinking eyes and ginger moustache made him look pathetically unmilitary and friendly.
‘Guten Morgen,’ I said.
It was already late afternoon, but it was the only German greeting I knew besides ‘Heil Hitler’.
‘So, Sie sprechen deutsch…’
He asked me a lot of questions which I did not understand.
‘Ich verstehe nicht,’ I said pedantically.
He resumed grinning and blinking.
‘Engländer?’
‘Ja.’
For the first time he stopped grinning, and, resting his elbows on his knees and his head on his hands, began to shake his head from side to side.
He apparently forgot that I could not understand German or else decided that what he wanted to say could not be left unsaid, for he began to talk fast and seriously.
I understood almost nothing of what he said.
He was obviously very depressed about something, even disillusioned, and I got the impression that this something was the war.
He was speaking very much more quietly than when he first came in and occasionally looked reproachfully at the door as if the thing which had depressed him was just the other side of it.
Sometimes I understood a few words or phrases (‘Japaner nicht gut’, ‘Demokratie’) but on the whole it was a hopeless conversation just because he so badly wanted to get his meaning across to me.
Sometimes he grunted at me as if trying to get me to say something, but always I had to give him the same classroom answer: ‘Ich verstehe nicht.’
Eventually he gave it up, stood up and put on his hat.
‘Essen kommt,’ he said in his former hearty voice, and slowly rubbed his stomach with one hand.
‘Guten Appetit,’ he said and left the cell.
I wanted to shout after him that I had made a mistake and that I had really understood him very well.
It was a very good meal.
The enormous steak was dominated by waves of potatoes, carrots and onions.
During the next three and a half years I often thought of this meal and of the amount I had to leave on my plate because I could not eat any more.
About an hour later I was taken to the railway station in a closed van by another N.C.O. and a soldier with a rifle.
Except to tell me to stop or to go on neither of them spoke throughout the whole hour of the journey to Amsterdam.
Once or twice I caught the N.C.O. staring at me with an expression of hate and disgust but he never maintained it when I stared back, and would look suddenly out of the window or at the papers in the portfolio he was carrying.
The soldier looked very simple.
He was the sort of man who was aware of his simplicity and of the advantage which people continually took of it.
He was quite determined that I was going to try and escape, and followed so close behind me on the railway stations that I could smell his breath.
In the train he sat opposite me with his rifle across his knees and his steel helmet drowning his face.
He looked half determined, half afraid, as if I was a lion which he as assistant keeper was helping to escort from one zoo to another.
I had neither intention nor wish to escape.
Outside the window it looked as if the few farm houses we passed were floating in a sea of snow.
There was so much snow that it seemed impossible that this was not the natural surface of the earth.
Reason and conscience both told me that if I were ever to have any chance of escaping successfully this was that chance.
I was in a friendly country and was less effectively guarded than I ever would be in a prison camp.
But I thought of the snow, the speed of the train, and the rifle, and decided that I still had no intention of trying to escape.
To satisfy my pride I tried to give the soldier some grounds for his suspicions.
I walked suddenly faster on the railway station as if I was testing how closely he kept up with me.
On the train I looked furtively at the lock on the carriage door and watched the railway embankment carefully as if assessing the effect of falling out onto it at speed.
By the time we reached Amsterdam the man was in a frenzy of preparedness and anxiety, and followed me down the platform with his rifle in my back.
This frightened me but seemed to make me a hero in the eyes of the Dutch who broke out into a fever of winks and jerked-up thumbs and V-signs all round me.
Their genuine spirit made me feel bogus and cowardly.
At the entrance to the station a big Mercedes with two men in Luftwaffe uniform and a driver inside was waiting for us.
The N.C. O. handed over the papers he had brought and after clicking his heels and saluting went back into the station without looking at me.
The soldier, obviously relieved by his loss of responsibility, slung his rifle and followed after him.
One of the Luftwaffe men was an officer and the other a Feldwebel.
(The rank of Feldwebel in the German forces nominally corresponded to the British rank of sergeant, but a Feldwebel enjoyed greater prestige than a British sergeant and slightly more responsibility.)
The Feldwebel sat in front with the driver, and the officer, who undid the flap of his holster and swivelled his belt round so that his automatic was more accessible, sat in the back with me.
The Mercedes began to purr softly and then swept powerfully away into the streets of Amsterdam.
It was already nearly dusk and I supposed the Dutch people whom I saw on the pavements and on bicycles were hurrying to get home before the curfew.
I asked the officer who was looking out of the window if there was a curfew.
For about half a minute he did not reply and I thought that he either did not understand English or was trying to humiliate me.
Without looking back into the car he suddenly drawled in good English:
‘Yes, there is a curfew.’
I soon noticed that the car was being driven very dangerously.
The driver seemed as concerned to show off his excessive acceleration as if we had been prospective buyers and he a salesman.
Once when he swung across the road to frighten a cyclist by passing within inches of him at forty miles an hour I expected the Feldwebel or the officer to be angry.
But the officer continued to look out of the window, while the Feldwebel slapped his knee with enthusiasm and, pointing to a group of civilians on a corner of the pavement, nudged the driver in the ribs.
The driver headed the car towards them and accelerated.
When we were about twenty yards away from them an old woman turned and saw us. I just had time to see the panic on her face before the driver applied the brakes.
With the scream of a falling bomb the car mounted the pavement and crossed it onto the road the  other side.
The group disintegrated.
I never had a chance to see if anyone had been hurt or not because we were already accelerating up the next stretch of road.
The Feldwebel bounced up and down with laughter so that his hat fell off the back of his head and even the officer allowed himself a smile.
But neither of them looked back.
I was so angry that I could feel the scorched marks which the blood made on my cheeks.
I tried to think of something dignified and contemptuous to say to the officer but could find nothing.
Meanwhile the Feldwebel was talking excitedly to the driver like a school-boy egging on an accomplice to do something which he is fortunately not in a position to do himself.
The driver seemed pleased by the idea and the Feldwebel sat back in luxurious anticipation.
We were approaching a big road junction where there was a controlled Pedestrian crossing.
I could see a few figures strung out across it in the gloom.
The driver surprisingly began to slow down.
We were about thirty yards from the crossing and travelling at about fifteen miles an hour when a middle-aged man stepped off the pavement into the road.
The driver immediately accelerated towards him.
The man decided to run further across the road rather than go back.
The driver again headed the car towards him.
By this time we were only a few yards from him and the car had almost stopped.
The man was standing undecided in the middle of the road like a rabbit caught in headlights at night.
Every time he began to move the driver jerked the car a little further towards him.
We were so close that I could see the unhappy mixture of terror and subservience in his face.
The Feldwebel was choking with laughter.
As there was now no room left for the driver's game, he suddenly accelerated past the man and we were again moving down the street at forty miles an hour.
We had passed so close to the Dutchman that I thought we must have run over his foot.
I looked back and saw him grovelling in the road for his hat.
A few minutes later we drew up at a big concrete building which the officer told me was the town jail but which seemed to be a large Luftwaffe barracks.
The Feldwebel stepped out of the car and opened the door for me.
I tried to stare my dislike into him but I must have been unsuccessful for he merely said with a primitive accent: ‘Good in auto, yes?’ and grinned.
I pretended to ignore this and he said something in German after me which I took to mean: ‘You must be a very dull fellow if you don't think that sort of thing funny.’
We went into the building.
Long empty corridors echoed boots and voices and slammed doors.
I felt cold and tired.
We passed along some of the corridors and slammed some of the doors.
A man with a great bunch of keys joined us and led us down some steps to a doorway marked ‘Luftschutzraum’.
I tried to work this out in terms of‘Der Freischütz’ but failed.
I looked forward to reaching my cell, because I was beginning to feel miserable and wanted to be alone and warm.
But when the door was locked behind me the cell was dark for there was neither window nor electric light.
I felt my way over to the bed.
It was an iron bed with two folded blankets on it and a thin straw mattress.
I sat down and began to cry.
It seemed impossible that only a few hours before I had been happy in my cell at the aerodrome.
Now I felt only shame and hopelessness.
I realized with a shock that this was the first time I had been really unhappy since I had been taken prisoner.
It seemed to me that my personal disaster was so great that hitherto I had not allowed myself to understand it.
That was why I had been quite happy all day.
In the afternoon I had thought that the only important thing was that I was alive, now I wished that I was dead.
‘Killed in action’ was at least a positive end, but ‘Prisoner of war’— waiting for two or three years for other people to win the war for you — was just ineffectual and pitiable, an end which was also not an end.
I thought of the two members of my crew who were dead and remembered that if any of us had deserved to die it was 1, who was responsible for the disaster.
I thought, as most people probably think once or twice a year, that I should never be the same person again.
There was only one redemption from this shame and misery: I must escape back to England.
I should wait until I had got to the prison camp and then escape.
I knew that I should succeed.
I should be in England by the summer of that year at the latest.
My pride suddenly felt better.
I stood up and began to walk impatiently up and down the cell in the darkness.
The lights were obviously controlled from some master switch for they went on without a sound.
The bulb was in a little ventilation window above the door.
There was no other window.
I saw that the cell was clean but that several English names had been written in pencil on the wall.
Some people had written dates under their names and sometimes there were short messages.
‘Don't sign the Red Cross form — it's bogus’, ‘Look out for that  little shit Elbing’ and ‘No bloody marge again’.
Hanging on the wall by a nail was a notice printed in English:
‘It is forbidden to defile the walls with names.
Signed Oberst.’
Underneath ‘Oberst’ somebody had written ‘Oh balls’.
All this made me feel very much better and I immediately wrote my name up on the wall.
Soon I heard a noise in the passage outside: boots, voices, keys and doors.
It stopped just outside my cell.
Something flashed in the centre of the cell door like a lens in an old-fashioned camera.
I noticed for the first rime that there was a little hole in the door.
I was just going to look through it to find out what was happening in the passage when I saw a fishy eye fixed in the centre.
It stared at me for a few seconds, then the lens flashed again, a key was put into the lock, bolts were drawn and the door was opened.
He was so tall that his steel helmet grated gently against the top of the door when he came in.
He looked down at me as if he were a giant and I had just climbed a beanstalk.
Then he shook his head.
‘Wie alt?’ he asked.
I understood this.
‘Twenty-two,’ I said in English.
He shrugged his shoulders and smiled as if deprecating his lack of education.
I wrote it down on the top of the table with my pencil.
‘So jung,’ he said in astonishment, and I noticed that he had not got the face of a giant at all but that of a very old and reliable nanny.
We looked at each other.
‘So jung,’ he repeated.
Then: ‘Krieg ist Krieg,’ and he shrugged his shoulders again and opened his hands.
‘ Sheisse ,’ he added explosively as if he had at last allowed himself to be convinced of something which he had wanted to believe for a long time.
He ducked out of the cell into the passage leaving the door open.
There was the sound of a knife being put onto a plate.
He came back with two slices of dark brown bread and a semi-transparent lump of fat on the top.
Then he fetched a mug and a can of hot coffee.
His face lit up encouragingly.
‘Essen,’ he said, ‘Guten Appetit.’
I smiled.
It didn't look much of a meal.
‘England — nix Essen?’ he asked.
‘England — viel Essen,’ I said
He shook his head doubtfully as if he did not believe me but didn't want to be harsh about saying so.
I remembered the little N.C.O. in the cell at the aerodrome and rubbed my stomach appreciatively.
‘England — viel Essen,’ I said.
He ducked out of the cell, looked both ways along the passage and ducked back again.
He put a finger to his lips and brought his face close to mine.
‘Im Krieg,’ he whispered, ‘Alles Propaganda.’
‘No,’ I said, ‘not Propaganda.’
But he had already left the cell and, with a parting wink of his fat kindly face, shut the door.
For a moment I sensed his eye staring at me through the hole in the door but as soon as I looked at it the lens flashed and the cover on the other side swung quickly to rest.
I drank some of the coffee, which tasted of acorns, and looked at my meal.
I wondered if it was the usual supper for prisoners.
I spread a little of the peculiar fat on a piece of bread and put it into my mouth.
Its complete lack of any taste was so nauseating that I spat it out and decided to eat the rest of the bread by itself I was finishing this when there was the sound of boots in the passage again.
My door was opened and a very young-looking man in a peaked cap was shown in.
The giant nanny had unlocked the door for him but kept in the background and gave me no sign of recognition.
‘Do you mind if I sit down?’ asked the young man in effete, accented English.
He sat down on the wooden chair and I sat on the bed.
‘My name is Elbing,’ he began.
‘Quite easy for you to remember, you know.
Just the river Elbe with an ‘-ing’ on the end.
You have heard of the river Elbe, I expect.’
I looked to see if he was trying to be unpleasant but he was obviously making an effort to be polite.
‘I am sorry you did not have a very good meal,’ he said, looking at my plate.
‘You see, it is rather bad luck for you that you happened to come here on one of our meatless days.’
‘Oh, I see.’
It was good to know that supper would not always be like this.
‘Now to business,’ said Elbing.
‘I want you to trust me.
You see I am only a Feldwebel and I have no ulterior motives at all.
I always get on very well with English prisoners of the R. A. F. I worked for some  time at the prison camp where you'll be going tomorrow, and there I made many good English friends, especially —.’
he stopped and looked blankly at my battle-dress, ‘Are you an officer?’ he asked quickly.
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘— especially among the officers,’ he continued.
‘Yes, many friends and no bull-shit.’
He watched me for the effect of this slang.
It was impossible not to be slightly surprised and impressed.
He was pleased.
‘The fact that I say ‘bull-shit’ shows that I am not bull-shitting yes?’
‘Perhaps.’
‘Good, now I just want you to save me and yourself a lot of trouble by filling in this form for the Red Cross.’
He produced a form from the inside of his greatcoat.
‘I will only give you my name, rank and number.’
‘Oh, come on, what are you afraid of?
You don't think I'm trying to get information from you, do you?
We have all we want to know about that sort of thing and anyway it is not my job.
You see although I wear the German uniform, you might really say that I am more neutral than anything else.
I am only interested in getting your name back to the Red Cross as soon as possible so that your mother and father will be saved unnecessary worry.
Come on now, just fill in the form.’
I looked at it: ‘Name…
Address…
Station…
Squadron…
Group…
Command…
Name of Station Commander…’
I filled in my name, rank and number.
‘That's all,’ I said, grateful for the sacred formula.
‘Look here, old boy,’ he said, suddenly confidential.
‘You will land me right in the shit if you don't fill this up.
You see it is only a routine matter and they will not be able to understand why I couldn't get you to fill it in.
They will think I have been collaborating with you or something’
He looked so genuinely worried, that I began to doubt myself.
Perhaps I was just being a ridiculous prig, behaving quite differently from anyone else who had ever been taken prisoner.
‘Look here,’ said Elbing.
‘Do you know Wing Commander Fender, or Squadron Leader James or Pilot Officer Summers?’
‘What if I do?’
It was the first news I had heard that Robin Summers, shot down over Brest a few weeks before, was alive.
‘Well, if you do, do you think any of them would have signed this  form if it had not been all in order and above board?’
‘Did they sign this form?’
I was astonished.
I just could not imagine Robin, who used to throw Verey cartridges onto the anteroom fire behind the Group Captain's back, falling for this sort of thing.
‘I don't know which one of these you knew, but all of them were shot down recently and all signed the form without a murmur.
Summers, for instance, said to me ‘Elbing, old boy, I can see there is nothing phoney about you.'’
This settled it.
If there was one thing Robin could not stand, it was people calling each other‘old boy’.
I suddenly felt angry and stood up.
‘Look here,’ I said, ‘I have given you my name, rank and number and that's all you're going to get.
Now get out because you bore me.’
The giant nanny must have understood the tone of my voice because he strolled into sight through the open doorway and looked at me reproachfully.
Elbing stood up.
‘You little fool,’ he shouted.
‘You'll hear more about this.’
He went out.
The door was shut and bolted.
The cell still echoed my voice.
Left alone with it, my self-confidence began to fade.
Perhaps I had made a ridiculous fuss about nothing.
It was disconcerting how the desire not to appear a fool followed one into captivity.
I lay down on my bed.
It was written on the wall just above my head:
‘Look out for that little shit Elbing.’
My self-confidence returned like blood.
‘Thank you,’ I said aloud.
There were boots outside again and the door was unbolted.
It was the giant nanny.
‘Essen fertig?’ he asked, staring at the plate and the rejected lump of fat.
‘Ja.’
He picked up the plate and concentrated on the lump of fat.
‘Nicht gut?’ he asked in astonishment.
‘Nein.’
He set down the plate and taking a piece of newspaper out of his pocket wrapped the fat up and put it in his pocket.
‘Gut für Kinder,’ he said unconvincingly and hurriedly left the cell.
The next morning, after I had drunk some coffee and sat for an hour with the first suggestions of boredom stirring inside me, the Feldwebel who had enjoyed the ride in the Mercedes so much came to the door.
‘Nach Frankfurt,’ he said gaily as if he anticipated a journey packed with thrills and amusement.
He gave me a friendly smile.
He was aware that I had disliked him the day before and seemed anxious to make me change my opinion.
The car which took us to the station drove as sedately as a Daimler in a royal procession although the people of Amsterdam were on their way to work and provided admirable subjects for baiting.
Sometimes I caught the Feldwebel looking wistfully out of the window at a dilapidated horse and cart or an old man on a bicycle but he controlled himself and tried to make polite conversation.
This was at first very difficult because he knew as little English as I knew German.
Gradually, however, we evolved a pidgin language based on English, German and the telepathy of tone.
I wondered why he should bother to try and establish contact with me.
It was a characteristic I had noticed in most of the Germans I had met since being shot down.
If I had ever thought of the possibility of being taken prisoner while I was in England, I should have expected all Germans to be like the officer who had tried to interrogate me at the aerodrome or the two soldiers who had brought me from the aerodrome to Amsterdam.
I had not yet recovered from the simple shock of finding that many of them talked and behaved exactly like us.
It was even more of a shock to discover that these believed just as firmly in the Nazi cause as those who shouted and sneered.
Their talk and behaviour took a slightly different form from ours just as their uniforms did and for the same reason but their major premises seemed to be the same.
They thought that they were right about the war; they did not like awkward gaps in conversation; they wanted to be friendly to people they felt sorry for; they felt the natural human contempt for the way in which the Almighty ran the universe and yet their full share of human resignation towards it.
It is easy now to regard this wonder at an enemy's humanity as naïve, but as it is the business of war to foster the naïveté on which it thrives, so there can have been few people in England during the  isolation years of 1940–42 who did not take the impersonal nature of their enemy for granted.
We felt as different from them as from enemies from Mars.
The Germans were the bombs which smashed the towns and villages of England or they were the words in the newspapers which told of defeat.
They were a ridiculous race which was all Gestapo and people sticking out their arms at a villain-clown with a tooth-brush moustache.
They weren't human beings like you or me.
When we arrived at the station an enormous suitcase was taken out of the car.
‘Is that ours?’
I asked.
The Feldwebel nodded.
I remembered seeing pictures of German prisoners carrying what was described as their emergency Red Cross clothing in Tate and Lyle sugar boxes through London.
‘What's in it?’
I asked.
He smiled and said vigorously: ‘For you.’
I had to admit that the German service for prisoners seemed better than our own.
While the Feldwebel was talking to the driver of the car, the little soldier who was coming as an additional escort stood by the suitcase.
He was a mousy man: long thin strands of hair protruded erratically from under his steel helmet.
He wore his militarism apologetically.
The car drove away.
The Feldwebel pointed to the entrance to the station and the mousy man signed to me to pick up the case.
For a moment I felt an instinctive resentment, but remembering that it contained things ‘for me’, I picked it up.
The Feldwebel saw this and for some reason it worried him.
He made me put it down and began a long, fast conversation with the soldier.
I caught the word ‘Offizier’ several times and occasionally they looked from the suitcase to me and back again.
Eventually the soldier shrugged his shoulders and picked it up himself Its weight seemed to drag him out of sight into his enormous greatcoat.
I offered to carry it.
He shrugged his shoulders again, muttered ‘Offizier’, and staggered on.
We went into the station.
We took a first-class carriage to ourselves.
The soldier bolted the door which gave onto the platform and sat down opposite me.
He put his rifle and his steel helmet up on the rack and was soon asleep.
The Feldwebel stood at the entrance to the corridor turning away  people who wanted to come in.
I sat in a corner looking at the Dutchmen who smiled surreptitiously from the platform.
When the train started the Feldwebel sat down and put his feet up on the seat opposite.
‘Prima,’ he said.
He opened the suitcase.
It was very full although I could not see properly what was in it because he kept the opening away from me.
He produced two numbers of Colliers Magazine which he handed to me.
When I opened one of them and saw English words I could feel the tears pricking at the back of my eyes.
I spent a long time reading the advertisements.
As we drew nearer to the German frontier I began to wonder exactly what ‘frontier’ meant in a frontierless continent.
It was much as I had expected.
The train stopped for about two minutes.
A man looking classically like a detective passed down the corridor but did not come into our carriage.
The train moved on.
I was in Germany.
The fields and clouds were the same as those I had seen for the last half hour.
There were the same farm houses and the same people on bicycles moving along the roads.
But it was the enemy's country, an enemy whom we had fought so far as one might fight an armed man in a dark room.
For three years now we had moved stealthily through the darkness, sometimes absurdly confident, sometimes terrified, but always wondering just what sort of man it was that we heard creeping along the wall towards us and what sort of weapon he had in his hand.
Now for me at least the light had been turned on.
I stared out of the window at this country about which I had wondered for so long.
My past curiosity gave a sharpness to the outlines of the trees and the houses and a magic quality to the people I saw moving about.
For me the mystery of the enemy's identity had been increased by the peculiar sort of war I had fought.
Sometimes I had caught glimpses of his shadow on the wall.
Flying over the country at fifteen thousand feet at night, I had seen strange toy woods and towns and the eiderdown pattern of the fields.
Only once it had looked real: when we flew back one night from a blazing Hamm at twenty feet in the moonlight.
It had looked exactly like England: bicycles propped against hedges, trim gardens in housing estates, A.R.P.
men running about the streets of the towns.
But the experience had been short and isolated and the moonlight had given it a sufficient touch of unreality for me to be able to fire my machine gun at everything I saw without  scruple.
Now this was to be the country in which I should eat and sleep, read books and write letters for the rest of the war.
It was even just possible that I should have to spend more of the war in this country than I had done in my own.
I wondered just how long the war would last.
I did not think we could invade this year.
We should leave it until next year and make certain.
But even then the war would be only just beginning.
The Feldwebel had not moved and I looked all the way up his black leather jack-boots and the thin grey greatcoat with its cheap tin buttons looking as if they had come out of a Christmas pudding before I noticed that his eyes were slightly open and that he was watching me with an uncle's amusement.
‘For you the war is over,’ he said.
Somebody else had said this to me and now I disliked it.
‘No it's not,’ I said feebly, although I couldn't think why it wasn't.
Then I said: ‘It won't be over for me until it's over for everybody.’
‘But how not over for you?’ asked the Feldwebel.
‘What can you do now?’
I knew there was nothing I could do but that didn't seem to be the point.
‘I can escape,’ I said.
He made a sound of disappointment.
‘In camp the escape is impossible.
There is wire and machine guns.
And why escape?
There is sport and lessons.
Here if you try I shoot.’
He looked out of the window.
It suddenly became very important for me to explain why my war was not over.
I knew that he would not understand what I was going to say but it was as if there was an invisible person in the carriage before whom I had to justify myself.
‘You don't know what people in England think about this war,’ I said.
‘It isn't the same thing to us as it is to you.
We haven't any ambitions and we don't want any great changes, so we all hate war.
And it's just because we hate it that we'll beat you.
This is a personal war for each one of us and it's going on inside us all the time.
It won't be over for any of us until the people who make war have been destroyed.’
I was out of breath with excitement and anxiety.
I knew this was muddled and that it was not quite what I wanted to say, but I felt better for saying it.
I had surprised the Feldwebel.
He was leaning forward staring at me with his hands on his knees.
Even the mousy man was awake.
I struggled on.
‘We're fighting for simple ordinary things: the right to grumble whenever you feel like it; the right to be wrong and stupid, and the right to become less wrong and stupid if you want to; the right not to suffer bodily pain.
…All negative things, but that's the point.
Without these simple things as a foundation you would never build anything positive at all’
It all sounded very silly in a stuffy railway carriage spoken to two German soldiers who did not understand English.
The mousy man went to sleep again.
I was disappointed in myself.
If this was really all we were fighting for, it seemed very feeble.
I felt that I should have talked about Habeas Corpus, intellectual liberty and social security.
I was angry with myself.
I had failed in front of the invisible person in the carriage.
I had failed in everything.
I wasn't fit to fight the war.
For me the war was over.
The cold grey suburbs of the town we were entering reflected my misery.
I looked out of the window for air raid damage but could see none and decided that this was one of the minor Ruhr towns which had not yet been attacked.
Once I noticed the familiar gap in a row of houses like the space left by a drawn tooth, but I could not be certain that it was the result of bombing and if it was it had happened a long time ago.
The Feldwebel was watching me.
‘Nix kaput,’ he said.
‘Alles Propaganda.’
A few minutes later the train arrived in Duisburg and we got out.
We had to wait for an hour for our connection to Frankfurt.
The Feldwebel took us to a German Red Cross canteen.
It was nearly two o'clock and there were few soldiers drinking the hot soup and ersatz coffee.
The women who were working there looked at me in a kind curious way at first and then took me for granted.
The Feldwebel drank his soup straight out of the bowl and baited the mousy man because he wouldn't do the same.
Then he put his feet up on the bench and snored for ten minutes.
When we got back to the platform the train was not yet in.
We waited on the platform.
The mousy man sat on the suitcase panting dismally.
The Feldwebel looked disappointed at having to endure a situation which he couldn't control.
It was very cold and the grey gloom of Paddington and Euston was in the faces of the people who stood near us and of the soldiers who dragged their rifles and kit-bags from one platform to another.
The Feldwebel said he was going to the lavatory.
A civilian came up to the mousy man and asked him a question.
I heard the word ‘Engländer’ and saw from the corner of my eye that they were looking at me.
I had an idea that I should make a show of dignity and tried to do this by looking straight ahead, as if the crowds moving up and down the platform were beneath my notice.
It must have looked very silly.
The first suggestion that something was wrong came from the silence.
I was suddenly aware of the station undertones: the wheels and the steam and a distant whistle.
There were no voices.
I looked around.
The faces were packed white and sullen all round me.
There was a small space between me and them but the mousy man and the suitcase had disappeared.
I could not understand how it had all happened so quickly.
I was very frightened.
I remembered how once when I had been in a crowd teasing an awkward boy at school I had noticed his terror and been glad I was not him.
I tried to concentrate my attention on one face.
I thought it would make me feel less helpless if I was opposed by something definite.
But it was impossible.
The faces seemed to shift as I looked at them.
I could not see exactly what was in them but it was more than curiosity.
They were all pale.
A woman suddenly shouted from the back of the crowd.
It was like the scream of a solitary parrot.
Then a man stepped forward into the space around me.
The whole crowd seemed to move forward a little with him.
He was well dressed but had no hat and I noticed that his hair was thin.
His face was grey with hatred and I wondered if he was going to hit me.
He strutted all round me, his upper lip shaking loosely.
Then he stopped in front of me and put his face very close to mine.
He shouted and wagged his finger.
It was absurd but unpleasant and frightening, like someone making a scene in a ‘bus.
I stepped back to avoid the overpowering closeness of his face and a little man on the inner circle of the crowd startled me with a friendly smile, but  I could not find him again when I looked for him.
The man with the thin hair continued to shout and wag his finger.
Suddenly something strange happened to the crowd.
It was as if its backbone had been removed.
The mass wobbled shapelessly and disintegrated.
There was a swelling of human voices.
A peaked cap was cutting its way through the crowd towards me and I recognized the Feldwebel.
He was shouting and people were breaking away from him on both sides.
When he reached the empty space in which I was standing I saw that he had drawn an automatic.
The crowd had dissolved.
Nobody paid any attention to me.
It was once more a typical scene on any war-time station in Europe.
The mousy man reappeared struggling with his suitcase and sat down on it again.
I glowed with relief.
I wanted to go up to the Feldwebel and shake his hand.
I felt absurdly that we three were on the same side fighting the rest of the world.
‘Thanks very much,’ I said.
He said nothing.
As he looked down to put his pistol away in its holster I noticed that his face had changed.
It was difficult to remember that I had ever thought of him as a schoolboy.
A few minutes later our train came in and we established ourselves in a first class carriage.
This time, when people tried to force their way in, the Feldwebel shouted at them abruptly.
Once, when an officer questioned his right to keep the carriage empty, he produced papers to prove his case and the officer left to fight for a seat somewhere else.
As the train drew out I became very lonely.
It was not just that I was alone in the middle of the enemy.
After the agony of the scene on the station I felt that there was no-one in the world on my side.
The pale faces on the station and the millions of identical ones behind them were all that was left of the world.
I was cheered by some superficial damage to the station at Cologne.
I pointed it out to the Feldwebel.
He was angry.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘A little damage but elsewhere none at all.’
And moving out through the suburbs it looked as if he was right.
It was not until we were running beside the Rhine that the Feldwebel thawed.
The mousy man had gone to sleep and a jolt from the train knocked his steel helmet off the rack onto his knees.
He awoke  with a mousy oath.
The Feldwebel bounced up and down on his seat with laughter as he had done in the car at Amsterdam.
He picked the hat up off the floor and put it on his own head.
‘Better than English Stahlhelm,’ he said.
Ever since I had been taken prisoner I had found the presence of German helmets fascinating.
They were continual concrete evidence of the sleight of hand which had conjured me from one world to another.
Now it was the English helmet which belonged to the world of the news reel.
The Feldwebel suddenly pulled the helmet sideways over one eye and began to sing in English:
‘We're going to hang up the washing on the Siegfried Line…’
He choked with laughter.
I remembered the fatuous winter of 1939–40 and laughed too.
He pointed at a rock on the other side of the Rhine.
‘Die Lorelei,’ he said and began to sing again.
‘Ich weiss nicht was soll es bedeuten
 Das ich so traurig bin,
Ein Märchen aus alten Zeiten
Das kommt mir nicht aus dem Sinn…’
‘Heine,’ I said.
‘Yes.’
‘A Jew.’
He shrugged his shoulders and, whistling the Lorelei, stared out of the window at the castles on the Rhine.
It was night when we arrived at Frankfurt.
There were big crowds on the station and the Feldwebel and the mousy man kept very close to me.
Soon the mousy man became exhausted by struggling with the suitcase and for the first time the Feldwebel carried it for him.
Our connection for the prison camp did not leave until 11 o'clock and the Feldwebel was wondering what to do for the next two hours when the air raid siren blew.
It sounded the same as the English siren except that it was slower.
We went down into the station shelter and I experienced the familiar claustrophobic sensation of waiting for something to happen.
The shelter was clean and well built.
Civilians sat on benches joking and playing cards and rocking screaming babies to sleep.
It was obvious that the air raid siren had never been much more to them than a bore.
Some of them stared at me and a woman asked the Feldwebel who I was but there was no sign of  hostility.
When the sound of high-flying aircraft began to soak into the atmosphere people stopped talking but looked more interested than afraid.
Some guns were fired.
I wondered whether the flak was accurate and thought of the people fifteen thousand feet above us in Wellingtons, Stirlings and Hampdens, eating chocolate and plotting their track or weaving desperately and praying like tiny panic-stricken children.
No bombs were dropped and the sound of engines died away.
People began to discuss where the aircraft were going to.
The Feldwebel thought Mannheim.
The ‘all clear’ blew, identical to ours.
We went up onto the station again.
There was still an hour to wait so the Feldwebel suggested that we should have some coffee.
We went to the restaurant where there was a special room marked ‘Für englische Kriegsgefangenen’.
A woman came in and said perhaps we would rather have soup.
The Feldwebel agreed and she came back with three large bowls of hot pea soup.
The mousy man pulled out some bread and sausage, wrapped up in a copy of the Vökischer Beobachter .
There was a large black headline on the front page, thickly underlined in red:
‘Gegen den judisch-bolschewistischen Feind zum Sieg!’
Somebody had made a speech.
It didn't seem to have much to do with us as we sat there making heavy sucking noises over our soup.
On the walk from the village station to the camp itself the mousy man finally collapsed.
He stood in the middle of the deserted snow-packed road and raised his eyes towards the Feldwebel with the expression of a dying dog towards its master.
‘I'll carry it,’ I said.
The Feldwebel hesitated.
Then he shrugged his shoulders.
‘All right.’
It was a cold night and I had no overcoat but I was soon sweating with the effort of carrying the suitcase.
I shifted it from one hand to the other in an attempt to ease the pain in my back and shoulders.
I could not think what it was that could be for me and yet so heavy.
‘How much farther?’
I asked.
‘Not far,’ he said and pointed vaguely into the night.
‘For the first time I began to wonder about the camp and the people I should find inside it.
A searchlight suddenly lit up the white road and played around us.
The Feldwebel shouted in German.
He sounded nervous.
The searchlight remained fixed on us and a heavily muffled figure in a long overcoat and a steel helmet came towards us.
He spoke to the Feldwebel and looked at me.
He had the face of a very old man.
When he had gone the Feldwebel imitated his accent which he said was a thick Austrian one which he could hardly understand.
The searchlight was switched out and I saw that there was a wall of barbed wire running parallel with the road on one side.
It was too dark to see what lay behind it but we came to a corner where a tall wooden tower rose suddenly towards the stars.
There was the sound of someone trying to keep his feet warm above us.
I was surprised when we went on past this, because the camp seemed to have ended.
But after walking for about fifty yards we came to another thinner wall of barbed wire with a gate in it.
A sentry let us in after looking at the Feldwebel s papers with a torch and we walked up a garden path towards a sort of suburban villa.
Just inside the door there were two Germans in the grey uniform of the Luftwaffe sitting at a table.
A stove in the corner of the little room was giving out great waves of heat and there was the smell of leather, sweat and cigar smoke which seemed to hang in all German guard-rooms.
It was a relief to be able to put down the suitcase.
The Feldwebel took it into a corner and pulled out a large envelope which he threw onto the table.
One of the other Germans emptied it and I recognized among the papers the interrogation form which the naval officer on the island had filled in.
There was also my escape equipment.
The man began to fill in a new form.
The Feldwebel went out of the room.
I was very curious about the other contents of the suitcase which was now lying on the floor near me.
I raised the lid with my foot.
I was astonished by what I saw.
There were civilian suits and shirts, handkerchiefs and shoes.
There were also several tins of corned beef, some packets of American cigarettes and two bottles of Black and White whisky.
It was a reassuring sight.
I let the lid fall again.
The Feldwebel came back, and the man who had been filling in the  new form turned round in his chair and looked at me.
‘For you the war is over,’ he said.
This time I did not feel so angry, but I shook my head.
I thought of the contents of the suitcase and decided that there was something in what he said.
He stood up and I noticed for the first time a bunch of keys at his belt.
They jangled when he moved.
He said something to the Feldwebel and went out of the room.
‘He has gone to find you a room,’ said the Feldwebel, sitting down in front of the fire and stretching his legs.
I was suddenly infuriated at the thought of what we had believed about the Germans in England.
‘Correct’ treatment of prisoners had always been acknowledged, but there had never been any mention of civilian suits or bottles of whisky.
Apparently one even had a room to oneself.
It occurred to me that we might have been equally misinformed about other things the Germans did.
The man with the keys came back.
‘Komm,’ he said.
I stood up and looked at the Feldwebel.
‘Well, good-bye,’ I said.
‘And thanks very much for everything.’
I looked towards the suitcase.
‘Do I take this now?’
The Feldwebel stared at me blankly, his farewell smile still stuck on his face like an old label on a trunk.
‘Nix verstehen,’ he said.
‘My things,’ I said, a little surprised.
‘When do I get them?’
He looked from me to the suitcase and back again in amazement.
‘Yours?’ he said.
He shook his head.
A new slow, sly smile appeared over the old one.
‘No,’ he said.
‘All mine.
There are yours,’ and he pointed at the papers and my escape equipment on the table.
I still could not understand.
‘But what's all that for then?’
I asked, pointing at the suitcase.
He shrugged his shoulders.
‘Frankfurt is my home,’ he said.
‘I bring some presents: food,’— his eyes twinkled —‘and whisky.
English whisky.
Left behind with the washing on the Siegfried Line.’
‘But you said…’
I understood completely.
‘My God, you bloody swine and you made me carry…’
The Feldwebel waved impatiently to the man with the keys.
‘Komm,’ said the man roughly and pushed me out of the door.
He led me into a corridor.
I was beginning to feel suspicious about my room, but when he opened a door with a key and turned on the light I saw a small clean room with a bed, a table and a chair.
It looked a pleasant enough place in which to spend a period of compulsory leisure and I was glad I did not have to share it with anyone.
I was a little surprised that there was no sign of any other English people.
‘This is the camp, isn't it?’
‘Certainly.’
‘Where are the other Englishmen?’
‘In the camp.’
I thought that I was being stupid, so I gave it up.
‘When can I get hold of some books?’
‘Morgen früh.’
‘I beg your pardon?’
‘Tomorrow.’
‘Oh thanks.’
‘Now you must surrender your clothes.’
‘What?’
‘Please to undress.
Another uniform will be brought to you.’
He closed the door and locked it.
I felt confused and dismayed.
There seemed to be something which I had not properly understood.
I took off my battle-dress jacket.
The door was opened again and the German put a foreign khaki uniform onto the bed.
He stood in the room while I changed.
It was much too big and I wondered if I should always have to wear these clothes.
He went out with my battle-dress and locked the door again.
I could not understand why the door had been locked.
Surely one did not spend one's time locked in like a criminal.
I listened for some sound of other prisoners in the building but although I thought I heard the locking and unlocking of other doors the only voices were those of the guards.
I was very tired.
Sleep fell like an anaesthetic.
In the morning the sun was shining and I felt better.
I was excited at the thought of the unknown.
Very soon I should be talking to English people again, people who were on my side after all.
I should hear talk of ‘prangs’ and ‘piss-ups’and ‘good types’who ‘put up blacks’in Lincoln and Nottingham.
I shouldn't think this boring as I had sometimes done before.
It would be the most friendly talk in the  world.
I should be able to consider seriously the idea of escape, and talk over problems of disguise and frontier crossings with other people for whom the war was not yet over.
I wondered if there would be anyone I knew there.
I began to reckon up the people whom I knew to be prisoners.
I remembered how in England I had pitied them all tucked away in oblivion: Feathers, the first man of my course to go missing; Johnny Soames whose aircraft I had watched skidding away from the formation on one of the early daylight raids over northern France.
But these people had been shot down some months ago and as the Feldwebel had told me that this was only a transit camp I knew that I was not likely to meet them here.
Robin Summers was the most recent casualty from my squadron, and I had heard from the German at Amsterdam that he was a prisoner.
But, although I hoped very much that he would be here, it seemed to me that it mattered little whether one knew anybody in the camp or not.
They would all seem like old friends after the last few days.
I looked out of the window at the sun flashing on a field of snow.
A little boy came out of the woods opposite and began skiing down the slope towards the road.
The window was barred on the outside but this did not seem unreasonable as there was only one thin wall of barbed wire as defence for the whole camp.
I wondered what the place with towers and searchlights had been that we passed in the night.
The only thing that worried me was that the door to my room had not yet been unlocked.
I heard a voice just outside my window.
It spoke very quietly.
‘Smoky!
Hey, Smoky!’ it said.
I pressed my head close against one comer of the barred window trying to see who was speaking, but I could see no-one.
Whoever it was must have been very close to the wall.
I waited.
‘Smoky?
Are you there Smoky?’
There was no doubt about the Canadian accent.
I had heard it in barrack rooms and Officers' Messes all over England.
I was excited.
I longed to speak, but found absurdly that I was shy.
‘Hey, Smoky!’ said the voice again.
‘Wake up, Smoky.’
There was a groan in reply.
It seemed to come from above me.
‘What's the matter, Smoky?
Haven't you got rid of those squits yet?’
The Canadian still spoke quietly and with a sort of urgency.
This time the groan above me was louder.
Then somebody spoke in a strong New Zealand accent.
‘It's about all I haven't got rid of.’
He paused.
there was a bump on the ceiling above me.
‘Coo!
Ain't it lovely to see the sun?’
I realized that the voices were coming from different rooms in the building.
The Canadian was obviously in the room next to me.
I found the courage to speak.
‘How long have you been here?’
I asked.
There was complete silence.
Just as I was about to say it again, the Canadian spoke.
‘Hey, Smoky!
Did you hear that?
There's some other guy here.’
‘Yes, I heard it.’
‘How long have you been here?’
I asked again.
‘Are you next door to me?’ asked the Canadian.
‘I think so.’
‘I'll bang on the wall.’
He banged several times.
‘Yes, that's me.’
‘You English?’
‘Yes.’
There was a shout from outside the wire and the sound of heavy boots running over packed snow.
‘Keine Unterhaltung!
Keine Unterhaltung!’
The sentry appeared on the outside of the wire opposite my window.
He was an old man like the guard who had stopped us in the road the night before.
‘Zurück da!
Zurück!’ he shouted.
I had not yet learnt that a German is not necessarily angry because he is shouting, and so was surprised when he added in a gentle cooing voice:
‘Es ist verboten.
Please…’
Half an hour later the Canadian banged on the wall again.
‘Hallo,’ I said cautiously out of the window.
‘What did you think of the breakfast?’ he asked.
‘Not much.’
‘You, 11 get used to it.’
‘Oh.’
I asked him about the meatless days which the man at Amsterdam had mentioned.
‘What sort of days?’
‘Meatless.
He said that sometimes the supper was small because it  was a meatless day.
‘Sounds like a German joke to me’
‘What do you mean?’
‘You're in the Third Reich now.
It's a meatless century as far as prisoners are concerned.’
‘Oh.’
‘When were you shot down?’ he asked.
‘Three days ago.’
He whistled.
‘Hey, Smoky!’ he called.
‘There's a guy here who's only been down three days.
We'll get all the gen.’
‘Why, when were you shot down?’
I asked.
‘Four months ago’
‘And they still lock you in?
When are we let out of these rooms?’
‘Oh, we've only been here a couple of days.
We were on the loose in France for a couple of months.
Then the f — ing Gestapo picked us up.
God knows what happened to the family they found us with, but they took us to a place called Fresnes gaol, Paris.
We were there for two months.
I can tell you this place is a bloody paradise compared with Fresnes.
Eh, Smoky?’
The New Zealander spoke slowly from above.
‘I used to lie on my bed all day thinking about every bloody meal I'd ever had in my life.
At the end of each day my pillow was so soaked in saliva that I had to wring it out on the floor.’
‘At nights,’ said the Canadian, ‘it was so cold that you couldn't sleep at all, and about dawn you'd hear the shots as they knocked off that day's quota of Frenchmen out in the yard.’
‘Christ that used to give me the shits,’ said the New Zealander.
‘They'd told me that as I was caught in civilian clothes I was going to be treated as a spy, and every time I heard those shots I thought ‘My turn tomorrow’.'
I could not think of anything to say.
I was angry and ashamed of myself.
All this had been done and was being done every day all over Europe by the people whom I had found so pleasant and human ever since I had been shot down.
I could not understand this and only knew that I was angry.
I should have liked to trample on the face of the first German I could find and kick him over and over again in the stomach.
‘Hey, look out!’ called the Canadian suddenly.
The old guard who had stopped us talking before ambled past the  wire on the outside.
When he saw me looking out of the window he smiled, and, looking up at the sun, said:
‘Schön, was?’
He began to sing.
Go on, I said to myself, trample on his face, kick him in the stomach.
I knew that I could never have done it.
As I lay back on my bed I tried to work out the connection between him and the British Empire and Fresnes gaol, but could make nothing of it.
Later in the day I learnt from the Canadian that we were not in the main part of the camp at all, but in the cells or ‘cooler, awaiting interrogation.
This place had been the first German prison camp built specifically for British air-crew.
The first prisoners had come here in the days when the state of war between England and Germany was still largely theoretical.
The rooms had been comfortable and not overcrowded.
Some of the prisoners had been to parties in the German Kommandantur.
I once saw a copy of the German illustrated weekly Der Adler in which there were photographs of individual prisoners posing goodnaturedly.
There had been a superficial state of friendliness and good will between the Germans and the British in the camp.
When the ‘phoney war’ ended and British aircraft were shot down in larger numbers, the camp became too small to hold all aircrew prisoners.
Other special Air Force camps were built in different parts of Germany and it was in these that I eventually spent my rime as a prisoner.
But prisoners still came here first for interrogation and waited here until the camp was full, when they were ‘purged’ to other camps.
A ‘permanent staff’, consisting largely of the original prisoners, remained to run the camp.
The members of this permanent staff had adjusted themselves to captivity, but prisoners passing through had only just been shot down and were still unsure and bewildered.
In addition to this the men who were passing through the camp after the first year often had a different view of the war from those who had been there since before the fall of France.
Some of the early prisoners had regarded the Germans much as, afterwards in the pavilion, one might regard the football team to whom one had lost the match.
The newer prisoners had seen English towns and villages burning.
As a result of such differences there was sometimes friction between those waiting to be purged and the permanent staff.
Charges of selfishness and even unjust charges of collaboration were  sometimes made against members of the permanent staff.
The main camps too, where conditions and supplies of Red Cross food and clothing were not so good, were full of distrust and contempt for them.
For their part the permanent staff thought all new prisoners childish, ill-mannered and unbalanced.
Some time before my arrival the permanent staff had surprised all the other R.A.F. prisoners in Germany by escaping from the camp by a tunnel.
About eighteen people escaped from this tunnel and they were not all recaptured until four days later.
The tunnel had taken several months to build and some of the accusations which had been made against these same people now looked rather silly.
Those who had escaped were immediately purged to other camps.
Those who had not escaped remained as a nucleus permanent staff to which a few of the prisoners passing through were added.
But the division between the permanent staff and new prisoners persisted.
Most of the old prisoners were there because they personally had no wish to escape, and although their reasons for not wishing to were usually quite sensible and not always selfish it was difficult for a new prisoner to grasp them.
In addition to this, all members of the permanent staff were comfortably installed and were certain of receiving Red Cross food supplies, while the others were passing through to the unknown.
Finally they were resented as any established clique is resented by newcomers, and for their part, put on little airs and gave themselves privileges in return.
Such had been the history of this camp up to the time I arrived there.
A garbled version of it had somehow reached England.
In this the camp was run as a luxury camp by the Germans in order to lull people into a sense of false security while they were pumped for information.
The pumping was said to be done by Germans, faultlessly disguised as British officers, or even, it had been whispered, by genuine British officers who had fallen for German propaganda.
It was not until one had made oneself ridiculous by days of suspicion and over-cautiousness in the camp that one realized how hopelessly less dramatic was the truth.
Later in the war, with the increase in the size of our bombing attacks against Germany and the corresponding increase in the number of prisoners, the camp's character changed again.
The permanent staff was gradually purged to other camps until there were none of the original ‘old people’ left.
The Germans intensified and brutalized their methods of interrogation until it was quite usual for a  prisoner who refused to talk to be kept in solitary confinement under intentionally unpleasant conditions for weeks.
Prisoners passed through the place so fast that it ceased to be a camp in the true sense altogether.
It was not until I had been in the camp some days that I learnt the full story of the past.
The Canadian in the next cell knew only that we would be moved into the camp itself when we had been interrogated.
He said that an English sergeant who acted as orderly in the ‘cooler’ had told him this, and that he had promised to come back later in the day with some cigarettes for us.
I spent most of the day staring at the walls and ceiling and wondering when the next meal would come.
Each time a guard arrived, either with food or to let me out to the lavatory, I asked for a book, and each time he said ‘Yes’ and didn't bring one.
Once I banged on the wall for the Canadian's attention and got no reply.
I felt very lonely, but half an hour later I heard his voice calling to me through the window.
‘You silly clot,’ he said.
‘I was being interrogated when you knocked on the wall.
The chap was furious and said he'd put me in a cell without anyone on either side of me if I talked to you again.’
‘What was he like?’
‘A nasty piece of work.
Talked with an Oxford accent and produced that bogus Red Cross form the Air Ministry warns you about’
‘What did you say to him?’
‘I told him he knew where he could put it!
‘Did he mind?’
‘He didn't understand, but he laughed to show his sense of humour.’
I watched the dusk coming across the snow from the edge of the wood like smoke from a newly-lit bonfire.
A figure walking along the path on the outside of the wire came into the corner of my vision.
The guard, I thought, and paid no more attention to it until it stopped opposite my window and spoke.
‘It's your own fault, chum,’ it said.
‘You ought never to have joined up.’
I saw that he had no hat and was wearing British battle-dress.
‘Cheer up,’ he went on, ‘I'll bring you a few cigarettes in a minute when Arthur's opened the gate.’
‘Who's Arthur?’
I asked.
There didn't seem much point in asking about himself.
I had met him every day of my life in England: punching my ticket on a ‘bus, cutting my hair, selling me an evening newspaper or looking after the engine of my aeroplane.
‘Oh, Arthur's all right,’ he said.
‘Just a bit stupid, but you mean well, don't you Arthur?’
The silhouette of a small man in German uniform came shambling along the wire.
‘Komm, Arthur.
Guter Kamerad im Cooler.
Zigaretten geben.’
It was the first time I had heard orderly's German: a rich hybrid language spoken with any English local accent which often achieved wonders when the phrases of classroom or grammar book produced only a blank expression and a shrug of the shoulders.
The German turned round obediently and the orderly followed him down the wire.
A minute later I heard the orderly's voice inside the compound as he passed cigarettes to the Canadian through the window of the cell next door.
‘And there are some for your pal upstairs,’ he added and moved along the wall to my window.
He pushed two packets of Players and a box of matches through the bars while the German stood miserably in the background looking furtively up and down the wire.
‘Schnell, schnell,’ he mumbled.
‘All right, Arthur.
Don’ t panic,’said the orderly.
‘He's scared the Gestapo'll get him,’ he added to me, ‘Christ, they would too if they searched his quarters.
He must have got enough Nescafé there to make brews for the whole of Frankfurt.
He sends regular food parcels to his family in Hamburg, don't you Arthur?
Schwarzmarkt nicht, Arthur?’
The German winced.
‘Schnell,’ he muttered, ‘Posten kommt.’
‘Still, he's worth it,’ continued the orderly.
‘Well, thanks very much,’ I said.
‘I suppose there's no chance of your bringing any food some time is there?’
His manner changed.
‘We're all pretty short of that, I'm afraid sir, but I'll see what I can do.’
‘Thanks,’ I said.
‘And there's one more thing.’
I lowered my voice.
‘Schnell,’ whined the German.
‘Yes?’
‘What about escape?
Is there any chance?’
‘Absolutely none at all, sir, from here.
You'd do better to wait.’
‘Thanks.’
I was secretly relieved.
He stepped back from the window and rejoined the German.
‘So long,’ he said.
‘See you tomorrow if Arthur hasn't been sent to the Ostfront by then.
Eh, Arthur?
Ostfront?’
The German growled.
‘He's scared stiff of it,’ said the orderly.
‘Well, so long.
Vorwärts, Arthur.’
They disappeared into the dusk which had now reached the square of my window.
The next morning I banged on the wall to attract the Canadian's attention but there was no answer.
I waited another half hour and banged again.
There was still no answer.
But there was a sound of boots in the passage outside and my door was unlocked.
A man in Luftwaffe officer's uniform put his head inside.
‘It's no use trying to talk to him, old man,’ he said.
‘He's been moved across to the main camp.’
‘Oh, I see,’ I said sheepishly.
It was like being caught ‘talking in the dorm.’
‘I expect you're pretty keen to get across, aren't you?’ he asked, without coming any further in.
‘Well, yes, I am.’
‘Good show, then I'll try and get you through as soon as possible.
Expect me some time this afternoon.
In the meantime is there anything else you'd like?’
‘I'd rather like something to read.’
‘I'll do what I can.
Well, so long for now.’
He shut the door.
But the only person I saw for the rest of that day, besides the German who brought my food and took me to the lavatory, was the English orderly.
He came just as it was getting dark again.
‘They've moved the chap next door to another cell,’ he said, as he handed a crust of bread and some cigarettes through the bars.
‘It's because he was found talking to you.
Still, I expect you'll all be out in a couple of days.
No-one's ever in for much longer than four days altogether.’
‘Thank God for that,’ I said.
The staleness of blood and brain which comes from solitary confinement was already maturing inside me.
‘Sorry about the bread.
It was the best I could do.’
‘But it's wonderful.’
‘Oh don't thank me.
I stole it out of one of the Posten's haversacks when I was cleaning out the guard-room.
It's good for these buggers to have to go hungry.
Good practice for after the war.’
He changed his tone.
‘I was caught at Dunkirk when they thought they'd won the bloody war.
I shan't forget what they were like then.
Marched us back into Germany the whole bloody way.
Bullets for those that couldn't keep up and a fifth of a loaf a day for those that could.
I shan't forget that.’
He turned and looked at his guard who was waiting tamely behind him and keeping an occasional look-out along the wire.
‘Christ,’ he said, ‘I'm looking forward to watching these buggers starve.’
I laughed.
The possibility of anything like that happening to the Germans seemed a long way off in those days.
‘Well, I must be off.’
he said.
‘Come on, Arthur.
So long.’
They moved out of sight.
The next day I was interrogated twice.
It was a tedious business.
Both the interrogators had been doing their job for so long that they no longer thought much about what they were saying.
They were as familiar with their patter as music-hall comedians.
‘Perhaps you can just let me have a few details…
Nothing important, of course…
We respect your status as a prisoner of war and don't ask you for military information…
But you want to be sure that your parents get to hear as soon as possible that you are safe, don't you?…
Good…
Now what did you say was the number of your squadron?…’
The first interrogator was not the officer who had looked in the day before but a wizened little old man who seemed half afraid of me.
He also wore uniform but explained that he only held an honorary rank.
At the rime his Jewish appearance did not strike me as peculiar because I had not yet got used to the idea of people thinking racially, but I learnt later that he was half Jewish and that he did this job to keep his Jewish wife out of trouble.
‘What did you say was the number of your squadron?’
‘I didn't.’
He looked out of the window towards the wood.
‘No,’ he said.
‘None of them do.’
There was a silence in which I almost began to feel sorry for him.
‘You know all about this form, I suppose,’ he said.
He had the bogus Red Cross form which I had seen at Amsterdam on his lap.
I nodded.
‘Yes,’ he said.
‘They all do.’
Eventually he persuaded me to give him the name and address of my parents.
It was like giving a button to a blind beggar.
I wrote to my parents at that address for the next three years.
The second interrogator was the hearty man of the day before.
‘Hullo, old man.
Quite comfortable?…
Now then, perhaps you can let me have a few details…
Red Cross…formality…number of your squadron?’
His reaction to my replies was more vigorous than the other man's and once he even pretended to get angry.
‘Well, if that's your attitude, and I call it bloody unco-operative, there's nothing more to say.’
But it was obvious that he was used to it all.
Soon we slipped into an argument about the war.
This time I remembered all the things I had forgotten to say in the railway carriage.
‘We stand for the liberty of the individual — Habeas Corpus.’
‘What about India, then?’
‘We aim at social security.’
‘What about the slums?
There are no slums in Germany.’
‘We uphold the rights of free nations.’
‘How was the British Empire built?’
Something was going wrong.
I became angry and confused.
‘Well, anyway, the fact that the whole of Europe is against you shows that we're fighting for something worth-while.’
‘But my dear old boy, what can have put the idea into your head that Europe is against us?
You must have been listening to the B.B.C. or something.’
When he left I had a sense of futility and frustration.
I had not yet learnt that every German soldier from private upwards had had an elementary political education which made this sort of argument child's play for him.
It was a fact that quite easily became disheartening during the first few months of captivity.
So he left me in a stew of doubt.
I determined to spend the first part of my prison leisure working out my reasons for knowing I was right.
But it annoyed me  that I had not got them worked out already.
And to my annoyance was added the realization that perhaps he had not been such a bad interrogator after all.
The wood opposite was smoking with dusk again and I was looking forward to seeing the orderly, when my door was opened and I was told that I would be moved across to the main camp at once.
This excited me and while I was being photographed and having my particulars taken —‘Hairs: black…
Nose: straight…
Knowledge of German…little…’— I was thinking of the pleasure of being once again among my own people.
We went out of the building.
The air was cold and the snow crunched as we walked.
It was a relief to be able to look at objects in depth again after the hypnotic closeness of the walls and the limited view from my room.
I saw a range of hills behind us.
Something inside me stretched as I walked so that at the same time I was walking on the top of those hills.
The camp came into sight at the bottom of the road.
I saw the massed coils of barbed wire, the tall wooden towers and the muffled sentries that we had passed on the night I arrived.
I was astonished at the smallness of the area which these enclosed.
It was about 100 yards long and 70 yards wide.
Inside there were some long wooden huts which occupied almost all the space.
It was like a large man inside a suit that was too small for him.
A few figures in battle-dress were walking round the perimeter.
Two were throwing a ball about.
The ball came over the wire as we passed and the German who was escorting me threw it back.
‘Danker,’ said the man in battle-dress, and to me: ‘Hullo, old boy’as if it was inevitable that I should have come there some time or other, and went on throwing the ball about.
We arrived at the gate.
It was a double one and the man on duty smiled as he let me in.
‘For you the war is over,’ he said and locked the gates behind me.
I was alone in the camp.
For a moment I had a ridiculous sense of anti-climax.
All the emotional turmoil and excitement of the outbreak of war, all the long drawn out details of my training, the thrills of flying and the fear of death, all the bustle and anticipation of the last few days had ended in this, in my standing alone on a slushy path  in the late afternoon with absolutely nothing whatever to do.
One of the couples walking round the camp was approaching.
‘Hullo, old chap, you just arrived?’
‘Yes’
‘Good show, well I'm the clothing officer.
If you're short of any clothes just come and see me, and I'll try and fix you up.’
‘Thanks.
I haven't got any clothes at all except what I've got on.’
The little eyes sharpened at the top of the thin nose.
‘Of course I'm not promising anything, old chap.
There are a lot of people here in your position and we've got to try and please everybody, which isn't an easy job in this place I can tell you.’
He smiled at his companion who said rather sadly:
‘It certainly isn't.’
‘I should very much like a change of underclothes at least,’ I said.
‘Yes, all right, old chap,’ said the clothing officer rather testily.
‘Well, just come and see me.’
‘Thanks very much.’
‘Not that I'm promising anything, mind you.’
They walked on.
There was no-one else in sight.
A German came out of one of the huts.
He was unarmed and I hoped that he might be one of the interpreters.
‘Can you tell me where I can see about getting a bed?’
I asked him.
‘You are new, yes?’
‘Yes.’
He led me into the hut he had just come out of ‘I will take you to Flight-Lieutenant Sutton, the accommodation officer.’
We walked up the wooden passage.
There were doors on either side and pinned to some of these were pieces of paper on which the occupants of the rooms had written their names.
Steam came from underneath one of the doors and there was the sound of a shower running.
Somebody inside sang:
‘Now's the time to roll the barrel,
For the gang's — all — here.’
The German stopped outside a door at the top of the passage and knocked.
The door opened.
A Flight-Lieutenant in faded blue uniform came out.
‘Hullo?
Ah, Karl.’
He didn't notice me, but lapsed heavily into what even I could recognize as elementary German.
‘Ich denke, Karl, dass Sie haben meines Buch.’
‘Oh, that is terrible, Mr. Sutton,’ said the German.
‘Your German is worse and worse.
And I haven't got your book.’
The Flight-Lieutenant became suddenly petulant, like a child that has lost its toy.
‘Oh confound it, then where is the bloody thing?’
He turned back into the room and started rummaging among books and papers.
‘Mr. Sutton, there is a new officer here.’
‘What?
Oh wait a minute, I must try and find this wretched book.
I want to do Lesson Twelve tonight for our hour tomorrow afternoon’
‘Here, you can borrow mine, Mr. Sutton, until tomorrow’
He produced a book from under his arm.
‘Oh thanks, Karl, very much.
Now what did you say?’
He saw me for the first time.
‘I'm sorry to keep you waiting.
Come in and have a cup of tea.
Buzz off, Karl, no tea for you today.’
We sat down at a table and he poured me out some tea.
‘It's a good thing to do something to keep your mind occupied, you know.
That's why I do German.
Can't say I've learnt much although I've started it again and again in the last two years.
Still, it gives you something to do.’
‘I suppose there are plenty of other books too, besides Grammars?’
‘Oh yes, there are books.’
He said it as if books were some terrible bore which everybody had to put up with but which weren't of the slightest use.
‘But what you need is something to do.
Take my tip: keep yourself occupied.
If you don't want to learn a language, there are plenty of other ways of doing it.
For instance, a very good way is to make everything you do take twice as long as it would normally take you.
If it normally takes you a quarter of an hour to shave, make it take you half an hour.
If you normally spend ten minutes making your bed, spend twenty minutes on it.
You'll find you soon get through the day that way, and you're occupied all the time which is the important thing.’
‘Thanks for the tip,’ I said.
‘Now do you think I could have a bed somewhere?’
I suddenly wanted very badly to get out of that room.
‘There's a chap called Summers came in the other day.
You can go in with him if you like.’
‘I'd like to very much.
He was on my squadron.’
‘All the people that were on my squadron are either dead or Group Captains by now.’
He told me where to go and I left the room with relief.
There was a man walking up and down the corridor outside.
He came up to me as I shut the door.
‘Are you the man that's just arrived?’
‘Yes.’
‘Oh good show.
At least I don't mean that — not a good show for you, I know — but frankly when you've been down a long time it is a good show to see someone from home and get all the news.
My name's Lomas.
I wondered if you'd care to come along and have a cup of tea in my room.
We're all rather keen to hear what you've got to say about the war.’
He spoke energetically and his words tripped over one another as they tumbled out.
‘Thanks very much.
I'd love to.’
There was only one other man in his room and he introduced him as George Apsley.
They were as shy as I was and the effort they made to be friendly was the most heartening thing I had experienced since I had been taken prisoner.
They asked me questions about myself and my squadron and the way I was shot down.
They made me feel of some value again and the warmth was flooding through me long before the kettle had boiled on the iron stove in the corner.
There was a pause and I sensed a slight tension as Lomas spoke.
‘And the war?’ he said.
‘How's it going on?’
‘Oh, it's going on,’ I said.
‘That's about all you can say for it.’
‘But it's going pretty well really, isn't it?
You see, we only get the German news in this Place, and of course that doesn't mean a thing’
I thought for a moment.
‘I don't think you could honestly say it was going well just now, but it will do soon and that's all that matters.’
‘Any idea how soon?’ asked George Apsley slowly.
He had been shot down in September, 194O.
‘No, but next year some time, I should think.’
‘But we'll invade this year, surely?’ said Lomas.
‘I shouldn't think so.
We're only just beginning to think about it.’
‘Oh, I think there'll be an invasion this year, you know,’ said Lomas confidentially.
‘Yes, but which way?’ said Apsley mournfully through his moustaches.
‘Don't take any notice of George,’ said Lomas to me.
‘He's been a prisoner too long’
‘Oh no,’ said Apsley.
‘Only five hundred days the day after tomorrow’
‘Anyway,’ persisted Lomas.
‘What is happening?’
‘Well, the Germans are pretty badly stuck in Russia.’
‘Oh yes, they've had it there all right.
Have the Russians retaken Smolensk yet?’
Smolensk, Smolensk.
I had heard something about it once or seen it on a map, but I could remember nothing definite.
‘I'm not quite sure,’ I said.
‘I think you'll find they have,’ said Lomas.
‘What about the Far East?’
‘You heard about Singapore, I suppose?’
‘The German news said it had fallen, but we don't believe that.’
‘It's fallen all right, I'm afraid.’
‘Good God!’
They were both astonished and Lomas stopped for a moment to stare at the floor.
‘I bet they put up a bloody good fight,’ he said.
‘I don't know,’ I said.
‘There were 70,000 prisoners’
They asked about the escape through the Channel of the German battleships Scharnhorst and Gneisenau .
‘They didn't get clean away, did they?’ asked Lomas.
‘I'm afraid they got away,’ I said.
‘A destroyer claimed to have damaged one, I think.’
‘The Germans said they shot down forty-one aircraft.
How many were actually missing?’
‘Thirty-seven, I think.’
There was another silence.
‘Still, you think we're going to invade this year?’ said Lomas.
‘No, next year.’
‘This year, next year, sometime, never,’ said Apsley.
Then surprisingly: ‘Don't think I'm a pessimist, I'm not.
The Germans have lost the war all right.
It's just going to take rather a long time making them admit it.’
Later in the evening I asked him what life in a prison camp was like.
‘I wish I could think of a slick answer to that one,’ he said.
‘But I never can.
It seems to me that the only possible way of finding out what it is like is to live it.
You see, all the things which at the moment seem strange to you about it become every day normality after a bit, so that it's untrue to give you an answer in terms of the lack of space or the lack of change or the lack of food or any of the other things which make this so different from ordinary life.’
He pulled at his moustaches.
‘Nor is there any advice which an old prisoner can reasonably give to a new one except: don't worry.
Everyone finds something congenial about this life.
People are like chameleons: they can adjust themselves to any environment so long as they've no alternative.
Lomas, for instance, finds his pleasure in wishful thinking about the war; Sutton in continually starting a language which he's physically incapable of learning; I paint — shockingly.’
He frowned.
‘Even analysing it like this somehow makes it unreal, because in fact the whole thing is so un-selfconscious.
Actually, I can think of an answer to your question, but you'll think it very silly.’
‘No, I won't,’ I said.
‘Well, it's just that life here is exactly like life anywhere else.
Of course the environment is very much more simple and unpleasant than the environment from which you've just come.
But as I said, I've decided that human beings adjust themselves to any environment to which there is no alternative, and human life in here is the same as in the world outside, for which also there is no alternative.
Viewed from the standards of the outside world, the main trends in human life are perhaps shown up rather more clearly here: selfishness, courage, the desire for escape, self-fulfilment etc’ but then once you're here you don't think about the standards of the outside world very much.’
As I lay in bed that night, watching the flash of the searchlights on the darkened wall, I asked Robin Summers the same question.
He had been there a few weeks, suffering most of the time from frostbite after thirty hours in a dinghy in the Atlantic.
He still had moments of extreme pain and walked only with difficulty.
‘What's this life like?’
I asked.
‘Bloody awful,’ he said.
Then he gave a great roar of pain and kicked furiously underneath the blankets.
‘Bloody funny of course, too,’ he added.
Part Two
I cannot write fully about the years that followed.
Although at the time they were made up of an apparently infinite chain of familiar days, I can think of them now only as a whole.
The only real characteristic of each day was that it was the same as the day before and to give any account of such days in strict sequence would make as tedious reading as it made tedious living.
Now it is possible to summarize the main features of that life in a single chapter.
Apsley was right: you adjusted yourself to prison life.
Unnatural conditions became natural and as time passed it was more and more difficult to believe that there was any other life beyond that which went on inside the wire.
Certainly it was an adjustment which you fought against.
It was claustrophobic to feel that the outside world, which reason told you was still there, was in fact disappearing.
But adjustment went on all the same because it was the only way of making yourself tolerate a condition which you loathed.
So the outside world faded.
Of course you could never forget about it.
Sometimes you would see people who lived in it walking past the camp.
News of public events poured in ceaselessly through the German loudspeaker and the secret wireless.
Letters arrived from home.
But all these things somehow had their centre inside the wire.
It was as if they were all specially created to be viewed from there.
The pale women in black who walked along the dusty road beside the wire on Sundays, and the unguarded French prisoners who returned to their camps from work every evening might have been  extras walking across a film set.
It was difficult to believe that they had a life to the left or right of that stretch of wire.
The battles in Russia, Africa and Normandy became mere words, to be heard punctually from the loudspeaker at three or four o'clock, from the English news-reader if German security was sufficiently relaxed, or from anybody who thought he knew what the next allotment of words was going to be about.
Rommel arrived at Alamein, the Russians drove the Germans out of Russia, English and American troops landed on the continent, whole German cities were razed to the ground in one night: I heard it all from the same patch of sand, four hundred yards long by a hundred wide in the middle of a Silesian Pine forest.
And in the forest there was nothing to show for it.
The wire was still there and the bored guards and the roll-call, morning and evening, and the hundreds of faces you grew to hate just because they were a part of the unaltering surroundings.
For three years the war was just a large scale Radio thriller.
Sometimes it frightened us, sometimes it had us madly excited and always somebody listened.
Letters were fantastic tricks of the imagination, tangible messages received from the world of day dreams.
As with all good day dreams you were confident that one day this world would materialize and yet at the same time it seemed as unattainable as another planet.
So letters were unearthly and invaluable, even if they only came from Barclays Bank.
Of course reason struggled hard to maintain its accustomed position and simultaneously you knew that the People passing the wire slept somewhere and that the news on the wireless meant friendly troops nearer or further away.
Sometimes you even wrote back to Barclays Bank.
But the odds were weighted against reason, and other parts of the mind, like some Resistance movement long held down in an oppressed country, came out into the open.
Whether you lived eight men to a room in partitioned huts or ninety men to a cold stone barn, this remoteness of the outside world was the conditioning factor of prison life.
Variations in standards of treatment and comfort made little difference relative to the permanence of this one condition.
In some camps Red Cross parcels arrived less regularly than in others and when they failed altogether people talked about food all the time instead of, as usually, about food or football or politics or the theatre.
But always the world in which you could go into a shop and buy as much bread and potatoes as you liked  was remote.
In some camps the lavatories were so bad that white slugs bred in the depths.
You could see the filth heaving with them as you peered through the crudely cut holes in the wood which served for seats, and sometimes they would crawl out through these holes and invade the neighbouring parts of the camp.
In other camps rats lived under the seats and bit people as they sat there naked.
In others there was merely an overpowering smell when the wind blew in your direction.
But always it seemed impossible that you would ever sit on the polished seat of a flushing lavatory again.
You took for granted the presence of the Germans and the wire as ordinary citizens take for granted the law of gravity.
The morning and evening roll-calls (‘appel’) were complementary to sunrise and sunset.
If there was an air raid at night and the lights on the camp boundary were turned out you missed the flickering of the searchlights as you miss the light of the moon when it goes behind a cloud.
So four hundred square yards became an everyday world.
And, as in the greater everyday world, the majority of people were superficially happy.
Each man had his everyday business in which he could feel he had his niche and even at times his indispensability.
Almost every activity of the outside world was reproduced there and provided the same outlets, fatuous and valuable, for human energy.
For the bureaucratic minded there was camp administration, and there were good and bad bureaucrats.
For readers there were books and rooms set apart as libraries, and there were people who learnt a great deal and people who read furiously and learnt nothing.
For actors and producers and carpenters there was a theatre and for people who liked seeing plays there was an auditorium.
For those who liked cleaning their buttons there was button polish and a British parade once a year on the King's Birthday.
For those who ‘liked a job to do’ there was the distribution of food and clothing and fuel, and there were some who did it honestly and others who were suspected of turning it into a ‘racket’.
For those who liked to go to church there were padres of several denominations and candles and a camp-built altar.
And for those who liked to go to the office every morning by the 8.15 there were class rooms and classes where nobody learnt very much but where everybody thought they were doing something.
Games players cleared areas of sand or dusty rubble.
Strategists pinned up maps.
Gardeners dug gardens.
And  people who liked to walk and talk walked round and round the perimeter track in endless identical circles.
As soon as prisoners had been poured into the particular patch of ground which was to be their camp, all this activity materialized from nothing; and it materialized in every camp regardless of the nationality of the prisoners.
It was quite spontaneous, for the Germans instigated nothing although they would sometimes co-operate in an elementary way by allowing wood for goalposts or permitting the construction of a theatre.
The ceaseless thrust and bustle came from something deep and primaeval in man.
The restless indifferent force of human energy, responsible alike for beauty and ugliness, comedy and tragedy, saintliness and crime, had to find its own level inside the wire.
But if the determining force in human existence was unaltered, the peculiarities of environment — shortage of food, absence of women, lack of space, remoteness of the outside world — did produce corresponding peculiarities of behaviour.
Some tendencies in human behaviour were encouraged, others repressed, and the results were both pleasant and unpleasant.
Strange twists were given to the normal body of human nature, revealing that such freak developments are potentially in all of us all the time.
The only beneficial peculiarity of environment was the sense of detachment from the outside world.
In the first place people developed a greater objectiveness than they had ever done while they were living in it.
The formation of liberal thought by those who normally might have taken a pride in never bothering to think at all was remarkable.
But more significant than this was the general increase in sensibility.
There were no cinemas or pubs or dances so that we were forced to find pleasure in the ordinary things which surrounded us, the sky and books and the changing seasons.
Many people seemed to become aware of such things for the first time in their lives.
‘I never realized that sunsets could be so lovely.’
‘This classical music has much better tunes than dance music and I don't seem to get tired of them nearly so easily.
‘At home you hardly know whether it's raining from one day to the next but here you feel better every time the sun comes out.
‘I never used to read poetry at all but I've just found out that it says all the things I've often felt but never been able to express.
‘I didn't realize Dickens was so funny.’
Naïve unsophisticated statements such as these marked a regeneration which perhaps must be experienced by more than a handful of  prisoners if we are to care enough about civilization to want to save it.
As people became more intensely aware of the pleasures of beauty they wanted to create it for themselves and another new source of happiness was discovered.
Commercial travellers began to paint, stockbrokers to act and footballers to write poetry.
Perhaps none of it was very good, but it was at least the beginning of something true in the lives of people who had been educated to falsity.
Certainly not everybody in the camp found pleasure in books or music or poetry or nature but many people who normally would never have had anything to do with such things were forced by their environment to look into them and found there greater wealth than they had ever known before.
I often used to wonder whether we should carry these new springs of happiness away with us when we emerged.
I certainly intended to.
If we could find a heightened sense of beauty in the world of a prison camp, I thought, surely we could find it in the great free world of which we dreamed?
I cursed myself for having made such a feeble thing of life before being shot down.
I determined that it should not happen again and it seemed impossible that it should for this time I should carry with me the foundation of happiness which I had found behind the wire.
I used to despise the people who wrote me letters from England showing that they found the world drab and depressing.
They seemed silly and childish and so much less wise than us who really did live in a drab and depressing world and yet found happiness in it.
I laughed when I read of the things which they considered important: political creeds, literary cliques, careerist intrigues.
Looking back now I wonder only at my arrogance.
The very fact that I had only properly discovered a foundation of happiness when separated from the world should have shown me that the tendency of the world was to flood and destroy such a thing.
I should have known that no amount of understanding can carry any individual for long against the swirling crowds of social existence, and that soon after rejoining them I too should be stampeding with them.
The fact that I was in a prison camp at all should have made clear to me the ruthlessness and irresistibility of the stampede.
All the other peculiar effects of camp environment were bad.
In so far as material conditions were more unpleasant, so human beings were  more unpleasant.
It is not my experience that physical hardship ‘brings out the best in a man’.
Changes of character brought about by the fluctuation of material conditions were so marked that they were noticeable even at the time from within the camp.
As the weekly parcel issue decreased from one to a half you began to notice who took more than his share of the butter or the jam and though you felt mean for noticing it you went on being mean.
You were glad when someone suggested that the butter or the jam should be cut up into rations even though you did see the hard selfishness in his eyes as he said it and felt sick because you knew that normally he was neither hard nor selfish.
When there were no Red Cross parcels at all you began to notice that people sized up the rations of margarine before they helped themselves, and though you despised them for it you were none the less sharp to do it yourself.
A roster for crusts had to be started as these contained more bread than the average thin slice.
After some weeks without Red Cross parcels, people began to arrive early at meals so that they could size up and take the largest of the scrupulously rationed helpings of potatoes, or the thickest of the apparently identical slices of bread.
Though the differences were minute they were capable of calling forth the highest passions: great content if you did well, or jealousy and despair if you did badly.
You loathed it when you saw other people behaving like this and yet you could no more control it in yourself than you could any other automatic physical reflex.
And it was small compensation to be able to loathe yourself
Life was not quite a state of nature or a question of the survival of the fittest, but in times of no food parcels the partition separating us from that state was unpleasantly thin and even at the best of times it was thin enough to be able to hear most of what went on on the other side.
The general shortage of comforts and of everything which kept us just above the lowest level of life was sufficiently great to make individuals cling to what they had with something like fanaticism.
Improvised cooking utensils, the contents of the three-monthly clothing parcel, a few nails, bits of wood for shelves, were objects around which a sacred ring was drawn.
There was an unspoken religious respect for another man's possessions far stronger than the respect for property in normal society and correspondingly more unpleasant.
If you wished to borrow such things you instinctively made it clear that you intended no blasphemy.
The effect of overcrowding was the disastrous one of turning you  against all humanity.
Your mind became numbed to everything about human beings except that they pressed close around you all the time, that they slept above or below you, that you could never turn your head without seeing some evidence of their closeness — their clothes or their books or their photographs — that they made it impossible for you ever to be alone.
Although this was no fault of theirs you hated them for it.
Certainly you did not quarrel with them all the time.
Superficially you were usually on good terms with them as individuals and sometimes there was even an elementary sense of comradeship.
But underneath you did not think of them as individuals.
They were the crowd whose heads you could not see over.
And the crowd was not company.
Of all the various forms of starvation and near starvation at work, sex starvation was the most complete.
Officers did not go out of the camp to work and they had no contact with women.
Some were prisoners for four or five years.
‘What did you do about sex?’
It is the question everybody asks and it is difficult to give a satisfactory answer because everybody wants a definite or even a sensational one.
I think most Prisoners would say that the sex problem worried them less than they had expected it to, but that is not to say that it did not worry most people some of the time and some people all the time.
A restraining factor was undoubtedly the poorness of the food.
But there was sufficient sex feeling left over to need an outlet and this was often more than could be successfully sublimated into a mere exuberance of energy in reading or games or any other form of camp activity.
I think there was very little practised homosexuality.
The reason for this was a simple one: that it was highly impractical.
The natural British attitude to sex made any open homosexual conduct such as was supposed to exist at the French Stalags inconceivable, while the lack of any privacy made public school secrecy impossible.
As a result such homosexuality as there was usually took a repressed form.
There were a few couples whose friendship was of long standing and who were always seen about together.
There were a few people who ‘took an interest’ first in one young man and then another.
There were a few young men who developed female characteristics, unconsciously perhaps at first but certainly consciously when they became aware of the power that these gave them.
(There was a long correspondence in a camp newspaper about the  evil effects which female parts in a play had on such people.)
There was a good deal of schoolboy teasing and even bullying which probably had its origins in sex.
But it is useless to start deciding which aspects of behaviour did or did not have their origin in sex.
Even in normal society it is boring and, after a while, meaningless to trace everything to a common source, especially when the detail is elaborate.
It was just that in camp the link between sex and behaviour was often cruder and more obvious than in ordinary life.
As with all the other special effects of camp environment, those produced by sex starvation were not organically different but merely the ordinary trends aggravated and emphasized.
All these twists given to human character by the conditions of camp life were noticeable in varying degrees throughout the years.
And in normal life too they stand always within call.
‘Is man no more than this?’ says Lear, standing on the heath with his two companions and watching the madman.
‘Consider him well…
Here's three on's are sophisticated; thou art the thing itself; unaccommodated man is no more but such a poor, bare, forked animal as thou art.’
It is a truth which I can never now forget as I go about a world in which human beings apparently have themselves under control.
The smooth-phrased B.B.C. announcer, the amusing don, the self-confident politician, the jargon-perfect critic, the editor of the literary magazine — all are reducible within a few months to a bewildered defensive creature with hollow cheeks and desperate eyes whose only cares will be to see that he gets his fair share of the potato ration, that nobody steals his bed boards, and that he exchanges his cigarette ends for food or vice versa at the best possible price.
Whenever I hear a man being witty or sensible or kindly or civilized I think: the qualities which now seem so much a part of this man could be stripped away at any time, and there would be left just a man who suffered and who fought with his suffering like an animal.
Such thoughts need not be pessimistic.
But they should make us modest.
They should also make us determined to prevent the conditions which bring out this aspect of our nature.
There was one practical advantage which our miniature world had over the world outside the wire.
It was Possible to escape from it.
Those who spend their lives looking for some practical escape from the ordinary world eventually have to accept the fact that there is no  escape except through death or the imagination.
In a prison-camp the world you wanted to get to was visible all the time and, although you did not live in it, you knew that it was only a matter of some barbed wire and a few yards away.
Of course there were some people who, as in the ordinary world, were content with their lives and therefore had no wish to escape.
Others realized that it was only a matter of patience to wait for the guaranteed escape which would be provided by the end of the war, and as the war dragged on more and more people became converted to this view.
But the lust for escape was a powerful one and the fact that escape was possible made the idea a great stimulus whether you got away or not.
Not only was the world into which you wanted to escape there for you to see but you also knew that it was a practical possibility to reach it.
There was nothing magic or even electric about the barbed wire.
It could be cut or climbed or dug under.
So satisfactory was this knowledge that many people were content with nothing else.
It was possible to spend all day wandering happily round and round the camp musing on the possibility of a hole cut in the wire here, a tunnel dug there, or an assault with scaling ladders somewhere else.
And all the rime you knew that you would never take the risk of getting shot which this involved or have the necessary patience to carry it out.
Many people took this game of make-believe to fantastic lengths and went through the whole elaborate business of a preparation for escape without the slightest real intention of ever carrying it out.
Impractical plans absorbed imaginative people for weeks.
There was the chemist who toyed with the possibilities of making synthetic gas for a balloon, the aerodynamic expert who planned to construct a glider out of bed boards, and the dog-lover who wanted to make himself a dog-skin out of an Irvin flying suit and crawl out as one of the guards' Alsatians.
The orthodox visualized themselves cutting through the wire or bringing off some unprecedented bluff at the main gate.
All schemes involved weeks and sometimes months of furtive planning, decisions on route and disguise, invention of a suitable story for travelling purposes and sometimes even the learning of a new language.
Generally speaking, the longer the period of planning for an escape the more satisfactory it was for the prospective escaper.
For weeks he would live in a world by himself conscious as he watched the humdrum routine of his fellow prisoners that he was destined for higher things and happy in the knowledge that he was not as other men.
Each night as he lay in bed he would  imagine himself catching the train from the local station — such reveries usually assumed the initial achievement of getting outside the camp — or stalking the frontier guards among the mountains with Switzerland a few hundred yards away across the snow…
Then the welcome at the British Embassy, the flight back to England, the smiles and the cheering and the medals, the pressing of Button A in the telephone box: ‘Hullo, I'm back.’
And at some point it would all become as real as it was ever to become again, as the happy escaper slid into dreams until morning.
For weeks it would go on like this and then suddenly one day you would notice him just lying in the sun instead of studying his map, or reading a novel instead of his German grammar.
‘How's that scheme of yours coming on?’ you might ask him and he would reply with just a little too much nonchalance to sound natural: ‘Oh, I had to give it up; we had good reason for thinking that the goons were on to it.’
or ‘It's too late now really: the mountains are impassable at this time of year…perhaps next spring…’
And you would know that at last he had called his own bluff.
It is difficult to assess the amount of self-deceit involved in such unreal escapes.
It was often obvious from the start that they would never lead to anything and this made those who were more settled openly contemptuous.
They regarded such activity as a schoolboy game of cloaks and daggers.
So it was, but that in itself was no real explanation.
The state of mind of day-dream escapers was not simple and they both believed in their plans and knew quite well that they would never carry them out at the same time.
Certainly there would have been no satisfaction in such behaviour if the would-be escaper had not for a time at any rate believed in himself
Of course not all escape schemes were unreal.
Many hundreds of successful escapes were made by prisoners during the war.
But even in the most matter-of-fact and determined plans there was always an element of unreality.
Everyone engaged on an escape scheme enjoyed the furtiveness necessary for good security: the concealment of tell-tale evidence under coats a few feet away from unsuspecting sentries, the private knowledge kept from other members of the hut.
They enjoyed too the almost unlimited scope for invention and strategy, and the Personal romanticizing in bed at night.
It was the schoolboy's dream come true.
Here were all the ingredients of an exciting life and nothing to pay.
If you played Spies or conspirators anywhere else your life was at stake.
But here, if you were caught  preparing an escape, the worst that could happen to you was fourteen days solitary confinement with books and writing materials, and it was often a pleasant change to spend a fortnight by yourself after months of compulsory association.
It was this element of unreality which made tunnelling the most popular scheme for escape.
It gave easily the best value.
While a wire or a gate scheme might take a few weeks if spun out to the maximum, tunnels were sometimes under construction for six months.
During that time the pleasures of furtiveness were open to all concerned, and to these was added the satisfaction of hard physical work and the stimulus of a mild sense of danger while actually working under the earth.
There was even one tunnel which, after it had reached its original destination outside the wire, was continued twenty or thirty yards to further cover.
There it was saved further prolongation by discovery by the Germans before anyone had escaped at all.
Several tunnels were completed but discovered before they could be used because the escapers were ‘waiting for the thaw’ or ‘for the berries to appear on the hedgerows’, and sometimes individuals would fail to go through with attempts (which others carried out) because ‘their boots were being mended’or ‘they had sprained an ankle playing basketball’.
It was only at the last moment that the real or unreal nature of an escape project was finally determined.
Then of course it seemed to have been predetermined all the time.
‘I knew he'd never try it: he never really wanted to get out.’
‘It was a commonsense scheme and he wanted to get out: it was bound to work.’
But it was not as simple as that.
It was just that at the moment of climax when the escape had to be attempted or abandoned, it became if attempted something quite different from what it had been in the planning.
It became a decisive and dangerous piece of initiative and the escaper got the credit of it having been that all the time.
So, year after year, abnormal influences jostled with the normal and all were considered normal.
Sometimes rain lashed the tarred roofs of the huts until they glistened like the skin of a seal.
Sometimes all life seemed stilled in the aquarium silence of a July sun.
Always, outside the wire, the bored guards relieved each other at two hourly intervals while, inside, prisoners did the washing-up or quarrelled or went to sleep.
And always, inside and outside, people dreamed of the end of the war.
Moments and impressions from this great desert of time remain with me but I have long forgotten in which part of it they occurred.
I remember a day in late spring when people looked anxiously towards the sky for signs of warmth.
The dominating colours of the camp — grey, brown and dusty green — were strongly accentuated by the cold.
People ran from the blocks to the lavatories and back with pinched faces and sat in their rooms wishing they had saved a little coal.
Somebody said that it was a colder day than any we had morning I read Houghton's Life of Keats and copied out some passages from Keats' letters.
After the familiar ladle-full of soup and two thin slices of bread, the afternoon moved orthodoxly towards the German communiqué and tea.
I culled the German newspapers for new words and idioms and felt a little smug for having done ‘something useful’.
Suddenly I remembered my weekly shower and hurried to join the ragged party which was forming outside.
The German guard ran up and down beside us like a good natured sheep dog, counting and getting the numbers wrong and counting again.
Eventually we moved off through the main gate of the camp to the Vorlager, or front camp, where the showers were situated.
This part of the camp was in itself no more attractive than the part in which we lived, but the very fact that we did not live there, that we did not know every inch of its dusty ground, that normally we only saw it from the distance, gave it a charm of its own.
It was a pleasure to walk through it, to see differently arranged buildings, different sentry's towers, a different stretch of wire and a road running in a different direction beyond it.
I had dressed after my shower and was sitting on the steps of the shower room staring dully through the wire.
Suddenly I awoke to the fact that I was staring at a tree on the other side of the road and that this tree was green and delicate.
For a few moments I was intensely conscious of the tree and saw nothing else.
Then I thought of all the trees I had taken for granted in the past — beside the Cherwell at Oxford or on the pavements of a Surrey suburb.
Always I had regarded them as only incidental to the main theme, the real great things that were to happen to me.
At the time I had wondered why this main theme somehow always eluded me, why the great  events never materialized.
Now as I looked at the tree I saw that the great things had been there all the time but I had mistaken them for the background.
Some Australians came out of the shower room and began arguing with the merry sub-human guard:
‘Deutschland kaput!’
‘Nein, England kaput!’
‘Nach dem Krieg…’
I wondered what would happen to all of us ‘after the war’.
I remember a dream.
I dreamt that my mind was ending.
Order dropped from my memory as a sticky substance melted in the sun might drop from a table and spread on the floor.
I cried desperately for recognition at people whose identities I had confused.
I committed myself to a series of disjointed actions which at the moment of decision all seemed reasonable but which immediately afterwards were as terrifying as they were irrevocable.
There was a fluid pain at the back of my neck and my own voice was strange to me.
Somehow this all happened in the darkened room in which in fact I lay asleep.
And although there were many dreams and faces I remained all the time in my bed.
As a result when I awoke there was no positive proof that all this had not in fact happened, and that it did not belong to a mental lapse from which I had recovered.
A remark which someone had once made to me about a man who had gone mad in the camp came clearly out of the darkness:
‘…and the pathetic thing was that he thought he had just recovered from a long period of madness.’
I was relieved when the daylight came and I could surrender to the exhaustion in my brain.
New prisoners.
They arrived at ever decreasing intervals, always the same pale bewildered collection of strangers, always with new and astonishing stories of battle and the day-dream world.
As they gathered outside the wire waiting for their guard to open the gate into the camp, they were suspended for a few moments in a sort of limbo.
They did not yet belong to our world and they certainly belonged to no other.
Inquisitive old prisoners collected on the inside of the wire to scan the incoming group for friends.
They seldom found anyone they  knew.
Some of the men who came in late in the war had not joined up until after the older prisoners had been shot down.
But the inquisitive crowd always collected inside the wire to outnumber the newcomers and to stare.
I don't really know why I always went unless it was to remind myself that I too had once come from some other world than the one in which I lived.
Certainly I always tried to remember the shocking effect which the sight of so many old prisoners, some of them bearded, all of them strangely dressed, had had on me the first time I arrived in a main camp.
In the slightly embarrassed silence that lasted while the two groups stared at each other through the wire, there were occasional calls of recognition.
‘Hullo, Pranger, I've been waiting for you for years.’
‘Hullo, George.’
‘My God, it's Sammy.’
‘Well, if it isn't old Pissy.’
Later there would be the questions and answers about the war, the old familiar stories of the way in which people had been shot down.
It must have been heartbreaking for people who had been through sensational experiences to have to recount them to politely tepid audiences and to discover that their stories conformed to an orthodox pattern.
‘…a burst of cannon shell in the cockpit: it was the first thing I knew…’
‘…a Piece of flak must have hit the elevators as we went straight into a dive…’
‘…a 110 on its second attack…’
‘…
I think we must have collided or something…’
‘…
I think we must have hit the sea…’
‘…my harness slipper and I dropped ten thousand feet hanging by one leg.
Fortunately I landed in a river…’
They would be noticeable for a few days after passing into the camp, unfamiliar faces asking the way to the lavatories, or being excused washing-up by the people in whose rooms they had been placed.
They used to look especially pathetic in summer.
Then, in addition to their normal strained lost appearance, they had white bodies which contrasted unpleasantly with the strongly browned nakedness of everyone else.
But soon they too would be absorbed by the world of the camp, know their way about it in their sleep, do the washing-up and water-carrying once a week, or walk about like  negroes in G-strings made out of a towel.
And in a fortnight or three weeks time they too would be found with the inquisitive crowd on the inside of the gate staring at the prisoners who had just arrived.
One autumn evening in 1944, twenty new prisoners arrived in the compound unexpectedly.
Their closely cropped hair and the drawn pale look of hunger in their faces gave them that terrifying animal uniformity which falls over all human beings in permanent physical distress.
For a rime after D-Day the stories of incoming prisoners had developed a new excitement.
They contained fresh and astonishing details of underground movements and midnight rendezvous.
Now even these, by reason of their frequency, were beginning to pall.
But the stories told by these twenty prisoners of the camp from which they had come, stirred the most lethargic and bore-minded five year man.
We heard of daily torture, public hangings, guards who walked about with whips, gas chambers, castrated children and prisoners who lay dead for hours in the communal beds.
It was almost impossible to believe.
Next morning the German camp Feldwebel would come round calling us ‘Gentlemen’, and the officer who counted us on appel would salute us and talk of German honour.
The irreconcilability of two such extremes in one group of human beings could only be explained as part of the great mystery of human personality.
Even at the time it seemed to me that it was pointless to be vindictive or even to allot responsibility for such happenings.
It all seemed too important for that: a warning of what was inside us all as human beings and of what we must avoid at all costs.
But as I listened to the stories of these prisoners it was difficult not to be overwhelmed with feelings of hate and revenge.
The camp and many others like it had been in existence for years.
I felt ashamed for having loathed my own life for so long.
None of us had ever heard the name of the camp before.
It was called Buchenwald.
I remember an autumn afternoon when I was walking alone round the perimeter track which in Air Force camps was known as ‘the circuit’.
It had rained heavily earlier and the exhausted trodden ground seemed refreshed and cleansed.
The flat Polish landscape stretched away into the marshes to the south-east, and I stopped for a moment and stared towards them.
If only I could be out there, I used to think, just that far away, alone in the useless marshes…
Great  shafts of white after-rain light poured down from the edges of the clouds and soon the sun shone alone in a patch of blue, a weakening autumn sun.
At a junction in the road outside the wire there was a Yellow sign-post:
‘BROMBERG 22KM.’
If it had said 22.000 KM. it would have been all the same to me.
The sun went in again and I walked on.
Three quarters of the way round the circuit I was surprised to find a small Party of Germans erecting a barbed wire barricade across the path.
They seemed to be cutting off a great slice of the camp.
I was learning German and found pleasure in talking to the guards on any subject.
‘Can't I go through?’
‘Nein, verboten’
Guards were either abruptly mistrustful or effusively friendly when they discovered that you could speak their language.
Some of the others came closer.
‘Your comrades shouldn't try so many escapes, then life would be much pleasanter for you.’
‘You are silly, you Englishmen.
When the French were here they had much freedom in the camp because they were sensible and did not try to escape.
They went to the cinema twice a week.’
It was a strange fact that the Germans who so admired soldierly qualities could never understand soldierly integrity in a prisoner of war, whereas the British, least military of all nations, were probably the most spirited prisoners.
I Pressed home the usual arguments about duty and not fighting the war for the privilege of going to the cinema.
One reacted in this way not because one had thought about it much but because some instinct demanded it.
Often, in private, one thought it a pretty silly instinct.
‘If you go on in this way, half the camp will be out of bounds before long’
It was, before we left.
‘You're all mad,’ said a red-nosed Bardolphian Gefreiter, ‘I wish I could be a prisoner: you wouldn't catch me trying to get back to the war’
‘When we heard that the French were going and the British were coming, we were glad,’ said another.
‘The French were a dirty lot.
They walked round all day with their heads slumped between their  shoulders like this’— he took up the appropriate attitude —‘instead of like this, as the British do.’
Here he stuck out his chest and strutted about like a professional walker setting out on a long distance race.
‘The British are a military people.’
I looked at the faces of the other soldiers to see if he was trying to make a fool of me.
It was obvious however not only that he was being quite serious, but also that they all agreed with him.
I did not tell him that his imitation of the French was far more like what I had been seeing for the past year.
Only a peacock or a P.T. instructor could have walked round a camp in the way he admired.
‘And now that you have come, you disappoint us all like this,’ he concluded.
I had neither the patience nor the German to point out the contradiction in his argument.
‘So I can't go out through the garden?’
The man who had originally told me that it was ‘verboten’ and who had stood a little apart while the others talked, now came forward again.
‘The garden is out of bounds from now on,’ he said.
The fact that he was so self-consciously different from the other soldiers annoyed me.
‘Be careful they don't send you to the Eastern Front,’ I said.
It was a favourite prisoners' jeer at the guards, though unfair in view of the relative safety of the prisoners' position.
He spoke a little louder but otherwise kept his temper.
‘The Eastern front?’ he sneered.
‘The war in the East is almost over.
In a few days you will hear that Stalingrad is completely in German hands.’
The others smiled and nodded.
‘That's right,’ they said.
‘Stalingrad will never fail,’ I said.
They all roared with laughter except for the sneering man who suddenly grew fish-coloured and shouted and wagged his finger.
I looked at my watch to maintain a show of dignity and began to move.
‘Stalingrad will never fall,’ I repeated slowly and walked away.
It was an absurd remark.
I could hear them laughing behind me.
The sun had disappeared and it was beginning to rain again.
In a flower bed close to one of the lavatories, people were crouching like  tramps over roughly built brick fire-places, warming a little stew in smoky tins for the evening meal.
Already the flames showed up vividly though there was no other indication of the failing light.
In the blocks, I thought, a sort of interior fog will be creeping out from the corners of the ceilings and under the beds.
A man I knew came out of the block next to mine.
‘Heard the news?’ he asked, worried.
‘No.’
‘It was on the communiqué: the goons have taken another big factory in Stalingrad.’
‘Oh, is that all?’
I had expected to hear that the whole city had fallen.
So many small rivalries existed between different cliques in the camp and so many of them seemed synthetic that it looked sometimes as if antagonism was essential to human beings as a form of self-expression.
There were the people who were in favour of‘baiting the goons’ and those who for various reasons thought this was ‘bad Policy’.
There were those who wanted to escape and thought that everyone else ought to want to, and there were those who didn't want to escape and who didn't want anyone else to want to either.
There were rival theatrical cliques, and rifts and vendettas among the games people over alleged unsporting behaviour.
Some of the great controversies were so trivial that it seemed as if people had positively to search for something to quarrel about.
One of the most farcical rivalries was that which existed for a time between two groups of prisoners who earlier had been in different Oflags.
They behaved towards each other like boys who had been educated at rival private schools.
A new R. A. F. camp, to which I was duly sent, had just been opened and was still partly empty when one day a new batch of prisoners was announced.
Everyone put on their coats and crowded to the gate with that mixture of patronage and curiosity reserved by old prisoners for those who had just been shot down.
But when a crowd of equally hardened bearded old prisoners from another Oflag appeared on the other side of the gate, the inmates of the camp felt rebuffed and even a little concerned.
Of course they welcomed them in and exchanged news and questions.
(‘Good God, I never knew you were down!’—‘Remember old Johnny Johnston?
Well, he's here.’
—‘Any idea what the squadron's doing now?’) but from that moment there was a clear cut division  between the sheep and the goats.
The goats were allotted a whole hut to themselves and the trouble soon started.
‘These sheep are a dead-beat lot.
They've got no spirit.
They ought to stand up to the goons.’
‘These goats are just like a lot of prep.
school kids.
They don't realize that you need to use finesse when dealing with the goons.’
‘Do you realize how many people escaped from our place in six months?’ asked the goats.
‘Twenty-four!’
‘Ah, but the only R.A.F. people to get back to England came from our place,’ said the sheep.
‘Our S.B.O. was much better than this man.’
‘Impossible — Wings Balsdon's got the goons just where he wants them’
‘We could bust this place wide open.’
‘All right then, try.’
So the goats dug tunnels all over the place while the sheep sat apart and disapproved.
And when the Germans bust the tunnels wide open, both parties thought they had justified themselves.
A football match was arranged between the two groups.
Tension ran high and fighting broke out among the spectators as well as among the players.
One day a German officer came in to the camp to supervise work that was being done on some primitive drains by Polish forced labour.
He propped his bicycle against the brick wall of the washroom.
Unfortunately for him the work was being done close to the room where one of the most lively goats lived.
When the German officer began to shout abuse at the Poles, this goat leant out of his window and shouted abuse at the German officer.
The German officer switched his abuse onto the goat and a crowd soon collected.
‘Come on chaps, we'll have some fun here,’ shouted the goat and bounded out of the window.
Some of the German soldiers who were acting as escort for the Poles, began to unsling their rifles apprehensively.
The crowd expanded.
‘Someone go and let the air out of his bicycle tyres while I hold his attention,’ shouted the goat.
The German officer, who thought that this was more abuse, shouted back.
A figure crawled round the back of the crowd towards the bicycle.
‘You lousy rotten Hun,’ shouted the goat, and the crowd cheered or muttered: ‘the bloody fool’, according to their Political line-up.
The Poles in the trench waited and smiled appreciatively.
‘Wenn Sie alle nicht sofort zurücktreten, gebe ich den Schiessbefehl!’
There was a sharp pop as the valves of both tyres were unscrewed simultaneously, a swift rush of air and a dying sigh.
The bicycle subsided wearily into the sand.
The crowd cheered, the chief goat danced for joy and the German officer ran screaming and gesticulating to his bicycle.
As he bent tenderly over it to examine the flattened tyres, a hand stuck a length of rubber piping out of the wash-room window and directed a jet of water down his neck.
At this even the boldest goat fled to the nearest hut for fear of reprisal, and from the cover of the walls watched the frustrated officer screaming at sentries, Poles, hut and bicycle in turn.
Then he took hold of the handle-bars and accepting defeat, pushed his bicycle painstakingly through the sand to the main gate.
Later in the day it was said that the Germans had refused to issue any more food parcels for the rest of the week.
‘There you are, you see,’ said the sheep.
‘Now it'll take all Wings Balsdon's tact to get any parcels issued before next Monday.’
‘It was bloody well worth going hungry for,’ said the goats.
It was about twelve o'clock in the morning.
The great cloud of dust raised inside the block by the morning's sweeping of the floor had not yet settled down again.
But only the occasional shafts of sunlight gave it away as it worked slowly downwards, making the most of its daily exercise.
It was that point in the morning when people usually began to think about the soup and potatoes that were expected shortly, rather than about the books they were reading.
Little groups stood about talking of the war or Brighton or what they were going to cook for supper.
There was the sound of empty bowls being put onto tables to receive the daily ladle-full of soup.
Nothing could have sounded more incongruous than the shot which stopped it all.
‘That was a shot.’
The little groups looked anxiously at one another.
A man ran to the window.
‘Yes, they've shot someone,’ he shouted.
Everyone ran for the door to see what had happened.
In the carefully raked stretch of earth between the warning wire  and the barbed wire itself, a man was sitting in a queer hunched position.
There seemed to be no blood but his legs were strangely wide apart.
His face was like wax and his eyes stared like a doll's.
At the warning wire everyone was talking at once.
‘Quick, get a doctor someone.’
‘What's happened?’
‘Ask the goon if you can get over and help him.’
‘Who is it?’
‘Anyone here speak German?’
‘My God, it's Johnny Soames’
I stared at the sitting figure.
It was a man I knew quite well.
On the other side of the double row of barbed wire a guard was standing still holding his rifle at the ready.
Someone shouted to him asking if they could step over to help.
‘Nein.
Zurück!
Zurück!’
He was a small man and it looked as if his rifle was much too heavy for him as he waved it threateningly at the crowd inside the camp.
There were shouts of anger and he became still more excited.
‘Look out, here comes the doctor.’
The crowd parted and an English doctor stepped over the warning wire and knelt down beside the man.
Everyone stopped talking.
The deliberate action seemed to pacify the German too.
The wounded man spoke suddenly in a quiet normal voice.
‘Give me a cigarette, please, Doc.’
He sat there for a few moments inhaling the smoke.
The doctor was cutting away the top part of his khaki trousers, and spoke to him reassuringly.
A new wave of talking spread through the crowd.
A small party of soldiers with fixed bayonets was marching across the football ground.
‘Everyone back into barrack!
Everyone back into barrack!’
The crowd began to disperse.
As I turned away I saw a small patch of khaki material caught on the very top of the wire.
A Feldwebel passed me with a drawn revolver.
I wanted to express the anger inside me.
‘What a brave sentry — shooting a defenceless man from two yards like that,’ I said.
It was pompous but it satisfied me.
He turned and came after me waving his revolver, but I easily lost him in the crowd.
In the block somebody said that he had seen the whole incident.
‘What happened then?’
‘How could he hope to get away like that?’
‘He didn't.
He waited until the guard was opposite him then he stepped deliberately over the warning rail and climbed slowly up the wire.
The guard shouted to him three times but he took no notice at all.
He shot him when he was right at the top.’
Several people were listening but nobody said anything at first.
Then someone said:
‘He must have gone off his head.’
I remembered how I had walked with him only a few days before.
‘It's difficult sometimes to remember that you've had any other life,’ he had said.
‘Not that this is too bad, of course.’
I thought of the hundreds of others of us who said something like that once or twice a week.
During my first year as a prisoner some of us were moved for a time from Silesia to a camp in the Polish corridor.
I was in the first party to leave and there were about fifty of us altogether.
In fifty different variations of British uniform, with cooking pots, cardboard boxes and bundles of clothing slung about us, we shuffled out of the camp to a railway siding with an escort of thirty-six guards and three dogs.
After we had sat by the track for two hours the train came in.
It was like a toy.
Two old-fashioned third class carriages with close wooden seats were pulled by an engine that puffed bulbs of black smoke.
When the guards had surrounded the train we were allowed to get in.
We sat for an hour wondering if any soup would be issued.
Then an interpreter came into the carriage and said:
‘One moment please, gentlemen.
I have some mail for you and will call out the names.’
So with our legs and bottoms already aching from the lack of space and the hard seats, we read about the party someone had given in Christ Church, or how well so-and-so was doing at the Ministry of Information, or what little Nicolette had said to her grandmother.
After we had read about these things several times over we started wondering again if there would be any soup.
Quite suddenly all the guards jumped in, their tommy-guns banging against the sides of the carriage and their leather harness creaking, and the train chugged off at about fifteen miles an hour towards Bromberg.
We had only about a hundred miles to go but the journey was to take twenty-four hours.
‘Räder müssen rollen für den Sieg,’ screamed the notices in the little Polish stations where we sometimes waited for hours on end.
But for the bony discomfort of the seats and  the pressure of other people's legs it was quite pleasant to take our time.
None of us had been outside the camp for many months and every field seemed infinite and exciting.
It was as if our vision was a piece of elastic which was being stretched for the first time after a long period in a drawer.
When it grew dark the Feldwebel in charge began to get restive about escaping.
‘Take off your boots please, gentlemen — it's healthier to sleep with your boots off.’
There were some protests:
‘Hey, you can't do that, Glemnitz.’
‘How shall we know our own boots again?’
Personally I should have been quite glad to get someone else's boots.
Mine had been letting in sand and water for some time.
‘Another atrocity, gentlemens,’ said the Feldwebel, walking up and down the corridor.
‘Boots off, please.’
He was a good-humoured Feldwebel really, although he had a tendency to panic and a tendency to be self-consciously patriotic.
When the two combined the results were sometimes unpleasant.
When the great pile of boots had been collected at one end of the carriage, he spoke again:
‘Listen, please.
If anyone tries to escape the guards will shoot and they are all very good shots; also I shall take away the trousers of those who have not escaped.’
An ironical cheer went up at this and we settled down for the night.
Before I went to sleep I heard Glemnitz talking quite amiably to someone about rugger:
‘Yes, it's a very good game, but there is no culture in it.’
I awoke in the middle of the night with a pain in the back of my neck and a beating headache.
People were asleep all over the carriage: on the floor, in the narrow luggage racks, in the lavatory.
The windows which had been nailed up as an anti-escape measure were thick with steam, and water was pouring down the panes.
I could still just see where someone had written: ‘DEUTSCHLAND KAPUT’ with his finger, but it had melted and the letters had grown tails like tadpoles.
There was a strong smell of feet and breath.
The guards were yawning and leaning against the wood-work.
Occasionally they gave a perfunctory look up and down the carriage, but they had obviously wilted with the tedium of the journey and the foul air.
Suddenly I noticed that although the prisoner opposite me had  thrown back his head and was snoring loudly, he was not asleep.
He was fumbling with something close to his left side.
There was a sharp click and he remained quite still.
The guards still yawned and leaned.
Snoring louder than ever he fumbled again and I saw him insert a small blade into the side of the carriage.
My first feeling was one of excitement: I was getting all the pleasure of being in a conspiracy without having to take any of the responsibility for it.
Then I thought that if this man succeeded in cutting a hole in the side of the carriage and escaping through it, there would be an obligation on me to go out after him.
And I didn't want to jump out into the fast-moving darkness without any boots and within range of fifty tommy-guns.
Without moving his head from its sleeping position the man opposite said quietly: ‘Snore, please.’
I started a stage snore and I thought that together we must drown any other noise he could make, but when he began to use his saw it seemed to be the only noise in the carriage.
I looked at the nearest guard through half-closed eyes.
His eyes were half-closed too.
Once his head began to fall onto his chest but he jerked it up again.
Once he looked at his watch to see how long it would be before he was relieved.
Once he lifted his cap and scratched the top of his head.
Then he heard the noise.
At first he was like a man who thinks he smells gas or a fire, his body alert and his head held high as he looked quickly round the carriage.
Then with a great shout he began to plunge over bodies and kit-bags down the gangway towards us.
The man opposite me scuffled hopelessly with his tools, but it was much too late.
Shouting and grey in the face the guard took them from him while everybody in the carriage woke up.
‘What the bloody hell?’
‘Shut up.’
‘Good God, don't the goons even stop shouting in their sleep?’
Glemnitz, the Feldwebel, arrived.
‘Oh, Mr. Winser, I'm ashamed of you.’
He took out a pencil and note-book like a policeman at a road accident.
‘I shall have to report this.’
Winser was looking disgusted with himself for being caught.
‘Oh bugger off, Glemnitz’
The Feldwebel's voice rose a key.
‘Now then, Mr. Winser, don't start any of that.’
‘Oh all right, Glemnitz.
I know.
Orders are orders and Krieg ist Krieg and you're only doing your duty.’
‘Exactly, Mr. Winser’
‘Well, now let us all get some sleep’
‘Bad luck, George,’ somebody shouted.
Slowly the fuss subsided.
Glemnitz closed his note-book and left the carriage.
The guards were changed and the prisoners settled back onto the luggage racks or the floor or the upright wooden seats to sleep.
Soon there again seemed no-one awake except Winser and me.
‘Bad luck,’ I said although for my own sake I was glad that he had failed.
‘Oh, that's just what comes of being a prisoner too long: you make a fool of yourself like that.’
He too, closed his eyes.
Beside him in the thin inner wall of the carriage there was a pathetic rectangular hole like the slot of a small letter-box.
The lawn.
This was a patch of sand, stone and grass, about twelve feet by six, outside the window of a room in which I lived.
The grass, grown from seed, just held its own against the weeds.
But the green smell used to be there and it was strong enough to make me think of English summers when I looked at the sky.
I could think that I was at school again, lying in the long grass waiting to bat, or walking over Berkshire downs or along a Devon valley.
If I pressed my eye flat to the ground and looked into the next garden, the big bushes there with thick tall stems and flat leaves seemed part of a mysterious tropical forest.
A thunderstorm.
It came rolling towards us from the west.
Lightning, deep in the clouds, flashed orange over whole quarters of the sky at a time.
Occasionally a thin savage streak of wiry blue hinted at what the storm could really do if it tried.
It moved over to the north before it reached the camp, so that we never heard much of the thunder.
It was as if some giant electrician was just rehearsing effects in the sky.
When we were locked in we played the gramophone.
A Beethoven Sonata and the Pastoral.
We turned out the lights and opened  the shutters and the windows.
The searchlights from the guards' boxes competed feebly with the storm still sizzling blue in the distance.
When someone who was putting on the records said: ‘Fourth movement, called The Storm,’ I wondered how the music would compare with the storm outside.
A few seconds later I was despising myself for having been in any doubt.
The music triumphed completely.
At first I could not understand how Beethoven could triumph over God.
Then I realized that that was not what was happening.
It was just Beethoven's sense of what was going on outside triumphing over our own.
Thoughts on my twenty-fifth birthday, which was to be my last in a prison-camp.
I can remember them clearly because they were so much more optimistic than those I was to have a year later.
‘Almost for the first time since I was a child,’ I thought, ‘I am glad that it is my birthday.
I know now that there is every reason for joy at the thought of the day on which I was given life.
I have learnt that the sun and the stars are eternally good, and that my body leaps in contact with this sparkling world and everything that it contains from the minds of Beethoven and Shakespeare to food and drink and a soft night's sleep.
I see now that a child knows these things intuitively, including those things which are at first beyond its own experience.
So that perhaps all I have done in twenty-five years is to find out something which I have known all the time.
But a man can be content to know nothing more.
And the pain and the misery?
I know that these things too are real, and yet I know that they too have helped me to find beauty.
This is something I cannot understand: the wonder of sadness, the glory of pain.
When I look back over the years I see impatience as the great sin of life.
The thrust and strain which has dominated these twenty-five years now seems quite irrelevant.
But it is the tragedy of life that you cannot help thrusting and straining.
Something inside me which I cannot stop is whirling me faster and faster past beauty into oblivion.
Six of us were sitting at a table.
Closed copies of Hugo's Russian grammar lay in front of us and the lecturer was asking questions.
‘Have you a brother?’
One of us translated it into Russian.
‘Where is the meat and the butter?’
‘Is this gentleman's luggage at the station?’
The double-tiered beds were close round us, making ‘rooms’ in the long brick barrack.
On one of these beds a man lay asleep on his back, his arms by his sides and his feet together, like a lain-out corpse.
From the other rooms came the sounds or hammering, quarrelling and playing bridge.
‘Is there a telephone in this hotel?’
From the door came a familiar cry:
‘Goon approaching!’
There was a change in the rhythm of the hammering and a scuffle in the corridor, but the quarrelling and the bridge went on as before.
People who were doing nothing in particular took up the cry and chanted it down the block, like priests in some strange pagan mass:
‘Goon approaching!’
‘Goon approaching!’
The chant changed:
‘Goon in the block!’
‘Goon in the block!’
Through the gap between two lockers which was the ‘door’, I saw a bored German private wandering dutifully down the corridor.
‘Are there stooges on in this block?’
At first I thought it was just another question for translation.
‘Because if there are it's hopeless: we'll get no peace at all.’
A very tired gramophone in another room started playing a tune called ‘Kalamazoo’.
‘These bloody escaping people make life impossible.
I'm not going on with the lecture if they're going to play their childish little games in here.’
The outburst seemed a little unbalanced but nobody questioned it.
We had all been prisoners long enough to know that you must allow people to be unbalanced if they felt like it.
We began to collect our books from the table.
‘Well, thanks very much.’
‘Thanks.’
‘Thank you.’
‘All clear!’
‘All clear!
All clear!’ sang the priests.
‘There you are again, you see.
It's impossible.
Quite impossible.’
He strode out of the door, the buckles jingling on his highly polished flying boots.
When I got out into the corridor I saw that a piece of wire had been strung between two beams on either side of the block and that a sort of ladder was leaning against it.
At the top of this ladder there was a flat portion parallel to the ground.
At the end of the flat portion there was a gap big enough for a man's body to drop through, and then a single rung like a short parallel bar in a gym.
A queue of about ten people wearing gym shoes was lined up in front of the ladder.
‘All clear, Charles?’ shouted the man at the head of the queue to someone at the door.
All clear!
‘All clear!’
‘O.K. then, chaps.
Let's go.
Have you got the stop watch, Pakenham?
Right then.
Lights fused: go.’
He dashed up the ladder, clambered along the horizontal part, dropped through the gap and swung himself clear from the final rung onto the ground.
The rest of the queue followed close behind him so that there were at least six people on the ladder at the same time.
‘Bloody good show, chaps,’ he said when they were all over.
‘How long did that take, Pakenham?’
‘I'm afraid something seems to have gone wrong with the watch’
‘Perhaps I just pushed the wrong knob.’
‘Oh Christ.
Somebody else take it.
Tommy, you do it.
Come on now, chaps, once again, and let's see if we can't break thirty seconds.’
‘Goon approaching!’
The people in gym shoes dispersed quickly into different rooms while special dismantling personnel leapt out from behind lockers and took charge of the ladder.
On my way out of the block, I passed a Feldwebel.
When I got back to my room I waited for my friend Malleson.
I had noticed him near the end of the queue as it swarmed over the ladder.
‘When's it coming off?’
‘Too bloody soon.’
‘Why, aren't you ready yet?
You all seemed to be going over pretty smoothly.’
‘Look here: that was in broad daylight over a single strand of wire, not under fire from any machine guns, and with no patrolling goon with a gun to meet us on the other side.
Quite apart from that, and even if the lights are fused properly, it will take double the time on the night itself.
In the block we start running from just in front of the ladder, but on the night we've first of all got to run from the block to the wire, which is twenty yards away in the nearest place and then put the ladder up.
Even the dimmest goon is going to realize there's something queer going on in all that time.
It's murder.’
I saw his point.
Still, I envied him.
I had already been a prisoner nearly a year and had not yet escaped.
It was like being an undergraduate a year without having been drunk.
It was not so much the escape itself that mattered but being able to say you had done it.
‘It's all right for old Ryan,’ Malleson went on.
‘Bags of chaps will get over, chaps.’
Well, maybe the first four or five will, and he's the first of the five.
But after that the goon with the machine guns is going to get the range.
No sir, I'm getting out of it’
That afternoon I walked round the circuit alone and thought about it.
After all it would have a great element of surprise in its favour and although there might be some shooting it was doubtful if the Germans would know what they were shooting at, especially if good diversions were laid on.
The same scheme had been tried at another camp with four ladders.
Thirty-two men had got over and the only people hurt had been two patrolling guards hit by stray bullets.
At tea I made one of the mistakes of my life.
‘Any chance of getting in at the end of that scheme?’
I asked Malleson.
He stopped thinking about the amount of jam he was taking and leant back in his chair.
‘You're not considering…’
‘Yes.’
‘You must be mad.’
He took some jam.
‘I'm sorry,’ he said.
‘You may be right, and you may get away with it.
But I'm just not going to take the risk.’
‘I think you're very sensible if you feel like that about it.
But what are my chances of getting onto it?’
‘Fairly good, I should say.
There's a waiting list of three after the first ten and I don't see why you shouldn't persuade Ryan to let you be No. 4 on that.
That'll make you No. 14 on the whole thing.
Of course people are talking pretty big at the moment but half of them  are as ready to drop as I am.’
After tea I went out and saw Ryan.
He had been playing football and lines of dust and sweat were pouring down his strained red face.
‘Sure,’ he said, in answer to my question, ‘and if one or two of the chaps drop out, you'll have your chance.
Good man.’
I went away wondering if I was being a fool.
Still, there was no getting out of it now.
I was only on the waiting list anyway and it wasn't very likely that four people would drop out.
But my uneasiness increased throughout the evening, and the words repeated themselves in my head:
‘There's no getting out of it now.’
By the next morning I was feeling definitely unhappy.
Malleson had said that half the people were as ready to drop out as he was and he had already dropped out.
I tried to forget about it and to go about my routine day as usual.
After appel I collected some books from my locker — my locker was in a comer and there was always a pile of block rubbish in front of it so that it was a business to open and shut the door — and went out towards the library.
A British orderly and a Polish civilian were pumping filth from one of the lavatories into a long cylindrical cart.
The pump leaked and a jet of yellow liquid Splashed onto the path with every stroke.
I waited behind the cart for them to stop and let me pass.
As I waited, Ryan came out of a near-by block and called to me:
‘Can I have a word with you, old boy?’
We went out onto the circuit.
‘Look, it so happens that a number of people have dropped out of the scheme for one reason or another, and there's now a place for you at the end of the team.
Now, I feel I ought to warn you: you won't have quite such a good chance at the end as you would have at the front.’
He paused.
Perhaps I was expected to say something.
I made a non-committal cluck at the back of my throat, but it came out higher than I had intended.
‘Not that I think there's any danger of anyone getting hurt,’ he added.
‘Absolutely none at all.’
He looked firmly ahead.
I got the impression that he had had to use this look rather a lot lately.
‘Still, it's up to you’
Now, I thought, now.
Now's your chance to get out of this.
He's  made it perfectly easy for you, and nobody will think any the worse of you for getting out.
Now.
‘I'll risk it,’ I said, with an unnatural smile.
Oh God.
An alarm bell was ringing in my stomach.
Ryan stopped and clapped me on the shoulder.
‘Bloody good show, old boy.
It probably won't be long now.
We're going to make use of this moonless period, but we'll try and give you a practice run over the ladder before the big night.
Get all your gear ready.
See you later.’
‘Yes,’ I began, ‘I should just like a practice…’
But he had left me and broken into a trot towards his block.
A little unsteadily I wandered away to the library, but I found it difficult to concentrate on the uses of the Russian Imperfective.
It was the day of parcel issues and as lunch time approached I tried to forget the future in the pleasure of the present.
There was always something extra for lunch on ‘parcel’ day.
When I got back to the block there it was sitting on the table beside the empty bowls waiting for soup: an extra biscuit each, spread with liver paste, and half a quarter pound slab of chocolate.
‘Oh, goody goody,’ said Malleson coming into the room at the same time.
‘This is the life: stuff, stuff, stuff away all bloody day.’
He looked happier than I had seen him for weeks and there was colour in his cheeks.
After I had eaten my biscuit I climbed up onto my bunk with the chocolate and took off my boots.
‘For Christ's sake be more careful when you're climbing up,’ said the man who slept underneath me.
‘I'm always finding mud from your boots on my pillow.’
‘I've got to climb up somehow.’
‘Yes, but not that how.’
‘Sorry.’
I reached for The Mayor of Casterbridge which I knew was somewhere in the bed.
I was determined to let nothing, not even my pride, interfere with the little pleasure I had left.
I put a piece of chocolate into my mouth and opened my book…
‘Could I have a word with you, old man?’
It was Ryan.
‘Of course.’
I untied my boots which were laced together round one of the bed-posts, put them on and jumped down.
‘And mind those bloody boots when you get up again,’ said the man who had complained before.
He was lying down now and his face shone palely out of the gloom of the lower bunk like that of some animal in its hole.
‘Oh, shut up,’ I said.
Outside, Ryan said:
‘Do you mind if we do a circuit?’
‘Not at all.’
‘Rather an unfortunate thing has happened, I'm afraid.
The goons have discovered part of an old dismantled ladder which we'd used for earlier trials and we think it may put them onto something.’
My heart leapt like a lift for joy.
Visions of an endless life of eating chocolate and reading Hardy rose before me.
I would even take care not to wipe my boots on Roper's pillow.
‘Of course we're going through with it,’ said Ryan.
‘It'll just mean speeding things up a little.’
‘I see’
‘The net result for you, I'm afraid, is that you won't be able to get any practice on the ladder.
You see, we've decided to go tomorrow night and we daren't risk another trial before then.
There'll be no moon, and if this wind holds it should help us a lot.
Also, the goons will hardly have had time to make anything out of those bits of wood by then.
Now, do you think you can be ready?’
‘I should think so.’
Ready?
‘I can let you have a copy of the local map and some civilian buttons to sew onto your great-coat.
Everything else you'll have to fix up for yourself.
You must have your face covered up in some way on the night: I suggest a balaclava worn back to front, with eye-holes cut in it.
There'll be a meeting for last minute instructions some time tomorrow afternoon.
O. K.?’
‘O. K’’ I said feebly.
He went into his block.
These practical details solidified my fears.
I knew that I should not be able to forget them again until the business had been resolved one way or the other.
I continued to walk round the camp.
I thought, I must get as much walking practice as possible between now and tomorrow night.
By tea-time I felt that I conformed more to the recognized pattern of an escaper.
But, back in my room, all sorts of hopeless thoughts again attacked me.
I began to feel sentimental about the familiar squalor.
I should be quite content, I thought, to live here for ever, smelling the cooking and the lavatory and the dust, looking forward to my two slices of bread at lunch or tea and my Red Cross stew at supper, thinking about all the books I am going to read and how nice it is going to be when I can speak German and Russian fluently; I only want to be allowed to live, and enjoy the sun when it shines, and wait for it when it goes behind a cloud.
‘I hear you're going tomorrow,’ said Malleson.
‘Let me know if there's anything I can do to help.’
It was like one of the sentences that used to come in letters from home: ‘Do let me know if there's anything I can do.’
‘Thanks very much,’ I said.
‘There are one or two things.’
Jefferson overheard.
‘You leaving us?’ he said chirpily.
‘Good show.’
He was an Australian and it sounded nasty the way he said it.
Everyone at the table turned towards me.
‘Well, well’
‘You kept that pretty quiet.’
‘Marge, please.’
Roper said: ‘Good luck, old boy,’ and I was surprised to see that he meant it.
Still, it would mean a clean pillow for him.
The only person who really said anything helpful was Jack Nopps.
‘Sheer bloody suicide,’ he said slowly in his deep thick Cockney.
I felt that he and I had something in common.
After we had been locked in I spent the evening making preparations with Malleson's help: sewing on buttons, dubbining my boots, making a pillow case into a rucksack and staring at a map with unreal names on it like Danzig and Berlin.
One of Jack's ‘tame’ Germans came round about nine o'clock to exchange wireless parts for his weekly ration of Red Cross coffee.
He had a nice face and I had got used to him.
I should miss him too.
I woke very early the next morning.
The peace of the barrack block was startling.
I had never been awake in it as early as that before.
One or two people at the other end were snoring and once someone quite close to me shouted in his sleep:
‘Oh, for Christ's sake, stop bitching!’
But on the whole the bundles of blanket and piled clothing in the beds did not seem alive at all and I might have been alone in the  block.
It was like finding oneself alone at Piccadilly Circus.
It was too cold to push my face far out of my sleeping bag but I could see the yellow damp stain, like a map, on the wall opposite, and the little nest of cobwebs in a comer of the ceiling.
I wondered if I should ever see them again.
I lay there for a long time unhappy and hardly noticing the daily noises of the block assembling round me.
At least, I thought, by this time tomorrow it will be all over.
I was surprised at the deterioration in my nerves since my flying days.
Perhaps this was what those few loud-mouthed rabbit-eyed creatures who dropped their bombs at the first flak and then came back and talked about the target area had felt like.
I had never been able to understand them then, but I sympathized with them now.
I would have given anything to be able to get out of this.
In the end I was nearly late for appel.
‘Come along, hurry up there.’
The Wing Commander was lucky.
He had an outlet for his temper at the beginning of a new day.
Still, I thought as I waited in thick over-coated ranks for the Germans to come and count us, it'll all be over by this time tomorrow.
Tomorrow.
Tomorrow.
Actually the day Passed more quickly than I had expected.
There was still a good deal to be done: studying the local map, persuading a naval man to lend me his dark blue trousers, and buying a filthy cap for a hundred cigarettes from a Pole working in the washroom.
But there was a flat period just after lunch when there seemed nothing to do but wait for the special meeting at half past three.
I walked round the camp for what I thought was half an hour, imagining myself hiding in woods, boarding goods trains, stealing food, doing anything except clamber over the wire.
Then I discovered that it was still only ten to two.
I decided to go back to the block and rest for a little.
But as I was going into it the sun came out, challenging the smell from the night lavatory.
I decided to fetch a book and read out of doors in my overcoat.
Surely I could forget my surroundings for an hour and a half.
After the meeting there would be so much to do that the time would Pass quickly.
I looked through the books in my locker: Tristram Shandy, P. G. Wodehouse, Marcus Aurelius, John Stuart Mill and the Spanish grammar.
The grammar turned the whole of my stomach over like a huge unwieldy omelette.
I had borrowed it about a week before.
Spanish was to have been my next language: my winter's task.
For some reason I had put off starting on it and had even begun to convince myself that it would be better to leave it until next winter.
Now I felt that I wanted nothing else in the world but to be allowed to read this dismal grammar all winter.
I took it down from the shelf in my locker and went out of doors.
Close to the block there was a steep bank looking onto the football ground.
Most of the grass had already been worn away by cheering trampling spectators but it was still pleasant to sit there when it caught the sun.
I opened my grammar.
I would begin Spanish now just to reassure myself that I expected a future in which I could pick up past threads.
‘It is suggested that this grammar should provide the basis for a year's study of Spanish.
If all the lessons are worked through conscientiously and results compared with a key…’
A year.
It sounded so comfortable and reassuring, like the drone of a distant mowing machine through the class-room window at school.
A year.
But tomorrow?
I read on quickly.
‘The basic principles of the Spanish language…’
A game of football had started below and the familiar quarrels of sportsmen were already floating up to me.
‘Look here, are we playing an off-side rule or not?’
‘Oh, stop bitching: of course we are.’
‘Who's refereeing this game anyway?’
‘That's just what I'd like to know.’
‘Oh shut up and get on with the game.’
Somehow the afternoon arrived at half past three.
I made my way round the football pitch towards the library.
There was a queue outside the parcel store and people were coming out with newly opened clothing parcels in their arms.
Those still in the queue peered inquisitively at the contents jumbled loosely together in brown paper wrapping.
‘The bloody goons confiscated my sponge-bag.’
‘Good parcel, Prince?’
‘Excellent: nine and a half pounds of chocolate and a pair of socks.’
A man with a pencil and a list saw me and shouted:
‘Clothing parcel for you.
Collect it after tea.’
‘Thanks,’ I said..
I thought of the little touches of home there would be inside it: the hand-knitted pullover, the familiar English toothpaste, and the razor  blades fastened together with elastic bands.
I walked into the library.
A man was standing in the shadow behind the front door.
‘You for the meeting?’ he asked.
‘Yes.’
‘It's in the back room.
Tell them it s all clear again, will you?’?
The library consisted of two rooms, but the only entry to the inner room was through the outer.
The outer room was already full of readers but people were being turned out of the inner room to make way for the meeting.
They were streaming through the connecting door, muttering discontentedly and clutching their books and papers as they looked hopelessly around for somewhere to sit.
There was a great noise of shuffling boots and dropped books, and the readers already established in the outer room looked up and clicked disapproval with their tongues.
A man leaning against the wall with a copy of The Golden Bough in his hand, screwed up his eyebrows in disgust.
‘These bloody escapers,’ he said loudly.
I pushed past him into the inner room.
The door was shut.
The sudden contrast was magical.
The room was quiet with tension.
Ryan stood on the little platform by the blackboard, cleaning the board with a rag.
Some chairs had been arranged on the platform and two senior officers were sitting there with bland smiles like judges at a beauty competition.
I sat down at the end of one of the tables and looked around me.
There seemed to be a lot of faces I had not noticed in the original team.
We all looked anxiously towards the platform.
When Ryan turned round, I said:
‘The man downstairs says it's all clear again now’
‘Good show, old man.
Well, in that case, sir,’ he turned to the most senior of the senior officers, ‘I think we might as well start.’
The most senior officer nodded profoundly.
Ryan began to explain exactly how the scheme was to work, drawing little diagrams with chalk on the blackboard.
‘All members of the team are to be down in the lower block, with their kit, half an hour before lock-up…
Zero hour will be half past nine.
At that time the first five of the ladder party must be standing ready by the window with the ladder.
The rest of the team will be assembled in their right order in the block corridor.
They will be ready to follow the ladder party as soon as they see its last man go  through the window.
The actual signal for the ladder party to open the window and go will of course be when all the lights in the camp go out.
The signal for the lights to be fused will be given by Wing Commander Sawyer here.’
He pointed to someone sitting in the front row.
‘The Wing Commander won't do that of course until we're all ready inside the block.
When we're ready, that is at zero hour, he will climb out of the night lavatory window and first make sure that the immediate area round the block is clear of goons.
He will then watch the patrolling goon on the wire.
When this goon is at the point of his beat furthest away from our stretch of wire, the Wing Commander will give the signal to Clinker here —’ a dark beetle-like man stood up for a moment and sat down again, ‘— who will fuse the entire lighting system of the camp including the searchlights.’
The beetle-like man nodded quietly.
One of the senior officers looked up and said to Ryan:
‘Oh, it will be including the searchlights?’
‘Yes, it will be including the searchlights.’
‘That was something I was going to raise: whether the fusing of the lights would include the searchlights or not.’
‘Yes, it most certainly will.’
The senior officer nodded.
‘Good,’ he said, ‘sound.’
There was a pause while Ryan tried to remember where he had got to.
In the silence the beetle-like man spoke very slowly and clearly:
‘There wouldn't have been much point in fusing only half the lighting system, would there?’
He said it straight at the senior officer, who looked for a moment as if someone had cracked a whip in his face.
Then Ryan, who had not noticed the embarrassment, went on with his explanation.
He described how the ladder was to be set up against the wire, how people were to clamber over and how they were to swing themselves clear through the gap at the end.
‘…
And personally I'm absolutely confident —’ he repeated the word —‘confident, that the whole show will be a hundred per cent.
success.’
The senior officers both nodded emphatically.
I tried to absorb some of Ryan's confidence.
After all, he ought to know.
He had done this sort of thing before.
He had planned the whole scheme and ought to have a better idea than me of what was  going to happen.
Yet I found my own conviction that the attempt would result in my death steadfast and stubborn.
‘And now I'll hand you over to Vincent, who will brief you from the Intelligence angle.
He is very unselfishly standing down from this scheme although the Group Captain did offer him a place on it in recognition of his services to the committee.
But as I say, he unselfishly insisted that he should not be given a place on any scheme in which he hadn't taken a personal part.
However, he has a lot of valuable information about the surrounding countryside, and the frontier crossings which I will ask him to give to us now.’
Vincent stood up at the back of the room and walked modestly along the wall to the platform.
He was a man twenty years older than most of us who, though he held a junior rank and had no real ties with the service, had obtained considerable influence with the senior officers in the camp.
He was well-read and clever, and he made it easy for stupid men to respect his intellect if he thought they could be of use to him.
No-one knew much about his past.
He had been at Cambridge just after the last war, had fought with the International Brigade in Spain and had joined the R.A.F. as an air-gunner in 194O.
He had a lean, controlled face and spoke with confidence.
‘All the available data goes to show that you will find the local Polish population friendly,’ he began.
The Polish population?
How had he managed to get us as far as that?
In contrast with my wishful thinking of the day before, I now found it impossible to visualize anything after the moment when the lights would go out and the window of the block would be thrown open.
Ryan's last words had been disturbing.
If Vincent had rejected a place on the scheme, then it was certain that he thought it would fail.
I remembered how once, when a tunnel had been successfully completed contrary to expectation, he had jockeyed himself into a position on the team which finally escaped although he had never done any of the work.
‘Or, of course, if you don't like the idea of crossing the Swiss frontier, you could always try something quite different, such as making your way down to Yugoslavia and joining Mihailovitch…’
He might have been planning a Cooks' Tour.
The senior officer nodded approvingly.
By the time the meeting was over I was in such a state of  excitement and fright that I forgot all about the clothing parcel I was supposed to collect.
No-one said much to me at tea, although I caught them looking at me sometimes as they sipped at their mugs.
Jack Nopps tried to be kind.
‘Thought about your plans for when you get outside at all?’ he asked casually.
‘Yes,’ I lied.
‘Where are you going?’
‘Danzig.’
It was a safe answer.
He looked out of the window.
‘Well,’ he said.
‘You never know.’
‘Rather him than me all the same,’ said Jefferson, the Australian.
Afterwards Malleson helped me to get my things together.
We cut a mask for my face out of a balaclava and made it black with boot polish.
I looked at myself in the mirror.
The mask made me look terrifying and rather professional, like a commando.
I felt better.
Malleson carried my things down to the other block under his greatcoat and I followed him down the path about twenty yards behind.
Inside the block I said good-bye to him.
‘But there's another hour before we're locked in.’
‘I know, but I'd rather be left alone down here.
I want to calm down a bit.’
‘O.K. Well, all the very best.’
‘Thanks.’
He put his hand into his pocket.
‘Here,’ he said, ‘take this.
You've got more use for it than I have.’
It was a half-pound slab of chocolate.
He hadn't had a clothing parcel for a long time.
He must have been saving it for months.
‘No,’ I stammered, ‘I can't possibly…’
But he had pushed it into my hand and walked abruptly out of the door.
I looked through the gap between two lockers into the first ‘room’ in the block.
A man was preparing something for supper at a table.
Someone lying in the gloom of a lower bunk was reading a book.
Otherwise the room was empty.
‘May I come in here: I'm on this scheme for tonight.’
The man at the table straightened up and looked at me.
He held a  newly-made fish cake in his two hands like a cricket ball he had just caught.
‘Can't say, I'm sure, old boy.
You'd better wait until the others come back, and ask them.’
‘But I understood that it had been arranged that one of us was to go into each room.’
‘I dare say it has, old man, but you can't do that sort of thing without asking the others, can you?’
He leant over the table and started to make another fish cake.
‘Well, can I stay in here until the others come back?’
He didn't answer at first.
I was beginning to think he hadn't heard when he said:
‘There's not really much room in here, you know.
Why don't you try one of the rooms further down?’
The man on the lower bunk put down his book.
‘Oh for Christ's sake, Birkett,’ he said ‘don't be so bloody uncivilized.’
He dropped one leg from his bed onto the floor and turned to me.
‘Sure, come in.
You'll find an empty bed over there which belongs to a chap in sick quarters.
You can use that.’
‘Thanks very much.’
I put my things on the straw mattress.
‘How about food?
Would you like to have supper with us?’
I saw Birkett straighten up sharply.
‘No thanks very much,’ I said, ‘I've brought all my own food.’
‘Oh, O. K.’ He lifted his leg off the floor with one hand and put it back on the bed.
‘Well, if there's anything you want just let us know.’
Birkett shrugged his shoulders and went on with the fish cakes.
I lay back on the empty bed and looked at my watch.
There was another three and a half hours to go.
At first it was pleasant to lie back on the straw mattress and relax.
Most of the inhabitants of the block were walking their last circuits before being locked in, and there was an absence of noise which merged with the deepening gloom.
It seemed that it must take a long time for such peace to be broken.
Wrapped in it like a butterfly in its cocoon, I felt secure.
The lights were switched on and the harsh familiar outlines of beds, stools and tables forced me back into reality.
The little pin of anxiety in my stomach began to dance.
People began to come back into the block.
The noise swelled until it had the jarring monotony of  traffic.
The shutters were banged shut.
The outside door was locked.
People began to wonder how they were going to get through the evening.
‘This chap's on the show tonight.
He's spending the evening with us.
Two of them looked down at me.
‘Oh, really.
Hallo, old boy.’
‘Hallo.’
I didn't feel like conversation.
One of them turned away.
‘Poor sod,’ I heard him mutter.
‘The moment those lights go out,’ said Birkett, ‘I'm getting behind that stove and I'm staying there until the whole shooting match is over’
I pulled a paper-covered Anthology of verse out of my pocket.
There was an advertisement for tooth-paste on one of the back pages and I thought at once of the clothing parcel I had not collected.
I turned to the front of the book.
‘Fear no more the heat of the sun,
Nor the furious winter's rages;
Thou thy worldly task hast done,
Home art gone and ta'en thy wages…’
‘Good show, old boy.’
It was Ryan.
‘Everything on the top line?’
‘Yes thanks, sir.’
It made me feel better to call him sir.
It helped me in my desperate attempt to respect his judgement.
‘Good man.’
He paused.
‘I think we've a very good sporting chance,’ he added confidentially.
‘…
Golden lads and girls all must
As chimney-sweepers come to dust.'
After about an hour Birkett began to be very busy about the room collecting a saucepan and a baking dish made of hammered-out tins and chipping little bits of wood for a fire.
Four people were playing bridge on a blanket spread over one end of the table.
Over the other end a man was reading the Völkischer Beobachter with the aid of a dictionary.
‘Three spades.’
‘I'll be wanting to lay the table in a minute.’
‘No bid.’
‘Four spades.’
‘Did you hear that everyone?
I'll be wanting to lay the table for
‘Double four spades.’
‘Anything in the paper today, Larry?’
‘A lot of bull about some wonderful new weapon they'll be using
‘All right, if you don't want the table laid, don't move.
I don't care a damn.’
‘Oh, yes you do.
It's about the only thing you do care about.
You've got the soul of a housemaid.
Now shut up and let them get on with their game.’
It was the man who had been lying on his bed when I arrived.
‘There's no need to be impertinent, Trench.’
Birkett flounced out of the room with his tins and his little pieces of wood.
It was interesting to watch the life of my own room being reproduced in such detail.
It was like recognizing the germs of some disease under a microscope.
By the time Birkett came back with his hot fish cakes and his prunes, the bridge players and the man reading the newspaper had moved.
‘Here you are, chaps.
Come and get it.’
‘Jolly good show.’
‘What, prunes as well?’
‘Goody, goody.’
‘Well done, Birkett.’
They rushed at the table from all sides, scrambling over stools, jumping down from top bunks like pigeons clattering down for crumbs.
They ate quickly and in silence.
I took out some of the bread and cold meat roll I had brought as my supper.
It was just after eight o'clock.
‘You all right there?’ said someone from the table to me.
They all turned, still eating, and looked at me.
‘Yes, thanks.’
‘When does it start?’ one asked another.
‘Half past nine, I think.’
‘Yes,’ I said, ‘half past nine.’
I was glad to be able to say something.
They all turned and looked at me again.
After supper I walked up and down in the corridor for a bit.
Although there was now little more than an hour to go, the actual moment when the lights would go out remained stubbornly remote.
I imagined the whole business of running to the wire, and setting up the ladder a thousand times, but I could never get beyond the point when I set my foot on the bottom rung.
Trench came up to me as I turned to walk down the corridor again.
‘Come and have some coffee with us,’ he said, ‘it's just ready.’
I made a show of looking at my watch.
‘Yes, I think I've just got time.’
But it must have been clear to him that I was not a professional escaper.
The bridge four had started again.
Birkett was pouring the coffee out into mugs.
‘Sugar?’ he asked, offering me a mug.
‘Oh no, really, thanks.’
‘Come on.
Of course you want some.’
He poured in a large teaspoonful of sugar.
I was astonished.
‘Thanks very much.’
He grinned and handed round the rest of the mugs.
I took my coffee and followed Trench over to his bed.
‘How are you feeling about all this?’ he asked.
It was suddenly a great relief to be able to speak the truth.
‘I don't like it much,’ I said, ‘but I think there's a chance.’
‘Yes, I think there's a chance, too.
Of course, I must be honest: I think some people will probably get hurt, but I suppose that's a risk which everyone's got to take in war.’
‘Yes.’
‘The only question is: are we still in a war, or not?’
He sucked slowly at his pipe and blew out a cloud of smoke which disappeared into the haze all around us.
‘I can't say I feel much as if I am,’ he added.
‘I don't either.’
He looked at me and then sucked at his pipe again and shrugged his shoulders.
‘Still, I suppose you know what you're doing.’
Ryan came into the room.
‘Ah, there you are.
All set?
I think I should begin to get changed now if I were you.
We want everybody to be ready to fall into their places five minutes before zero hour.’
I went over to my clothes on the empty bed.
It was going to happen.
There was no way out.
However much I might take refuge in the present in which it had not yet happened, there would be a moment when the present was the present in which it was happening.
The darkness.
The sudden cold night air.
Running across the open flower beds to the warning wire.
Over the warning wire.
Shouts from the guards in the boxes.
Across the raked earth to the ladder.
The sound of a machine-gun.
The scramble round the ladder.
And then?
The picture in my imagination dissolved.
However often I lived through the moment, and I had just lived through it so vividly that the palms of my hands were sweating and my heart thumping, I could not make it last beyond that point.
I put on a clean pair of socks.
Then the airman's tunic with the civilian buttons.
Collar and tie.
Trench had settled down to his book again.
One of the bridge players saw me dressing and said:
‘My God, is it starting now?’
‘About another twenty minutes, I think.’
‘Christ, let's pack up chaps.’
‘Time for one more game.’
‘All right.
Whose deal?’
He turned to me again.
‘But you'll let us know when it's about to start, won't you?’
‘Yes.’
I was ready now.
I tried to sit down on the bed and wait.
I looked through the contents of my pack again.
Yes, it was all there: bread, biscuits, local map, cheese, plaster for the feet, a spare pair of socks, chocolate.
I fingered the mask I had made.
The boot blacking came off on my hands and I wiped it off on the side of the bed.
I stood up and went out into the corridor.
It was full of people strangely dressed in plus fours and navy blue suits, with packs strapped to their backs.
They were bustling anxiously from room to room, forgetting things, making last minute plans, asking each other how they looked.
I had a moment of panic.
Everybody seemed ready except me.
I ran back to my room and collected my pack and my mask.
I could  not speak to anyone, but when the bridge players saw me they threw down their cards and jumped up from the table.
I ran out into the corridor.
I saw the Wing Commander who was to do the reconnoitre and give the signal for the fusing of the lights talking anxiously to Ryan.
Ryan had his mask on, only pushed up above his eyes like flying goggles before take-off.
Ryan and the Wing Commander separated.
‘Come on now,’ said Ryan to those of us huddled together in the corridor, ‘sort yourselves out into the proper order.’
We pushed each other around for a few minutes.
I found that so many new people had come into the scheme at the last moment that I was now four from the end.
‘Come on, you're in front of me’
‘Who comes after Gus?’
‘Come on, hurry up for Christ's sake.’
Now that so much was happening I felt better.
Perhaps it really would work after all.
Anyway, we should know soon enough.
From my place in the queue I watched through a chink between two lockers the ladder party assembling by the window.
‘Everyone in their right places now?’
Ryan was jumping to and fro between the room from which the ladder was to be launched and the corridor.
‘O.K’ Wing Commander!’he yelled up the passage.
I watched Sawyer disappear into the night lavatory.
The rest of the barrack was absolutely quiet, waiting to see what would happen.
Ryan had just said: ‘O.K’ you can bring the ladder out now,’when all the lights went out.
‘What the bloody hell?’
‘Quick, out with that ladder,’ said Ryan, ‘there must have been a balls-up.’
In the sudden darkness it was impossible to see anything.
There was a clatter as the ladder was dragged across the floor.
Everyone was talking at once.
‘For Christ's sake, hurry up.’
‘What the hell's happening?’
The man behind me kept pulling at my coat.
‘Stop pulling, damn you.’
‘Get the window open.’
‘What the hell are they waiting for?’
‘I'll say there's been a balls-up.’
With a loud report the shutters of the launching window were thrown open.
The boundary lights were out.
There was no moon and a high wind.
The night was a sea of darkness and the unknown.
The wind carried the shouts of the guards away from us so that they sounded like the shouts of men drowning.
‘Go on, for Christ's sake; what are we waiting for?’
I could hear them fumbling with the ladder at the window.
Like a jet of blue fire one of the searchlights from the boxes played straight up into the sky.
Then it splashed furiously into the camp.
Everyone threw themselves onto the floor.
There was a pop as if someone had exploded a huge paper bag, a disappearing electric sizzle, and the searchlight went out.
‘Good old Clinker.’
‘Get that window shut.’
‘No, now's our chance.’
‘Come on, chaps, every man for himself.’
It was Ryan's voice.
But something had gone wrong with Clinker's fusing.
A great blue flash lit the darkness.
It was followed by flash after flash, sheets or blue light which stabbed flat at the camp.
With each sound went the silky sound of electricity.
It was like being at the source of the lightning.
We lay on our stomachs watching each other.
Every rime the blue light filled the block we saw ourselves silhouetted against the floor.
Nobody knew what to do.
There was another loud report as someone slammed the shutters closed again.
‘O.K’ chaps,’—.
it was Ryan's voice —‘pack it up.
We'll abandon.’
When the lights went on five minutes later, we were still all lying on the floor.
The exact cause of the fiasco was the main topic of argument for weeks.
Some said that Ryan had made a mistake in failing to get everything ready in the block before he sent Sawyer off.
Others said that Sawyer had panicked and gone straight out and given the signal without first doing the reconnoitring for which Ryan had allowed time.
Others said that Clinker had gone mad at the fusing point and couldn't restrain himself.
I don't know why the people who argued  so much about it didn't go and ask these three what had happened.
Between them they could probably have established the reason for the failure quite easily.
Personally I had nothing but an overwhelming feeling of gratitude for whoever had made the attempt impossible.
I went about the camp like a man reprieved while on his way to the chaplain and the hangman.
I collected my clothing parcel the next morning and there were the razor blades and the tooth paste just as I had expected.
I took my friendly Spanish grammar to the library every day and tried to be polite to Jefferson when he maddened me at meals.
For a week or so I was even careful not to wipe my boots on Roper's pillow.
As clearly as any incident of those years I remember the books which I read.
We could not have lived without books.
They were the only sure support, the one true comfort.
When food was short, clothing scarce, blocks overcrowded and underheated, and war news bad, there were always books.
In reading one had a pleasure of which, like sleep, one could never be deprived.
I remember the books which I read in that time with a great love.
I think chiefly of novels: all Hardy, Adam Bede, Tristram Shandy, The Newcomes, Henry Esmond, The Old Wives' Tale, Sentimental Education and many others, but every sort of reading was happiness.
As supply was limited, and controlled by censorship, reading was conventional, but one soon discovered that it would be possible to spend a life-time reading books which were not obscure and still not exhaust everything that was worthwhile.
I even remember books I disliked with affection.
During the worst period for external conditions of the whole three years the only book I could get hold of (and then only after putting my name down on a waiting list) was Somerset Maugham's enormous Of Human Bondage .
I read it, literally hungrily, for four days, stopping only for the daily half pint of soup and four slices of bread, and sleep.
I did not think it a good book, but I shall always be grateful to it.
Now I can only remember one thing about it: a passage which refers to the death by starvation of a girl in Paris because she only had a pint of milk and a loaf of bread a day.
At that time I should have considered a pint of milk and a loaf of bread a day paradise.
From a book,The Modern Short Story , by H. E. Bates, I remember a criticism of Hardy which made the blood rush to my head with anger:
‘…
So what one remembers out of Hardy is not the philosophic vapourings or the spiritual anguish, all impossibly unreal today…’
Silly literary prig, I thought, and how typical of a man who thinks that good writing can only be learnt from good reading to find spiritual anguish unreal.
But I was grateful even to Mr. Bates for giving me something to read.
There were many copies of plays in the camps.
Among those which gave me the greatest pleasure I remember the whole of Shakespeare, Shaw's Androcles and the Lion , and Thornton Wilder's Our Town .
For the first time in my life I found the real Shakespeare.
At last I understood the fanaticism which during my schooldays had always struck me as so forced.
The stuff of the plays (Jaques on life, Falstaff on honour, Claudio on death, Hamlet on everything, and so on) became essential to me.
I used to go to his characters for help as a Catholic might go to a priest or a sick man to his doctor.
How ridiculous to think that these plays had been thrust at me when I was ten!
As this was long before I had any real experience of life myself it was hardly surprising that Shakespeare's comments should not have meant much to me then.
What can As You Like It possibly mean to someone who had never been in love, or Hamlet to someone who has never felt ‘how weary, stale, flat and unprofitable seem to me all the uses of this world’.
I made a vow that I should not allow my children to look at Shakespeare until adolescence.
For myself I knew that I should go on finding greater and greater depths in Shakespeare as I grew older, and that I should die and still not have found the bottom.
This personal quality of books was their greatest worth.
Every prisoner suffered from cycles of depression, more frequent but almost as regular as the changing seasons.
With some people the effect was just numbing: the man would lie on his bed all day like a piece of dead wood.
With others it brought a violent distress of spirit often visible on faces for days on end.
In one such mood I turned for the first time to Marcus Aurelius.
The strong simplicity of his ideas about life and the universe made it easy to link him with other men of understanding, so that for me the book seemed to be ringing with echoes of Hamlet and Richard Jefferies and the New Testament.
‘Of course, it is not important philosophy,’ all the commentators were careful to point out.
To me in that mood it seemed more important than philosophy, like the poetry of Keats or the music of Sibelius.
But undoubtedly the most satisfactory reading of all was poetry.
Always the most directly relevant to a charged state of mind  even though it wasn't always modem, it was thus the most comforting and the most healing.
If anthologies ever needed any justification they received it for me at least during those years.
Under such conditions one could not afford to despise what was well known.
One needed it too much for its own sake.
Every year, about eight weeks before Christmas, we began to talk about laying down a ‘brew’.
‘Oh, for God's sake let's ignore Christmas this year.’
‘There's nothing more depressing than pretending to be jolly in a prison camp.’
‘But everyone else is having a brew.
It won't make Christmas any less awful if we don't have one’
‘I agree.
It's the line of least resistance.’
‘It's not worth the fruit and the sugar.’
But in the end someone usually found a barrel, and scrubbed it, and poured in the raisins and the sugar and the water.
As Christmas approached we would become affectionate about the brew and go and raise the lid and listen to it working quietly away in its comer.
‘I think I've got a way of making it taste a little less foul this year,’ said Jack Nopps one Christmas.
‘There won't be quite so much for everybody as usual, but it will be stronger and it won't make us all sick quite so easily.’
In the evenings he would sit on his bed beating old tins into strange shapes with a hammer.
One evening he clambered down with an armful of tin pipes and funnels, scooped a cupful of fermenting liquid out of the barrel, and disappeared into the lavatory.
Half an hour later he came back, his yellow teeth flashing in a confident cockney smile.
‘Trust your Uncle Jack,’ he shouted, ‘you'll be drinking apricot brandy for Christmas.
It's a first-class still.’
About the second week in December he began taking his still into the night lavatory every evening.
He would sit by the little fire he had built underneath it, watching the drops of spirit trickle out of the tubes into bottles partially filled with apricot jam.
By Christmas Day he had twenty-four little medicine bottles filled with a pale opaque liquid.
‘Three bottles per man,’ he said triumphantly.
‘But one will be quite enough for most of you’
There was the usual extra food for Christmas and we allowed ourselves three slices of bread each for breakfast instead of two.
The  snow sparkled in the sunshine outside the window and nobody really minded much when people came into the room and said ‘Happy Christmas’.
But about lunch-time the drunks began to look in.
‘Merry Christmas, old boy.
Got any brew?’
‘Hullo, Ken, come in.’
‘I said have you got any bloody brew?’
‘Yes, but we're not starting it till this evening.’
‘Unsociable bastards.’
He slammed the door, kicking a locker as he went.
There was the roaring and stamping of a herd of drunks at the other end of the corridor.
Tessel, the Canadian, opened the door.
‘Sex rears its ugly head,’ he said, and shut it again.
We decided that it was time to start on Jack Nopps' apricot brandy.
It tasted of petrol, mixed with creosote and hair oil.
Jack took one gulp, said ‘Lovely stuff, and went off to tune in to the King's Speech on the secret wireless, which only he could operate.
Soon it was dark and the Christmas evening was in full swing.
The drink made me excited and confused so that time seemed to be moving in a series of huge uneasy jerks, sometimes accelerating wildly and sometimes standing absolutely still.
First I was in a room where people stood crowded together in the atmosphere of a cocktail party.
‘Of course I was on the same squadron as him for a time.’
‘If I can get drunk enough on this stuff I might be able to get away with it at the next repatriation board.’
‘It was one of the finest knocking-shops in Cairo.’
‘If only we can get a foothold round Calais.’
Every now and again people would step neatly aside while the person they were talking to was sick on the floor.
‘Awfully sorry, old boy…’
The floor was slimy with sick like the deck of a channel steamer after a bad crossing.
Then I was in the corridor, having an intimate talk with an old friend who could no longer stand.
‘Of course, you know, I'm not really tight.
It's just this bloody hooch.
It goes straight to the stomach.’
All down the corridor people were propping themselves up  against the walls, or lying on the floor singly or in couples.
The Germans had allowed us to walk between the huts until midnight.
I passed from one block to another.
In the sort snow-lit darkness people were systematically sicking up the food which they had saved for so long.
I debated whether to be sick or not myself, and decided that I could hold out for another half hour.
In the next block a man I had never seen before rushed up to me with a jug.
‘Have some of my hock: it tastes of furniture polish.’
He splashed some down the front of my tunic and was gone.
I walked in at the first door I saw.
The smell of crude spirit was overpowering, like an anaesthetic.
Sitting astride one of the beams that spanned the ceiling was Tessel.
There was a little crowd underneath him, beseeching him with the heavy solemn common-sense of drunks to ‘come down and not be a fool’.
Tessel said nothing but looked down at them with contempt.
His face was green.
He had a bad squint anyway, but now his two eyes seemed completely dissociated from each other and wandered restlessly round different comers of his head, apparently quite out of control and enjoying their surprising liberty.
From the room next door came a heavy tuneless chorus:
‘Fuck 'em all, fuck 'em all,
The long and the short and the tall…
I found myself face to face with Jack Nopps.
‘What did the King say, Jack?’
He was so drunk that his words came thickly and with great difficulty as if he had been wounded.
‘He said…’
‘…
So cheer up my lads, fuck 'em all.’
‘He said…the prisoners of war…were conducting themselves…with great dignity.’
Tessel slipped heavily from the beam and slumped onto the floor.
Finally I remember many small things which no longer have the coherence of an incident: stray wisps of thought, ends of conversation, odd corners of moods and impressions.
A bad weather front feeling its way over from the west like a nasty white octopus in the blue summer sky.
Hate for a man.
Smashing his face against the floor in a horrible day-dream fight.
The long gaps that sometimes occurred between letters.
It was as if you were swimming out at sea with a piece of string tied round your middle attached to someone on the shore.
When there were no letters the person on the shore disappeared below your horizon and you thought you were alone.
Then came the pull on the string and you had to think about something else besides the water and the sky and the sun.
A story about a R.A.F. Flight-Sergeant who noticed that a recruit was still wearing his hat in church.
‘Take your hat off, you silly bugger,’ he yelled across the pews, ‘don't you know you're in the 'ouse of God?’
The interminable searches —.
‘We are only doing our duty, gentlemen’— and returning to find books and food and clothes scattered in chaos on the floor.
The day when the search guards were given orders to act roughly, and the little R.A.S.C. captain who came running out of the block with his mouth still bleeding from a blow with a rifle butt.
Running in a half-mile race with little pains tearing at my chest and my knees sinking lower and lower as if I were running across quick-sands.
The thought that came into my head as I rounded a comer into the straight: ‘Why add this to it all?’
The vividness with which stray insignificant pictures from childhood would suddenly appear before me.
It was as if an antiquated lecturer, standing somewhere behind me, had slipped a slide into a magic lantern and brought it sharply into focus.
Going to sleep or opening a book: an old garden, a childish fear, a face seen casually and quickly forgotten, would take possession of my mind as if there had been no time between.
‘…
But I think your attitude is completely unreasonable…’
Slowly the argument began to change colour.
His face shrank into lines of hostility and I felt my right knee twitching with anger inside my trouser-leg.
The grey clouds, the strong dry wind and the leaping dust of a summer evening.
Rain, driving perpendicularly into the ground in long sharp needles, and the sweet smell afterwards and the feeling that life was worth loving after all.
Days when the colours were cold and bleak, the hardening arteries of summer.
Days when my mind was like those days, grey and comfortless for no particular reason.
Days when the summer was like a beauty in her early forties, full-blown and creasing, but warm and dear.
Snow lying in the sun and making the place we had lived in for years suddenly fresh and rare.
A moment at a gramophone concert when the badly-tuned loudspeaker suddenly blared Beethoven's Ninth Symphony into the theatre like a roundabout organ on Hampstead Heath.
The screams of a man who had tried to cut his throat.
A present from a Russian prisoner: a very fat pink pumpkin.