

PART A: THE EMPIRICAL STUDY
Summary
a.
The environmental scanning activities of the corporate planning departments of seven large UK-based companies were investigated.
The enquiry concentrated on that external information that is available from formal publicly available information sources, and we were particularly concerned with the use of such sources for longer-term strategic planning.
b.
One company had a very different and more sophisticated method of scanning the environment than the rest.
Partly for confidentiality reasons, this company's methodology could not be examined in detail.
Specific findings for the six companies that we were able to examine in detail are included in Appendix A to this report.
c.
For these six, it was naturally difficult to distinguish scanning done for general planning purposes from that done for longer-term strategic planning.
But an attempt was made to do this.
d.
As regards environmental scanning for general planning purposes, the major reasons for scanning being carried out can be divided into:
Need for knowledge and understanding of the environment of each of the company's business units
Circulation of planning guidelines
Competitive analysis
Special projects
e.
The study examined the information gathered from the environment under these headings.
Who provides the information?
What type of information is found useful?
Where does the information come from?
How is the information stored?
When is the information obtained?
f.
The planners put most effort into acquiring micro-environmental information (competitive: industries, companies, products and services, markets), with relatively little attention to the macro-environmental influences (economic/financial, political, social/ cultural, technological).
g.
In trying to obtain relevant environmental information, the planners often find traditional sources, such as libraries, tedious, time-consuming and frustrating to use.
They find it difficult to establish what is available, where.
There was scepticism of the value of information-broking services, except as document delivery operations, principally because the planners usually preferred raw to refined data.
h.
Partly in response to these feelings, the planners generally showed great interest in, and in some cases a considerable amount of use of, the online information services.
However, increased use is being seriously inhibited by technical and conceptual difficulties.
Cost is not an inhibiting factor.
i.
The planners' internal methods of handling personal and departmental information seem, generally, to be rather rudimentary.
j.
The overall impression is of an environmental scanning of the formal published resource that is predominantly ad hoc , informal and low key.
This contrasts strongly with practice recommended in much of US literature, particularly that on what has come to be called ‘competitive intelligence’, of a central coordinated and proactive gathering of both formal and informal environmental information and its dissemination throughout the firm.
However, as discussed in Part B of this report, we found there is increasingly debate as to the overall benefits of such centralised operations (and, indeed, of the notion of head office-based corporate planning departments per se ).
It may be that the relatively light involvement with the formal external information resource at the centre mirrors heavier involvements at the periphery.
Or it may be that the formal resource is just not perceived to be of all that much  importance.
As this exploratory study restricted its attention to the centre, we were not able to pursue these points.
k.
But, assuming that the formal external information resource does have a significant role to play in helping corporations to achieve viable strategies, the overwhelming message for information providers is that much more effort needs to be put into making that resource — whether in traditional print or in online form — more comprehensible in its overall structure, and easier to access and use in its individual parts, by the non-specialist user.
Things generally are much more complicated and confusing than they need be.
Overview
The corporate environment
Executives, academics and consultants, particularly in the USA, have shown a growing concern about the environments facing business organisations.
The environment is becoming increasingly volatile, complex and susceptible to major shifts.
Under such conditions of change there is a growing sense of urgency to develop more effective ways of providing environmental intelligence to decision makers.
The more difficult decisions under times of change are the longer-term or strategic decisions for the corporation rather than the shorter-term, mainly operational, decisions.
It is the environmental intelligence for strategic decisions that is the prime concern of this study.
Environmental scanning
In an attempt to improve the effective provision of intelligence to decision makers, some companies, particularly in the USA, are experimenting with various ways of developing a process of gathering information, analysing and interpreting the information and ensuring that it is used effectively in the decision-making process.
It is believed that the environment should be subject to broad-based scanning and should not be restricted by what is already ‘known’ to the company of the existing general environment, current markets, product lines or services.
This management process of using environmental information in decision making has been termed environmental scanning .
The structure of this process can be considered to be made up of three main parts:
— the gathering of information concerning the organisation's external environment;
— the analysis and interpretation of this information;
— the use of this analysed intelligence in strategic decision making.
Some researchers suggest that this environmental scanning process might best be achieved by developing especially organised environmental scanning units that are positioned towards the top of an organisation's hierarchy.
They need not necessarily be totally stand-alone units but could be part of the central planning department.
Reasons for this study
The aim of this short exploratory project was to gather empirical evidence of scanning practices in the UK.
The evidence briefly covered all three parts of each company's total scanning structure.
However, as it was intended that this study should be of particular use to the suppliers of information, it was therefore biased towards the first stage of environmental scanning; that is, the gathering of information.
It was hoped that our results would update and extend our knowledge of the demand for external information by UK businesses today.
Equipped with this knowledge, those involved in the production, storage and dissemination of publicly available information should be better able to assist the business sector by providing more effective services.
Strategic Planning
‘Strategic planning’ cannot be defined rigidly but, in general, consists firstly, of a broad statement of objectives and strategies for the organisation and, secondly, the formulation of long-term plans to achieve these.
Objectives and strategies can remain valid for many years but the long-term plans to achieve them need to be revised more frequently to reflect the up-to-date position of the organisation and its environment.
The long-term plans could be revised on an informal basis by the chief executive of the organisation, using intuition and experience to know when the outlook for the organisation has changed sufficiently to require him or her to update the plans.
However, for companies of a reasonable size or for those influenced by complex environments this informal and simplistic approach is unlikely to be successful.
In these cases a more systematic approach is required, and, certainly in all the companies included in this study, a system of corporate planning is usually used to prepare corporate plans.
The purpose of a corporate plan is to state the objectives and strategies of the corporation and to present the long-term plans of the total corporation.
These total plans are made up from the individual plans of every business activity of the corporation.
The corporate plan is therefore built up along the same lines as the organisational hierarchy.
At the bottom of this hierarchy are business units representing each individual type of business.
These business units are grouped together into divisions which represent areas of similar business interest.
Finally, the divisions are grouped into the total corporate entity.
In the planning process, plans are prepared for each business unit which are consolidated into divisional plans which in turn are consolidated into the total corporate plan.
The organisation of the planning process tends to be done in corporate head office by a central corporate planning department.
The extent of the input by the business units themselves depends on the style of planning management adopted by the planning department.
At one extreme, frequently referred to as ‘bottom-up’ planning, most of the work of formulating strategies and plans is left to the business units themselves.
Planning department's role is then to ensure that plans are prepared, to help the chief executive to review the proposed plans, and to consolidate and present a total corporate-wide plan.
At the other extreme, referred to as ‘top-down’ planning, the planning department participates in, and influences the development of, strategies and plans of each business unit as they are being prepared.
The department is therefore able to impose central, corporate views, on to the business units at an early stage.
In practice the planning style will fall between these two extremes, with the degree of input from the planning department compared with the business units varying from company to company.
The final and most important input into the planning process is from the final strategic decision makers — the chief executive and his or her board members.
It is the board which has the final responsibility for strategic plans and actions while the role of the corporate planning department is to advise and assist it in its decisions.
This is, of course, a highly abbreviated description of what happens in practice.
Readers requiring further information might usefully consult the book by Goold and Campbell:Strategies and styles: the role of the centre in managing diversified corporations [Goold & Campbell (1987)].
This volume reports a wide-ranging study of 16 leading British companies — including each of the seven companies covered in this report — carried out at the London Business School Centre for Business Strategy.
Environmental scanning for strategic decisions
It is clear that all participants in the planning process will require information, although of different types, and the amount required by each level will depend on the type of planning management.
To investigate in full the total use of environmental scanning for strategic decisions even in just one specific company would require examination of the scanning practices of every business unit, division and head office department in that company.
In this exploratory project this was neither sensible nor practically possible.
Therefore a decision was taken to investigate only the scanning undertaken by corporate planning departments and deliberately to exclude the business divisions and the chief executive.
In addition it was decided only to examine information that is external to the company and available from formal sources even though it is well known (and was confirmed in discussions with the companies themselves) that a considerable use is made of internal and informal information.
Methodology
Type of company sampled
The sample used was of large companies that were known to be at the leading edge in terms of corporate planning practices.
It was not known whether they would be the most advanced protagonists of environmental scanning, but for various reasons it was expected that they would have views about scanning and about the extent to which they wished to undertake formal environmental analysis.
It was known in advance that the companies sampled planned for at least three years in the future, frequently for longer, and that the time between making a strategic decision and the final outcome was long.
Each company chosen was known to have a corporate planning department and a sophisticated planning process.
As has already been indicated, the planning processes of each company had previously been examined in a research study carried out at the London Business School.
Companies investigated
The seven companies which were investigated are all large, well known, international companies.
Table A lists their principal activities, sales and number of employees for 1985 and outlines their organisational structures.
The number of business divisions in these companies varied between 2 and 27; and within each of these divisions were grouped between 3 and 15 business units.
The corporate planning departments of these companies differed in size and structure.
One company had one planner, whilst another had 50 planners.
The rest had three or four planners.
The departments either reported to a finance director or planning director on the main board or a planning director positioned just below the main board but as a member of an executive committee.
Method of collecting data
The total structure of environmental scanning is complex and every company displays individual nuances which would be impossible in practice to determine from a questionnaire approach.
It was therefore    decided that an interview would be the best way of exploring the issues and would be particularly useful for the more qualitative type of issue.
The planning directors of eight companies were contacted, of whom one declined to be interviewed on the grounds that his company did not use environmental scanning.
The directors of the seven remaining companies agreed to interviews of their corporate planning managers or themselves.
In total nine people were interviewed: two planning directors, one group development director, four planning managers, one manager in charge of a policy review group and one information officer in charge of corporate planning information systems.
Each interview lasted between one and two hours.
Interview structure
The interviews had an open structure but with defined benchmarks.
They took the form of in-depth discussions not only of environmental scanning itself; but also of the analysis and interpretation of the retrieved information, and its use in strategic decision making.
The interviews used the framework outlined in Table B. This framework has three columns covering the three stages of scanning.
For each of these stages there is a standard set of questions which, in their simplest form, are: who? what? where? how? and when? together with questions about cost and value.
Sophisticated environmental analysis
In the sample of seven companies, one stood out from the others as having a very different and more sophisticated method of scanning the environment.
The company maintained a separate policy unit which is concerned only with interpreting and assessing the impact of environmental factors on the company's policies.
It is therefore the one example found in the UK which follows Ansoff's recommendation that organisations should maintain separate units to monitor the environment for ‘weak signals of threats or opportunities for the organization to consider’[Ansoff (1975)].
This proportion of one company doing sophisticated scanning out of a sample of seven companies is in line with the US study by Fahey & King (1977) which found that two companies out of a sample of 12 maintained separate environmental-scanning units.
In the remaining 10 US companies, scanning was not done in an independent unit but was undertaken in a more informal manner within the corporate planning department.
The single, separate policy unit found in our sample of UK companies operates within the corporate planning department.
The number of personnel is small but they work full time in the unit and are not concerned with the rest of the corporate planning department's roles in the planning process.
The unit requires information that is wide-ranging, remote and often ‘seemingly has no relevance to the company's activities’.
To obtain this type of information the unit makes extensive use of a very wide range of information sources and has direct access to an internal information service which is maintained within the corporate planning department.
In addition, it maintains its own computerised database made up of literature summaries of potential interest.
Partly for reasons of confidentiality, we are not able to describe this company's environmental analysis activities in more detail.
In the other six companies investigated, the strategic environmental scanning is intertwined with the other scanning activities of the corporate planning department.
The departments undertake general scanning for the organisation and help the operation of the overall planning process.
Some of this scanning might be wide-ranging and contribute to strategic decision making but not necessarily so.
It is therefore not easy to separate that done for general planning purposes from that done for longer-term strategic decision making.
However, an attempt has been made in the following two sections.
First, the scanning which is undertaken by the six companies for the total planning process is described in Chapter 5.
Secondly, the scanning which is more closely concerned with the longer-term strategic future of the company is outlined in Chapter 6.
Environmental scanning for general planning purposes
Roles of the corporate planning department in the planning process
As has been indicated, environmental scanning can be considered to be made up of three processes:
— The gathering of information concerning the organisation's external environment.
— The analysis and interpretation of this information.
— The use of this analysed intelligence in strategic decision making.
This section concentrates on the second and third of these phases; Section 5.2 looks at the first phase.
In order to examine phases two and three, we needed to investigate the roles of the companies' corporate planning departments in the total planning process.
These roles could be divided into four:
a.
Need for knowledge and understanding of each business unit's environment.
b.
Circulation of planning guidelines.
c.
Competitive analysis.
d.
Special projects.
Each of these roles is now examined in turn.
Need for knowledge and understanding of each business unit's environment
In spite of the size and complexity of the companies examined, which ranged up to 10 divisions and 40 businesses, but in one case had 27 divisions and 150 businesses, all the planning departments considered scanning for environmental information about every business unit to be important.
Indeed, one planning department considered this to be its most important role.
All businesses were examined except those where the technical complexity was too great to be understood by central corporate staff.
The planning department's scanning of business information could duplicate that done by the business units but it was found that the planners were more concerned with understanding the structure of industries and markets rather than with more detailed facts.
The planning departments need sufficient knowledge to enable informal discussions to be maintained with the business units throughout the year, particularly to put forward corporate and strategic views.
In addition to the informal discussions, corporate planning departments require knowledge of the business environments for their formal roles in the planning process.
Two companies assist the business units in preparing their plans.
The remaining four review the plans put forward by the business units and challenge them; as one company commented, ‘playing devil's advocate’.
Whatever style of planning management is used, the overriding need for understanding the business is to ensure that no important issues are neglected.
This general scanning is done informally by continuous reading of papers and journals in all six planning departments.
In three departments this is supplemented by ‘homing into’ more detail if a topic looks interesting.
The use of online services is particularly important in this connection.
Two planning departments not only scan for their own purposes but offer an information service to the business units.
It is felt that by doing this the planning department can gain a better understanding of the information needed by the business units, their concerns and possible ways in which they could be assisted.
Circulation of planning guidelines
At the start of a company's planning cycle, the planning departments  of all six companies issue guidelines indicating how the planning process should be organised.
In four companies the departments also issue economic guidelines, which indicate the economic concerns and assumptions to be incorporated in the plans.
All departments include a list of key environmental issues which must be addressed by the business units:Economic guidelines 
Four of the companies issue economic guidelines at least once a year.
All of these guidelines tend to be narrative and concentrate on qualitative trends and areas of concern but with an accompanying outline of quantitative forecasts.
Two departments rely mainly on a single source for their forecasts with perhaps slight alterations to incorporate their own views.
The remaining two use many sources and one undertakes its own detailed analyses which are done regularly not only for the planning process but for general economic surveys of geographical areas, industries etc.
While the economic forecasts are issued to the business units to be use d in their plans, none of the four planning departments insist that the numbers must be adhered to.
Business units can make up their own minds about the implications of economic factors on their own operations; the corporate planning departments are more interested in determining how vulnerable each business unit is to different economic environments.
Key environmental issues 
In all six companies the corporate planning department formulated a list of environmental issues which were considered to be of key importance to the company as a whole.
This list is circulated to the business units and the issues must be addressed by the business units in their plans.
How the issues are identified and used is discussed in more detail in Section 6.2.
Competitive analysis
Analysis of competitors and competitive markets is of the utmost importance to each company, and in all six the planning departments have a significant role to play in this analysis.
The ways in which the departments perform this role fall roughly into two.
Some undertake this role at a working level by assisting and challenging the business units when they submit their plans; for example, by questioning why the business units are not competing in a certain way or as much as they should.
Other planning departments draw strategic conclusions from their own competitive analyses and these are used as a direct input into  the final corporate plan.
For example, they ask what are the strategic implications to the total company of various competitive actions.
All six companies undertake financial analysis of those companies in which they have an interest for competitive, acquisition or divestment purposes.
The analysis is concerned mainly with the corporate competitive situation rather than the individual business level; for example, the financial performance of the total company, its borrowing position, its major new activities.
This compares with the analysis done by the business units which tends to be more detailed, operational and more concerned with the competitor's performance in individual markets.
A good example of the planner's role as opposed to the business unit's role was a major acquisition made by one of the companies.
The company acquired had many business interests which overlapped the company's own businesses.
Only the planning department was able to cope with the total analysis of the situation.
Of the six planning departments, three are regularly asked to provide competitive financial information to the rest of the company; two others do so on an irregular basis.
To perform this task the departments store a variety of information either electronically or in hard copy.
The information in general is kept as raw data, but if necessary the planning department does do detailed analyses of the data for the business units.
Special projects
In five of the six companies it was found that the planning department could be involved in special projects on an ad hoc basis.
For one department this was its major role.
The need for these projects mainly arises for two reasons: first, from the recommendations made in the course of preparing, analysing and approving corporate plans; secondly, from concern by senior management about particular issues, industries, markets, company practices etc.
The corporate planning department either undertakes these projects itself if it has the manpower, or alternatively its members join an investigative committee.
While the subject matter of the projects can cover a wide range, the examples quoted in interviews tended to be of an operational nature.
For example, an investigation was done into the profitability of a certain product which was common to several divisions.
It was not possible from the divisional information to determine if the product was profitable overall.
A central investigation was needed to determine this.
The gathering of information concerning the organisation's external environment
This section concentrates on the first part of scanning; that is, the gathering of information.
The framework used in the interviews (Table B) provided information which can be categorised into five are as:
a.
Who provides the information?
b.
What type of information is found useful?
c.
Where does the information come from?
d.
How is the information stored?
e.
When is the information obtained?
Who provides the information?
The major sources of publicly available information are:
— In-house libraries
— External libraries
— External services
— Online services
Each of these is discussed in turn.
In-house libraries None of the companies maintain an in-house library in central head office.
Four out of the six do maintain at least one library in a business division.
However, there appear to be no obvious reasons for the variation in number of libraries in total, or their divisional spread.
The survey indicated that in general the number of divisional libraries is small.
Most had been subject to companies' general cost-cutting exercises and are now smaller in number and size than formerly.
There are several problems for the planners in using internal libraries.
First, they can be situated in any part of the UK, which makes access difficult and the length of time to get the information can be long.
Secondly, they specialise by business activity; for example, some  specialise in technology only.
Thirdly, a different emphasis is put on the information stored; for example, the divisional libraries are often concerned just with shorter-term, operational information.
Fourthly, the resources in the libraries are small, and therefore the services available to a central department such as planning are limited.
External libraries Four of the six departments use external libraries although the amount of use ranges quite widely and the reasons for their use differ.
The department making the greatest use of external libraries uses them on quite a regular basis, ‘at least once a month’;, and uses them to obtain any general type of information.
The remaining three departments do not use libraries as regularly or frequently as this.
Libraries are not used for general scanning-type purposes but only for specific tasks.
One department uses a library mainly when undertaking a major study which requires the stimulation of a general library search.
Another uses an external library to provide specific statistics which are too detailed for the department to store itself.
A third department mentioned the usefulness of a library in providing the full text of esoteric articles.
The use made of a library depended on the individual planner's preference.
The two most frequently mentioned were the City Business Library and the library of the London Business School.
No mention was made of The British Library.
External services Three types of services were mentioned: consultants, information services, press-cutting services:
Consultants
Three planning departments employ consultants to produce specially commissioned studies.
One department is concerned with worldwide issues; for example, when looking at the outlook for energy, it does not feel qualified to do this type of study itself.
The other two departments are concerned that ‘any information which is publicly available is also known to competitors and is therefore of little use’.
These two departments therefore commission market research and strategic market research studies.
Market research will identify, for example, markets and their characteristics which are suitable for the company to enter.
But of far more use to the company is strategic market research which explicitly identifies the actions the company needs to take in order to achieve a position in a market.
One of these two departments spends almost 80% of its information budget on consultants who provide these types of research service.
Information services
Few departments even of the size and sophistication of those included in this study were aware of information services such as that offered by the London Business School Library.
Press-cutting services
One company uses an external press-cutting service.
Online services 
Use in the company in general Online services are available in several departments in all six companies.
In one company, however, the corporate planning department does not take any online services but has access to such services via a divisional library.
In the other five companies, the planning department makes a greater use of online business information services than any other department.
Indeed, one planning department achieves its objective of supplying business information to the rest of the company almost entirely by searching online.
Two other departments also undertake this role but not to the same extent.
Online services used by planning departments
The number of services taken by the five departments ranges from one to eight, with an average of five.
The range of services used includes: Textline, Dialog, Pergamon, Datastar, Datasolve (Profile), Jordanwatch, Telecom Gold, Reuters, Extel, Datastream.
All five departments used Textline, and, in addition, this is the most frequently used service by all.
The services taken by four of the departments are used exclusively within the department.
The fifth department shares services, of which there are three, with other departments.
Who uses online services in planning?
In all five departments it is the planners themselves who use the online services, although one had a clerical assistant to undertake the bulk of the work.
This contradicts the results found in the survey done by Collier in 1981; he found that ‘end users’ did not undertake their own searches [Collier (1982)].
Amount of use
The use by planning departments varies widely.
The smallest user estimated an average use of two to three hours a month.
The largest user uses at least one of its eight services daily; this is the department providing an information service to the company at large.
Interestingly, the department consisting of a single planner has his only service, Textline, on his desk.
He used it almost every day, often spending a whole afternoon on it.
What type of information is found useful?
In the format for the interviews, the external information was divided into five categories as listed below.
The table indicates which categories each of the six companies found useful; the categories are listed in descending order of usefulness.
Commercial information
Commercial information (competitive, market, product etc.) is considered to be the most important by all the planning departments.
This is despite the great effort put into scanning for commercial information by their individual business units.
This is because the planning departments believe that the information obtained by the business units needs to be supplemented by their own scanning which has a different emphasis.
Planners concentrate on the structure of industries and markets and the longer-term implications of their findings.
Business units concentrate on the operations and operators within individual markets and the shorter-term consequences of this analysis.
It was commented in one company that, since commercial environments have become more volatile in the 1980s, it is no longer sensible to undertake detailed quantitative analysis of market sizes or market shares.
By the time the analysis is finished, the market has changed.
A ‘guesstimate’ from qualitative information is considered more appropriate.
Qualitative information satisfies the need for trends of what is happening in markets.
It was found that even from those sources of commercial information which give quantitative information, for example ICC and Business Monitors, it is the qualitative messages that are considered to be the most useful by the planners.
As noted in Section 5.1.3, financial information is required by planners at the corporate level.
All six companies use unedited quantitative information; for example, the annual accounts which can be analysed by the planners themselves in order to form their own opinions.
Their own analyses can then be used to diagnose qualitative information from articles and brokers' reports.
Economic/financial information
The next most sought-after type of information is economic, but the resources put into this are comparatively small, even in those four companies issuing economic guidelines.
As previously outlined, only one company undertakes detailed quantitative economic analysis; the remaining three produce insubstantial outlooks which rely heavily on external published forecasts.
There were several reasons put forward for this rather modest use of economic information.
In the two companies with the greatest number of businesses it was felt that the individual business units have a better knowledge of the specific economic factors which directly affect their own markets.
The corporate planning departments therefore felt that they should be more concerned with the overall economic views rather than with details.
In another company, one major activity is only related to economic factors to a small extent, while its other activities are so stable that detailed economic information analysis is considered unnecessary.
This company therefore obtained only limited information of this type.
All four companies need international economic information and outlooks.
This therefore ruled out some forecasts such as that of the London Business School, and it might explain why all took the Henley publications.
Finally, two companies did not seek economic information at all.
One commented that the use of economic information ‘can often be an excuse for inaction’!
Political information
It can be seen from the table that in general if the department is concerned with economic information, it is also concerned with political risks.
However, there are two exceptions.
The first department which is an exception to this statement has a small interest in economic information but is not concerned with politics because the company only operates in the UK and the USA.
The second exception feels it ‘knows’ its markets and products sufficiently well not to require economic information.
However, as the company has recently  started to expand overseas the department is becoming concerned with the stability of overseas countries and is seeking political information.
Social/cultural information
Although five of the six departments do acquire social and cultural information, little effort is put into using what is acquired.
One company commented that the attitude to the information in such studies as it purchases is often one of ‘how interesting’, rather than one of seeking to put the information to use.
Another believed that if its markets were to become less stable, which it expects, then it will put more emphasis on social and cultural information.
Technological information
None of the planning departments obtain and analyse technological information, except perhaps for background interest.
The responsibility for obtaining such information rests with the business units themselves and/or a central research and development department.
Where does the information come from?
The following lists the sources of information in order of declining use:
Newspapers
These are the most popular sources of external information and are used by all companies.
In particular The Financial Times is read daily by all the planners.
Journals
All planners regularly read general business journals, particularly The Economist , as well as the journals specific to the company's business interests.
In some cases the need for knowledge of the businesses meant that a large number of specialist journals were taken by the corporate planning department and circulated within corporate head office.
Indeed, it was found to be difficult sometimes to keep down the number of journals to a manageable size.
Financial accounts and stockbroker reports
All six departments obtain specific company annual accounts which they analyse themselves for their own particular uses.
It is felt that this ‘hands-on’ approach is the only way of getting sufficiently reliable information.
But, for less detailed examinations or as back-up information, the analyses presented in stockbroker reports are considered extremely useful.
Economic outlooks
These are obtained by four of the six departments on a constant basis from regular sources.
Each department  takes a different number of outlooks and takes them from different sources.
In addition each shows a different preference for quantitative forecasts, compared with more qualitative outlooks.
Government statistics
Four out of the six planning departments purchase government statistics but three of these four departments do not find the statistics particularly useful.
The main reason the three gave for this was the outdatedness of the data, especially those data which are ‘referring to the past and therefore of little use’.
This is particularly true of statistics covering the marketing activities of the company.
While economic statistics are more up-to-date and therefore more relevant, they are not used regularly by the three departments because they are not specific enough.
The three departments, however, do use official statistics in the detailed studies which are done from time to time on a one-off basis.
The published statistics are therefore retained for this purpose, but, as one company commented, their use is, however, so infrequent that it has difficulty in locating the relevant data when they are needed!
The fourth department that purchases statistics does so for the preparation of its quantitative economic outlooks; it uses sufficient statistics to justify use of an online facility as well as of hard copy.
When this department was located near a public library in London which specialised in regional statistics that were unavailable elsewhere, significant use was made of that library.
This has diminished since the company's move out of London.
Publicly available consultants' reports
All the companies obtain a small number of such reports.
There does not appear to be any preference for particular types: worldwide issues and trends, market research, attitudinal surveys were all mentioned.
There was a wide range of authors: Frost and Sullivan, Taylor Nelson, SRI International, Economist Intelligence Unit, Inter-Company Comparisons.
All six companies appeared to find the outlooks from Henley useful.
In addition to reports that are publicly available, three departments have on occasion specially commissioned reports for their own specific needs.
Government and academic reports
These were not in general obtained except when noted from scanning newspapers or when highlighted by the online services.
One company, however, had several informal contacts in universities and these contacts would pass on relevant papers and reports.
How is the information stored
The six departments roughly split into two patterns when considering the storage of information.
Three departments attempt to keep the use of hard copy to a minimum by extensive use of online services.
The other three departments keep most information in hard copy but back it up with a small use of online services.
Minimum use of hard copy
The first group of three do not keep newspapers or magazines in hard copy at all except for the specialist journals which are retained for one year.
All non-specialist information is obtained from online services and, indeed, one department is considering putting specialist information on to its own database.
The retention of statistics is also kept to a minimum by all three companies.
One does not store statistics at all; if statistics are ever required they are obtained from one of the business divisions.
Another keeps a few statistics but not many.
The third uses a significant volume of statistics but uses an online service and public libraries as much as possible to obtain these.
For financial information, all keep annual accounts and some brokers' reports in hard copy.
This is supplemented by the department's own financial analyses which it puts on to its own financial online database.
In another department further financial information can be obtained from Datastream.
Full use of hard copy
The other group of three departments retain most information in hard copy but use online services to supplement it, particularly for newspaper and journal articles and some financial information.
One of these departments has no online service itself and therefore makes infrequent use of its library's services.
The other two departments use online services which they either retain themselves or share with other departments.
When is the information obtained?
The time the information is obtained splits into different patterns depending on the type of information being sought.
Economic information
Information of an economic type is, in the main, obtained by receiving a set number of economic outlooks on a regular basis.
The planning departments determine in advance which ones they choose to receive.
Financial information
Information of a financial type is kept up-to-date by five of the six departments on a continuous basis.
It is decided in advance what information is required, for example which companies and which business areas, and this information is regularly reviewed.
More detailed information can be obtained on an ad hoc basis.
Other information
Other information is obtained by all six departments by continuous trawling, particularly of newspapers and journals.
Three of the departments commented that when undertaking this general type of trawl some topics appeared sufficiently interesting to require more detailed information.
In general this is obtained by undertaking a survey through the online services.
In addition more detailed information is obtained on occasion in order to satisfy the needs of ad hoc detailed projects.
Environmental scanning for longer-term strategic decisions
The previous section described how planning departments scan the environment in order to operate their corporate planning processes.
Only part of the information obtained will indicate where the company should take strategic actions to cope with fundamental structural changes in the environment.
This section is therefore designed to show how the companies scan their environments to identify these fundamental and broad-ranging changes that might have an impact on the companies' future outlook.
How scanning is used in making long-term decisions
Longer-term decisions in the six companies are in general made as a result of discussions of strategic issues.
These strategic-issue discussions are held at two main levels.
First, at executive-director level and secondly, at business-unit level:
Executive-director level
In all six companies, strategic issues are discussed by the executive board at the time of reviewing the company's plans.
In addition, this is supplemented in four companies with discussions at other times.
Two companies have an executive committee made up of executive directors; the committee meets on a regular basis and strategic issues are raised on an ‘as-and-when-needed’ basis.
Another company holds an annual senior managers' conference attended by only a few select top executives at which fundamental issues are discussed.
In the fourth company, the planning department produces an array of issues in a ‘strategic statement’ at the start of the planning cycle.
This is presented to the board where the issues are discussed before the strategic statement is approved.
Business-unit level
Strategic discussions at business level are directly orchestrated by the corporate planning department.
In five  companies this is achieved by the circulation of planning guidelines at the start of the planning process.
Included in these guidelines is a list of key environmental issues which might require strategic action by the business units.
The business units must address these issues in their plans.
Therefore, while most of the effort in preparing plans is put in by the business units, the planning department attempts to guide the strategic discussion by identifying key environmental issues.
The sixth company, which does not identify key environmental issues in its planning guidelines, does not do so because strategic issues are not discussed as part of the planning process but are considered on a continuous basis.
Strategic issues are discussed at all levels of management on an as-and-when-needed basis.
In summary, the corporate planning department has a contribution to make at both levels of strategic-issue discussions.
First, the department has a role at the executive-director level by being present at the board's review of the plans from the business units and by highlighting where these plans do not adequately address certain strategic issues.
The department is also responsible for consolidating all the business plans and presenting the resulting total corporate plan and the strategic implications of the total plan to senior management.
Secondly, the planning department has a role at the business level by determining the key environmental issues which should be addressed by the business units.
How environmental analysis is undertaken for long-term decisions
In order to fulfil both of these roles the planning departments need to determine those key environmental issues which must be addressed by all levels of management.
In five of the six companies the environmental issues are determined mainly by the planners within the planning department itself and in a totally informal way.
Each planner is individually responsible for putting forward suggestions of suitable issues; in some instances these can be the result of maverick ideas, and in others they are achieved through a more down-to-earth type of thought.
The ideas arise from the planner's informal trawling of the external environment for information.
Each planner is continuously exposed to data from general reading, particularly of newspapers and journals.
and the ideas are formulated by a process of osmosis.
For example, one director commented that when he saw a topic referred to a few times then it  would ‘click’ in his mind, and he would then consider if it could have some significance to his company.
Each planner obtains and retains information in his own way.
For example, some planners file paper cuttings while others just keep the ideas in their own mind.
The analysis of the information is therefore not always comprehensive nor undertaken in a consistent way.
All five of these companies supplement this informal trawl for information with use of the online services.
Three of them use online services to a reasonable extent, while the other two make limited use of them.
A final list of key issues is prepared from all those suggestions put forward by the individual planners through informal discussions.
These discussions are held on an informal basis mainly within the planning department, but in some instances the opinions of other departments are sought.
Brain-storming sessions may also be organised.
The sixth company has undertaken systematic formal investigations twice in recent years but does not produce a regular list of key environmental issues.
In these two instances a committee was formed, made up of planners and members of other departments, whose task was to consider an array of about 50 possible issues.
This number was gradually reduced to the most important 10 and this list of 10 was then circulated to the business units for their consideration.
This process was not tied into the planning cycle.
The planning department found that business units considered the time horizon of the issues to be too long to be of relevance and these issues were therefore considered to be ‘back of the mind’ flagging signals and were therefore not acted on.
The planning department of this sixth company questioned the usefulness of determining key environmental issues, particularly given the effort involved.
It was felt that this type of exercise would probably not be repeated for a few years.
Attitudes of corporate planners towards information issues
In reply to an open-ended question concerning ways in which improvements could be made to help their environmental scanning, most planners discussed the online services.
This could either indicate that online services are failing to be useful, which is doubtful given the significant use that planners make of them, or that the online services have not lived up to the planners' expectations.
Alternatively, planners may have a high potential demand for these services, and are therefore concerned to make them easier to use and thereby to expand their use.
The majority of comments below relate, therefore, to the online services, but there are also a group of comments on external libraries, on external information services, and two miscellaneous comments.
Online services
The areas discussed were: user difficulties, knowledge of suitable services, coordination of services, cost.
User difficulties
Hardware
The most common difficulty found with hardware was that of coping with noisy lines and of getting through to the services.
Software
Online services are perceived as having complicated languages and methods of access, each one different from the other.
Learning how to use each service is therefore difficult; reference was made to ‘coping with a technical user manual’.
Remembering how to use each service is even more problematic, particularly for the casual user, which the planner usually is.
Manpower constraints, often found in industry, make it impracticable to allocate a single person to using online services.
The final result is a circular problem.
Using the services is difficult, and therefore use is infrequent; infrequent use makes it even more difficult to use the services.
One user commented that when the procedure for access keeps changing, this presents him with further problems.
Often the volume of references and information produced by online services is considered to be too great and this ‘sea of information’ is confusing to the user.
The user finds it difficult to narrow down his or her search.
One user expressed concern over using services; he expressed this as ‘technofear’.
Because he felt uncomfortable about how the services operated and how to use them, he therefore limited his use of them.
Databases
All interviewees mentioned certain information needs that online services did not satisfy.
In all cases they considered the limitations of online information specific to their own needs to be a major deficiency.
The planners would like more coverage of full text; Companies House information; international annual accounts; specialist journals; qualitative commercial information, e.g. market research.
However, the interviewees did not indicate what price they would be prepared to pay for such extended coverage.
The planners felt that online services are not suitable for browsing for general ideas.
No stimulus is given to help the searcher know what leads to follow up.
Online searching is therefore usually used by most of the planners when ‘homing in’ on specific pieces of information or projects.
Finally, two companies, although they take several online services, expressed doubt about the usefulness of them because of all the difficulties and limitations listed above.
Knowledge of suitable services
The interviewees expressed a fundamental unease about their knowledge of the availability of services.
They felt they did not know what services, nor how many, are available.
In spite of attempting to understand the differences between the services, the planners did not feel satisfied with their knowledge.
As one commented, he visited online exhibitions but remained ‘baffled by it all’.
He is therefore cautious about purchasing more services.
Several planners expressed the need for independent advice in this area.
The main need is to determine in what ways their own individual needs  for information can be satisfied by online services and which are the most suitable.
Coordination of services
Three of the five corporate planning departments that use online services expressed a desire to make these services freely available throughout the company.
However, several constraints were identified as holding back this development.
The first was lack of knowledge about how to set up a system.
One company in particular felt that the appropriate hardware was in position for a total online information system, but the company needed assistance in setting up the system.
For another company, the online information services can be accessed through each individual's personal computer.
However, difficulties in using online services, as outlined above, have limited their use and they have ‘not spread through the company as was originally hoped’.
Finally, the development of the application of online services was felt to depend on the enthusiasm and ability of, at least, one good user.
When this is lacking, the chance of successfully developing and maintaining optimum use of the online service systems is minimal.
Cost
The cost of online services is not considered to be a critical factor in their use.
As one company commented, ‘the value of information is high’.
Another explained that the alternative cost of going to a library is very high.
External libraries
Usefulness
The views expressed about the usefulness of libraries differed radically between the companies.
One company was adamant that libraries have very limited use because there is a reasonable chance they will not satisfy any particular need for information.
On the other hand, two other companies were equally adamant that browsing through a business library was one of the first steps needed to stimulate and promote ideas.
Two other companies believed libraries could be useful on occasion, particularly in supplying statistics and other hard copy.
Convenience
The cost of using a library was considered to be significant by all.
The cost is measured not just in terms of time spent away from the office but also by the inconvenience of leaving an office empty.
While two companies were prepared to pay this cost for their searches, three others were less willing to do so.
One company had recently moved from the centre of London and had curtailed its use of libraries.
A comment was made that the idiosyncrasies of each library made them difficult to use.
External information services
The desire for good external information services, such as that offered by the London Business School Library, was mixed.
Major problems are found with the loss of ‘hands-on’ work by the planner himself or herself; and there were comments on the difficulties in delegating and communicating the particular needs for information.
The planners felt some ad hoc information requests might be delegated, but these are a very small part of their total information need.
Miscellaneous comments
One planner commented that he had difficulty in knowing where and who to approach to seek advice on how to find information.
Another company had difficulty in tracking down specialised research work, what there is and how to get a copy.
PART B: A REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
The literature of environmental scanning
The impetus for the following review of the literature arose from a detailed study of 15 published reports of empirical research in the field of ‘environmental scanning’.
The results of the study are reproduced as Appendix B to this report.
The main conclusions that might be drawn from the study are:
a.
There is considerable reported variation in the methodology and location of scanning, and the degree to which it is carried out by a formally constituted unit or units (B.1).
b.
At the gross level of discrimination used in the surveys, managers have difficulty in conceptualising ‘the environment’, particularly in the softer areas (B.2).
c.
As would be expected, there is an overwhelming preference for informal as against formal sources of environmental information, but with great variation in type of source preferred (B.3).
d.
Attempts to map scanning characteristics against industry type were few and generally unsuccessful (B.4).
e.
A variety of assessment methodologies are used by scanners (B.5).
But the overwhelming impression after analysing these papers is one of:
f.
A high degree of executive frustration with, and scepticism about, the notion of environmental scanning (B.6).
g.
Concern about the introduction of information bias by scanners (B.7).
h.
Most of all, high perceived difficulty of ensuring optimal strategic use of environmental information within the organisation (B.8).
Some difficulties in writing this review
It was these latter findings, plus the conclusions of the exploratory study given in Part A of this report, that persuaded me to attempt a more wide-ranging review of published literature than one that just focussed on the literature of environmental scanning.
In the event, the compilation of this review proved to be a far more difficult undertaking than I had anticipated — and took far far longer than it should have done.
As a practising manager scanning and trying to make sense of the environment surrounding my particular enterprise, I came, too, to experience a high degree of frustration with, and scepticism about, the very notion of scanning; and great concern as to the bias that I might introduce if I tried to communicate my conclusions to others!
But, most of all, I found it to be very difficult to decide how best to try to ensure that the environmental information that I was gathering would be used optimally by those reading my conclusions — both inside and outside my organisation.
I found that I was trying to achieve two somewhat incompatible objectives.
On the one hand, as I wrote, I found myself wanting to alert readers to an increasing amount of detailed literature, across a wide range of disciplines, currently being reported; and to indicate something of the complexity of the issues being pursued.
The review started to become rather long, and I found myself — with some considerable difficulty — trying to be scholarly, and to achieve an air of objective reality.
On the other hand, I suspected that those concerned with the practical supply of publicly available information to business executives (whom, after all, the work carried out here was originally intended to help) would probably not take the trouble to read such a review, if it ever came to fruition, because it would not be practical enough!
There are plenty of good recent reviews aimed at research workers covering at least some of the issues I was starting to address.
Some excellent work trying to synthesise a number of the current research themes is currently being carried out by Marianne Broadbent and colleagues in Australia [Broadbent (1988)]; see also Broadbent & Koenig (1988a); Broadbent & Koenig (1988b).
For practitioners, what was needed was an essay that  was not too long, and which attempted to develop specific proposals that they could act upon.
The more I read, the more I became determined to try to produce something that had a good basis in theory, but that was pungent enough to counter the bland unsupported generalisations that seem so prevalent in the more practical end of the library and information science literature.
I feel strongly that if the library and information profession is to play a significant role in the handling of information within business (and other) organisations, we really must stop pussy-footing around with weak half-baked notions!
Business is tough, and if our profession is to make real progress within it — as I believe it can and should, then we have got to develop strong, well-thought-out proposals.
Inevitably, an essay along these lines would tend to be rather unscholarly and prejudiced!
The result that appears below is thus a rather unsatisfactory compromise.
I trust that my proposals as to where I believe library and information science professionals should direct their efforts are sufficiently clear-cut so as to draw responses from the professionals involved.
But also that any who might peruse this essay from a research perspective will feel that I have not been too cavalier in the implications that I draw from the results of their studies.
Apart from a very small number of older key texts, the literature I cite is purposely recent literature, which can of course always be used to track the historical contributions, if the reader so wishes.
Very few people will have the time and desire to follow up more than a small number of the leads that are referenced; and those who do will usually be aware of the older literature, in any case.
It should be obvious that the review is in no way comprehensive — even of current literature.
That is not its purpose.
Rather the intention is to flag some of the key areas where relevant work is being carried out.
One of the reasons that this report has taken so long to appear is that, scanning the literature arriving in my library, I kept coming across new relevant areas of work.
There is, indeed, an awful lot of potentially relevant literature being produced (but also a large amount which does not seem to add anything new; naturally, I have tried to avoid referencing that!).
I have included in the review a number of quite lengthy verbatim quotations.
Although this means that the essay has, indeed, become rather bulky, it does enable one to communicate the nuances of people's arguments, which can be especially useful for those readers who do not have easy access to the primary documents quoted.
In any case, if a writer has managed to put some key point rather well, why not both give him the credit for doing so, and at the same time avoid struggling to reinvent the wheel?
Roles for librarians and information scientists in the transfer of strategically usable information from environment to enterprise
Introduction and summary
This review is about the use of external information by strategic decision makers in enterprises.
I have tried to address the question: What are the appropriate roles for librarians and information scientists in the information communication process from environment to enterprise decision maker?
The review is organised as follows:
a.
First, we briefly outline the nature of strategic decisions.
b.
Secondly, we summarise what we know about managers' use of external information in general; there is an overwhelming preference for informal rather than formal information sources.
c.
Thirdly, we recognise that managers, however, certainly at the strategic level, do make significant use of the formal publicly available information resource.
But this use is usually an indirect one, via one or another internal or external knowledge worker.
d.
This concept of a knowledge worker enables us to sketch out a simple model of the major information communication processes between environment and enterprise.
e.
We then examine the approaches firms have made in recent years, such as‘environmental scanning’, to formalise their acquisition of external information.
f.
We provide some details of the notion of ‘competitive intelligence’:.
This has had considerable attention in the literature coming from the United States.
g.
This leads us to a discussion of the concept of ‘information management’.
Here, we need to distinguish the sort of information management that is more or less synonymous with the overall management of a firm's information technology (IT) -based resources from that which has a wider remit.
h.
At this point, we move from these macro considerations to the micro-world of the individual decision maker, the eventual user of the information librarians and information scientists might purvey.
We remind ourselves that decision making is a complex activity which is highly task- and context-dependent.
i.
With that perspective, it is perhaps not surprising to discover that decision makers often find the external information delivered to them by knowledge workers to be not as valuable in helping to solve the task in hand as they would have wished.
j.
Armed with this knowledge, we then decide to adopt Taylor's value-added framework (in his seminal work of 1986) to discuss the processes needed to transform information as it first appears in the public domain into information that matches the detailed individual decision-making situation.
We stress that information only exhibits value when it is put to use in a specific context.
Prior to that it only has a potential for value.
k.
Arising from this point follows the key hypothesis of the review.
This is to make a fundamental distinction between ‘understanding information’ and ‘understanding the full potential value of information’:.
The first might be said to be context- and task-independent: we can understand what a sequence of symbols is meant to represent, without understanding the context within which those symbols might be put to use.
For the second, there are  indeed a number of important general processes which can add value to an information construct, and which are not dependent on the eventual setting within which that construct will be used.
But there are many other critical value-adding processes which can only be satisfactorily completed by those who know and understand the specific decision-making situation in which the construct will be used.
l.
We draw what seem to be two important conclusions from this hypothesis.
First, if specific librarians and information scientists are unable or unwilling (or both) to learn about and understand the detailed situations within which the information that they handle will eventually be used, then they should restrict themselves to the more general situation-independent value-adding processes.
That is, they should not get involved in information analysis and judgement.
They should leave the latter processes to those people — knowledge workers — who are charged with having a detailed knowledge and understanding of specific decision-making situations.
Secondly, although this might be seen by some to relegate librarians and information scientists to a rather mundane, humdrum existence, we would submit that the reverse is true.
Freed from having to try to learn about the intimate details of the businesses they are serving, librarians and information scientists can then direct their energies to trying to improve the general accessibility and availability of publicly available information of relevance to business activity.
This is especially necessary in an increasingly IT-dominated society.
And it is an improvement which only they have the requisite professional skills and training to undertake.
Strategic decisions
The general area within which this study lies is that of an enterprise's business strategy and the relationship of that strategy to events in the environment surrounding the enterprise.
We are particularly concerned here with the process by which strategically usable information is transferred from the external environment to those within the enterprise charged with making strategic decisions.
Strategic decisions are concerned with:
The scope of an organisation's activities
The matching of the organisation's activities to the environment in which it operates
The matching of the activities of an organisation to its resource capability
The allocation and re-allocation of major resources in an organisation
The values, expectations and goals of those influencing strategy
The direction an organisation will move in the long term
Implications for change throughout the organisation — they are therefore likely to be complex in nature.
[Johnson & Scholes (1988)]
Thomas (1984) provides a good introduction to the research literature relevant to business strategy.
In trying to appreciate the variety of relevant perspectives that research workers have adopted, his table comprising 10 ‘alternative lenses and approaches for strategy research’(economics, cognitive psychology, analytical modelling, organisational behaviour, and so on) is especially useful.
A reasonably vivid appreciation of the complexity of the environments firms have to try to survive within (albeit some 15 years old) is shown in Diagram 1.
Companies potentially need to acquire information about all the environmental factors shown in the diagram, if they are to survive and prosper.
We wish to throw light on the question: ‘What role should librarians and information scientists play in this process of information transfer?’
Managers' use of external information
Let us focus, initially, on that portion of the external information resource that, traditionally, has been the predominant — and, often, sole — province of library and information centres, the formal publicly available information resource.
It is well known that managers in general make very limited use of external publicly available information sources for strategic (or, indeed, frequently for any other) purposes.
Rosemary Stewart has recently summarised the situation, writing from a UK viewpoint:
Many occupations require the use of formal information obtained from papers, books and prepared presentations.
Managing is unusual in the extent in which it has been shown to rely on informal information.
Such information comes through the formal provision of reports and scheduled meetings, but much comes from other, often brief, contacts.
Mintzberg, who studied five chief executives in the USA and reviewed previous research, gives the best account of the importance of informal information and argues that: the manager's advantage lies, not in the documented information that is widely available, and which takes time to process, but in the current non-documented information transmitted largely by word of mouth…managers seem to indicate strong preference for current information, much of which is necessarily unsubstantiated (gossip), and for information on events rather than trends…
This kind of information, not that carried in formal reports, forms the heart of the manager's information system.
The manager develops an understanding of his milieu by piecing together all the scraps of data he can find.
This generalisation is more applicable to chief executives who must look outside their organisation than to those managers whose job is wholly an internal one.
The importance of such informal information is therefore greater in some jobs than in others, but it exists in all.
[Stewart (1988), pp 116–117.
See also: Kotter (1982)]
Robert Taylor, to whose seminal text Value-added processes in information Systems we shall need to return, provides a similar perspective: Executives or managers, especially those who are policy makers, have information requirements that can be characterized as follows:
They rely heavily on evaluated, aggregated data.
They make a variety of short-, medium-, and long-term decisions, each frequently requiring different configurations and quality of information.
They must operate on a good deal less than total information; 70 per cent is considered high availability for business people.
They suffer from an abundance of irrelevant information.
They seek options and alternatives, rather than answers.
Subjective (human) judgement plays an important role in executive decision making.
They strongly favour the verbal media, namely, telephone calls and meetings.
No manager can depend solely on information generated internally in the organization; external information, often unpredictable in occurrence or impact, is critical.
They tend to use formal information systems through assistants and secretaries who act as preliminary filters.
[Taylor (1986), p 40]
This emphasis on informal information means that the external formal information resource is hardly ever specifically discussed in general management texts, and libraries are never ever mentioned!
(I have been checking the indexes of such books for several years now!)
In the considerable amount of recent work in the UK on managerial competency, again the formal resource seems to have been ignored [Training Commission (1958)].
There is often an assumption that information-handling skills are the same as IT skills.
In a section, ‘Classifying management characteristics’, in a recent report concerned with the future of management education and training, one needed skill, alongside financial, marketing, planning etc. skills, appears as ‘Information technology skills’, but with the single by-line: ‘How to acquire, select and understand the information one needs’[Barham, Fraser & Heath (1988), p 42].
Knowledge workers
Managers, especially those in more senior positions, thus for the most part obtain such externally available information as they use informally.
If they do decide to make use of the formal publicly available resource, they will normally do so via what Taylor calls ‘assistants and secretaries’.
Here I shall use the term ‘knowledge workers’ for such  people.
These knowledge workers may be located within the enterprise (e.g. in the enterprise's corporate planning department), or outside the enterprise (e.g. in consultancies).
There is no agreed definition as to what constitutes a knowledge worker.
Marchand and Horton, in their book Infotrends , suggest an extremely broad definition.
Our conviction is that the term knowledge worker needs to be very broadly defined.
And terms like information professional , at this early stage, often tend to do more harm than good.
Moreover, we believe that the knowledge worker in its broadest sense is any member of the labor force who adds value to a data or information product whether or not that added value is primarily in terms of packaging and delivering the message, or in terms of enhancing the meaning and usability of the message….
In sum, our definition of a knowledge worker is anyone, in any work context (office, factory, laboratory, classroom, hospital, school, government meeting room) who adds value either to a message or to the message's package (container).
[Marchand & Horton (1956), pp 238–239]
However, we will find it of much more use in the context here to conceive of a knowledge worker as someone who actually adds value to the message itself, and not just to the message's package, by processes of analysis, judgement, and higher-level decision making.
A basic but often misunderstood principle is that intelligence= information.
Information is the raw material of the intelligence process.
It is unevaluated, unanalyzed data derived from every possible source of information — financial statements, trade show gossip, union newsletters, marketplace rumors, product brochures, executive speeches, and so on.
The bits and pieces of competitor information that flow by in a constant stream may be true or false, relevant or irrelevant, confirmed or unconfirmed, positive or negative, deceptive or insightful.
In its undigested state, this voluminous competitor information, 90 per cent of which is publicly available, may be vaguely interesting and occasionally intriguing, but however glittering it is essentially an unusable and potentially dangerous resource.
Within this disorganised, confused stream of competitor information there is, however, a pattern of knowledge that if pieced together and analyzed can be very revealing and strategically significant.
Intelligence is the analytical process that transforms disaggregated competitor data into relevant, accurate, and usable strategic knowledge about competitors' position, performance, capabilities, and intentions .
[Sammon (1984b), p 91]
Using Sammon's definitions, knowledge workers are workers in ‘intelligence’, rather than just workers in ‘information’.
A simple model
This question of the definition of a knowledge worker will prove to be germane to our subsequent discussion, and we will need to develop the theme in more detail.
For the moment, let us create a simple model to represent the major information communication channels between environment and enterprise [Diagram 2].
This model has the following key features:
a.
First, clearly, we need to distinguish between those librarians and information scientists who work within the enterprise from those who do not.
In Diagram 2, the first group would work in what I have labelled ‘Internal Library and Information Centres’, the second in the ‘External Library and Information Centres’.
The phrase ‘Library and Information Centres’ encompasses any purveyor of any type and format of publicly available information — including that available in electronic form.
It thus covers all the products and services of the electronic publishing industry, including the online database services.
b.
Secondly, as a key line of argument (and as implied by the communication paths indicated on Diagram 2), by definition here, ‘External Library and Information Centres’ are only concerned with that environmental information which is ‘publicly available’.
Within the enterprise, we will also assume for the purposes of argument that ‘Internal Library and Information Centres’ restrict themselves to acquiring only that external information which is ‘publicly available’.
(Of course, the latter will often have responsibilities in the area of non-publicly available internal information: e.g. internal company reports.)
c.
Thirdly, we should present some definition of the other terms used in Diagram 2:
The enterprise
This is the company or corporation which, to help it survive, needs to devise mechanisms for acquiring and appropriately responding to signals from the environment.
We have been particularly concerned in this study with the large to very large enterprise.
The environment
is everything outside the boundaries of the enterprise.
The resources within the enterprise are under the direct control of the managers of the enterprise.
Those outside are not.
External information
We are specifically concerned in this review with information which is generated within the environment.
Information about an enterprise's environment will frequently be generated within the enterprise; see, for example, Thietart & Vivas (1981).
But we wish to focus here on the particular problems involved in the transfer of information from producers who are external to users who are internal.
Knowledge workers
Again, by definition here, knowledge workers are charged with understanding the full potential value of the information that they process.
Partly because of this facility, knowledge workers are able to communicate directly and informally with the environment's ‘original information formulators’— and thus receive information before it enters the public domain, if, indeed, it ever subsequently does.
It seems worth while to remind the reader just how wide is the range of external informal information sources relevant to business activity (it will be seen that this list is of US origin):
After a company's internal competitor resources are organised, outside sources of information should be analyzed.
There are basically two types of outside sources of competitor information:(1) those external to the competitor, and (2) internal competitor sources…
A basic list of (external sources) contains the following:
Regulatory groups
Federal agencies
Town clerks
Voter registries
Banks
Consultants
Newspapers and magazines
Distributors
Retailers
Consumers
Newsclipping agencies
Foreign trade groups
Trade shows
Congressional studies
Company unions
State government
Realtors
Stock analysts
Trade groups
Advertising agencies
Universities
Suppliers
Wholesalers
Consumer groups
Consulates
Conferences
Government reports
…
Both categories should be screened to determine which can be assessed through a company's own collection agencies in a convenient, legal and ethical manner.
Competitor press releases and financial statements, for example, can be easily collected by the corporate legal or communications staff; relevant government reports and filings can probably be acquired through the legal department or by company lobbyists at the state or national level; the investor relations staff can get security analysts' reports; and so on .
Only after it is decided that company collection agencies are unsuitable for the job should outside agencies be contracted to fill in the gaps.
[Sammon (1984b), pp 120–121]
Original information formulators
Much of the field covered here is bedevilled with terminological problems; see, for example, Crow (1989) on the term ‘strategy’, or Mintzberg (1981) on ‘planning’, Martin & Martin (1989) on ‘scanning’, Stewart (1989) on the definition of a manager (see also Leontiades (1982)).
Indeed, Ronald Stamper suggests that doing business is predominantly a matter of solving semantic problems:
I am prepared to argue that doing business involves, even at the lower levels in an organization but especially at the higher levels of management, semantic problem-solving; for example, agreeing on boundaries, identifying individuals, establishing and maintaining classifications, conjecturing ways of doing things that belong in no existing formal schema.
Thus, if we are interested in studying business from the perspective of information systems, I believe that the paradigm usually accepted in the Management Information Systems community, of a system where facts about a definite world are stored, retrieved and manipulated, is inadequate…
We must also study the conflicts about meanings, ranging from the trivial to the epic, that are the daily bread of business existence.
[Stamper (1987), p 57]
One highly problematical term, of course, is the term ‘information’ itself.
But, using that term in its colloquial sense ‘in which an item of information is a piece of fact, a factual claim about the world, presented as being true’(Wilson (1968), p 17], we are particularly focussing here on that portion of the total external information resource which is ‘publicly available’.
Before any ‘factual claim about the world’ becomes publicly available, someone — some person — must have formulated that claim into a meaningful statement.
We refer to such a person as an ‘original information formulator’.
Publicly available information artefacts
It is useful to bear in mind the sharp distinction between those artefacts which, to use, the user needs to have to hand, and those which can be used remotely.
The key distinction is not between ‘electronic’ and ‘non-electronic’artefacts; it is between those artefacts which can be organised for use via telecommunication connection and those which cannot [Lester (1985)].
Strategic decision makers
We have been trying to focus in this study on those people within the enterprise who are in a position to effect strategic change (or to maintain the status quo in the face of destabilising influences).
Apart from a very limited number of highly specialist areas of the environment where changes will automatically trigger responses within the enterprise (e.g. the financial markets, meteorology), an enterprise cannot respond to changes in its environment unless someone, or some people make(s) a positive effort to transfer information about the changes to the person or persons within the enterprise charged with responding to the changes (or not, as the case might be).
Virtually everyone who works for an enterprise from time to time will acquire information from the environment of potential value to its operations.
Some of this information will be of strategic value.
But this ‘strategic’ information is to nought unless it can be transmitted to the organisation's ‘strategic decision makers’.
Environmental scanning
We would argue then, that knowledge workers, distinct from most managers, do make significant use of external publicly available information sources.
This use seems generally to have grown in recent years.
This is partly fuelled by an increased concern by enterprises with their environments, partly by an increase in the volume of potentially relevant information being published, and partly by improvements in the physical communication of information from source to recipient made possible by advances in IT.
Some companies (particularly in the USA), in response to these and other factors, decided in the late 70s and early 80s that they should designate within their organisations a person or persons whose job would be to specialise in the acquisition and processing of information from the environment that might be of potential strategic importance.
In some cases, organisationally distinct units were created especially for this purpose.
We have been particularly concerned in this report with perhaps the main exemplar of such a development: what has come to be called ‘environmental scanning’.
Although perusal of Appendix B will reveal much of what is involved in environmental scanning in practice, it is as well here to place the activity within the broader process often known as ‘environmental  analysis’.
Fahey & Narayanan (1956) conceptualise environmental analysis as consisting of four analytical stages:
Environmental scanning
This is defined as a general surveillance of all environmental segments and their interactions in order to (1) identify early signals of possible environmental change, and (2) detect environmental change already under way.
Ideally, scanning is aimed at alerting the organisation to potentially significant external impingements before they have fully formed or crystallised.
Indeed, successful environmental scanning draws attention to possible changes and events well before they have revealed themselves in a discernible manner.
However, Fahey and Narayanan comment, in practice scanning frequently detects environmental change that is already at an advanced state.
This is because it explicitly focusses on areas that the organisation may have previously neglected, or because it challenges the organisation to rethink areas to which it had paid insufficient attention.
The authors conclude that scanning is the most ill structured and ambiguous environmental analysis activity.
The potentially relevant data are essentially unlimited.
The data are inherently scattered, vague, and imprecise, and the data sources are many and varied.
Moreover, a common feature of scanning is that early signals often show up in unexpected places.
Thus, the purview of search must be broad, but — they say — no guidelines exist as to where the search should be focussed.
In short, the noise level in scanning is likely to be high.
The fundamental challenge for analysts in scanning is to make sense out of vague, ambiguous, and unconnected data.
Environmental monitoring
Monitoring involves tracking the evolution of environmental trends, sequences of events, or streams of activities.
It frequently involves following signals or indicators unearthed during environmental scanning.
Sometimes it entails tracking trends, events, or activities that the organisation  accidentally becomes aware of or which are brought to the organisation's attention by outsiders.
The outputs of monitoring are threefold:(1) a specific description of environmental trends and patterns to be forecast,(2) the identification of trends for further monitoring, and (3) the identification of areas requiring further scanning.
Thus, the outputs of monitoring go beyond the simple provision of inputs for forecasting.
Environmental forecasting
Scanning and monitoring provide a picture of what has already taken place and what is happening.
Strategic decision making, however, requires a future orientation: it needs a picture of what is likely to take place.
Thus forecasting is an essential element in environmental analysis, and it is concerned with developing plausible projections of the direction, scope, speed, and intensity of environmental change.
Environmental assessment
Scanning, monitoring and forecasting are not ends in themselves.
Unless their outputs are assessed to determine implications for the organisation's current and potential strategies, scanning, monitoring and forecasting merely provide ‘nice-to-know’ information.
Assessment involves identifying and evaluating how and why current and projected environment changes affect or will affect strategic management of the organisation.
[Fahey & Narayanan (1986), p 33–35]
It will be obvious to the reader that the boundaries drawn and phraseology used above are just those of one group of workers.
Environmental analysis overlaps in part with areas that have acquired other buzz words in the literature: for example, ‘marketing intelligence systems’[McLeod & Rogers (1982); Fletcher (1983); Piercy (1983)]; ‘issues management’[(Littlejohn (1986); Wartick & Rude (1986); Ewing (1987)]; ‘forecasting’[Torre & Nelkar (1958); Van Ston (1989)].
People within enterprises who are designated to engage in environmental scanning (and similar) activities do not of course restrict themselves to that part of the total external information resource that happens to be publicly available at a specific point in time.
They will retrieve any piece of information from the environment that can be legitimately acquired, or, in some cases, illegitimately acquired [Wall & Shin (1984)].
As has been found with regard to‘insider trading’, it is very difficult to define what is and what is not legitimate.
For example, online techniques are being increasingly used for the rapid transmission of confidential non-publicly available information.
An interesting example is NOMIS, a retailing information system operated by the University of Durham, access to which — in theory — is restricted to academics and government sector employees.
Some of the data on this system are considered to be highly sensitive:
Figures (on this screen) MUST NOT be passed onto a third party (i.e. appear in a paper, report or thesis), or passed verbally to anyone not named on the Notice (or other authorisation which allows you access to the census of employment data) without DE branch D4's WRITTEN authority.
Such clearance will be eased by not reproducing any of the figures marked*>.
It is very difficult to avoid seeking out and using information that is confidential if it is known or suspected that the information will be a crucial aid to survival for your company in the future.
Competitive intelligence
Particularly following on Michael Porter's seminal work on ‘competitive strategy’ in the early part of this decade [Porter (1980); see also Porter (1985)], we have had a yet further development: the idea of ‘competitive intelligence’.
Although it is by no means axiomatic, this notion of competitive intelligence usually brings with it an extra dimension, when compared with environmental analysis (and, to a lesser degree, with issues management and marketing intelligence).
This is that of a centralised management of all competitive information held within the firm.
A higher quality of timely competitor intelligence is possible when the corporation's intelligence resources are identified and centrally co-ordinated.
The probing competitor analyses that are essential to a strategic understanding of a rapidly changing competitor environment cut across and involve all the major line divisions and staff functions in a corporation — domestic businesses, foreign businesses, sales, marketing, manufacturing, R & D, purchasing, finance, personnel, government affairs, public relations, and planning.
By identifying, developing, and communicating the competitor information relevant to each, and then moulding those disparate information resources into a coherent, relevant intelligence picture of key corporate and business unit competitors, a far more comprehensive, forward-looking, and dynamic view of the changing competitor situation emerges.
With a solid base of competitor data that is continually updated to maintain its currency, senior executives and general managers — the corporation's key decision-makers — will be in a much stronger position to:
Understand and anticipate competitor moves
Ask the right strategic questions
Take the most effective actions for the long term [Sammon (1984a), p 70]
The underlying idea here is that every corporation, willy-nilly, acquires large amounts of information that is potentially useful in a competitive sense; but that this information is scattered throughout the firm in its various divisions, units, departments and so on.
The aim of formalised, competitive intelligence systems is not only to bring all this information together on a continuing basis — perhaps using database techniques (though as we shall see, there is still considerable scepticism about the cost-effectiveness of such techniques, when compared to manual methods).
It is also — and this is the key point in the context here — to analyse and refine all this information prior to disseminating it to appropriate decision makers throughout the firm.
Usage of the term ‘competitive intelligence’ is sometimes restricted to information on the companies, industries, products and services comprising the firm's competitive situation (but also including suppliers, buyers, potential entrants, substitutes à la Porter).
Or usage of the term may be extended to aspects of the macro-environment so as to include information on the economic, financial, political, legal, social, cultural and technological situations.
From a strategic perspective, management will usually need intelligence for two general purposes: environmental scanning and competitor analysis.
The major elements in each are outlined below.
Although some regard competitor analysis as a subcomponent of environmental scanning, it is probably advisable to identify it as a separate and distinct analytical effort to insure that it is given the strategic priority and management attention it requires.
Too often the study of competitors will be subsumed in market research or industry analyses, and only an incomplete and very partial view of competitors' strategies will emerge.
The potential influence of competitors on a company's fortunes is too significant to be indirectly addressed as a side issue of market/industry analyses.
[Sammon (1984b), pp 97–98]
Again, we note fundamental problems of terminology.
Information management
Meanwhile — and here is a term that is proving to be particularly confusing — we have had a veritable flurry of activity in the area, or more precisely areas, designated as ‘information management’.
Although there is certainly no clear-cut distinction, there seem to have been in recent years two rather separate major usages of this term (and related terms such as‘chief information officer’;, ‘information system’, ‘information centre’, ‘end user’, and so on ) in the literature.
The first usage is firmly linked to IT (e.g. the book [Perry (1987)]is solely about the ‘end users’ of IT systems, and its references to ‘libraries’are to program libraries!).
The basic idea here is one of the effective management of the whole of the IT-based resources of the enterprise.
With the growth of powerful micro-systems, and of sophisticated networking capabilities, particular attention is understandably being paid to the relative degree of centralisation versus distribution of resources.
But more recently, as companies have become more and more concerned at the escalating costs of purchasing and maintaining  increasingly advanced technological capabilities, fundamental questions are being asked as to how the use of IT gives a company strategic advantage — if it does [Earl (1988); Bruce (1988)].
From a reading of their own literature, librarians and information scientists might have expected that one area where use of IT would definitely have been recognised to be giving such an advantage to its users is that of the retrieval of publicly available information online.
The fact is that the considerable amount of literature now being produced on ‘IT’ and ‘strategy’is notable for the almost complete absence of any mention of external online database systems of the type used by librarians and information scientists.
Where there is coverage of such systems as potential IT-based contributors to improved corporate strategy, the reference will be to systems that are not normally the province of librarians and information scientists (such as financial market systems, credit-rating services); or it will be to videotex-based systems which most librarians and information scientists wouldn't be seen dead using!(cf. Prestel).
The other major usage of the term ‘information management’(sometimes extended to ‘information resource management’ or ‘information resources management’[Information Resource Management (1988)]) is closer to home.
And it is usually taken to mean the coordinated management of all the information-based resources of the firm: those that are IT-based; but also those that are not (yet?)
IT-based.
This is of course the area with which certain members of the library and information profession have sought to become intimately involved, and even to command the heights.
However, before the latter can happen (assuming for the moment that it is a desirable objective), it would seem to me that there are at least two major obstacles that must be overcome.
The first and most obvious one, is the need to surmount the inevitable resistance of, and to achieve the ready cooperation of, existing vested interests.
The problem is not just one of specialist areas defending their territorial interests.
It is also that those working within those other information- (or knowledge-) based areas have ambitions to command the heights too!(e.g. from the accounting area [Estrin (1987)]).
Because it is inevitable that there will continue to be an increased use of IT within enterprises, existing computer- and telecommunications-based managers clearly would normally be expected to be in a much stronger position than existing library and information centre managers to become the overall managers of all the information-based resources of the firm, IT-based or not, if that is what the company decides it needs.
This, unless  librarians and information scientists can become thoroughly competent in the detailed management of IT.
The second obstacle, however, is more fundamental.
At a time when a major trend in large businesses, particularly those operating across national boundaries, is towards decentralisation and the management of the whole as a set of, for example, ‘core competencies’, with very light control at the centre, it would be surprising if companies rushed to put significant resources into global information management.
Of course, it is not quite as straightforward as that.
Increasingly, corporations are questioning whether the costs of resourcing remote centralised units — of which environmental scanning units and competitor intelligence units would be good examples — produce comparable benefits.
They are not questioning the potential value of, in this context, high-quality environmental information per se .
They are saying that such information will only realise its value if it is available to the person, at the point, at the time where the strategic decision to act upon that information can best be made.
And this normally will not be in some remote centralised corporate planning department.
It will be out in the field, where the people receiving the information can make sensible decisions as to how to act on that information.
To deal with the new strategic requirements for success, all the tools to induce and support action-taking must be available at the front line.
Therefore, we must:
Share virtually all information with everyone
Decentralise control systems, and  decentralise the accountants/systems people who oversee them
Provide very high levels of expenditure authority for division general managers — and all other levels as well Decentralise strategic planning
The ability to take action close to the market — and fast — is the first requirement for competing.
Therefore both information availability and the authority to move forward at the front line are musts.
[Peters (1988), p 504]
To summarise the arguments, the critical proposition is that European companies, particularly technology-intensive ones, start from a position of disadvantage, where they have initially diversified rather broadly as multi-divisional companies and in the context of one single country.
In order to compete against some of the global competitors, they need to make sure that the various businesses build upon each other, contribute to the development of core competences and use these core competences to build their competitive advantage.
This is the route followed by successful companies.
The model of managing much more along core competence lines than along autonomous business-unit lines, demands much more intensive information flows within the organisation.
It really takes us back to this question of managing information and of organising to do this.
The critical success factor for matching opportunities and core competences is one of having widely shared information within the firm.
This is very contrary to our traditional view of trying to segment and fragment the information and trying to keep it at the business specific level or trying to keep it at the corporate level.
It assumes a much freer flow of information and a much richer flow of information within the company, both between businesses and between corporate management and business-unit management….
It is not just a question of providing more information.
The issue is not one of saying, ‘We ought to use information technology better’ or ‘We used to do environmental scanning better’, and so on.
That is not enough.
The real question is to encourage and to make feasible more horizontal collaboration by working with managers within individual business units, through programmes which get resources across existing business units, and by having top management play a much more active role in managing the totality of the firm as a portfolio of core competences
[Doz (1989), pp 53–54.
See also: Doz (1986); Orsini (1986); Drucker (1988)]
It is very tempting to pursue here the question of how an optimum distribution of relevant information throughout the firm can be achieved, without a considerable degree of  centralised control.
Our focus here is on information received by the enterprise from the external environment; but a similar dilemma exists for any type of information within the firm.
Given, as we have already implied, that pertinent external information might be acquired and stored in any functional or operational unit throughout the firm, if there is not some degree of central coordination, how can we ensure that information received from the environment in unit A is readily available and usable in unit B?
This key problem is not unique to information, and applies to many key resources.
For example, to the distribution of the IT resources that might  support such an optimum distribution of the information resources themselves:
The dilemma of ITM (information technology management) can be seen, then as the need to  simultaneously provide centralised direction and coordination while recognising the value of increased discretion regarding IT decision making on the part of managers throughout the organization.
[Boynton & Zmud (1987)]
However, we will not pursue here that very important problem (see: Devlin & Murphy (1988)).
Rather, on the assumption that the firm manages to devise effective mechanisms for routeing potentially relevant information from the external environment to its decision makers, we will ask: ‘How should we try to ensure that the information, when it arrives on the executive's desk, is usable by that executive?’
Executives' need for usable information
I have used the word ‘usable’;, rather than, say, the more usual ‘useful’ or ‘relevant’for two reasons.
First, the notion of ‘usability’ leads us not only to focus on the eventual users of the information for whom, presumably, companies are investing significant amounts of money on more or less elaborate information-processing systems and structures.
(Clearly, it is high time in this essay that we did just that!)
We also use the word because it has the connotation that the information that we are concerned with is being transferred from environment to enterprise, actually to be used (good heavens!)— by specific users in specific contexts for specific tasks, and is not being transferred just because it seems a nice thing to do.
Secondly, the notion of usability allows us to recognise that if information is actually to be used by users, then it must also be usable by those users, without undue expenditure of time, effort or resource, or it simply will just not get used.
This then reminds us that although there is a veritable plethora (and, as I shall argue, cornucopia) of potentially useful publicly available information artefacts in each enterprise's external environment, in their format and detailed context, these artefacts will often not be directly usable by the enterprise's decision makers in the context in which they find themselves to help solve the tasks in hand.
In order for the information in the artefacts to become directly usable, we must then organise our affairs so that the artefacts are transformed before they reach the executive decision maker's desk.
That is, we must add value to those artefacts.
This process of the effective addition of value to meet a specific executive information need at a specific time and place is most certainly not a trivial task.
Firstly, because there is immense variation in executive tasks and contexts — which we will pursue here; secondly, because of the complexity of the potentially relevant external information resource — which we will pursue later.
Large corporations inevitably have complex organisational structures, with large numbers of different functional and professional groupings.
R is not helpful to talk of ‘the manager's’ needs for external information and intelligence, because, clearly, those needs will differ greatly depending on the manager's specific role: corporate treasurer, product development manager, research and development scientist, marketing executive etc., and particularly the specific contexts in which those roles are exercised.
In his excellent review of studies of ‘what managers do’, Hales has argued that three areas of difficulty may be encountered in the published research evidence on managerial work, viz:
The plethora of categories for describing the phenomenon
The difficulty of judging the appropriateness of the behaviour identified
The problem of whether the work described is exclusively ‘managerial’(and in what sense)
These may all be traced to a reluctance to consider the managerial function which provides the context for the tasks, activities and behaviour of individual managers [Hales (1986)].
Following a study of information use and needs in UK manufacturing organisations, White questioned the assumption of an easy correlation between functional role and particular information needs [White (1986)].
Managers do not concern themselves solely with one type of problem and, consequently, one type of information need.
White's results do not support a stratified or ‘hierarchy of needs’ model of information need in work organisations.
He feels that it is crucial that information system designers take account of the different types of corporate organisational structure.
The way that organisational information systems are used depends less on technological forces or notions of information need than on the nature of organisational authority and control into which they are introduced.
There is indeed an immense amount of relevant work appearing from several directions that might be cited on the effect of organisational  setting on individual information behaviour: see, for example, Boisot (1987); Tricker (1988) on cultural factors; an interesting paper from an R & D perspective:
The choice of organizational structure and process has a major effect on the way STI (scientific and technical information) is transferred and the quality of the STI disseminated and used.
[Davis & Wilkof (1988).
(See also an excellent review of the innovation literature: Dosi (1988)]
Some progress is being made with modelling the information flow processes within organisations: for example, Land (1985); Stamper (1985); Sullivan & Smart (1957).
An excellent overview of organisational communication research written specifically with reference to the external organisational environment appears in a valuable compendium Handbook of organizational communication — a volume that in this context I am not ashamed to admit that I came across just by chance in a bookshop whilst looking for something completely different!
[Huber & Daft (1957)].
(See also: Blackler (1988); Lansdale (1989); Hogarth (1988)).
Suffice it to conclude that there is overwhelming evidence that the external information delivered to those who might use it as an aid to their strategic decision making will tend actually to be used to the extent that it matches the detailed task being undertaken and its context.
(This conclusion is not at all surprising.
What is surprising is the extent to which it seems continually to be ignored by business information providers.)
The greater, therefore, is the information provider's knowledge and understanding of those specific tasks and contexts, the more likely it is that the information provided will be valued and used.
[After a study of chief executives in 50 US manufacturing companies]In summary, chief executives have limited scanning capacity, and organizations have limited resources….
Executives in high-performing firms tailored scanning to perceived strategic uncertainty in all sectors.
The implication is that scanning systems should not be locked into continuous data on limited sectors of the environment….
Executives in successful firms seem to maintain ‘information flexibility’, which means scanning is carefully tailored to the amount of uncertainty across all sectors….
The data from these chief executives suggest that both personal and written sources are valued, and that both internal and external sources are used….
Written sources provide systematic periodic data that can show  trends and provide other relevant facts.
Written sources were especially important for the economic sector.
Personal sources provide a view of intangible aspects of the environment that may be filtered out by written media.
.. perhaps the next step in future research can be to explore the detailed linkage between environment, scanning, and actual strategic adjustments.
Gradually unravelling the sequence of activities associated with interpretation of the environment and strategic responses may provide a stronger normative basis for saying how firms can be designed to increase company performance in the light of strategic and environmental contingencies.
[Daft, Sormunen & Parks (1988), pp 136–137)]
The kind of information that the general manager normally receives also affects his or her ability to conceive or to commit to new strategic ideas.
The information most line managers receive tends to be heavily skewed to operational considerations [AGUILAR (1967).
Information from conventional sources — such as industry publications, industry association meetings, an individual's network of industry-related personal contacts — can suffer from in-bred myopia.
Information from unconventional sources not related to the industry carries the extra burden of having to be proved relevant or urgent.
The more distant in time an issue is to current industry concerns, the more difficult it is for managers to establish that it applies to their business in some significant way (relevancy) and that it should be addressed now (urgency).
Ironically, a formal process of strategic planning often does more to inhibit than to enhance innovative conceptual thinking….
For example, many managers became confused and distracted by the mechanics and terminology (jargon) of the elaborate planning systems increasingly in vogue.
... Also, managers often became enamoured with specific planning concepts, employing them with a fervor that inhibited sensitivity to special considerations and that diverted attention from other important issues….
The most deleterious situations were those where general managers abdicated their responsibility for setting strategic direction to staff planners….
A business general manager who moves up to corporate responsibilities can quickly lose touch with his or her former industry.
The problem of limited knowledge is intensified in multibusiness companies for those businesses where the senior managers have not had direct experience.
Fred Borch, while CEO of General Electric, gave a clear indication of just how severe this problem can be:
With hundreds of products ranging from electric pencil sharpeners to diesel engines and nuclear plants, it is difficult to do an effective job of planning.
It is, in fact, impossible for management to have a direct, personal feeling and knowledge about so many business environments.
[Aguilar (1988), pp 39–40]
It is fascinating to find Aguilar writing in this way 20 years after publishing the most frequently referenced text on environmental scanning!
Problems in delivering usable information
In one sense, in a report about ‘environmental scanning’, it would be good to be able to report that those engaged in that activity had solved this problem of making the information that they deliver, directly usable by those to whom it is delivered.
Certainly there are many examples where this is the case.
But our review of the literature on environmental scanning contained in Appendix B has shown that all too frequently this is far from being true.
And this problem of information usability continues to be of great concern:
The most disturbing fact about business intelligence is that the information obtained is rarely used for actual decision making….
Unfortunately, we repeatedly confronted situations where managers were busily engaged in developing increasingly sophisticated computer-based techniques for analysing, environmental change, oblivious of the fact that their reports were seldom used by anyone within the firm….
There are many reasons for the separation between environmental intelligence and decision making.
Business systems are highly complex and involve processes that are heterogeneous and multidimensional….
Environmental analysis techniques, in contrast, are usually analytical and reductionist in their approach.
They oversimplify the richness of reality and are, therefore, ignored by managers who must have a holistic view of situations and who, unlike some economists, cannot wish reality away by ignoring the facts and instead expound on the theories….
Information that is received in the course of the decision-making process has a far greater chance of being used than information that is stored within the organization.
Going from files to user-friendly, on-line, relational databases has clearly eased the problem but has not solved it.
By and large, information stored in files or computers is used mostly for packaging proposals and rarely for learning or initiating and evaluating alternative courses of action.
Most  environmental analysts ignore this reality and continue to assume that managers will use ‘stored’ information.
Managers, alas, do not….
Environmental intelligence is usually provided too late in the decision process and at too high a level in the hierarchy….
By the time a proposal re aches senior levels, it has already acquired too much momentum to be changed without there being serious internal consequences….
To use environmental analysis as a special intelligence source for top managers is perhaps the single most common reason why it ceases to have any effect on decisions….
Finally, there is a complex set of interactions between information and its source that influences the way information is perceived and acted upon.
The same piece of information is seen differently when it is received from a favourite and trusted subordinate than when it is received from the manager of the intelligence section: the manager of the intelligence section is neither respected nor trusted.
In all of our discussions with intelligence unit managers, this point surfaced consistently and repeatedly: their biggest challenge was not collecting or even interpreting the information, but developing a respected working relationship with managers.
In most cases, this is difficult to develop because intelligence experts are seen either as outsiders who do not understand the business, or as lackeys to top managers.
[Ghoshal & Kim (1986), pp 54–55]
Furthermore, attempts to use sophisticated IT-based systems to help to solve the problem often seem merely to aggravate it!
[After a 1985 survey of corporate intelligence-gathering activity in 25 Fortune-500 companies]All the companies surveyed have an individual, a group within a department, or a full department devoted to gathering competitor intelligence….
All the companies surveyed have increased their intelligence-gathering budgets substantially in the past five years….
Many of the most successful intelligence companies have not built — nor do they intend to build — data bases to track the competition.
Instead, they rely solely on manual filing systems and an active network of internal experts for their business intelligence.
The companies that have used computer data bases most successfully for competitor intelligence have kept the data bases small and simple.
The successful data bases generally are maintained on microcomputers, rather than minicomputers or mainframes.
Many large-scale competitor data bases, especially those on mainframes, have fallen into disuse.
Major reasons for database failure include:
Maintenance expense often overlooked by data-base designers
Difficulties in keeping information current
Poor communication to the rest of the company about the benefits of the data base
Lack of priorities on information to be input.
(Fuld (1988), pp 180–181]
[Ninety-five US-based multi-national companies (MNC), out of a total of 450 contacted, responded to a 1987 mailed questionnaire]The above findings suggest an ever increasing usage, sophistication and integration of international environmental scanning activities.
A broad range of environmental and foreign risk factors are continuously being monitored.
In-house personnel are being utilized on a full-time basis to carry out the above activities and as a consequence, internal data collection capabilities have increased.
Computerization is often being employed to collect, process and disseminate environmental information.
Formalized procedures for monitoring publications are in place to keep up with the information explosion….
The fact that progress appears to be being made with respect to MNC environmental scanning practices should not be overly comforting to MNC executives.
On the other side of the argument is the fact that over one-fourth of the respondent firms in the survey did not have an environmental scanning system in evidence, only 5% of the firms were using the most sophisticated environmental scanning system available (i.e. they have an environmental scanning unit which is tied to the planning process, utilizes computer data banks, involves most countries in which they operate and integrates environmental information on a worldwide basis), and 51% of the respondents still reported little or no computerization being used in the process.
(Asked about inside and outside sources of international environmental information, 27% ‘always used’ outside publications and reports, whereas 0% reported that they ‘never used’such sources; but only 6% reported that they ‘always used’inside computer databanks, whereas 34% reported that they ‘never used’such sources.)
[Preble, Rau & Reichel (1988)]
In a survey of the top IT-based issues for managers in the UK, it was recently found that ‘external data’ ranked in importance as 23rd out of 23 issues of concern!
[Parker & Idundun (1988)].
Paul Strassman's comment is of relevance here: ‘American executives spend too much  money on computer systems that allow them to do the wrong things faster.:’[Strassmann (1988); see also Strassmann (1985)].
All this makes the following statements promoting recent seminars on online database systems not only misguided, but silly!
Commercial intelligence is essential for informed decision making.
Company results, trade statistics and marketing information are all available through convenient, inexpensive information networks which deliver results to the desktop.
Online information is the lightning-fast way to bring relevant business information — corporate, market and product data and much more — right to your desk.
Using online information gives you a cost-effective business tool.
Your competitors are using it.
Are you?
The need for expertise in adding value
Thus it cannot be stressed too strongly that the process of transforming publicly available information artefacts into information that is directly usable with minimal resource expenditure by the strategic decision maker is almost always a very difficult and demanding job requiring a considerable amount of intelligence, training and expertise.
Interpretation is the process through which information is given meaning and actions are chosen.
Even in the most objective environments, the interpretation process may not be easy.
People in organizations are talented at normalizing deviant events, at reconciling outliers to a central tendency, at producing plausible displays, at making do with scraps of information, and at treating as sufficient whatever information is at hand [WEICK & DAFT (1983)].
The result of these human tendencies is that the organization can build up workable interpretations from scraps that consolidate and inform other bits and pieces of data.
The process and the outcomes are a good deal less tidy than many have come to appreciate with current models and assumptions about organizations.
[Daft & Weick (1984),
p 294.
See also: Walsh (1988)]
Even when the sources of external information are straightforward, we must not underestimate the problems of analysis of that data.
We have noted in the report of our experimental study, the desire of planners to use ‘raw,’ accounting data.
However, those data themselves can be highly problematic, and need much reworking [Hergert & Morris (1989)].
Patrick Wilson beautifully summed up the overall problem in a general sense:
No bibliographical instrument could be made which was equally aimed at, and equally suitable to the situations of, all its potential users; for no matter how large an instrument was made, no matter how many interests and situations were foreseen, there would remain over some interests and situations unforeseen, to which the consultants could address themselves if they were presented with them.
They may know more than they realize, for it may be only on the occasion of a question that they see or realize applications and utilities of writings with which they are perfectly familiar.
It is the peculiar human ability to re-organize and re-describe and re-evaluate from novel points of view that makes for the superiority of the consultants over any set of bibliographical instruments, as well as the human ability to recognize a question as misconceived or stupid.
The virtues of instruments as against human memory are simply their greater capacity for preserving indefinitely a huge mass of detail.
Bibliographical instruments might in fact be seen as simply aides-memoire to the consultant, public memories.
But these public memories are rigid in organization and inflexible in description; they do not respond to questions, or contents.
We can easily imagine devices by which a public memory could within modest limits reorganize itself on demand; a catalog, or some analogous instrument, could be devised that would on request display its contents in several different arrangements.
But the possible alternate arrangements must be unambiguously specified by the human constructor of the catalog when it is put together, and thereafter it cannot, without further human intervention, other than mechanically go through its limited variety of tricks.
A human being, on the other hand, can reconsider his stock of knowledge and opinion in terms of a completely novel concept, or a completely novel requirement.
He may not in fact manage to produce what meets the requirement, even when something he knows about would meet the requirement; but that is simply a failure in a sort of performance in which he is at least sometimes capable of success, while no instrument is ever capable of it at all.
[Wilson (1968), pp123–124]
Wilson adds this footnote:
It may be argued that such distinctions between what machines can do and what only humans can do are of merely temporary interest, since in principle there is nothing that a human can do that a machine might not be devised, some day, to do.
Whatever the force of this metaphysical claim, it is clear enough that, for the foreseeable future, bibliographical consultants will be able to do things that no bibliographical machines can do.
I shall not attempt to suggest readings in the literature on ‘artificial intelligence’ and of the more or less  philosophical literature on the possibility of a ‘thinking machine’.
I shall mention only the lucid and witty essay of A.M. Turing, ‘Computing Machinery and Intelligence’,Mind , 59 (1950), 433–460.
Twenty years later, we have made some progress in the use of artificial intelligence and knowledge-based techniques to help to solve information-based problems.
(Hart (1988) provides a good introduction for non-specialists to this field; see also: Enslow (1989); Dawson (1988).)
However, such progress as has been made is in areas that are well defined in advance — which, by definition is not usually the case in the are a of strategic decision making.
Thus when faced with a specification such as the following for so-called ‘executive information systems’, one wonders exactly how the system is expected to filter and compress critical data received from the external environment!:
Recently available executive information systems will have a dramatic impact on how managers and executives work and use information.
These are the essential specifications for an EIS.
Such systems must provide:
1.
End user specified internal information.
2.
End user specified external information.
3.
Critical data that is filtered and compressed.
4.
Status access for various corporation activities.
5.
Electronic communications facility.
6.
Capability to perform ad hoc analysis.
7.
Time series information to track trends.
8.
The ability to combine text and graphics on the same screen.
9.
Quick and easy access to mainframe data bases.
10.
The ability to search for supporting detailed information as time and necessity dictate.
11.
Uncomplicated computer interface that is truly easy to use.
There is a revolution taking place today in the way that executives are obtaining information to help them make critical business decisions.
[Meixner (1958), p 104]
However, there are reports of increased sales for such systems [Sutcliffe (1989)], and even a report of ‘Three business leaders who have mastered an executive information system now wonder how their companies ever did without it’[Wallis (1989)].
See also: Alexander (1989); Healy (1989).
Value-added Processes in information systems
So, to recap.
High-level executive decision makers need ‘usable’ external information, tailored to the task in hand and its context.
The transformation of external publicly available information into usable information in this sense is a highly complex activity demanding detailed knowledge and understanding of the application area (’’ knowledge of the business’— a phrase frequently used within business) by the transformer (the: ‘knowledge worker’).
There is considerable evidence of executive dissatisfaction with some of the efforts of knowledge workers in this area.
If knowledge workers have problems providing usable information to executive decision makers, what hope for librarians and information scientists trying to provide a similar service?
Well, I shall argue that librarians and information scientists can help to add value to information in the path from when it first becomes publicly available to when it appears on the executive's desk.
But the exact nature of the value-adding processes that it is appropriate for librarians and information scientists to engage in needs to be precisely defined.
Unfortunately, leading writers in the profession seem to have been rather vague as to the precise value-adding role that is appropriate for librarians and information scientists:
Professional librarians and information scientists, who are providing effective and efficient services to appreciative (and preferably paying) customers across the company organisation, have much to offer.
They can help bridge the communication divide between information system technologist and the ultimate user, and also ensure that due account is taken of the quality and type of information that is being manipulated, communicated and stored on the systems.
[Wiggins(1985), p 54]
And, finally, don't just get sold a bill of goods.
Special librarians are not just information managers That would imply that any MBA could come in and manage information as well as managing production or finances.
We also know how to identify what users need; develop often complex systems to index, abstract, catalog, and organize all types of information; disseminate information by packing it in ways appropriate for users, providing the critical role of sifting through vast quantities to identify what is pertinent and what is not; and to work with a wide range of other professionals for the most effective use of information.
Our profession requires complex and varied knowledge, skills, and attitudes.
It is healthy; it is strong; and I think it will continue to grow and become even more exciting and challenging in the future.
[Bearman (1988), p 8]
The main purpose of the seminars was to show how the information and library profession is adapting to new technology and merge new techniques with old to produce an unbeatable combination of management skills and techniques.
It is expected that this combination will not only ensure the continuing existence of the profession but also identify a high potential for information managers and librarians and a rapid growth in the requirements for their services.
[Aslib (1988)]
Fortunately, a framework was recently developed which is of great help in delineating appropriate value-adding roles for librarians and information scientists.
In his book Value-added processes in information systems , Robert Taylor lists 23 criteria which users consciously, or unknowingly, make use of in choosing amongst a variety of information presented [Taylor (1986), p 50]:
EASE OF USE
Browsing
Formatting
Interfacing I (Mediation)
Interfacing II (Orientation)
Ordering
Physical Accessibility
NOISE REDUCTION
Access I (Item identification)
Access II (Subject description)
Access III (Subject summary)
Linkage
Precision
Selectivity
QUALITY
Accuracy
Comprehensiveness
Currency
Reliability
Validity
ADAPTABILITY
Closeness to problem
Flexibility
Simplicity
Stimulatory
TIME-SAVING
Response Speed
COST-SAVING
Cost-Saving
I would submit that these are all value-adding activities which librarians and information scientists can and should be involved with in the transformation process, from when information originally appears in the public domain to when it appears on the executive's desk.
But, as Taylor shows, in the value-adding spectrum, they only comprise the first stage of a four-stage process.
The other three stages: Analysing Processes (separating, evaluating, validating, comparing, interpreting, synthesising); Judgemental Processes (presenting options, advantages, disadvantages); and Decision Processes (matching goals, compromising, bargaining, choosing) I would submit, should not normally be the province of librarians and information scientists.
They should be left to the knowledge workers who, we would hope, understand the full potential value of the information being transmitted to the executives who will make use of that information.
Eschewing the considerable underlying complexities in the points that I am making, I would argue that there is a fundamental difference between ‘understanding information’ and ‘understanding the full potential value of information’:.
As Taylor has stressed:
Value is not inherent in, nor is it carried by, an information message.
A message has value only in context.
It is given value by its users.
Consequently, a message has potential for value.
This means that the better we understand the environment in which the output of a system will be used, the better we will be able to estimate the potential value of those outputs, and to design systems accordingly.
Thus, to raise the potential value of the information being processed using activities beyond Taylor's Stage 1 (i.e. those in his Stage 2  (analysing processes), or his Stage 3 (judgemental processes), or his Stage 4 (decision processes)), the people involved must know and understand the detailed decision-making situation wherein the information will eventually be used.
And, because the majority of librarians and information scientists are unable or unwilling (or both) to do this, they should restrict their activities to those areas of value-adding in which they are specifically qualified to practise.
(The recent trend in library and information science schools away from teaching the fundamental skills of cataloguing, classifying, indexing and so on has, therefore, in my view, been mistaken.)
The complexity of the Publicly available information resource
In case librarians and information scientists feel that the first stage of Taylor's processes of adding value is not very challenging, I feel that I should spend a few moments indicating the considerable complexity of the publicly available information resource potentially relevant to business activities.
a.
First, we would stress the immense size of the resource.
It is worth noting that some writers on business strategy are well aware of this problem.
For instance, Jauch and Glueck in the 1985 edition of their widely used text on Strategic management and business policy , include eight pages of finely typed text entitled ‘Business Facts: Where to Find Them’[Jauch & Glueck (1985), pp 143–150].
Even so, such guides are really only the tip of the iceberg.
Diagram 3, taken from Sammon (1986), starts to reveal more of the detailed problem, but even here each heading could be (and often has been) expanded into a whole book of sources.
The proliferation of business information sources has been driven by the increasing ease with which information can be made publicly available through advances in IT, and of course by the availability of cash to purchase those resources.
b.
Unfortunately, much of this vast publicly available information resource is bibliographically ill-organised , is of very variable quality , and is frequently difficult to access or acquire The problems of accessing and acquiring such information have been greatly aggravated by the need for enterprises more and more to compete on a global basis (compare, for example, the ‘1992’ initiative; suddenly, we have to know all about Greece!).
c.
The result is that the publicly available information resource that might be of relevance to strategic decision making presents an extremely confusing picture to the executive decision maker.
Even the online area is complicated in its structure, and many librarians and information scientists must have struggled, like me, to explain to users the differences between database producers, hosts, gateways and so on(see Aitchison (1988)).
Aware of this complexity, I have recently been trying to develop a non-traditional approach to describing publicly available business information resources that might help non-specialists appreciate how they come to be.
As a guiding principle, it seemed to me that future business information systems must not only be able to cope with all the many individual sources of business information, but also, such systems should be able to rank those sources in importance using various appropriate criteria.
Bearing this in mind, I sought to develop an approach which would try to distinguish what might be termed the ‘players’ in an industry, from those who are not players, whom I have termed the ‘commentators’:
Players are those whose actions have, or can have, a direct influence on a particular industry sector.
We know that what the players do can be decisive for the survival of a specific enterprise within such an industrial sector.
Thus those within the sector will wish to pay particular attention to what the sector's players say, do, and say they are going to do.
Commentators do not have the guaranteed ability to influence directly the competitive environment, although, of course, they may over time have a significant indirect influence.
a.
Industrial sector players
The players might be divided into five groups:
Corporations
Present competitors, suppliers, buyers possible entrants, substitutes.
Financial institutions and markets
The suppliers of capital.
National governments
Include official and quasi-official governmental organisations.
International official organisations
For example: International Monetary Fund, Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, European Economic Community (EEC).
Membership organisations
Trade unions, trade associations, professional associations etc.
Significantly, the statutorily required information compilations emanating from these bodies for the most part appear in a defined physical format:
company annual reports and accounts
prospectuses
official and quasi-official statistics and data-sets
parliamentary papers
laws and regulations
standards
patents
minutes of meetings
official pronouncements
The required logical format of these publications arises from their statutory nature.
Their physical format is still almost wholly print-on-paper.
This is partly because of the need to make the publications truly publicly available — thus satisfying the legal requirement — and partly because their producers do not normally have any financial or other incentive to make them available online.
Very slowly, this situation is changing, particularly in the data and statistics area.
However, ‘players’ do not confine themselves to releasing into the public domain ‘required’publications.
They will also seek to influence public and corporate opinion by generating other publicly available information via:
media events : press conferences, briefings, interviews etc.
documentary publications : ranging from press releases to substantial formal publications.
b.
The commentators
In these activities, the ‘players’ are joined by a very large number of other people and organisations, each seeking an audience for their comments:
journalists
This diagram is reproduced from ‘Assessing the competition: business intelligence for strategic management’, Sammon, William L;(in),Handbook of strategic planning ; eds.
J T Gardner, R Rachlin and H W A Sweeny, 1956, p 4.18.
Copyright 0 1956 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Reprinted by permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
consultants
market researchers
academic researchers
1ad hoc committees and bodies
etc. etc.
In contrast to most of the statutorily required information, the information produced by these ‘commentators’, and the information from the players that they are not legally required to release, but have chosen to do so voluntarily, can appear in a large number of logical documentary formats:
newspapers
newsletters
trade magazines
house journals
academic journals
working papers
theses and dissertations
reports
conference proceedings
loose-leaf compendia
card services
directories and handbooks
books.
Again, very little of this information is presently available in electronic form on initial publication, though also, again, this situation is gradually changing.
The above approach is clearly only one amongst several that might be fruitful.
(If it appears to be too gross and simple to the library and information professional, I can assure you that it has already proved to be too complex for many busy executives to take the time to grasp!)
The underlying point is that much more can and should be done than at present by librarians and information scientists to bring order and control to the myriad of business information sources that they are called upon to handle.
Once that is done, the next stage would be to produce neutral assessments of the relative value per se of the individual business information sources.
As is implied by Taylor's list above of 23 criteria, there are a number of attributes of information sources that can show considerable variation in practice.
I have in mind such measures as coverage, timeliness, accuracy, ease of use, and so on, all of which if  assessed and publicised by library and information professionals would do a great deal to improve the overall standard of business information sources.
On improving accessibility, we need to produce more and better tools which not only say what is available in theory relevant to a particular area, but how it can be consulted in practice.
A recently produced directory of EEC-country company information, produced from the London Business School Information Service, is the sort of thing I have in mind [London Business School Information Service (1989)].
Fahey and Narayanan, in a quotation I reproduced earlier from their book on ‘environmental analysis’ stressed that:
The potentially relevant data are essentially unlimited.
The data are inherently scattered, vague and imprecise, and the data sources are many and varied.
[Fahey & Narayanan (1986)]
My contention is that the prime reason for this situation — in the publicly available data domain — is the failure of librarians and information scientists to get a proper grip on the overall problem and to take effective measures to solve it.
It ought to be possible to get to a position where we can say with regard to a specific query: ‘These are the most inherently valuable sources available worldwide ‘about’ that subject.’
Even such an apparently simple thing as better training in reference enquiry work can reap immense benefits.
My library is not alone in having seriously under-invested in this area in the past.
Then there's a great amount that can be done in the interfaces with the other players in the information industry.
Work is, of course, being carried out already on several fronts, but it is generally ill-publicised and lacks coordination.
Issues such as copyright, disclosure, privacy and bibliographical control all fall — or should fall — firmly within the library and information science professionals' area.
And any improvements that they are able to bring to the overall situation cannot but improve the availability of information potentially relevant to business activities.
In summary, my message to library and information professionals is: do better what you and only you are qualified to do properly, and leave the other areas of value-adding to knowledge professionals who ‘understand the businesses’ that they are serving.
Conclusions
The conclusions that I have come to about what is and is not important in the area of environmental scanning and business strategy are similar in many respects to those of White and Wilson, in another piece of British Library-sponsored research [White & Wilson (1985)].
However, I would disagree most strongly with the suggestions for future action that they draw from their results.
They recommend:
5.
Any information provider should seek to establish a reputation as a ‘trusted source’ of information.
6.
Because information needs in business are likely to be highly specific to a company, and even to individuals within companies, a reputation as a trusted source should be developed on a basis of a good understanding of firms' market positions, products, exports markets, and competitors at home and abroad.
Because the authors perceive oral communication to be of great significance in business, they further recommend that:
7.
Information providers should develop some level of personal contact with managers, if they are to be regarded as trusted sources.
Furthermore, because information needs are often very specific to companies and individuals, they recommend that:
8.
Specific, narrow-targeted services should be developed either to replace or supplement general-purpose business information services.
My argument has been, on the one hand, that individual executive information needs are so task- and context-dependent that only skilled knowledge workers — at best— can hope to provide effective services.
And, on the other hand, that there is a tremendous amount that needs doing to make the formal, publicly available information resource more understandable in its structure, and accessible in its details.
It is librarians and information scientists who can best improve the latter situation.
The same is true — although it is not the prime focus here — in the area of internal ‘information management’(using the term in its widest sense).
Librarians and information scientists should concentrate on mapping the information resources of the firm, and making sure that  the processes for retrieving individual elements of resource conform with their professional knowledge of information retrieval techniques.
They should leave the actual management of the overall resource to others who fully ‘understand the business’.
(See Burk & Horton (1988); Horton (1988); Horton (1989).)
White and Wilson also comment: ‘Within the case studies it has not been possible to examine closely the relationship (if any exists) between the use of information and personal or business effectiveness.
This is an extremely difficult area to investigate.’
They therefore recommend:
23.
That a study be undertaken of how business managers perceive their effectiveness to be affected by access to, and use of, information of different kinds.
24.
That work be undertaken to identify indicators of information use in companies and to relate such indicators to those of business ‘success’.
Frankly, this proposal reminded me of one of the quotations with which Taylor prefaces his chapter on ‘Value-added Processes in Information Analysis’:
I don't want you coming back and telling me that what we need is more data.
Every time there is a problem, people come back and say, ‘The answer is for us to purchase additional data’.
We've got information coming out of our ears and what we need now is some way to make sense of it.
[Taylor (1986)]
Library and information science researchers keep wanting to do more research on the ‘information needs of managers’ in the vain hope that, eventually, they will find some managers somewhere who say that librarians and information scientists are the salt of the earth, and that their businesses would fail without them!
The true situation is as Patrick Wilson put it so well in another seminal work:
The librarian is not a specialist in information in general, but in information about records.
The librarian's job is a job of management of information-bearing objects, and the continually improved performance of that necessary job is a natural and reasonable goal for the future.
[Wilson 1977)]
Finally, inevitably in a review of this kind covering such a complex and multi-faceted area, one has to be highly selective in the sources one draws upon.
Taylor, after going through a similar — but much more extensive — exercise to the one here, came to this conclusion:
The field desperately needs a data analysis program of its own to collect, analyze, evaluate, compare, discard, and synthesize data already available.
As anyone knows who has read the literature of management information systems, office automation, and document-based systems, we are bombarded by data which if valid (and accepted by the profession) would have a profound effect on the design of information systems.
Unfortunately, much of such data is less than useful because of poor definition or methodology, or it is inapplicable because of local or special constraints in derivation.
These data float freely in our milieu.
We pick out those pieces which match our needs at the time [My emphasis]As have most people in the field, this author has participated in this game, using these data for illustration or emphasis in the classroom, as arguments in a paper, or as support in negotiating a budget or a new piece of equipment.
It is hoped that appropriate qualifiers were attached to the data.
Such is not always the case because qualifiers would weaken the argument, and data are data and, therefore, except for ranges, cannot be qualified.
[Taylor(1986), p 222.
See also Brittain (1989)]
Broadbent also recognises the overall problem:
Related research in this area has focussed on the views of information systems managers only, and generally, has not taken into account the views of a range of managers.
There has not been a rigorous research study which attempts to relate the cluster of managerial viewpoints concerning strategic uses of information resources and information technology to the information services infrastructure of organisations.
[Broadbent (1988)]
People trying to comprehend the field reviewed here have exactly the same problems in information overload as executives trying to comprehend their enterprise's environment!
I trust that this review has helped at least somewhat to lighten that load.
We have all heard the tedious cliché that we are living in an Information Society.
I would suggest a counter-proposition: that we are living in a society that is sick and tired of information.
Professional people in research, business, government and public service, whose work depends on information, are drowning in memos, reports, surveys, lists and other communications, many of which are trivial and unsolicited….
As consumers see it, most of the information they receive arrives spontaneously, and most of the information that they really value requires a disproportionate effort to find.
Hardly anyone enjoys information-seeking.
[Mignon (1988)]