

THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF AGRICULTURE IN THE DEVELOPING WORLD
INTRODUCTION
Population growth, the need for foreign currency earnings, and foreign aid have, in the past three or four decades, stimulated agricultural development in developing nations and have thus prompted environmental change.
While there are many success stories in terms of increased food supply (China for example can feed its entire population of 1060 million) such developments have also brought about environmental degradation.
For the purpose of discussion the impact of agriculture on environment will initially be examined in relation to three distinct regions that exemplify developing world environments, namely arid and semi-arid regions, humid rainforest regions and mountain areas.
In the former, which regularly reach media headlines because of famine, the major environmental changes that have occurred are soil erosion, desertification and salinisation.
All three are inherent components of the natural earth surface processes that occur in arid and semi-arid regions but have been exacerbated by human activity.
These processes are often interlinked and although they will be discussed separately here it is often the case that measures to combat one problem may lead directly to another, or that desertification results from soil erosion and/or salinisation.
In rainforest regions, deforestation is the major agent of environmental change and while it has obvious localised effects, especially in relation to soil erosion and soil degradation, there is growing concern that such large-scale destruction of biomass may have implications for climatic change (section 5.3.1).
Deforestation is also a significant problem in mountainous regions, notably in the Andes and the Himalayas, and has caused accelerated soil erosion as well as water management problems for downslope piedmont and deltaic regions.
Finally, attention will focus on the specific problems of island nations in the developing world where agricultural impacts have been particularly severe.
ARID AND SEMI-ARID REGIONS
Arid and semi-arid lands occupy one-third of the earth's surface and support a population of 700 million people.
Much of this land area and many of the people are in developing countries, especially in Africa ,South America and central Asia.
The availability of water is the main constraint on food production and while traditional shifting cultivation and nomadic practices are inherently conservation-oriented, the trend towards permanent cultivation and settled herding over the last 50 years has led to widespread environmental change.
In some cases land has become so degraded that it is agriculturally worthless.
Removal of the natural vegetation, overgrazing and overcropping have resulted in nutrient depletion, widespread soil erosion and desertification (section 7.2.1 for a definition).
In order to overcome the problem of an inadequate water supply, many parts of the arid and semi-arid regions have been irrigated.
While the construction of dams, reservoirs and drainage channels has changed the character of the landscape, many irrigation schemes, through mismanagement, have created problems of salinisation and waterlogging that counteract the beneficial effects.
In extreme cases, irrigation systems have been abandoned, contributing further to land that is annually lost to agriculture.
These problems also occur in developed countries (section 6.3.3), but here there is sufficient finance and expertise to initiate reclamation programmes.
This, however, is not the case in many developing countries, especially in Africa and thus it is likely that the rate of land degradation will increase indefinitely as populations continue to grow.
DESERTIFICATION
This issue will be discussed first in this section because it is controversial and because it is also related to the issues of salinisation and soil erosion which will be examined below.
There is considerable dissension in the literature as to what precisely constitutes desertification; Kovda (1980), for example, uses the term to describe land aridisation which involves all the processes that culminate in a reduction of the effective moisture content of soils and thus cause a decrease in biological productivity.
He makes no distinction between natural processes, such as climatic change, that may promote the spread of arid conditions, and those which are due to human activity.
Other sources distinguish between these two groups of factors, referring to natural processes as desertisation and to anthropogenically related ones as desertification.
This epitomises the current debate that exists relating to causal factors: while the issue remains unresolved, most of the available evidence points to human activity as the more important catalyst.
In consequence, the terms are frequently used to describe what is essentially the spread of desert-like conditions and decreasing biological productivity.
Goudie (1986), for example, uses the word ‘desertisation’ while Botkin and  Keller (1987) and Rapp (1987) use the term ‘desertification’.
The latter's definition is adopted here:
…the spread of desert-like conditions of low biological productivity to drylands outside the previous desert boundaries.
Desertification is the long-term degradation of drylands, resulting either from over-use by man [sic]and his animals, or from natural causes such as climatic fluctuations.
It leads to loss of vegetation cover, loss of topsoil by wind or water erosion, or loss of useful plant production as a result of salinization or excessive sedimentation associated with sand dunes, sand sheets or torrents.
Apart from the Sahel-Saharan zone, desertification is a significant problem in China, Southern Africa and Pakistan as well as in many developed nations such as Australia, North America and the USSR (Fig. 7.1).
Estimates of the extent of desertification vary; the Gaia atlas of planet management (Myers 1985), for example, suggests that c. 10 per cent of the 700 million people that inhabit the arid and semi-arid zones are living in areas that are becoming impoverished and that c. 12 million ha of land are degraded annually to such an extent that they are agriculturally unproductive.
These data contrast with those of the Independent Commission on International Humanitarian Issues (1986) which opines that some 230 million people are directly threatened by desertification and that annually 21 million ha are rendered almost or completely unproductive.
This variation is due to inadequate and imperfect monitoring, but nevertheless indicates that the problem is immense.
As Fig. 7.1 illustrates, the greatest risk of desertification is in   areas adjacent to the world's hot hyper-arid zones, and include rain-fed croplands, irrigated lands and rangelands.
Not all desertification is severe or irreversible, but as shown in Table 7.1, even slightly desertified land experiences a 10 per cent decline in productivity.
Moreover, the largest areas that are affected (Table 7.1) are rangelands where overgrazing is the major culprit though, as Cloudsley-Thompson (1988) has discussed, this is often brought about by the encroachment on grazing lands by cash-crop farmers.
North (1986), for example, has suggested that widespread cash-cropping of groundnuts in the Sahelian zone has obliquely contributed to desertification because farmers cannot afford either to purchase fertilisers to maintain soil-nutrient status or to use a long fallow period.
They are thus forced to extend the area of cultivation on to land hitherto used by pastoralists for seasonal grazing.
In consequence, the latter are impelled to maintain their livestock in dry savanna lands all year round.
In their natural state, such lands are characterised by large herds of herbivores that seasonally migrate in tune with biomass availability, so it is not surprising that overgrazing and land degradation ensue.
Apart from the problems of precisely delimiting areas that are experiencing desertification, it is equally difficult to determine whether or not rates of desertification are increasing.
This is because remedial measures have been effective in some regions (mostly in developed nations) while in others the rate of degradation has increased.
Clearly, each region with its attendant physical and socio-economic characteristics must be considered as a separate case.
As stated above, the problem of desertification has been brought to public attention by famines that have resulted in immense loss of life, especially in the Sahel-Saharan zone of Africa (reviewed in Glanz 1987 and Mortimore 1989), the causes of which have been the subject of much debate and have   recently been reviewed by Hulme (1989).
Here, drought is the crux of the matter  and whether it is caused by or causes land degradation.
If the former is the case, then a reduced vegetation cover due to mismanagement may lead, by affecting albedo and soil moisture, to reduced convective processes and therefore less rainfall; thus self-perpetuating drought becomes the norm.
In this case, land-cover becomes a key factor in determining the internal climate mechanisms in the Sahel and, by implication, land-use becomes the most significant way of combating the problem.
As Hulme has pointed out, this hypothesis takes no account of the possibility of influence from external factors such as global climatic change and the imperfectly understood ocean-atmosphere interrelationships which, as has been discussed in section 1.2.2, have played a major role in the longer-term glacial-interglacial cycle.
For example, Bradley et al.(1987a) have suggested that for the last 30–40 years there has been a general decrease in precipitation in low-latitudes of the northern hemisphere which are in accord with General Circulation Model (GCM) predictions based on doubled carbon dioxide levels.
Thus the reduced rainfall trends experienced in the Sahel may reflect the enhanced greenhouse effect.
The question then arises as to whether human activity has exacerbated and is continuing to exacerbate the drought process and whether it can be mitigated by better land management.
Whatever the answer is there is little doubt that improving the vegetation cover can only enhance productivity and improve the soil structure so that it is less susceptible to erosion and degradation.
Notwithstanding this debate, what precisely has happened in terms of environmental change in the Sahel in the last two to three decades?
There have been a plethora of studies at varying scales, which is a reflection of the Sahel zone's extension some 6000 km from the Atlantic to the Red Sea (Fig. 7.1) as a transition zone between the Sahara Desert and the Acacia- dominated savanna lands to the south.
As Mensching (1988) has discussed, erratic rainfall means that the boundary of rainfed cultivation varies from year to year and, as has been mentioned above, land-use pressures have intensified, including cash-crop production.
In the pre-1965 period a long run of higher than average precipitation allowed the spread northward of rain-fed cultivation, dominated by millet, and at the same time the increased populations placed more pressure on the vegetation for fuelwood.
After droughts first began in 1969, the Sahel zone, already one of high risk, became a famine zone as crop yields declined and the remaining vegetation was depleted by overgrazing as carrying capacity was exceeded.
In consequence, the unprotected soil, depleted of binding organic matter, was rapidly eroded by wind especially and desert dunes encroached.
According to Berry (1988), sand dune encroachment, deterioration of rangelands and rain-fed croplands have been severe or very severe in Sahelian West Africa and the Sudan.
In Burkina Faso, for example, observations between 1955 and 1974 have shown that degraded land and active sand have increased from 181 to 390 ha and from 56 to 150 ha respectively in the Menegon-Bidi area, which represents only a small proportion of the total 3000 ha of lost arable land in the Burkina Sahel and which is equivalent to the loss of 800 t of millet or 4500 t of straw (Mainguet 1986).
In the Sudan, apart from the increased extent of sand dunes along the Nile, El-Karouri (1986) reports a decline in sorghum production, a staple food, from  in 1961 to  in 1973 in the Kardofan region as well as similar declines in maize and millet  productivity and a reduction in gum arabic production due to the exploitation of Acacia senegal for fuel and clearance.
Outside Africa, desertification is occurring in many other arid and semi-arid regions.
In Kuwait, Al-Nakshabandi and El-Robee (1988) have shown that aeolian deposition has resulted in decreased productivity or complete failure of many agricultural enterprises.
In contrast to the Sahel zone which is classified as semi-arid, Kuwait is arid (Desertification Map of the World , FAO/Unesco 1977) so it is to be expected that desertification is a prominent problem and a major agent of environmental change.
In the Abdaly region of northern Kuwait there are some 156 farms which are separated by desert and thus exposed to sandstorms, where metal wind-breaks and shelter-belts have not prevented sand encroachment, largely as Al-Nakshabandi and El-Robee have suggested, due to poor management.
Similar problems have occurred in the Al-Wafra region in the south of Kuwait, where desert encroachment has led to the abandonment of farms.
Here the annual rate of sand encroachment is  which is in excess of the average annual rate of sand encroachment of  (Khalaf 1989).
Desertification is also occurring in South America and is most extensive in Argentina where the severest cases are recorded.
According to Dregne (1986), wind erosion is particularly acute in the central area of Argentina where dry-farming has resulted in the formation of mobile dunes to such an extent that more than 16 million ha have been affected.
Overall in South America, some 22 per cent of the arid regions are severely or very severely affected by desertification and there are few remedial programmes in hand.
The problem is also significant in China where there are c. 170 000 km 2 of desertified land, approximately 30 per cent of which has been created since 1920 (Zhu Zhenda 1982, quoted in Kebin and Kaiguo 1989).
Most of this is in the northwest where there has been a long history of land-use, involving both degradation and successful reclamation.
Songqiao (1988) describes the Mu-Us sandy region on the southeastern margin of the Ordos plateau and the Kolshin sandy region of the west Liao River basin as the worst cases of desertification in Chinese history.
In the former, shifting sand dunes have become more extensive due to overgrazing and injudicious cultivation causing the southern margin of the Mu-Us sandy region to extend beyond the northern boundary of the Loess plateau and the northern margin to extend into the Nobq Desert.
In northeastern China, Leeming (1985) reports that in the vicinity of the Great Wall in Shaanxi Province the desert margin has advanced markedly in the last 150 years so that sand now extends 70 km south of the Great Wall, and in the nearby Yulin area grazing land and arable fields have been engulfed.
Leeming also suggests that the increased incidence of sandstorms in Beijing are another result of poor land management that is creating desertification in northwestern Hebei and the adjacent areas of Inner Mongolia by the clearance of woodland and pastureland for arable crops.
There are a number of instances in China, however, where oases have been created out of the desert and where desertification has been halted.
Songqiao (1988) describes that of the Hexi corridor which is situated between the Mongolian and Tibetan plateaux and which has a long history of cultivation based on irrigation.
Moreover, Kebin and Kaiguo (1989) describe the measures suggested by the Project of Protective Forest System which was approved by the government in 1978 to improve conditions in northern China.
Between 1978 and 1985 some 5.3 × 10 6 ha were planted with trees, shrubs and herbs, including a sand-fixation forest belt of 700 000 ha, another 700 000 ha of shelter-belts for arable land and 170 000 ha of shelter-belts for pasture.
Eventually some 8 × 106 ha will be planted to constitute the ‘Green Great Wall’.
Kebin and Kaiguo also report that grazing and wood removal for firewood are prohibited near oases and villages and that these measures, plus tree planting and irrigation, have been effective in reclaiming parts of Gansu Province.
Here, the measures were instituted in 1982 and by 1984 c. 26 000 ha of desert had been restored and the shifting dunes fixed.
Successes such as this suggest that remedial actions are feasible and can bring beneficial effects in a relatively short time.
SALINISATION AND WATERLOGGING
As discussed in section 6.3.3, salinisation and waterlogging are processes of environmental degradation associated with irrigation.
Some 12 per cent of the world's cultivated land is irrigated, of which more than half is affected to some extent by these problems which inevitably lead to a reduction in crop productivity, the very factor that such schemes were established to increase salinisation and waterlogging are particularly significant in arid and semiarid regions where irrigation is necessary for agriculture, and while they are important in developed nations, they are fast becoming major environmental problems in many developing nations.
Earth Report (1988), for example, states that in Pakistan more than 65 per cent of the country's 150 000 km 2 of irrigated land are thus affected; in Egypt 35 per cent of farmland has salinity and waterlogging problems and in Iraq and India the situation is similarly acute.
The reasons why salinisation occurs and the mechanisms involved have already been discussed in section 6.3.3 and illustrated in Fig. 5.6.
In Pakistan, salinisation and waterlogging are particularly acute in the Indus Valley where irrigation has been practised since 5 kyr BP; currently some 15 x 10 6 ha are irrigated by a system that includes the Indus River and its tributaries, 3 storage reservoirs, 19 barrages, 43 canals and 90 000 watercourse systems (Shanan 1987).
This irrigation system supports large-scale grain production as well as a dense rurally based population.
Ground-water is also extensively used to supplement surface-water irrigation: in the Punjab alone there are some 164500 wells (Sabadell 1988).
Waterlogging and salinisation have, however, resulted in declining crop productivity to such an extent that crop yields in the region are now among the lowest in the world.
According to Shanan (1987), irrigation efficiencies are so low that between 35 and 45 per cent of the water entering the canal system never actually reaches the fields; losses are due to evaporation and unlined drainage ditches.
The latter combined with poor drainage in an area with an average slope of only 1: 5000 has resulted in raised water-tables and extensive waterlogging.
Shanan, referring to a 1978 survey of 14.6 × 106 ha, asserts that in 13 per cent of the area the water-table was less than 1.8 m below the surface and in a further 41 per cent of the area it was between 1.8 and 3 m depth.
Moreover, rates of water-table rise are rapid, at between 30 and 40 cm per year, and already large areas of the Indus basin have been transposed into saline waterlogged swamps, though remedial measures involving government-controlled drainage schemes have helped to mitigate this problem.
Salinisation in the region is extensive because of inadequate natural drainage and the fact that much of the ground-water in the underlying  aquifer is also saline.
More than 1 million ha are currently classified as severely saline and are mostly unsuitable for crop production because of either highly saline water in the root zone or the presence of salt crusts on the soil.
As Sabadell (1988) has discussed, remedial measures have been initiated, beginning in 1958 with the Salinity Control Reclamation Project I (SCARP).
Currently SCARP V is in operation, the aim of which is to encourage pumping from non-saline groundwater areas in order to ameliorate waterlogging problems.
Plans are also afoot to ensure the discharge of highly saline drainage water, via large outfall drains, into the lower reaches of the Indus whence it can be flushed into the sea in the flooding season; and to divert some of the saline water to evaporation lakes in nearby desert areas so that salt can be removed.
Such measures inevitably incur substantial costs which in turn increases the cost of crop production.
Egypt is another example of a country which, like Pakistan and China, has a long history of irrigation, in this case in the Nile Valley (section 3.4.2) beginning some 5 kyr BP.
In the last 200 years the irrigation system has been extended to increase the number of crops grown annually and especially to increase the cultivation of cotton which is a major export crop.
Stanhill (1986) suggests that the ensuing rise of the water table was initially beneficial, but by 1947 waterlogging and salinisation had reduced the cotton crop to half of its potential.
The opening of the Aswan Dam in 1970 was also initially considered to be beneficial to Egypt's agricultural productivity, as its capacity to control the Nile's sometimes erratic flow facilitated the conversion of all arable land to perennial cropping.
Each cultivated hectare of land in Egypt now produces, on average, five crops every 3 years.
This represents a large increase in productivity compared with pre-1970 levels but it has been achieved at great cost in terms of environmental degradation and human health.
In relation to the latter, the increased amount of year-round open water has caused the spread of several water-borne diseases into the rural population.
The most significant of these is schistosomiasis (bilharzia), a debilitating disease that can cause liver fibrosis and bladder cancer, which is transmitted to humans by a parasitic worm that requires water-snails as an intermediate host.
According to Earth Report (1988) the incidence of this disease increased significantly in the immediate post-1970 period in villages adjacent to Lake Nasser, the lake dammed by the Aswan Dam, though subsequent public health measures have brought the disease under control.
In terms of environmental change, the same problems that characterise the Indus basin of Pakistan have ensued in the Nile Valley.
Firstly, the salinity of irrigation water has increased due, as Stanhill (1986) explains, to the high rates of water loss from Lake Nasser which is situated in an arid region where evaporation is particularly rapid.
Using data for the period 1954–74, Khalil and Hanna (1984) have demonstrated that since the scheme was initiated the dissolved salt content of the Nile at the head of the delta has increased by 29 per cent.
Secondly, since half of the water that is emitted from the reservoir for agriculture is transported, via evaporation and transpiration, to the atmosphere much more salt is deposited in the soil.
This amounts to 6 million annually and because of elevated ground-water levels its removal by leaching is impaired.
Exchanges between surface water and ground-water also mean that the latter is becoming more saline.
Incidental, but significant for environmental change, is the effect that the Aswan Dam has had on the fertility of the land situated in the lower reaches of the Nile.
According to Earth Report (1988), some 100 million t of nutrient-rich silt were deposited annually in the pre-Aswan period but is now reduced to just a few tomes per year, necessitating extensive fertiliser use at considerable cost and, presumably, inviting long-term eutrophication problems that characterise many developing countries (section 6.3.1).
Rapid siltation at Aswan is also a major ongoing problem.
Irrigation programmes in the Sudan since 1955, where cotton is a major export crop as it is in Egypt, have again created considerable environmental change.
Environmental degradation in this region is not confined to pre-independence times (before 1955) as post-independence practices and policies have not fared much better despite considerable financial assistance from the World Bank (Wallach 1988).
Apart from changing the landscape of Sudan, especially in the Gezira region to the south of Khartoum by canal construction, the irrigation projects have not resulted in the increased production of cash crops that was initially envisaged.
This Wallach attributes to the overall control of government and aid agencies that assigns to the farmers a passive role in land management.
Salinisation and waterlogging are also creating environmental degradation in Iraq where some 50 per cent of the country's 36 000 km 2 of irrigated land is affected.
Much of this occurs as a result of the Greater Mussayib Irrigation Project.
This was established in the 1953–56 period and is located c. 60 km south of Baghdad in the alluvial plains between the Tigris and Euphrates, using water from the latter.
As Clark (1986) points out, the project was considered to be a failure in both technical and economic terms within 10 years of its inception, not least because of resulting poor drainage, increasing soil salinity and excessive silting.
In China, as discussed by Smil (1984) and Songqiao (1986), salinisation and waterlogging have occurred extensively in irrigated regions, chiefly in the north China plain and the eastern provinces.
According to Songqiao (1986), about 20 per cent of China's 1 × 10 8 ha of cropland are affected by salinisation.
In the Tarim River basin in the northwest province of Xinjiang, between 15 000 and 60 000 m 3 of water per hectare are used annually for irrigation, but inadequate drainage means that the system is inefficient resulting in considerable water loss and salinisation.
Similarly, in the Huimin prefecture of Shandong Province (northeast China) irrigation works constructed between 1957 and 1960 led to a rapid rise in the water-table and increasing salt levels of such magnitude that many irrigation systems have been abandoned.
Irrigation schemes in other parts of Shandong as well as the neighbouring provinces of Heenan and Hebei have also proved to be less efficient than originally envisaged (Leeming 1985).
This is partly due to the fact that reservoir construction is incomplete, many are unsafe and the water-distribution systems are often incomplete or inadequate so that water cannot reach the fields.
As a result, water loss is high due to evaporation and seepage which promote waterlogging and salinisation.
Concern is also being expressed about the proposed construction of a large dam at the north of the Three Gorges on the Yangtze River.
As Jhaveri (1988) reports, this project, which has the support of the World Bank, is being undertaken to reduce the threat of flooding, to provide hydroelectric power and to improve navigation.
There is, however, a great deal of opposition to the project as there is no guarantee that these objectives will be achieved, because large-scale relocation of displaced farmers will be necessary and because there are likely to be profound and detrimental ecological consequences.
In relation to the latter, the reduced flow of fresh water into the estuary will allow the  intrusion of salt water and thus affect biological productivity that will rebound on fisheries and the supply of water for industrial, agricultural and domestic use.
Increased salinisation is thus a real prospect for the lower Yangtze if this project proceeds.
Here, the cause will be a very different one to that associated with irrigation but may have significant repercussions for the exacerbated salinisation of one of China's most productive agricultural regions.
SOIL EROSION
On a global basis, soil erosion is particularly serious in dry tropical regions and is, therefore, a major problem in many developing countries.
According to the Gaia atlas of planet management (Myers 1985), approximately 75 000 million t of soil are lost annually from the land surface and the areas that are most severely affected are shown in Fig. 7.2.
Comparing this with Fig. 7.1, which illustrates the global distribution of desertification, it is clear that the two processes are often interrelated.
While soil erosion is an integral part of natural denudation processes, human activity, especially injudicious agricultural practices, has greatly accelerated natural rates of soil erosion affecting   not only areas from which soil is removed but areas in which it is deposited.
The problem is likely to increase because, as Pimentel et al.(1987) point out, most of the world's fertile land is already being cultivated — which means that most newly cultivated areas will be on marginal land, often on steep slopes.
For agriculture, the most significant result of accelerated soil erosion is a reduction in productivity.
As in the case of developed countries (section 6.2.2), the major agents of soil erosion are wind and water, the efficiency of which depends on many other factors such as angle of slope, land-use and vegetation cover (see Fig. 6.1).
According to Kovda (1983) soil erosion has increased by a factor of five since the beginning of settled agriculture and has resulted in the destruction of c. 4.3 × 10 ha of productive land.
Buringh (1981) has estimated that annually the global loss of agricultural land due to soil erosion is 3 x 10 6 ha.
These data reinforce Lal's (1988) view that accelerated soil erosion is a major global problem.
Among the developing nations that are worst affected by soil erosion are Mexico, Ethiopia and many more African states, as well as India, Pakistan and China (see review in Brown and Wolf 1984).
In India, for example, 6000 million t of topsoil are lost annually, while in the highlands of Ethiopia the annual figure is 1600 million t (Earth Report 1988).
Not all of this is due to soil losses from agricultural systems since deforestation also increases soil erosion rates (sections 7.3 and 7.4), and in contrast there are numerous examples where remedial measures have actually reduced soil erosion.
It has long been recognised that the human factor is just as significant an influence on rates of erosion as physical features, as has been highlighted by a study of potential versus actual erosion in Zimbabwe by Whitlow (1988).
Since rural development here is a major aim of government policy, such research is an essential prerequisite to the formulation of efficient management programmes: clearly, long-term development of this kind is only sustainable if the soil resource is adequate, especially in a country that already has a widespread soil erosion problem.
Whitlow's comparison (Fig. 7.3) between the occurrence of actual erosion, as deduced from aerial photographs, with a survey of potential erosion hazards based on environmental factors such as rainfall erosivity, soil erodibility and slope, indicates that there is poor agreement between the two.
According to a potential erosion hazard map produced by Stocking (1975), a modified version of which is given in Fig. 7.3, the areas with the highest erosion potential are located mainly in the northern part of the country especially in the Zambesi Valley and the Mutoko District.
In contrast, Whitlow's (1988) map of actual erosion indicates that the most severely eroded lands are in the region to the east and south of Masvingo, including the Save River basin.
There is some correspondence between the two maps in the Mutoko District but the main correlation is between actual erosion and land tenure systems.
As Fig. 7.3 shows, the Communal Lands are more heavily eroded than the General Lands.
The latter is a term used to refer to former ‘white’ areas of pre-independence Zimbabwe and are commercial farmlands, while the Communal Lands are peasant farming areas, of which nearly 27 per cent are subject to extensive or very extensive erosion, which compares with only 1.6 per cent of the General Lands.
Whitlow's survey also shows that non-agricultural land in Zimbabwe is not seriously affected by erosion, since 95.2 per cent of these areas are in the lowest erosion classes (Fig. 7.3), and that in Zimbabwe there are 1.83 × 10 6 ha of eroded land overall, of which 83 per cent occurs in the Communal Lands.
Here population levels are highest, with 25.5 people km-2  as compared with 7.6 people km-2 in the General Lands, indicating that population densities and erosion rates are directly related.
As Zinyama and Whitlow (1986) have pointed out, erosion problems are likely to increase in the Communal Lands, where a population growth of 3.6 per cent per year means that the population will double in less than 20 years.
In the absence of soil conservation, the productivity of these lands w ill inevitably decline rapidly; Elwell and Stocking (1984) have suggested that the soils of the Save Valley, for example, will only be able to support maize cropping for another   10 years.
Moreover, enhanced soil erosion is creating other problems.
Of 130 dams constructed in the last 50 years in the Masvingo District, more than half are badly silted (Elwell 1985).
These data not only confirm the severity of erosion in parts of Zimbabwe but reinforce Blaikie and Brookfield's (1987) view (section 4.4.1) that social factors are a significant component of soil erosion problems and must, therefore, be accorded sufficient consideration in soil conservation programmes.
Soil erosion, exacerbated by land-use practices, is a widespread problem in Africa despite and because of many colonial (section 4.4.1) and post-colonial soil conservation schemes.
In Tanzania, for example, the Dodoma section of the semi-arid central region has a long history of both accelerated soil erosion and attempts at conservation.
As Christiansson (1988) describes, rotational bush-fallowing and permanent agriculture are gradually replacing shifting cultivation in an area that experiences a long dry season and a short intense wet season.
Clearance of semi-arid savanna, coupled with overgrazing and friable soils, has resulted in annual degradation rates of between 1 and 10 mm per year, the higher rates occurring on overgrazed slopes.
As well as contributing to declining soil fertility, such high sediment removal are causing problems with water supply by increasing reservoir siltation rates.
Colonial soil conservation measures during the 1930–50 period, which involved hedge planting, contour ridging of cultivated land and gully control, proved to be ineffective because of the unpopularity of controls on stock movement and resettlement.
This, combined with a 47 per cent increase in the livestock population, and an increase in human populations, led to even greater degradation between 1957 and 1964 and prompted local prohibition of clearance and cultivation.
In addition, the post-independence government inaugurated a resettlement programme, involving villagisation of the scattered rural population, to improve service availability and promote rural development.
This in turn led to increased degradation that has been exacerbated by the subsequent use of marginal lands for cultivation.
Currently, a new programme is in operation to develop arable cultivation, but incorporating soil and water conservation measures which include the planting of wind-breaks and forests as well as contour farming to minimise erosion.
Christiansson (1988) reports that between 1973 and 1983, 11 400 ha of land were reclaimed under the auspices of this project which includes educational projects and a policy of livestock destocking.
Remedial measures to curb soil erosion, involving the use of grass hedges, have also been successful in several southern Indian states.
Sattaur (1989) reports that planting of vetiver grass (Vetiveria ziganiodes ) has helped to counteract soil erosion on slopes as steep as 50 per cent.
If planted along contours, the grass, which is unpalatable to livestock except in its early growth stages and thrives even in arid areas, will rapidly form easily managed hedges that act as a wind-break as well as a trap for eroded soil particles.
China is another developing country where soil erosion is a serious problem, with an average annual rate of erosion of 43 t ha- (Pimentel et al.1987).
It is acute in the Loess Plateau which occupies 530 000 km 2 of north and central China where fine-grained silts derived by wind erosion from the deserts of Mongolia and northwest China were deposited during the Tertiary and Quaternary periods.
The depth of these deposits varies from less than 10 m to more than 200 m and the major drainage system is that of the Huanghe River, which is also known as the Yellow River since it carries a huge volume of yellow silt from the Loess plateau into the Yellow Sea.
Songqiao  (1986) states that the silt amounts to some 1.6 × 10 9 per year and that the rate of erosion from the middle reaches of the Huanghe River basin is 100 t ha- per year.
The region has a long history of human activity (section 3.2.1), and although erosion has always been a problem it has intensified considerably in the last 100 years as deforestation has accelerated and grasslands have been degraded.
According to Smil (1984), severe erosion is now symptomatic of c. 80 per cent of the region, of which more than half is very seriously affected.
The major agent of erosion is water, especially during the summer months when two-thirds of the annual rainfall occurs in heavy thunderstorms and thus has high erosivity which is enhanced by a much diminished vegetation cover.
As Zachar (1982) has described, the poor cohesiveness of loess soils, due to the paucity of binding colloids, means that they are characterised by high erodibility which is made worse by leaching that rapidly removes cations like calcium and magnesium.
In consequence, the Loess plateau has extensive rill and gully systems and even ravines which, in addition to the more gradual loss of topsoil, have resulted in decreased crop and livestock productivity.
The magnitude of erosion is reflected in the silt content of the Huanghe River: before it enters the Loess lands it has an average silt content of 2 kg m-3 of water, but when it leaves the region after its confluence with the Weihe the average silt content is 35 kg m- which can rise to several hundreds of kilograms after storms (Smil 1984).
The amount of silt that the Huanghe brings to the China Sea (1.6 × 10 t per year) represents a 25 per cent increase over the last 30 years and is due mainly to the conversion of grasslands to arable fields (Smil 1987b).
These data, plus those given in section 6.2.2 in relation to soil erosion in the developing world, provide a range of examples that indicate the magnitude of the global soil erosion problem.
The resulting loss in crop productivity is grave cause for immediate concern, even if it can be partially offset by more intensive use of fertilisers.
TROPICAL FOREST REGIONS
On the earth's surface, environmental change is a continuous process and much of this change is attributable to agriculture.
In Europe, for example, the removal of temperate forest began more than 5 kyr BP when permanent agricultural systems replaced the hunting and gathering strategies of the mesolithic period (sections 3.3.2 and 3.3.3); and has continued ever since, though post-war afforestation policies have redressed the balance to some extent (section 8.2).
In the tropics, however, environmental change is occurring at an unprecedented rate where deforestation is creating local and, in all probability, global environmental problems since the demise of tropical rainforests in particular may well be contributing to the enhanced greenhouse effect (section 5.3.1).
The reasons for such large-scale deforestation are complex.
Almost all of the world's tropical forests are in developing counties where rapid population growth means that the pressure on land for food production is high.
Undoubtedly, indigenous populations have accelerated rates of deforestation in their search for more extensive arable and grazing lands, and as populations Increase so to will the pressure on land.
External factors  have also stimulated deforestation: these include the increasing importance of cash crops which are exported to earn foreign currency, increased logging activities and the establishment of extensive ranches to satisfy the wood and meat requirements respectively of the developed world.
Many of these enterprises are controlled by external corporations or by a landed élite that comprises only a small proportion of the population, and while they are responsible for a great deal of environmental degradation they provide little benefit to the majority of the indigenous people.
The removal of the protective forest cover leads to accelerated soil erosion, which in turn affects local hydrological regimes and causes accelerated silting of water-bodies.
Apart from the problems associated with complete deforestation, extensive areas of primary forest have been degraded so that they are no longer as productive in terms of biomass, and sufficiently fragile that they too face extinction in the coming decades.
DEFORESTATION IN TROPICAL RAINFOREST REGIONS
As shown in Fig. 7.4, tropical forests occupy a considerable area of the earth's surface, comprising 2 × 10 km, which amounts to nearly half of the world's forested lands (Furtado and Ruddle 1986).
Of the major forest regions in South and Southeast Asia, Central Africa and Central and South America, Amazonia is the largest, occupying nearly 1000 million ha.
These forests vary in character from closed forests to open woodlands and include mangrove forests that occur in coastal regions.
In their natural state, tropical forests, especially tropical rainforests, are among the most productive of the earth's ecosystems producing two or three times as much organic matter per unit area (e.g. ) than temperate or boreal forests (typically ) and as numerous writers have pointed out they are also the most diverse ecosystems in terms of numbers of plant and animal species (P W Richards 1986, Walker 1986).
The reasons for this diversity have been subject to much debate (section 2.4.2) and while it is not yet resolved, the fact   remains that such forests house a huge genetic resource that has only been fractionally realised to yield what have ultimately become significant commercial products such as rubber.
The loss of this resource has been discussed by Lovejoy (1989) and it is almost as significant as the local and global environmental repercussions, in view, for example, of the search by agrochemical and drug companies for effective natural compounds.
The most rapid rates of deforestation are occurring in the tropical rainforest regions, but deforestation is also significant in the savanna woodlands that occupy the drier tropical and subtropical regions.
This will be discussed in section 7.4.3 and the current section will focus specifically on the tropical rainforest.
There are varying estimates of the amount of the world's tropical forests that have already been removed and at what rate deforestation is proceeding.
Nevertheless the data given in Table 7.2 are the most widely quoted, and illustrate that the area already affected is immense and that average rates of deforestation in these regions are sufficiently high that there is a real danger that forests will disappear altogether in the next 200 years, especially as reforestation is replacing only c. 10 per cent of the cleared forest (Lanly 1982).
The data show that the largest deforested area is in Central and South America where some of the highest rates of loss are occurring.
According to World resources 1988–1989 (World Resources Institute 1988), 0.6 per cent of the world's tropical moist forests are cleared annually on average, with similar values for all three of the major tropical rainforest regions.
This generalisation, however, masks the fact that there are considerable variations from country to country in each of these regions.
Some of the highest annual rates are occurring in the Ivory Coast and Nigeria where annual losses are currently reaching 5.2 per cent; in Costa Rica, Sri Lanka and El Salvador the annual rates are between 3.6 and 3.2 per cent .
The most significant reasons for deforestation are the spread of shifting cultivation, increasing plantation agriculture and large-scale ranching, logging, mineral extraction and road and dam construction.
Only the impact of agricultural practices will be discussed here.
According to Arnold (1987), shifting cultivation is the main cause of deforestation, causing 70, 50 and 35 per cent of the deforestation in Africa, Asia and tropical America respectively.
Data reported by Malingreau and Tucker (1988), however, suggest that these estimates are incorrect and that conversion to pasture is at least as significant as shifting cultivation.
Salati and Vose (1983), for example, believe that of the 8 x 10 6 km 2 of tropical forests that have been converted to agriculture, some 3 × 10 6 km 2 are now under shifting cultivation while 3.5 × 10 6 k 2 have been converted to pasture.
Nevertheless, the data reflect the magnitude of the impact of agriculture on tropical forest areas.
Sometimes   the movement of farmers into these regions is actively encouraged by government policies; elsewhere it is an indirect result of policies that have forced peasants off their lands in order to develop cash cropping and ranching, a process that began with colonial settlement (section 4.4).
In South America, for example, landownership especially in the developed coastal zones is concentrated in a small proportion of the population who are engaged in plantation agriculture or ranching.
As a consequence, there is a growing population of landless farmers whose only alternative to migrating to the ghettos of the major cities is to invade the forests.
Shifting agriculture is not in itself environmentally harmful, as is evidenced by the long and generally successful history that this type of agriculture has enjoyed in tropical regions.
The clearance of small areas of forest, followed by burning to release the nutrients stored in the biomass, ensures a sufficiently fertile soil to provide an adequate crop for 2–3 years.
Problems arise, however, when it becomes impossible to allow a long enough fallow period between cropping for the forest to redevelop and thus restore the nutrient content of the ecosystem.
This occurs because most tropical rainforest biogeochemical cycles involve a tight intra-system relationship between the living biomass and the litter which contains the major reservoirs of nutrients; this is in contrast to the biogeochemical cycles of temperate and boreal forests wherein the soil plays a much more significant role in nutrient recycling (see Mannion 1986e for a more complete discussion of these relationships).
More intensive use of tropical forests is occurring where pressure on land is so acute that fallow periods of insufficient duration are creating environmental degradation.
Scott (1987), for example, has examined the impact of more frequent clearance that is now being practised by the Campa Indians in the Gran Pajonal area of central Peru, where primary and secondary forest is interspersed with savanna and grassland.
The Campa Indians have been forced into the more remote regions of Gran Pajonal due to the migration of Peruvian settlers from the coastal and Andean cities.
Traditional Campa agriculture is based on garden or chacra plots which are used mainly for the cultivation of manioc, although plantains, bananas, sweet potatoes and beans are also grown on a smaller scale.
Initially, garden plots of c. 1 ha are created by felling (slashing) and the felled trees are burnt after a period of drying.
While any one group may cultivate two or three different gardens of varying ages at any one time, the nutrient stocks are rapidly depleted and within 3 years the plot is abandoned and secondary forest begins to reestablish.
Scott (1987), on the basis of biomass and nutrient data, believes that a 15-year fallow period is adequate to allow the replenishment of nutrients stocks to support a 2-3-year cycle of cultivation.
However, new colonists in Gran Pajonal are employing a fallow period of only 7 years, which is likely to cause long-term nutrient depletion so that maintenance of crop productivity will only be possible with the addition of artificial fertilisers.
Similar problems are occurring in Rondonia in the southwest of Brazil, where the Polonoroesti road-building project is attracting some 70 000–80 000 settlers per year as the forest is opened up.
The area has already lost 30 per cent of its forest cover (Earth Report 1988).
Many of the new colonists are, as Fearnside (1985) has commented, using a fallow period that is much too short for sustained agriculture.
In many cases the annual crops planted in the first few years are rapidly being replaced by pasture which itself is frequently proving to be uneconomic and environmentally detrimental.
Further large-scale deforestation is occurring in response to government-sanctioned  development projects, many of which involve cash cropping and ranching.
In Indonesia, for example, there is a government policy to encourage the migration of people from the densely populated islands of Java, Madura and Bali to the more sparsely populated outer islands of the archipelago.
This programme, titled Repelita, has been discussed by Ross (1986) who indicates that it operates via a series of 5-year plans.
That for 1983–88 involves the resettlement of 1.2 million families, most of whom will be engaged in agriculture, bringing the total number of resettled people to 3.6 million (Earth Report 1988).
Each family is provided with 3.5 ha of land of which 1 ha is used for rain-fed arable crops.
By 1982, some 180 000 ha of land had been cleared, with a further 1 million ha likely to be cleared by the completion of Repelita IV in 1988, involving c. 300 000 ha per year in mostly primary forest areas that are cleared by burning after initial felling.
In the earlier 5-year plans many environmentally destructive problems arose; the relocated Indonesians found that on arrival, despite a policy of grass planting on a contour basis, soil erosion had already occurred resulting in nutrient depletion.
As a result, there have been changes to land-clearance contracts, including the replacement of grasses by leguminous species that provide a better protective cover and enhance the nitrogen content of the soil.
Also, the responsibility for ensuring that such planting is actually carried out is now a binding part of the clearance contract, as is the application of initial fertiliser to ensure the success of newly sown legumes.
Nevertheless, as Suwardjo (1986) has discussed, these programmes have not only caused accelerated soil erosion, which in Sumatra may amount to as much as  per year, but also a loss of soil fertility, especially in areas cleared mechanically rather than by hand.
The former brings subsoil with a high aluminium content to the surface and this, in tandem with soil compaction and inadequate fertiliser use, has often resulted in poor harvests.
What remains unclear is whether this redistribution of Indonesian people has actually reduced the environmental problems associated with high populations in Java, Madura and Bali where deforestation and soil erosion are acute.
Or does it mean that the problems of environmental degradation are being magnified and transferred to hitherto uncompromised regions?
Once again, the interplay between politics and environment is apparent.
Schemes of a similar nature are underway in Amazonia where, as Johns (1988) has discussed, the rainforest is also threatened by logging and mining enterprises and road construction.
The development of Amazonia began in 1960 after the completion of the Belém-Brasilia highway that opened up the eastern part, and in the mid-1960s the government adopted numerous policies that, via tax incentives, were designed to encourage private sector development (Browder 1988).
One outcome of these policies has been the establishment of large-scale North American-style cattle ranching.
As World resources 1988–1989 (World Resources Institute 1988) points out, development of this type was initially considered to be more advantageous than other types of agriculture because it required relatively little new infrastracture, it could utilise abundant available labour and there was an expanding North American market for cheap pasture-reared beef.
The ultimate goal was the creation of an industry, originally funded by foreign investment, that would be self-sustaining and a major earner of foreign currency.
In the period 1965–83, encouraged by tax incentives, 470 cattle ranches with an average size of 23 000 ha were established in Amazonia which, according to Repetto (1988a), accounted for c. 30 per cent of the total deforestation  apparent from remotely sensed data collected between 1973 and 1983.
The schemes have proved to be both financially and environmentally unsatisfactory.
On the one hand, the high rate of government subsidies has benefited individual investors but resulted in considerable losses to the national economy that have done nothing to help Brazil repay its huge international loans.
On the other hand, loss of soil fertility after forest clearance and the invasion of weeds can result in a rapid decline in the carrying capacity of these ranches.
As Repetto (1988a) has discussed, the continued availability of subsidies for conversion of forest to pasture makes it more economic for the investor to clear further forest than to purchase fertiliser or control weeds in existing pasture.
Indeed, Malingreau and Tucker (1988) report that there is evidence from remotely sensed data for the recolonisation by forest vegetation of some ranches in the Matto Grosso following the abandonment of farms that were never economically or ecologically viable (see Fearnside 1984).
In spite of this, similar schemes are still being undertaken: in the Grande Carajás region, centred on Belém, 30 000 km 2 of forest w ill be cleared for ranching as part of a large-scale development plan involving mining, the establishment of heavy industry, road and rail construction, and a further 15 000 km 2 of forest will be removed to provide charcoal for pig-iron smelting (Fearnside 1989).
Large-scale cattle ranching is also one of the main reasons for forest decline in Central America.
Problems similar to those in Amazonia have been experienced in Costa Rica, but concern about forest demise stimulated in part by lumber companies' realisation that a resource vital to their enterprise is rapidly diminishing, has resulted in the establishment of a series of national parks within which local industry (such as small-scale farming and logging) is encouraged (Simons 1988).
THE CONSEQUENCES OF TROPICAL RAINFOREST DEMISE
There is little doubt that the rapid deforestation of tropical regions is contributing to the enhanced greenhouse effect.
For example, Goreau and de Mello (1988) have shown that deforestation in Amazonia has appreciably altered the fluxes of carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and methane from denuded soils to such an extent that they are likely to exacerbate the greenhouse effect, and thus mitigating measures should be undertaken which involve rainforest conservation as well as controls on combustion sources.
As this has been discussed in section 5.3.1, it will not be examined again in this section, which will concentrate on the local, though widespread, environmental change that occurs as a result of tropical deforestation and its often adverse economic consequences.
Of particular importance is the effect that deforestation has on tropical soils.
This varies according to land-use and from region to region depending on soil nutrient status, and is linked to the biogeochemical cycling of nutrients between the atmosphere, soil and biomass.
Interference with or removal of the latter will inevitably lead to changes in the reservoirs of nutrients and their inter-reservoir fluxes.
The tight intra-system cycling of nutrients that occurs in tropical rainforests between the biomass and the litter means that soils are rapidly depleted of nutrients once the vegetation is removed, as illustrated in Fig. 7.5.
In addition, removal of the protective  vegetation cover and its replacement with a crop or pasture often results in accelerated soil erosion that exacerbates nutrient deficits.
Rapid oxidation of soil organic matter is also promoted.
As a result, many tropical agroecosystems exhibit soil erosion and rapidly declining soil fertility, which in turn affect crop productivity, often with serious economic consequences.
Even within a relatively short time (5–10 years) a situation may develop wherein the economic gain is sufficiently diminished that the enterprise becomes self-destructive as the environmental costs increase.
Careful management is thus essential if agricultural enterprises are to survive.
Sioli (1985) has examined the effects of deforestation in relation to the Amazonian environment and points out that the disruption of biogeochemical cycles by burning renders nutrients susceptible to leaching.
While ash may temporarily increase soil nutrient content, it is readily leached so that nutrients are removed into ground-water or into surface runoff.
Further losses from the ecosystem occur as crops and/or animals are harvested and exported; and such cumulative losses, unless they are compensated for with artificial fertilisers, often lead to farm abandonment.
Sioli warns that ‘dust bowl’ conditions may develop as the protective vegetation cover is removed causing soils to dry out, and in some parts of Amazonia where seasonality is more pronounced there is already evidence of blown dust on newly constructed roads.
Soil erosion by water also increases and there is the   possibility of what Sioli describes as sandification.
This may occur at the exposed soil surface as raindrops selectively erode fine clay particles, leaving heavier sand particles: with time this process can affect deeper parts of the soil profile, impairing its water-retaining capacity to such an extent that even after agriculture has been abandoned the forest may be unable to recolonise.
As Buschbacher et al.(1987) have pointed out, it is doubtful if many of the pastures that were created in the eastern Amazon basin in the 1970s (section 7.3.1), and have since been abandoned, w ill ever return to forest: they may be permanently covered in heathlike vegetation.
Based on a study of fifteen abandoned sites in the Paragominas region south of Belém, each of which experienced varying degrees of land-use intensity, Buschbacher et al.have shown that only those sites where low- and medium-intensity use were practised are likely to return to a forest cover.
Their data are summarised in Table 7.3, which shows that pasture with a low intensity land-use exhibits characteristics that most closely resemble those of undisturbed forest, i.e. a high above-ground biomass in which most of the nutrient stocks are located and a diverse flora which includes many species found in mature forest.
This is in contrast to high intensity areas where mechanical removal of vegetation   coupled with intensive weeding and mowing have altered the environment to such a degree that forest recolonisation is unlikely.
Methods of deforestation and subsequent management practices not only influence the potential for forest regeneration but also influence the impact of deforestation on runoff and soil erosion.
For example, Maass et al.(1988) have examined the soil erosion losses that have occurred as agroecosystems have replaced tropical deciduous forest on the Pacific coast of Jalisco, Mexico.
Using data collected over a 2-year period from plots under a variety of management techniques, ranging from maize cultivation to a range of pasture grasses, they report that soil erosion and nutrient losses were greatest from maize (Zea mays ) and guinea grass (Panicum maximum Jacq.) plots.
Up to of soil per year were lost from these plots, which compares with less than  per year from undisturbed forest.
However, tests on the effects of a variety of conservation measures, including the incorporation of grass strips in cultivated maize fields and mulching with leaf litter from undisturbed forest, showed that the latter was particularly effective and reduced erosion by more than 90 per cent while, due to the nutrient input, productivity was increased by c. 30 per cent.
The effects of deforestation and management on tropical soils has also been discussed by Lal (1986), who cites examples in the humid tropics where deforestation has resulted in accelerated soil erosion.
This is reflected in the increased sediment load of many rivers, especially in Southeast Asia where, as Fig. 7.4 shows, deforestation is occurring rapidly.
Suspended sediment load data, however, provide only a crude measure of overall erosion and do not reveal the proportions of that load which are due to agriculture, logging, urban development, etc.
Conversely, individual site studies do not reveal the overall magnitude of erosion but nevertheless illustrate some of the trends which occur when the forest cover is removed.
Lal (1981) has examined the effects of deforestation on runoff and erosion in several small watersheds in the Ibadan region of Nigeria.
His data show that between 1978 and 1981 there was virtually no storm runoff or soil wash where forest was undisturbed; similar results were obtained for the catchment in which traditional farming was practised.
Where mechanical clearance was undertaken, 200 mm of runoff and  of soil were lost annually as compared to 48 mm of runoff and  of soil wash where manual clearing, followed by mechanised tillage, were practised.
Lal concludes that in this region the best methods of clearance and cultivation to conserve soil are manual clearing followed by no-tillage planting.
Similar experiments have been reported from the Ivory Coast by Roose (1986) who has compared runoff and erosion from several plots, one of which was deforested and maintained as a bare soil by ploughing, and others in which a variety of perennial, annual and tree crops were grown.
His data confirm many of the conclusions of Lal (1981).
Firstly, the method of land clearance is significant as a determinant of erosion which is least after manual clearing — and where mixed cropping is practised which maintains a protective vegetation cover all year round.
Secondly, land-use practices that involve tree crops in combination with legumes are also less likely to lead to soil degradation, while mechanised clearance for arable cropping is least beneficial, often leading to abandonment within 2 or 3 years.
The maintenance of at least a partial tree cover is particularly advantageous because it guarantees a supply of nutrients via litter fall, as well as affording protection against soil erosion.
The significance of tree crown or canopy cover as a  control on soil erosion has also been investigated by Ruangpanit (1985) in the mountainous region of northern Thailand where shifting cultivation is extensive.
His data show that runoff and soil erosion are considerably increased when the crown cover is low.
With a crown cover of 20 — 30 per cent, average erosion was 15.9 kg  but with an 80 — 90 per cent crown cover it was reduced to 7.0 kg .
Moreover, the data show that once the crown cover is reduced below c. 70 per cent, runoff and erosion increased rapidly but that there was little difference when crown cover was between 70 and 90 per cent .
Thus, Ruangpanit concludes that in such regions, especially where it is necessary to ensure watershed protection so that downstream regions are not affected by flooding or excessive silting, crown cover should be maintained at c. 70 per cent with as little bare soil as possible.
Inevitably, where soil erosion and declines in soil nutrients occur, there will be a decline in crop productivity, as has been discussed by Lal (1985, 1986) in relation to Amazonian pastures.
This will vary according to the crops being grown and management practices; it can be minimised if soil conservation measures, fertilisers and suitable crop rotations are utilised, including intercropping with legumes.
Nevertheless, ill-suited land-use and poor management can lead to environmental degradation with implications for present and future national economies.
The examples of Brazilian and Central American ranching, as discussed above, are cases in point.
Different problems but with similar consequences are occurring in the Philippines and have been described by Myers (1988), who points out that the mainstay of the country's economy is based on its natural resources, especially its forests.
There are also pressures to raise agricultural productivity to accommodate population increases, though most of the land that can be thus exploited is in the uplands and is consequently susceptible to erosion.
These are the areas in which the remaining forest lands are located; now only 22 per cent of the country is forested in comparison to nearly 100 per cent in 1900 and 66 per cent in 1945 (Myers 1988), which in itself constitutes a loss of revenue as timber exports (a major source of foreign currency) have declined in the last 20 years.
There is already evidence that, in the absence of suitable management plans, the uplands of the Philippines will rapidly undergo environmental degradation.
Myers points out that by 1986 the population in the uplands was in excess of 18 million, representing one-third of the total, mainly rurally based, population.
Many of these people are migrants from the lowlands, where most of the country's agriculture is located, who have little money to invest to ensure success in the longer term and who lack security of tenure to make farming the heritage enterprise that it is in many nations.
These facts, coupled with population growth, suggest that by the year 2000 most of the remaining forests will have disappeared and been replaced with subsistence farming with a little surplus income derived from cash crops.
Myers believes that soil erosion is already a problem and that at least 90 000 km 2 of land are so badly affected that they can no longer sustain crop production.
Open grasslands, for example, currently experience an annual loss of  of soil, with overgrazed areas losing , which compares with  annually from soils under secondary and primary forest respectively.
While there are no data from the Philippines that indicate what effect these soil losses will have on productivity, information from other tropical regions (e.g. Pimentel et al.1987) suggests that productivity will drop by between 15 and 70 per cent depending on the rate of soil  formation in relation to the rate of soil loss.
In addition to, there will be off-site repercussions, especially on watersheds which supply not only domestic water but also hydroelectric power and irrigation projects.
Excessive siltation will reduce the operational life span of dams and reservoirs and downstream areas are likely to witness an increase in flooding.
These problems are being made worse by logging practices which, unless carefully managed, w ill continue to contribute to excessive soil erosion.
Deforestation in the Philippines, especially that for agricultural development, is likely to be a major handicap to its economic development unless appropriate land-use strategies are implemented.
As Myers mentions, there are already some programmes in operation which suggest that the national resource base can be manipulated to accommodate the growing needs of the population without serious impairment of soil fertility.
These include social forestry, in which most land is used for tree growing and the harvest is balanced against a planting programme; and agroforestry in which the production of food crops is the primary objective but includes a large number of tree crops.
Such enterprises will, however, need to be expanded if the environment and the population are to be protected in the longer term.
SAVANNA REGIONS
Savanna regions occupy c. 20 per cent of the earth's land surface, comprising some 23 × 107sup6; km located between the equatorial rainforests and the mid-latitude arid and semi-arid deserts.
Savannas are most extensive in Africa, where they occupy 65 per cent of the land area.
Savannas also occupy 60 per cent of Australia, 45 per cent of South America and 10 per cent of India and Southeast Asia (MM Cole 1986).
Floristically such regions are complex (Johnson and Tothill 1985), the common feature being a continuous grass layer with varying amounts of trees and/or shrubs.
All are influenced by a strongly seasonal climate with abundant rainfall during the summer months and a dry period of between 4 and 8 months.
All of the world's savannas have been affected by human activity and, as Table 7.2 shows, deforestation is occurring at a rapid rate due to agricultural development and fuelwood collection.
The problems are most acute in Africa where population pressures are also greatest, though modification of South American savannas is increasing; desertification is occurring in some areas as a result of overgrazing.
The various land-uses that are practised in African savannas have been described by Okigbo (1985) and include nomadic herding, shifting cultivation on a 2–3 year basis, semi-permanent cultivation or rotational bushfallow, intensive dryland agriculture involving rotations and intercropping, and more intensive flood-land cultivation where small-scale irrigation is practised.
The most successful agricultural systems in terms of sustained productivity and the least environmentally degrading are those which involve crop rotations and an adequate fallow period.
Traditionally, as Okigbo points out, a production unit of this kind w ill consist of a number of fields centred around garden plots that are permanently cultivated; each field has a specific intercropping and fallowing pattern and the system as a whole relies on manual labour rather than mechanisation, with limited inputs of fertilisers and pesticides.
This semi-permanent cultivation is now more widespread than slash-and-bum shifting cultivation and has increased as nomadic  groups have become more sedentary and integration of crops and livestock has occurred.
In areas with high population densities (c. 100 people km-2), intensive dryland agriculture is becoming increasingly important and in many cases there is no fallow period although intercropping is common.
Where there is seasonal flooding or irrigation, as in West Africa, rice is cultivated — and specialised cash cropping is increasing in the savanna zone as a whole.
Despite these changes, some of which have proved to be environmentally degrading, there is still a food crisis because population growth is rapid (2–3 per cent per annum) and farming systems are failing to provide the necessary increase in productivity of c. 4 per cent per annum (Okigbo 1985).
For example, Tarrant (1987) has shown that while world cereal yields are increasing, those for Africa are actually declining and exhibit increased annual variability especially in semi-arid regions like the savanna.
Hadley (1985) also documents the poor success rates of many development projects in African savannas where, overall, crop and arable production have grown by only 2 per cent, necessitating a massive increase in food imports.
It is also significant that the small improvements in productivity are due not to better production methods, but to increases in animal populations and the amount of land under cultivation.
Dyson-Hudson (1984) has also commented that since c. 1970 the equivalent of $US600 million has been given as development funds to Africa's rangelands but has brought few rewards as far as more efficient and productive pastoralism is concerned.
There is also evidence that land degradation is accelerating, often as a result of incautious schemes to improve productivity, and as a consequence of overgrazing and firing.
Billé (1985), for example, has described the encroachment of bush at three sites in southern Ethiopia in relation to grazing pressure.
Tree and shrub numbers greatly increase as grazing pressure increases but there is a decline in the productivity of grasses which also become more inaccessible to livestock as the canopy closes; with moderate tree densities, grass productivity is enhanced.
This can be promoted by burning which removes woody tissue and locally enriches the soil.
It must however, be carefully controlled because it is essential that a cover of perennial rather than annual grasses is maintained as the latter are more susceptible to drought.
The maintenance of a partial tree cover is also to be encouraged in order to provide extra forage and a protective soil cover which helps combat desertification.
This is a major problem in the Sahel zone where cash cropping has been mooted by Earth Report (1988) as one of the major causes of environmental degradation, and while the case presented may be oversimplified it is worth reiterating since cash cropping in general is not (if past performance is taken as a measure) the answer to Africa's development problems.
Earth Report states that the introduction of peanuts as a cash crop in the 1950s and 1960s led farmers to become dependent on peanut harvests as their main source of income; as prices declined by 22 per cent between 1967 and 1969, so did soil fertility as less money was available for fertilisers.
In order to maintain living standards, marginal land was brought into cultivation causing disruption of the traditional interplay between cultivators and nomadic herders; the former provided millet and sorghum as staple crops which they exchanged for animal products and the benefits of having their lands fertilised by animal herds.
Fallow lands brought into cultivation reduced the range for grazing and restricted the distribution of much needed animal dung as fertiliser.
The onset of drought in the 1970s simply compounded and brought to a head a situation that was almost inevitable from  its inception, the root of which was fuelled by European interests to counteract competition from soya bean imports from the USA.
There are, of course, other arguments that pertain to the Sahel disaster (section 7.2.1).
Savanna regions outside Africa have also experienced development problems that have resulted in environmental change.
In South America where savannas occupy some 2 × 110 8 ha, there have been many modifications of the natural vegetation for a variety of agricultural purposes ranging from large-scale ranching to intensive cropping based on irrigation.
According to Cochrane et al.(1985), the land-use practised depends mainly on how well or badly the savannas are drained.
In poorly drained areas extensive cattle ranching is predominant while in better-drained areas annual cropping is expanding and in some cases, especially in Venezuela, irrigation is making a major contribution to agricultural development.
Cochrane et al.state that c. 80 per cent of tropical America's savannas are mostly well drained, with the largest single expanse in central Brazil.
Here, in common with the Llanos area of the Orinoco basin in Venezuela, the vegetation comprises cerrados which M M Cole (1986) defines as savanna woodland.
Cochrane et al.(1985) describe these two regions as; ‘undoubtedly the most rapidly expanding agricultural frontiers in the Americas’.
As communication networks have improved in the last three decades, there has been a shift away from cattle ranching to grain production.
After clearance, rice is cultivated, followed by soya beans and maize and eventually semi-permanent pastures are established.
Cassava, sugar cane, fruit crops, coffee and cotton are also grown and irrigation in the Venezuelan region is widely used for grain production.
In Brazil, for example, the total area of crops has increased from c. 5 × 10 ha to 8.8 × 10 ha (excluding cultivated pastures), with noteworthy increases in dryland rice, maize, wheat and soya-bean production between 1970 and 1980.
Moreover, Cochrane et al.believe that there is considerable potential for increased productivity as new cultivars are developed that are better suited to the relatively poor soils and if irrigation is extended, especially in Brazil.
Such developments in South America are not without adverse environmental consequences, though they are more limited than those of African savannas where population levels are much higher.
For example, Pla et al.(1985) report that in the northern central plains of Venezuela rain-fed production of sorghum and maize have resulted in accelerated erosion and an increase in flood frequency.
The former is due to soil exposure before sowing, inadequate soil protection by seedlings in the early stages of crop growth and the absence of crop residues, while the latter relates to erratic rainfall and the removal of the natural vegetation cover.
In terms of large-scale ranching and beef production in the savannas of South America, the nutritional value of the pasture grasses is, according to Vera et al.(1986), relatively low and thus the carrying capacity is limited.
Ranches are usually large (1500 — 3000 ha) and average herd size is c. 600.
Vera et al.believe that there is potential for improving productivity, including the introduction of legume-rich swards, though as yet the developments in cropping have far exceeded efforts to improve pasture lands.
Grazing pressures have also altered the savanna environment of India, as has been discussed by Gadgil and Meher-Homji (1985) in relation to the Deccan plateau which is the most degraded of India's savanna lands.
This is due to competition for land between grazing and cropping as well as a reduction in the vegetation cover for fuelwood.
As a consequence land has become unproductive as unpalatable weeds have replaced nutritious fodder.
Similarly in  the Western Ghats, much of the region is deforested and overgrazed and rates of soil erosion have increased, a situation which is not being improved by the replacement of buffalo and cattle by goats.
Overall, the world's savanna lands (those in Australia have been omitted from this discussion as this chapter deals specifically with developing countries) present both considerable potential and considerable environmental degradation.
As in many of the cases of environmental change discussed in this text, social or historical factors underlie many of these changes.
MOUNTAINOUS REGIONS AND ISLANDS
World population is increasing at a rate of between 1.5 and 2.0 per cent per annum(section 9.3.3) and most of the projected growth that will occur by the year 2000 will be in the developing world, mirroring a well-established trend.
As the foregoing sections have illustrated, population pressures, often stimulated by other factors such as economies and land ownership, are frequently the underpinning cause of environmental change, especially as agriculture has spread into areas that are only marginally productive or where injudicious land-use practices have been established.
This section will concentrate on those parts of the earth's surface where rapid environmental change is taking place with considerable repercussions for neighbouring regions.
Thus, attention will focus on the Himalayan region of Asia and the Andean region of Central and   South America where development is occurring rapidly and which, because they constitute watershed areas, are affecting downstream areas.
Finally, attention will focus on island communities in the developing world where land-use has created specific environmental problems that are frequently related to watershed abuse.
THE HIMALAYAS
The Himalaya mountain range, as shown in Fig. 7.6, extends for almost 3000 km from the southern edge of the USSR, through northern Pakistan, India and Bangladesh, to the borders of Burma and southern China.
According to Karan (1987), the population of the region is in excess of 33 million and is increasing at more than 2 per cent per annum.
In consequence, hitherto untouched lands are now being exploited; and more intense land-use pressures coupled with an increased demand for fuelwood are bringing about environmental change at an unprecedented rate.
As Ives (1987) has discussed, it is widely believed that the situation in the Himalaya will reach crisis proportions by the turn of the century, affecting not only that region   but also downstream and deltaic areas that are in receipt of drainage from the Ganges and Brahmaputra Rivers.
In 1988, media reports of a massive flooding episode that occurred in Bangladesh singled out deforestation in the Himalaya as the most important cause.
This is, however, disputed (Cohen in The Independent , 17 Sept 1988) and highlights the complexity of the Himalayan socio-economic and ecological balances.
To examine these problems examples will be presented against a backdrop of the region's natural divisions, in order to highlight the significance of environmental change.
The sites referred to are given in Fig. 7.6.
To divide the Himalaya into natural regions is itself difficult because the ecology is complex, as Schweinfurth (1984) has discussed.
However, Karan and Iijima (1985) have suggested a tripartite subdivision of the region which is depicted in Fig. 7.7.
Each zone is currently experiencing a range of pressures which are listed in Table 7.4.
As Ives (1987) has pointed out, the issue of environmental degradation in the Himalaya is extremely complex and has been extensively debated during the 1980s, giving rise to what he describes as the Himalaya Environmental Degradation Theory (HEDT).
This invokes the operation of vicious circles, involving deforestation for arable cultivation   and fuelwood underpinned by rapidly increasing population pressure; as land is degraded by accelerated erosion, even steeper slopes are cultivated and more forest is cleared.
This view is espoused by Myers (1986), who believes that deforestation in the Himalaya has been responsible for flood disasters in the lower reaches of the Ganges and Brahmaputra and the higher incidence of flooding that has occurred since 1940; apparently flooding now affects some 10 6 ha of land as compared with 6 × 10 6 ha in the early 1950s.
Such a theory is, according to Ives (1987), too simplistic not least because much of the data on deforestation and fuelwood consumption on which it is based are unsound.
For example, M Thompson et al.(1986) have highlighted the fact that estimates of the latter vary by a factor of 67!
That such discrepancies arise is due to compilation of data at a local scale and its subsequent incautious use to derive estimates at a regional scale.
The comments made in Fig. 7.7, concerning land-use pressures in the Himalayan   zones, thus represent a generalised overview which may be grossly inaccurate at the local scale.
Similarly, management and development plans may not be generally appropriate and should be tailored to alleviate local pressures within an integrated regional framework.
Deforestation still remains a crucial issue in the Himalaya but the temporal and spatial pattern of its occurrence is, in the light of more recent research, very different from that hitherto envisaged.
For example, Myers (1986) states that between 1947 and 1980 Nepal's forest cover declined from 57 per cent to 23 per cent , but Mahat et al.'s (1986a, b, 1987a, b) work in the Middle Hills of Nepal (Sindhu Palchok and Kabhri Palanchok districts) suggests a different spatial and temporal pattern.
Their data indicate that serious deforestation was occurring more than 200 years ago and was most severe between 1890 and 1930.
More recently, reforestation has occurred naturally on abandoned farm terraces where grazing pressures have been low.
Mahat et al.also show that the area of forested land has not changed very much since 1950, although forest quality has declined as grazing pressure has increased.
Using records of oral history from these two districts, Gilmour (1988) has shown that tree cover has actually increased on private farmland over the last 20 years and while there is still an overall loss of forest it is not as acute as the HEDT suggests.
Similarly, Byers's (1987) work in the Mount Everest National Park indicates that there has been less forest removal than envisaged and that shrubs/grassland and forested slopes below 4000 m OD are stable.
Nevertheless, soil erosion is an appreciable problem in some Alpine pastures of the park due to overgrazing in a transhumance system, fuelwood collection and periglacial processes.
There are also variations in the temporal and spatial patterns of deforestation in the Indian Himalaya; in Uttar Pradesh, for example, Tejwani (1987a) reports that forest losses have been extensive and that much of what remains is degraded.
In the Dehra Dun Valley some 16 per cent of the forest cover has disappeared during the last 100 years (J F Richards 1987).
Moreover, Tucker (1987) has pointed out that the first period of large-scale deforestation in northern India occurred in the 1850s and 1860s as the British colonisation of India gained momentum and railways were constructed to gain access to the upper Ganges and Indus plains.
Not only is the extent of deforestation variable but the reasons why it is occurring also vary from region to region.
Mahat et al.(1986a, b, 1987a, b) believe that in the Middle Mountain region of Nepal the loss of forest is due mainly to the increased requirements for arable land rather than to the need for fuelwood.
As Ives (1987) comments, findings such as these have important implications for the formulation of mitigating plans; the introduction of more efficient wood-burning stoves, for example, while reducing the need for fuelwood does not provide a substitute for arable land.
In fact, Hrabovszky and Miyan (1987) advocate land-use intensification rather than clearance of new land as the most effective way to increase food production in the Nepal Himalaya.
This, they argue, could be achieved, at least partially, by increasing the area of irrigated land especially in the Terai plains of southern Nepal.
There is also much uncertainty about the contribution of injudicious agricultural practices to soil erosion.
Traditionally, rain-fed terraces are constructed on steeper slopes in the Middle Mountains for the production of maize, millet and buckwheat.
Undoubtedly landslips occur, exacerbating soil erosion as the protective vegetation cover is impaired, but the extent of slope failure is due to climatic conditions, especially rainfall  intensity, and the degree of terrace maintenance.
The problem is worse in some areas than it is in others but, as Karan and Iijima (1985) point out, soil erosion is particularly acute where steep slopes are cultivated without terracing.
In the Sikkim Himalaya, for example, forest clearance of steep slopes for maize and rice cultivation have accelerated erosion rates as is evidenced by dry gullies and an increased sediment load of rivers.
Such erosion is also contributing to accelerated sedimentation in reservoirs but it is not the only cause, as Tejwani (1987b) has discussed in relation to reservoirs in the Indian Himalaya.
Road and reservoir construction and mining all contribute to increased sediment yields, as well as deforestation and overgrazing, leading to losses in reservoir capacity of up to 60 per cent.
Tejwani believes that the small size of agricultural landholdings and their fragmentation is a major obstacle to the implementation of soil conservation measures in the Indian Himalaya.
Once again this highlights the significance of social and administrative factors in environmental management.
Thus the causes and effects of land-use practices vary considerably from region to region in the Himalaya, so that a general theory such as the HEDT becomes untenable.
This is stressed by Ives et al.(1987), who argue the case for more research to obviate the problems associated with the extrapolation of data, often erroneously, from the micro-to the macro-scale within the Himalaya region.
Then there is the question of the relationship between activities in the Himalaya and events downstream.
Again the link between the two is more complex than is suggested by the HEDT.
Hamilton (1987) refutes the HEDT suggestion that widespread deforestation in the Himalaya is the prime cause of flooding in the lower reaches of the Ganges and the Brahmaputra and argues that large-scale flooding, such as that of 1985 in India when 237 people were killed (and presumably that in Bangladesh in 1988), could not be prevented even if the entire Himalaya were forested.
Such catastrophic events, he believes, are more likely to be due to the receipt of a considerable volume of rainfall in a short space of time on to soils which are already saturated, as occurs during the monsoon season.
Hamilton also points out that the replacement of forest by well-maintained agricultural terraces may actually reduce the amount of soil erosion, and Ives (1987) provides a timely reminder that the Himalaya are undergoing tectonic uplift which itself may be of sufficient magnitude a account for much of the increased sediment load of the major drainage systems.
Undoubtedly land-use practices influence flooding and erosion, but ignoring the impact of natural processes in the search for a human scapegoat is not going to pre-empt the potential land crisis of the Himalaya in the twenty-first century.
In view of the diversity of the environment, the variations in cultural, social and political organisation as well as rapid population growth, there is an overwhelming need for development and management plans that are practicable at a local level, are politically acceptable to all Himalayan nations and are equally beneficial to those extra-Himalayan regions that are affected by intra-Himalayan policies.
The task is formidable and impossible to achieve without international cooperation.
THE ANDES
The Andes also have a long history of human occupation which has transformed the landscape.
As discussed in section 3.2.1, there is much debate  as to when people first colonised the Americas but it occurred at least 12 kyr BP and there is evidence (section 3.3.1) that some early plant and animal domestications occurred in Central and South America.
The Andes of Peru, for example, provided animals like the llama and alpaca which were domesticated approximately 7 kyr BP, and in the Tehuacán Valley of Mexico the first permanent agricultural systems of the Americas were developed c. 8 or 9 kyr BP.
It was here that maize (Zea mays ) was first domesticated.
The major civilisations of the Americas, notably the Olmecs and Mayas which thrived between 3 kyr and 1 kyr, dominated the lowland regions adjacent to the Gulf of Mexico but by c. 600 AD (The Times,The World , 1986) the major centres of early American peoples had become established in the high Andean basins.
Ultimately, the great civilisations of the Aztecs and Incas developed.
The former established themselves on the margins of Lake Texcoco in the fourteenth century.
By 1428 they had established a city state, nurtured by food production on the lake margins, but in 1521 the state fell to Cortés and Mexico was annexed by Spain.
The Incas, on the other hand, were a short-lived civilisation of the fifteenth century which created an empire that extended some 3200 km along the Andes from what is now Ecuador to northern Chile.
They undertook numerous engineering feats, including the construction of roads, bridges and tunnels as well as extensive terracing and irrigation systems to improve crop production.
This empire was also destroyed by the Spanish colonists who eventually captured the capital, Cuzco, in 1533.
The vestiges of these empires, as well as those of the Olmecs and Mayas, are represented in the landscape by the remains of vast temples, road networks and terracing.
The latter were constructed to both conserve moisture and to reduce soil erosion and occur on slopes as steep as 25°.
Gischler and Jauregui (1984) have demonstrated that in Peru much of this pre-Hispanic terracing is abandoned but could be renovated to enhance food production more economically than by developing new lands.
Moreover, the success of these pre-Hispanic cultures implies that their food-producing systems were effective.
Millones (1982) believes that the value of the soil as a resource was fully acknowledged by the Incas and is reflected in the many thousands of hectares that were contour terraced and irrigated by water stored in artificial lakes (chochas ).
He argues that the arrival and conquests of the Spanish not only brought about the destruction of a sophisticated culture but also had a ruinous effect on the environment.
The aim of such colonial imposition (section 4.4.2) was mainly to exploit the natural resources for the benefit of Spain.
Precious metals were the chief resources sought by the invaders and the silver-mines of Potosí in Peru are a case in point (section 4.4.2).
The indiscriminate exploitation of Andean forests to provide wood for mines and as fuel, in tandem with burning for the creation of pastures and subsequent overgrazing, are, according to Millones, mainly responsible for the demise of these high forests and their fauna.
Further serious environmental consequences have arisen from the introduction of grazing herbivores (such as cattle, sheep, goats, horses, donkeys and mules) to which the Andean environment is not naturally adapted but which are the mainstay of modern Andean populations.
Parallels can be drawn with Australia (section 4.4.3) and the island of St Helena (section 7.4.3).
As Millones points out, erosion is now a crucial problem in most Andean environments.
Generalisations are, however, difficult to make for a region which is so diverse due to altitudinal changes and considerable  climatic variation.
As a guideline, the major zones are summarised in Table 7.5.
Overall, the potential for agriculture is limited by topography, especially slope angles and water availability.
As a result those areas, notably the paramos plains and intermontane valleys, which are suitable for herding and crop-growing are experiencing environmental problems due not simply to over-exploitation, but to poor management such as the lack of rotational grazing and the replacement of traditional crops with cash crops.
Land-use and the vulnerability of sloping terrain to erosion are, however, not the only causes of environmental degradation.
Land-tenure systems, leading to decreasing farm size and fragmentation, and high levels of population growth are among the social factors contributing to environmental change.
Stadel (1986), for example, has discussed the significance of these factors in relation to agricultural development in the Cordillera region of Ecuador.
Here, the rural population density is 208 km-2 and the annual increase in population is c. 3.1 per cent, but the amount of agricultural land per head of population is only 0.52 ha.
Moreover, in the Pelileo-Patate region (eastern Cordillera of Ecuador), Stadel states that nearly 60 per cent of the farms (minifundia ) are less than 1 ha and some 94.3 per cent are less than 5 ha.
The haciendas, in contrast, are not only larger (5 ha to 10 000 ha) but occupy nearly 63 per cent of the agricultural area including a much higher proportion of the best agricultural land.
Thus, many minifundia have restricted or no access to irrigation water and are often too small to support a family so that employment is sought elsewhere.
In terms of rates of erosion that are actually occurring within the Andean region, a study by Harden (1988) is illustrative of the impact of various land-use practices in the Rio Ambato catchment in the central Ecuadorian   Andes.
Here, elevations range from 2200 m in the valley to 6310 m which is the summit height of Mount Chimborazo.
Of the total area of 1300 km 2 , 31 per cent is cultivated, 65 per cent is used mainly for sheep grazing, 3 per cent is ice-covered or bare rock and the remaining 1 per cent is urban.
The average size of holding is between 3 and 6 ha, and below 3000 m irrigation is practised.
There is very little flat land and cultivation is common on unterraced land with slopes of 20–35 per cent.
Harden's data indicate an annual range of soil losses varying from , with the highest rates of erosion occurring where soils are exposed to drought, overgrazing or tillage.
Of the various land-uses in the region, soil erosion is most severe at intermediate altitudes where barley, corn, tubers, etc. are cultivated.
Harden estimates that under current conditions productivity can only be maintained for between 10 and 75 years.
Inevitably there are underlying social complexities, such as land tenure and population growth, which are contributing to the problem but there is also evidence, from locations within the drainage basin where conservation measures are being introduced, that terracing and contour farming can not only reduce the risk of erosion but also increase productivity.
While there is no way of knowing whether these rates of erosion are typical or atypical of Andean regions in general, the data nevertheless give cause for concern and emphasise the role of soil erosion as a major agent of environmental change.
What is perhaps more disturbing is Harden's statement that, apart from a few recently introduced measures, efforts to conserve the soil resource are not being undertaken, implying that soil conservation is not an intrinsic component of local agricultural practices.
SMALL ISLANDS
By virtue of their isolation and limited land area, many small islands have undergone considerable environmental change much of which is a consequence of agricultural developments.
To illustrate such changes, attention will focus on two Caribbean islands, Jamaica and St Lucia, plus St Helena and Fiji.
In Jamaica there is a long history of environmental change due to land-use practices.
As Eyre (1987) reports, there is considerable variation of opinion relating to rates of deforestation; FAO (1985), for example, quote a figure of 3.0 per cent per year which is assumed to be due to commercial logging.
Eyre (1987), on the other hand, believes that the figure is more like 3.3 per cent.
This is based on a detailed survey of 687 km 2 , which is c. 6 per cent of Jamaica's total land area.
In all of the forested areas sampled by Eyre, commercial lumber production was responsible for only a proportion of the deforestation.
The remainder was due to clearance for cultivation and pasture.
Of the 500 sites sampled, most of the deforestation was manifest as small parcels of land between 20 and 25 ha in size.
This, Eyre opines, is occurring because of social factors similar to those discussed in section 7.2.1 in relation to desertification; i.e. the need to generate foreign exchange, declining employment opportunity in urban centres and fragmentation of landholdings.
While the forest losses are themselves helping to transform the landscape, they are also contributing to accelerating rates of soil erosion because the sites are frequently on steeply sloping land.
The land itself rapidly becomes degraded and land in receipt of drainage from these slopes  is also adversely affected.
Moreover, 2.7 per cent of the deforested land is used for the cultivation, in small isolated tracts, of Cannabis sativa (marijuana) which is considerably lucrative although illegal.
At a more local level, Barker and McGregor (1988) have examined the landscape changes that have occurred in the Yallahs basin, a drainage basin of 180 km situated in the Blue Mountains northeast of Kingston, Jamaica's capital.
Here, land degradation due to natural and cultural factors is widespread.
The landscape, as part of a geologically young mountain region with steep slopes, is naturally predisposed to mass movement.
As Barker and McGregor point out, however, land-use practices have also played a significant role in landscape change since colonial times when deforestation began.
In the eighteenth century, for example, coffee plantations were established.
Coffee was cultivated on the steep slopes while housing and processing plants were located on flatter ridges.
Fire was used for forest clearance and because slopes were steep soil erosion was rapid; its effects were often so serious that productivity rapidly declined and new areas were cleared.
By the mid-nineteenth century, coffee plantations had largely been abandoned.
The next major phase of land degradation came after the abolition of slavery in 1838 and the rise of peasant agriculture.
Farmers tended small plots in a bush-fallowing system and employed fire for clearance.
The agriculture was essentially subsistent, with any available surplus being marketed in Kingston.
During the later nineteenth and early twentieth centuries cash cropping gradually increased, including the resumption of coffee cultivation but on a much more limited basis than hitherto.
In addition, an expanding Kingston required increasing amounts of fruit and market garden produce which are currently the main products.
Apart from the impact of agriculture on steep slopes, there are additional pressures on the landscape of which deforestation is the most significant.
As in Eyre's (1987) study, clearance is for agriculture as well as lumber, and coffee growing is increasing to produce an export crop and bring in foreign exchange.
McGregor (1986), for example, reports that in the upper Yallahs basin there is extensive sheetwash erosion, slope failures and extensive gullying.
Much of this is due to a combination of deforestation and the use of fire for clearance, which leave the soil susceptible to erosion, especially during periods of heavy rainfall which are relatively common.
Barker and Spence (1988) propose that the most effective way of combating these problems is to encourage the development of so-called food forests which involve the intercropping of food-producing trees and shrubs.
Such systems are effective as conservation strategies and are economically successful elsewhere in Jamaica.
Diverse cropping such as this is ecologically sound because it is much more akin to the rainforest that it replaces, in contrast to monoculture, and provides a year-round protective cover for the soil.
The problems of land degradation which characterise the Jamaican landscape are commonplace in many other Caribbean islands.
Rojas et al.(1988) have reviewed the situation in St Lucia where less than 5 per cent of the island's 617 km 2 can be cultivated without incurring environmental problems.
Since large plantations occupy the best agricultural land, most of the rural population cultivate small plots of less than 0.4 ha on the steep slopes of the mountainous central region where there are thin volcanic soils.
Some 25 per cent of the cultivated land is being used in a way that is not sustainable.
The practice of slash and burn shifting cultivation, along with intensive  mixed cropping, is causing accelerated soil erosion and, as the moisture-retaining capacity of the soil is impaired, the incidence of flooding is increasing.
The outcome is thus similar a that of Jamaica.
The social factors are also similar, including high rural populations, small landholdings and limited opportunities for alternative occupations.
Unsuitable large-scale farming is also being practised in some areas such as the Praslin watershed where bananas are grown for export.
When demand is high or prices increase there is a tendency to cultivate marginal areas, but when the economic situation reverses the opposite trend occurs and cultivation focuses on the most productive land.
As Rojas et al.point out, injudicious land-use practices on the steeper slopes have adverse effects on downstream agricultural lands, including silting and flooding.
Thus conservation programmes must involve integration between upland and lowland agricultural systems.
The problem is further compounded in St Lucia because the amount of land under cultivation is sufficient to support only 40 per cent of the rural population and, since there are few opportunities in urban centres to provide alternative livelihoods, pressures on land will continue to occur.
Nevertheless, as Rojas et al.indicate, there are some mitigating actions that can be taken.
For the small farmer on steep watershed slopes the food forest, as suggested for the Yallahs Basin of Jamaica, would be a more ecologically sound food-producing system.
Hence sustainable agriculture could replace unsustainable agriculture, reducing the impact of erosion and flooding on downstream agricultural areas.
St Helena, in the South Atlantic Ocean, is another example of an island that has been transformed by human activity.
Cronk (1989) has examined the course of vegetation development since the sixteenth century, and the subsequent demise of virtually all the natural flora and its replacement by introduced species.
Much of the destruction of the native vegetation is attributed to the introduction of grazing animals, notably goats, pigs and cattle.
These were first brought to St Helena in the sixteenth century by the Portuguese, and later, sheep were introduced.
Today, although sheep and goats roam on ranges set aside specifically for that purpose, escapees still damage the vegetation but to a much lesser extent.
During the 300 years following their introduction, Cronk indicates that these herbivores prevented regeneration of the natural vegetation by consuming seedlings and removing the bark of saplings.
The resulting openings, devoid of protective vegetation cover, were then subject to erosion which in turn precluded regeneration.
To replace the depleted vegetation a range of species were planted on the island in the nineteenth century, including the maritime pine (Pinus pinaster ) and blackwood (Acacia melanoxylon ), as well as a variety of herbs and shrubs which have now established specific vegetation zones.
These have replaced the indigenous species, some of which, for example gumwood (Commidendrum robustum ), scrubwood (C. rotundifolium ) and ebony (Trochetiopsis melanoxylon alt.
f.
Marais) have been successfully established in trial plantings.
Land-use practices have also altered the Fijian landscape, as has been discussed by Clarke and Morrison (1987) who point out that this is the result of sugar-cane cultivation which has been the mainstay of Fiji's economy since the 1880s.
In 1973 the industry came under national control and since then it has expanded from nearly 44 000 ha to more than 70 000 ha and employs more than 22 per cent of the island's labour force.
Much of this development has involved sugar-cane cultivation on sloping terrain in contrast to its confinement to flat alluvial areas prior to 1960.
It is this which has  resulted in accelerated erosion.
At Seaqaqa on the island of Vanua Levu, one such scheme was initiated in the mid-1970s with financial support from the World Bank.
Clarke and Morrison report data on soil erosion, collected between 1978 and 1983 from a 5–8' slope at Seaqaqa, which show that between 15 and 20 cm of soil were lost over the site as a whole, which is equivalent to an annual overall loss of , and that the soil became more compacted with a loss of organic matter.
Exchangeable bases also declined markedly, reflecting a considerable decline in fertility, as the topsoil was lost.
At another site near Nadi on Vanua Levu, on an 18–22° slope annual soil losses were even higher at  and exchangeable aluminium levels increased to such an extent that the m reached toxic levels.
As Clarke and Morrison discuss, their data are comparable with other studies in Fiji: such losses were known to be occurring more than 20 years ago but went unheeded in the wake of development.
However, the main underpinning causes of this erosion appear to be methods of management and land tenure rather than erosivity and erodibility (section 6.2.2), especially as sugar-cane provides a protective cover for most of the year.
While the problem was recognised as early as the 1930s, when institutions and regulations were created to combat it, these have been either ignored altogether or simply not enforced.
This, Clarke and Morrison believe, is a response to the need to increase employment and to maintain standards of living.
Moreover, the system of land tenure, wherein the land belongs to the indigenous Fijians and can only be leased to Indo-Fijians (the descendants of indentured cane workers who were drafted in from India in the early colonial period) militates against conservation measures because it ensures the political dominance of the former; and the encouragement of production ensures that such land is seen to be in use, an artefact to maintain internal stability.
These factors plus preferential marketing arrangements and external financial support for development projects have all contributed to land degradation.
Once again, these examples illustrate the significance of social, economic and political factors in land-use policies (or their absence) that fail to consider conservation measures as a necessary prerequisite for long-term sustainable productivity and development.
CONCLUSION
There is no doubt that agriculture has transformed the environments of all developing countries.
While it is essential, not only for the support through food supply for indigenous populations but also to provide a sound base on which economic progress can be made, it is unfortunate that in so many cases injudicious land-use practices have negated the very factor, increased productivity, that they sought to improve.
The reasons for this are manifold and often rooted in the historic past though, as discussed in section 4.4, colonialism cannot be used perpetually to excuse failure.
This is especially true in the light of the many more recent and post-independence projects that have failed, despite the often sizeable investments in the form of aid.
This of course is not to exonerate outside influences in toto because even the most altruistic of  such schemes have regularly failed to take into account the specific requirements of local groups and their inherent land-management skills.
Moreover, the fundamental social structures and traditional land-management practices of many indigenous populations have often been dismissed as more or less irrelevant to modern-day needs.
The very inception of agriculture (section 3.3) was based on the manipulation of natural biotic resources, emphasising the close relationship between environment and agriculture in all its forms.
In the developed world, the harnessing of fossil fuel energy as well as other scientific developments, and their application to agricultural systems, has opened up a new range of agricultural possibilities: but all this has happened over a relatively long time period and is not without its environmental implications.
Such expertise is not easily extrapolated to regions where the environment is markedly different.
All agricultural systems are underpinned by the processes of energy flows and biogeochemical cycles which, when disrupted, bring about environmental degradation.
In the developing nations, which are mostly located in the tropical and subtropical regions, an understanding of how these fundamental environmental processes work is only now being achieved.
In many instances this is too late to obviate desertification and soil erosion.
But equally, in many cases such degradation can be halted by more careful consideration of environmental processes and social requirements, as this chapter has shown.
Land-use has to be balanced to achieve sustainable use.
Land, productivity and conservation should not be inimical or mutually exclusive.
That they have frequently become so, not solely in developing countries, is a fundamental error which will exact an even greater toll in the longer term.
ADDITIONAL AGENTS FOR ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE: FORESTRY, RECREATION, TOURISM, SPORT AND BIOTECHNOLOGY
INTRODUCTION
Not all of the environmental changes that have occurred in the recent past are due to the impact of industry and agriculture.
Throughout history, both have involved either the manipulation and/or the destruction of the world's forests.
This continues today as the natural forest resource is managed to provide wood and wood-based products in both the developed and developing world.
In addition, afforestation programmes are under way in many nations to augment the rapidly diminishing natural forest resource and in some cases to halt environmental degradation.
Both forest management and afforestation are responsible for direct and indirect environmental change.
Moreover, in the last four developed world have resulted in increased leisure time which in turn has brought increased pressures on the environment via recreation, tourism and sport.
The development of such ‘industries’ has also been facilitated by improved communications and transport as well as the need to generate income in areas that have been adversely affected by the economic recession of the early 1980s or which are unsuitable for other kinds of economic activity such as agriculture.
Similarly, the need to generate foreign currency has stimulated tourism in regions that would have been virtually inaccessible 15 years ago.
Such activities, however, especially where wildlife habitats and wildscapes are concerned, often have adverse and environmentally degrading consequences which, in some instances, are leading to the destruction of the very resource that attracts the visitors.
At the very least, the growth of tourism has affected the environment by prompting the construction of hotel and resort complexes, nature trails and safari parks etc.
Another recent innovation is that of biotechnology, which involves the use of organisms (especially bacteria) in industrial and technological processes and which is being applied to a variety of environmental management problems such as waste treatment.
Associated with this is the even more recent development, in the 1980s, of genetic engineering.
While this has its origins in the manipulation of plant and animal species that began c. 10 kyr BP (section 3.3) it has been confined to plant and animal breeding programmes.
Now, however, science has provided the means to manipulate the basic genetic material that all plants and animals are made of, namely DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and already this has resulted in exciting progress in forensic science, pharmacology and disease control.
Genetic engineering is also being applied to the production of new crop strains and agents, such as viruses, that can protect existing crops from pests and frost.
Currently there is much international debate relating to the circumstances in which bioengineered species should be released into the environment and whether or not their impact will be entirely beneficial.
Genetic engineering thus constitutes an important potential agent of environmental change.
FORESTRY
There are few forested areas of the world that remain untouched by human activity and those that do remain are unlikely to survive intact in the future.
As Chapters 3 and 4 illustrate, forests have featured significantly in the historic development of the world's industrialised countries, especially in the temperate zone.
This is illustrated by the fact that there is little natural forest left in western Europe as a whole and that forest resources were much prized by colonial powers in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries (see section 4.4.2 in relation to North America).
Indeed, many industrialised nations today, as well as importing wood and wood products from other developed nations, rely to an extent on timber which is imported from the developing world.
Because of such ready markets, tropical and semi-tropical forests are increasingly being exploited by lumber industries, some of which are well-managed enterprises while others are major causes of forest degradation.
Thus the management of forests on a global basis constitutes an agent of environmental change in both the developed and developing world.
In addition, and in response to rapidly dwindling forest resources, there are in many nations afforestation programmes on both small and large scales.
In some cases, as in the UK, afforestation is widespread and like agriculture in the UK (section 6.2.3), the rationale behind it is economically-rather than ecologically-based.
Afforestation programmes are also being initiated in many tropical regions in an effort to mitigate the effects of deforestation and to ensure the availability of forest resources for future generations.
Deforestation is, however, occurring at a much more rapid rate than afforestation.
Afforestation on a localised scale is also occurring in many developing countries to provide a protective cover for the soil in agricultural systems that are threatened by excessive soil erosion and desertification (section 7.2), the provision of fuelwood and, in many cases, a crop.
This type of afforestation is generally known as agroforestry.
Like forest manipulation, afforestation also modifies the environment and must thus be regarded as a significant agent of environmental change.
FOREST MANIPULATION IN THE DEVELOPED WORLD
As an example of forest manipulation in the developed world, emphasis here will be on forestry in North America.
Here, after a rather shaky start in the colonial period (section 4.4.2), forestry is now practised on a sustainable basis involving a wide range of silvicultural techniques.
The transition from unsustainable to sustainable resource use involves a change from exploitation to careful management.
This is essential if renewable resources like   forests are to be maintained in a state that is conducive to future use.
While both exploitation and management are agents of environmental change, the latter is overtly conservational in nature because the objective is optimum return on a long-term basis.
In contrast, exploitation tends to involve the rapid diminution of resources, often to such an extent that the capacity for renewal is destroyed and optimum returns are short-lived.
(Such concepts are relevant to the use of all renewable resources and not just forests.)
The transition from exploitation to management is, however, underpinned by a change in economic attitudes, from those that are based on short-term high returns to those that recognise the need for sustainability in order to achieve long-term ongoing returns.
These transitions occurred in North American forestry in the period between early colonial occupation in the seventeenth century and 1920.
As Fig.   8.1 shows, the forest regions of North America are both extensive and diverse, which makes it difficult to offer a generalised historical perspective.
What is clear, however, is that the early European colonists entered a land in which native Americans had already influenced forest character (section 4.4.2).
In addition, the temporal basis of North American forest use has varied in relation to the extension of early colonial settlers across the continent, but as Table 8.1 illustrates, the turning-point in US forest history came in 1891 with the General Revision Act.
At this time, fears of a timber famine were being expounded as earlier laws had failed to redress the impact of lumber companies and agricultural development and it was becoming increasingly apparent that public lands were being sacked of their natural timber resources.
This Act, however, allowed the establishment of forest reserves and marked a change in attitude to the nation's forests which had hitherto been considered as inexhaustible.
This change in attitude from exploitation to conservation was undoubtedly influenced by growing industrialisation and urbanisation and by the recognition of the need to manage catchments, water supplies, etc.
Nevertheless, the prime objective of forest management remains that of timber production.
As Mather (1987) observes, the forest area of the USA has remained roughly the same since c. 1920 but annual growth rate has increased by 350 per cent more than in 1920.
This is a response to sustainable management policies which encourage growth and entail the maintenance of forests, not at optimum timber volume but at optimum growth rates.
The adoption of such policies at a critical time in forest resource use averted what politicians like President Theodore Roosevelt described as a potential timber famine.
forest policies, securely ensconced in an effective and enforceable legislative infrastructure, which were inaugurated in 1891 and subsequently reinforced by later statutes (Table 8.1), were essential controls on the transposition of natural forests into managed forests.
As in any stable, mature ecosystem, losses via the death of organisms, in this case trees, will be balanced by new growth.
Tree removal in such a system, as occurred in the 1607–1900 period of US history, will inevitably lead to forest demise, but if the ecological system is carefully managed there are large-scale opportunities to reap a timber harvest without jeopardising sustainability.
The basis of this depends on the relationship between annual growth and annual harvest: maximum tree growth is attained before old age.
Thus, if a forest is managed to achieve maximum growth rather than maximum timber volume, a characteristic of mature climax forest, it can both thrive and produce a substantial harvest in the long term (provided no exogenous effects such as climatic change occur and as long as soil nutrient status is maintained).
Today, the US national forest system comprises 95 million ha of forest land, which is approximately 25 per cent of the national total; the remaining area is privately owned.
This is in contrast to Canada, where 94 per cent of the forest area is publicly owned.
As Repetto (1988b) has pointed out, much of the US national forest consists of old-growth timber and is often in less accessible areas which contrasts with many privately owned forests where productivity is higher and which are more accessible.
This is partly a result of private acquisition of forest lands prior to the General Revision Act of 1891, when it made more economic sense to annex high quality, easily accessible forests.
Nevertheless, because of the wilderness value of the national forests and the adoption of multiple use policies by the US national forest system, there remain conflicts of interest which arise because actual  timber production is often uneconomic and many conservationists have argued against the commercial production of timber, proposing instead that such areas should be maintained as wilderness for recreation and conservation.
Most of the nationally owned forest is in the western USA and is dominated by softwood, while almost 90 per cent of private commercial forests are in the east where hardwoods are more important (fig. 8.1).
According to Sedjo (1987), the USA is the world's largest producer of industrial wood, accounting for nearly one-quarter of global production.
Of this, 76 per cent is softwood and the remaining 24 per cent is hardwood.
Production is centred in the Pacific northwest and the south and the various products are given in Fig. 8. 1.
Despite high productivity, however, the USA remains a net wood importer, most notably from Canada.
Timber production is maintained by a variety of practices which, since colonial times, have transformed the character of North American forests.
While extensive tracts of virgin forest remain from which sawnwood and plywood are derived, there has been a growing trend since the Second World War towards fibre-based products from plantations and second- and third-growth forests.
Silvicultural practices vary enormously and have been described by D M Smith (1986) and Lorimer (1982).
The aim of such practices is to achieve sustained yield involving optimum growth and regeneration; ideally it involves the maintenance of equal numbers of trees in each age class, but as D M Smith (1986) discusses, this is rarely achieved in toto especially in old-growth or second-growth forests where age-class distribution is naturally disposed to older trees.
Redressing the balance through thinning can thus take several decades without any significant financial return.
As a result, most management techniques in North American forests approach, rather than achieve, a situation of sustained yield.
In general, silvicultural techniques include the regulation of regeneration, species composition and growth and may be designed to enhance aspects of forestry, such as improvement of habitats for wildlife, that are not related to timber production.
Effective management requires accurate timber inventories, data on productivity and predictions of future growth; determination of the rotation age, which is the age of a stand at harvest, is also crucial and depends on the species and the time period required for optimum growth.
As Table 8.2 shows, there are many silvicultural techniques that can improve productivity; all influence the structure of forests and are thus agents of environmental change.
There are also indirect impacts of silviculture which relate not only to forest management but to the construction of roads and the effect of forest removal on watershed management.
The removal of trees constitutes the removal of both biomass and nutrients so it is important for sustainable yield that logging rotations are sufficiently long to allow replenishment.
Table 8.2 also shows that herbicides and fertilisers are frequently used in silvicultural practices and, as discussed in sections 6.3.1 and 6.4.3, these can have detrimental environmental impacts.
In forestry, these chemicals can lead to a decline in water quality and to declines in aquatic fauna and flora.
Road construction can also lead to soil erosion which can be exacerbated by the dragging or skidding of logs from the place of cutting to areas where they are loaded on to vehicles for transport.
With careful management, however, these problems can be kept to a minimum.
In relation to silviculture itself D M Smith (1986), based mainly on the North America experience, states that: ‘It is entirely within the realm of possibility to conduct forestry permanently without the degradation that is almost inevitable in agriculture…
However, realization of this potentiality is not automatic.’
FOREST MANIPULATION IN THE DEVELOPING WORLD
Forestry practices in the developing world are diverse and complex and in many cases the absence of overall institutional control of forests coupled with other pressures, such as expanding agriculture, has resulted in indiscriminate exploitation.
Even where there are national forest-management policies they are often difficult to enforce, especially where other interests, notably the potential of forest products to earn foreign currency, are  involved.
The absence of the concept of sustained yield, which underpins much of forestry practice in the developed world, is of particular concern for the long-term prospects of forest survival.
There are many factors involved in the exploitation of forests in the developing world, many of which have been discussed in section 7.3 in relation to soil erosion and desertification, not least of which is rapid population growth.
Multinational logging companies must also take their share of the blame for poor forest-management strategies in many developing countries, especially in Southeast Asia, where little heed is paid to conserving the remaining forest or to the effect of logging and heavy machinery on the soils.
Moreover, there is often, as Wyatt-Smith (1987) has discussed in relation to the exploitation of tropical moist forests, inadequate information about terrain conditions, species composition, growth rates and tree life cycles which compound the problems of resource management.
Many of these problems are exemplified by the current state of forestry in Nigeria which has been reviewed by Adegbehin (1988).
Here, forest reserves occupy some 9.7 per cent of the nation's land area and are most abundant in the lowland rainforest belt in the southern part of the country.
These reserves produce most of Nigeria's industrial roundwood which provides the raw material for various wood-based industries, notably plywood, particle board and match production as well as pulp and paper.
This industrial wood accounts for 20 per cent of Nigeria's wood consumption while the other 80 per cent is consumed as fuelwood which is mainly derived from the more northerly savanna zones.
Wood shortages for both uses are now widespread, not least because many rainforest areas outside the reserves, which in the pre-1960 period supplied about 50 per cent of the country's timber output, are now exhausted.
Deforestation and agricultural encroachment are among the reasons for this but forest-management policies have also been inadequate.
As Adegbehin points out, assessment of the resource base itself has been poor and existing inventory data are both incomplete and out of date.
In addition, the volume of timber removed in logging operations is either not recorded or is inaccurate.
Thus there is no closely managed relationship between potential supply and its exploitation.
Indeed, what data are available suggest that the current rate of roundwood removal,c. 6.75 million m 3 per year, will result in depletion within 10 years despite the initiation of plantation forestry since the 1960s.
Much of this overexploitation is due to poor institutional control.
for example, the government, via State forestry Services and the federal Department of Forestry, controls and implements regeneration and afforestation schemes but logging is transacted via the private sector with few enforceable controls.
This latter is illustrated by the fact that until recently operating licences were issued more or less indiscriminately to any company that wanted to set up a sawmill.
Such an ad hoc approach is not conducive to efficient use of present resources nor is it appropriate for long-term planning.
Already there are sawmills that cannot operate at full capacity because of wood shortages.
Improvements in the overall forestry infrastructure, involving inventory acquisition through to logging, would at least go some way towards achieving better resource use.
Other mitigating measures could involve the encouragement of private concerns to develop their own plantations, as is already occurring on a small scale, not only in the rainforest regions but also in savanna regions where Eucalyptus is being successfully cultivated to provide fuelwood and poles.
The fuelwood shortage in these  areas could also be alleviated to a degree by the introduction of more efficient wood-burning stoves, and industrial use of wood could be improved by minimising waste.
Poor infrastructure in the forestry industry of Nigeria is not, however, the only factor that has transformed the forest landscape.
Silvicultural management has been practised since the 1920s, beginning first with regulation of the telling cycle and then the stimulation of natural regeneration by cutting climbers, removing uneconomic species and canopy thinning in the 1930s, as has been described by Kio and Ekwebelam (1987).
None of these techniques proved particularly successful and in 1944 the tropical shelterwood system (TSS) was introduced, based on management techniques that had already proved successful in parts of the tropical forests of Malaysia.
The TSS involved similar techniques to those described above but they were more aggressively applied with specific time periods between each operation.
Nevertheless there was insufficient regeneration of desired species, largely because of the different life cycles, fruiting cycles and density of desired Nigerian species in comparison with the Malaysian forest species on which the methodology was based.
(This is another example of the inappropriateness of transposing management and land-use practices from one discrete ecological system to another.)
Other problems were also experienced, including the damage of saplings during the logging phase of TSS, which opened the habitat to colonisation by secondary species, and the availability of light as the canopy was opened up encouraged the growth of unwanted climbers and weeds.
Thus the lack of fundamental ecological knowledge has played a significant role in the shaping of these forests and lack of foresight has led to the demise, by deliberate poisoning and girdling, of many species which are now considered to be commercially viable.
Eventually TSS was abandoned and subsequent schemes to encourage restocking by enrichment planting of desired species also proved unsuccessful, not only in Nigeria but also in Ghana (Asabere 1987) and West Africa (Nwoboshi 1987).
In all of these cases the authors recommend that the best way of ensuring future timber resources is to organise forestry on a plantation basis; this will necessitate massive afforestation schemes to combat the losses of natural forest and appropriate infrastructures to ensure survival.
As is shown in fig. 7.4, Nigeria stands to lose, at current rates of deforestation, all of its rainforest by the year 2000 and with a rapidly growing population solutions are needed immediately.
As in the African countries discussed above, forest industries also provide a major source of foreign income in Malaysia.
According to Tang (1987) the forest sector contributed 14.1 per cent of the total export earnings in 1983 which is equivalent to 6.8 per cent of the gross national product (GNP).
Extensive logging, together with the expansion of agricultural land, will deplete Malaysia's forest resources by the turn of the century unless effective management programmes are instigated.
To this end, Tang reports that some 13.8 million ha of Malaysia's forests have been designated as permanent forest estate (PFE), of which 9.1 × 10 6 ha are productive forests that are intended to be managed on a sustained yield basis (see section 8.2.1 for a definition).
Whether this can be achieved is debatable because management schemes implemented to date have not been uniformly successful due to the tremendous variation in ecology and terrain.
Unless effective schemes can be designed, Malaysia's timber industry may depend on the establishment of plantations, as has been suggested as the saviour of African forestry (see  above).
While the efficient exploitation of Malaysia's forests is beset by problems similar to those discussed above for Nigeria, there have been attempts to implement governmental control.
This has been discussed by Douglas (1983) and includes government allocation of lands for agricultural development as well as controls on wood harvest volumes.
These, however, are not always strictly implemented and in some cases logging operations have been sanctioned which are in direct conflict with the needs of indigenous groups.
This has recently been highlighted by the imprisonment, in January 1989, of groups of forest dwellers who have obstructed the construction of forest roads (Cross 1989).
There are also studies from Malaysia, which are illustrative of the effects of logging practices in tropical regions in general, which show that the destructive effect is far greater than just the removal of trees.
Johns (1985), for example, has examined the impact of logging in part of west Malaysia where the harvest consisted of 3.3 per cent of the trees per ha but which, by damaging saplings and soils, caused an overall loss of nearly 51 per cent of the trees.
Other indirect effects include the opening up by forest roads of hitherto inaccessible forests to cultivators, resulting in even more and often indiscriminate forest destruction.
More covert reasons may also underlie the inability (or reticence) of government forest agencies in developing countries to enforce regulations.
These include the need for foreign currency and the attraction of foreign companies and their interests in developing economies.
Such pressures may be offset by the newly established International Tropical Timber Organisation (ITTO), the remit of which is to administer the International Tropical Timber Agreement.
As Cross (1988) reports, there are thirty-six countries producing tropical timber and thirty-three market countries which are party to this agreement that not only aims to regulate the tropical timber trade but to promote sustainable use and conservation of tropical forests.
How the latter will be achieved remains to be seen, but it has been mooted that a surcharge should be levied on tropical timber, to be paid by the market, which could be used to undertake research into ways of achieving and ensuring tropical forest survival.
This, and similar organisations, may well become agents of environmental change in the not too distant future.
There is also the corollary that the economic significance of tropical timber will ensure its survival (Cross 1988).
The economic significance of British woodlands throughout history (sections 4.1 and 4.2) did not, however, ensure their survival to any great extent, nor is there any guarantee that tropical forest plantations will succeed, though as Mather (1987) points out, their prospects are promising.
Other factors may also contribute to the survival or demise of tropical forests.
for example, will developing nations be able to reduce their reliance on forest resources as other aspects of their industrial economy begin to achieve importance?
Mather draws some interesting parallels between the development of agricultural systems and that of forestry.
He believes that the direct exploitation of natural forest, as is occurring in many tropical regions, is equivalent to ‘hunting-gathering’ while the managed natural forests of North America, for example, have reached the ‘farming’stage.
He states that: ‘if a similar stage can be quickly reached in tropical LDCs (Least Developed Countries), and if plantation forests can be established without serious problems of ecological sustainability or pest outbreaks, then prospects for future timber availability are brighter than the currently rapid rates of deforestation in many tropical countries would at first suggest’.
Is there also the possibility that the environmental movement  will reduce the demand for such forest products in the developed nations by educating the public in the undesirable environmental consequences (e.g. the enhanced greenhouse effect and the loss of genetic resources) of overexploitation?
THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF AFFORESTATION AND REFORESTATION
Afforestation and reforestation are both characteristic of modern forestry (the former is the planting of forests on land previously unoccupied by trees while the latter involves the re-establishment of trees on formerly forested land that has been cleared).
Much of it occurs as plantation forestry, the prime objective of which is to produce wood and wood products.
There is also an increasing trend towards agroforestry which involves a combination of tree and agricultural crops; the silvicultural component may be used to provide a crop and to ensure environmental protection.
Both afforestation and reforestation are agents of environmental change, affecting not only the floral elements of the environment but also the faunal elements and earth surface systems of water, sediment and nutrient transfer.
According to Sedjo and Clawson (1984) plantation forests on a global basis occupy some 9 × 10 7 ha which is equivalent to about 3 per cent of the extent of the world's closed forests.
Approximately 40 per cent of plantation forest is in the developed world, a further 50 per cent is in the Communist Bloc especially in China (section 7.2.1) while the remainder is in the developing world, though the rate of planting is not sufficient to compensate for the rates of deforestation.
In all cases, plantation forestry involves both afforestation and reforestation as is exemplified by the situation in the UK.
Here, such programmes have until recently been largely undertaken by the Forestry Commission (FC) which was established in 1919 as a result of the Forestry Act.
As discussed in section 6.2.3, FC policies are not without their critics (e.g. Shoard 1987); many conservationists believe that the widespread use of alien conifers is neither environmentally nor aesthetically beneficial to the British landscape.
In addition, many of the debates which relate to the conservation versus agriculture conflict (section 6.2.3) are equally relevant to forestry which, like agriculture, is not a free-market enterprise.
There are, for example, subsidies in the form of grants and, until 1988, tax advantages available to individuals willing to invest in forestry and which are often seen as the major impetus to afforestation and reforestation with little regard to the environmental consequences.
There is also much criticism of the FC because of the high degree of autonomy that it enjoys and its legally-enforceable powers that allow for the compulsory purchase of land.
In order to understand fully the role of forestry as an agent of environmental change in Britain, it is necessary to examine the historical perspective which has been discussed by Stewart (1987).
The major developments in forestry and forestry policies are summarised in Table 8.3 which shows that more than 2 × 10 6 ha of land, mainly in the uplands, have been afforested or reforested.
According to Campbell (1988) the British wood-processing industry is now highly efficient by international standards and has increased self-sufficiency to 16 per cent, reducing the cost of imports.
While the expansion of forestry in Britain (Table 8.3) has had environmental   repercussions, as are discussed below, increasing self-sufficiency should at least partially reduce the pressures for the exploitation of tropical forests.
Forestry policy has wrought considerable changes in the character of British upland landscapes.
For example, 52 per cent of the trees planted by the FC in Scotland and Wales are Sitka spruce (Picea sitchensis ) which is not a native British species.
Neither are Norway spruce (P. abies ) and lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta ) which are also widely used in forestry programmes because they grow relatively quickly and can tolerate the poor soils that are characteristic of British uplands.
Apart from such aesthetic changes, involving the blanketing of large areas with uniform tree stands planted in regular rows, there is evidence to show that afforestation programmes have led to the alteration of other floral and faunal elements of these ecosystems.
For example, the density and diversity of ground flora will vary according to the rotation cycle and the tree species which comprise the canopy.
Hill (1987) reports that under unthinned Sitka spruce older than 15 years there is very little ground flora; only bilberry (Vaccinium myrtillus ) will persist.
This means that silviculture of spruce on a 55-year rotation is less conducive to vegetation diversity, which attains its maximum only in the early years when light conditions are favourable.
Not all silvicultural practices are as extreme and the character of the ground flora will also depend on the land-use prior to afforestation.
In a study of six sites in southern Britain, which were previously occupied by ancient woodland, Kirby (1988) has shown that considerable variations in ground flora occur in relation to the rotation cycle, the canopy species and its density.
His data show that immediately after felling, the ground flora increases rapidly in density and diversity but declines as the canopy begins to close (the thicket stage) and increases again with tree thinning.
The data also show that at the thicket stage in coniferous plantations the ground flora is much less diverse and dense than in control sites of similar age which consist of semi-natural mixed oak (Quercus spp.) stands.
Beech (Fagus spp.) had a similar dampening effect while plantations of oak and conifers together, provided that the blocks or strips of oak are sufficiently large, had a better developed ground flora than that under conifers alone.
Afforestation also affects bird populations.
Where it occurs on open land, bird species characteristic of open country are replaced by those which prefer the limited cover afforded by young trees and are in turn replaced, as the forest matures, by those species which are forest dwellers (Bibby 1987).
Overall, however, afforestation in Britain has had an adverse impact on bird populations (Ratcliffe and Oswald 1987).
In Galloway, for example, the reduced breeding performance of golden eagles is considered to be directly related to afforestation due to loss of open moorland which is their main feeding area.
Apart from the effects of afforestation and reforestation on flora and fauna, there are other environmental implications.
For example, the change of land-use from moorland to coniferous plantations in British uplands has affected soils and soil processes as well as the quality and quantity of water yield.
The effects of afforestation on soils varies considerably and relates to soil type, species composition of the forest and management, including soil-preparation techniques.
Ploughing, which is commonly used to prepare upland sites for afforestation, results not only in the drying out of soils and peats, but also in nutrient losses which are in excess of those occurring in undisturbed habitats.
Such losses reduce as the plantation matures but rarely return to pre-disturbance levels because subsoil is exposed and weathering is  promoted.
The construction of drains, as Hornung et al.(1987) have discussed, tends to reduce the residence time of water in the soil or peat.
In addition, aeration is promoted by preparation techniques which increase the rate of decomposition of soil organic matter and the release of nutrients.
Drainage, via ditch and channel provision, in preparation for planting also increases the drainage network within a catchment.
Francis (1988) quotes the example of Llanbrynmair Moors, Mid-Wales, where drainage density was increased from c. 3 km to over 200 km of stream length per 100 ha.
There is also evidence that drainage schemes increase flooding frequency and the total amount of runoff (Robinson 1986).
Accelerated runoff and nutrient losses also occur as a result of thinning and especially clear felling.
Under mature coniferous forest further changes in soil properties occur.
Soil drying is promoted both by tree roots, which create large pores that are not characteristic of soils under grassland and moorlands, and the reduction of throughflow that occurs due to greater interception of precipitation by a tree canopy.
The latter is also more effective than grassland or moorland at capturing particulates and aerosols from the atmosphere.
Nutrient availability is thus enhanced but such scavenging also results in the trapping of pollutants, which can retard growth.
Enhanced inputs of sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides due to this process are thought to be contributing to acidification (Blackie and Newson 1986).
The production of conifer litter, which is base-poor, also contributes to increased acidity.
This has been reviewed by Hornung (1985) and Hornung et al.(1987) who report the replacement of mull or moder by mor humus on brown earth or brown podzolic soils.
This causes an increase in the amount of fulvic acid, the acidification of near-surface horizons and a decline in exchangeable bases.
All of these trends promote and/or accelerate podzolisation which in turn promotes leaching of iron and aluminium and the more acidic a soil profile becomes, the more decomposition of organic material is inhibited.
All of these processes affect soil and soil water chemistry which subsequently influences the quality of runoff.
Numerous studies (e.g. Stoner and Gee 1985, Bull and Hall 1986) have compared the water chemistry of streams draining afforested areas with that of streams draining nearby moorland.
Overall solute concentrations, notably chloride, sulphate and aluminium, are higher in the former which are also more acidic.
As Hornung et al.(1987) point out, most concern has been voiced about increasing acidity and aluminium concentrations, which mainly occur where afforestation has been undertaken on areas underlain by acidic bedrock, because of their impact on invertebrate and fish populations.
Egglishaw et al.(1987), for example, have shown that salmon catches have declined in many Scottish streams and rivers which drain afforested catchments, and Ormerod et al.(1987) have discussed the reduction in diversity that occurs in the invertebrate faunas of streams in Wales after afforestation.
The latter are particularly restricted by pH, while fish catches are sensitive to both low pH and aluminium concentrations as well as increased sedimentation rates which occur in the establishment phase of afforestation (Francis 1988).
Water yield as well as water quality is affected by afforestation and reforestation.
While the amount of runoff increases in the establishment phase it declines as the plantation matures.
Research on the Plynlimon catchment in upland Wales, for example, indicates that streamflow from the afforested area is c. 15 per cent less than from nearby grassland (Blackie and Newson 1986).
This occurs because forest vegetation intercepts a greater percentage  of rainfall than grassland (or moorland) and returns more water to the atmosphere via evapotranspiration.
Changes such as these affect the rate of aquifer recharge and thus indirectly affect streamflow.
Although data relating to the seasonal distribution of runoff are limited, there are indications that post-drought recharge rates of forest soils are reduced and that more rapid flood response is characteristic of all stages of the rotation cycle when compared with non-afforested catchments (Binns 1986).
In the developing world, plantation forestry is also increasing, though there are few data available which facilitate an assessment of environmental impact.
Obviously, the introduction of exotic taxa and the establishment of trees where few or none existed previously will alter the landscape.
A distinction must also be made between agroforestry and plantation forestry; the former involves the integration of silviculture with agricultural systems while the latter is entirely given over to timber production.
Agroforestry, as K F S King (1987) discusses, has been a component of agricultural systems since the latter began to develop (section 3.3).
It remains a component of many, more traditionally based, agroecosystems and as discussed in section 4.4.1, a return to such practices is now considered to be one answer to Africa's poor record as a provider of sufficient food for its population.
However, King also believes that traditional agroforestry led to the establishment of plantation forestry because of colonial timber requirements in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries that culminated in the separation of agricultural and forestry interests.
This process began in Burma in 1806 with the establishment of teak plantations (the forerunner of the Dehra Dun forest organisation in India referred to in Table 8.3).
Although agroforestry practices continued to be significant in tropical agricultural systems, in the ensuing period they achieved increasing importance in development policies from the 1970s as a means of optimising tropical land-use (Bene et al.1977).
As a consequence, the International Centre for Research in Agroforestry (ICRAF) was established in 1977.
In the words of King (1987) the potential of agroforestry is ‘…fast becoming recognised as a system which is capable of yielding both wood and food and at the same time of conserving and rehabilitating ecosystems’.
Reference has already been made to the intercropping of trees with cereals, legumes, etc. in many African agricultural systems (section 4.4.1) to increase food production ad as a means of soil conservation, and to the planting of trees (section 7.2.3) to combat erosion and desertification.
Swaminathan (1987) has also advanced the view that agroforestry is one of the keys to achieving what he describes as ecological and nutritional security.
The latter, he argues, can only be accomplished if an adequate food supply is produced within a ecologically sustainable system.
The maintenance (or planting) of a partial tree cover will help to conserve the soil resource by maintaining the organic components via litter supply; soil cohesiveness will thus be improved which, together with the wind- and water-break effect of trees, will reduce soil erosion.
The litter component will also help to maintain nutrient status which can also be manipulated if careful thought is given to the mixture of species (both tree and crop) to be grown in juxtaposition.
Such control will promote tight intra-system nutrient cycling and obviate to a degree the need for artificial fertilisers.
As Nair (1985) has pointed out, there are many different types of agroforestry systems ranging from shifting cultivation to agrisilvicultural practices.
These are briefly described in Table 8.4, and there are numerous  examples which indicate that, overall, carefully managed agroforestry enterprises can be successful in so far as they provide a sustainable food supply and are environmentally conservational.
In relation to shifting cultivation Unruh (1988), for example, has examined the factors underpinning successful fallow management in the Iquitos region of the Peruvian Amazon.
The first stage in cultivation involves forest clearance (though particular tree species which are valuable for timber are usually spared) and as annual crop plants such as manioc (Manihot esculenta ) and maize (Zea mays ) are cultivated, perennial species such as pineapple (Ananas comosus ) and banana (Musa spp.) are planted along with numerous other fruit trees, palms and shrubs that can be used for a variety of purposes from thatching to dyes and medicines.
These are slower-growing species than the annuals and will not be productive until the swidden stage is complete and in many cases not until the subsequent fallow is well established; the different ages at which the perennials mature also facilitates a phased harvest so that the fallow stage is not unproductive.
This system, in tandem with additional planting of species like peanuts (Arachis hypogaea ) at the end of the cropping cycle and the protection of useful species by controlling forest regrowth (by limited slashing) in the later stages of the fallow cycle, creates a diverse ecosystem which contains patches of useful species as well as natural forest regrowth.
Competition from weeds, notably the grass Imperata which can inhibit forest regeneration, is also discouraged by these practices because of the fragmented pattern of bare ground and the shade effects of perennials which also contribute to the renewal of soil nutrient pools.
Nutrient renewal also occurs more rapidly under a managed fallow system than it does under unmanaged fallow for a number of reasons.
Firstly, it influences the quality and spatial distribution of litter.
Regular slashing to protect useful species results in a litter richer in new leaves which are more nutrient-rich, especially in relation to nitrogen and phosphorus, than older leaves and slashing usually occurs only after the re-establishment of a root mat which helps to bind nutrients that would otherwise be lost via leaching.
Secondly, the persistence of a canopy enhances the interception of nutrients from precipitation.
For the longer term, Unruh also suggests that the persistence of useful species will be enhanced because their seed banks in the soil are increased; thus in the subsequent swidden-fallow cycle the abundance of such species will increase spontaneously.
These ecological considerations, together with the economic advantages that are apparent, must commend the system as one that has successfully modified a traditional subsistence system into a more economic one without major detrimental effects.
Environmental change is here registered as a modification of forest composition rather than as weed-infested secondary rainforest.
Once again the maintenance of diversity is a key to success.
Diversity is also a characteristic of the agroforestry system known as homegarden which is typical of many traditionally based food-producing systems in Southeast Asia (Soemarwoto 1987).
Tree crops, annual crops and animals are intermixed to provide a sustainable production base.
As in the case of the Peruvian Amazon, crops for a variety of purposes are produced.
In Java, homegardens have increased in extent in the last 50 years and now account for c. 18.5 per cent of agricultural land.
Soemarwoto has also compared data on soil erosion from homegardens, which are family-run plots of c. 1–2 ha, with those from plantation forests and cultivated fields in Java and Thailand.
In the homegardens erosion rates are virtually nil while cultivated fields suffer soil erosion to varying degrees of slight, moderate or severe.
Such facts speak for themselves and clearly emphasise Richards's (1985) view (section 4.4.1) that there is much to be gleaned from traditional agricultural/agroforestry methods if sustainable development is to be achieved in the light of current and projected population growth.
New agroforestry techniques have also been developed to increase productivity without disrupting the basic symbiosis which exists between tree crop and annual crop.
In Nigeria, for example, alley-cropping has been developed since the 1970s.
It involves the cultivation of arable crops between hedgerows of planted shrubs and trees (Kang and Wilson 1987).
The latter are usually leguminous species which enhance the nitrogen content of the soil to the benefit of the arable crop and regular pruning to prevent shading of the crop provides a further source of nutrients as a mulch.
The advantages of the system are illustrated in Fig. 8.2 and, like the Peruvian example discussed above, the fallow stage is contributing to crop productivity as well as providing protection against soil erosion.
Moreover, if animals are integrated into the system, the prunings from the hedges can be used to supplement their fodder.
According to Kang and Wilson, the best results are achieved if leguminous species are used to create the hedge, and trials carried out in Nigeria have shown that the most promising species are Leucaena leucocephala and Gliricidia sepium which will grow successfully even on degraded land.
Trials have also shown that crops like maize (Zea mays ) and cassava (Manihot esculenta ) provide higher yields when alley-cropped with leguminous bushes and trees because of the increased availability of nitrogen which also results in a considerably reduced fertiliser requirement.
As these examples illustrate, both plantation forestry and agroforestry are significant agents of environmental change.
Not only do they alter the physiognomy of the landscape but also the geomorphic, pedologic and hydrological processes.
THE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT OF RECREATION, TOURISM AND SPORT
As the standard of living has increased in the developed world it has brought with it a higher disposable income and increased leisure time.
The average working week in the UK, for example, is now about 37 hours as compared with 60 hours in 1900.
In addition, paid holiday entitlements are more generous, having increased from 2 weeks in 1963 to 4 or more weeks in 1985 (Geofile No 118 1988), car ownership is more common giving greater access to the countryside and greater affluence means that finance is available for enjoyment purposes.
These trends are typical of westernised society.
In these nations, the countryside is increasingly being exploited as a source of recreation and as a venue for sporting events.
Greater affluence and improved air travel have also encouraged an increase in tourism to such an extent that it is now the world's third largest industry and accounts for c. 12 per cent of the world's GNP (Geofile No 118 1988).
Tourism is also becoming an important component of developing nations' economy because it is a source of foreign income.
Trips to China, South America, the Caribbean and Indonesia, for example, are now common features of many tour  operators' brochures.
Although they are discussed here as separate issues, tourism, recreation and sport are not mutually exclusive.
The latter two may be the attractions prompting the former, but where the countryside or environmental features are the foci of interest, large influxes of people and the attendant services that they require can bring about environmental change.
The very landscape that creates the market for tourism and/or recreation may itself be put at risk in the absence of careful management.
The examples which follow illustrate a range of landscape changes created by recreation, tourism and sport.
RECREATION
Recreation in its broadest sense involves any pleasurable occupation of leisure time.
Thus, many recreational activities do not impinge on the physical environment or landscape with which this section is concerned.
Here, the definition of recreation follows that of Goldsmith (1983) who states that it is ‘…the pursuit of informal leisure in the countryside; its effects are to damage the vegetation by trampling, to accelerate the loss of soil and to disturb animals’.
Activities which create such damage include a variety of sports, such as skiing and boating, as well as camping, walking, riding and picnicking.
Trampling of vegetation is one of the most widespread environmentally degrading repercussions of recreation and can also lead to excessive soil erosion.
Numerous studies have been undertaken in US national parks which illustrate the ecological impact of visitors on camp and picnic sites, nature trails and footpaths.
In the Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona, D.N.
Cole (1986) has investigated twelve high-use and twelve low-use campsites located away from the main tourist access routes in three desert vegetation types consisting of desert scrub, catclaw (Acacia greggi ) and piñon-juniper (Pinus edulie–Juniperus osteosperma ) communities.
In all cases, soil compaction, changes in infiltration rates, soil organic matter, litter and soil moisture content as well as vegetation cover were recorded.
The data revealed that human impact was greatest with initial use; further increases in use levels exhibited a non-linear relationship, illustrating that once a campsite had been established, higher-use levels could be sustained without incurring disproportionate damage.
In relation to the vegetation communities in which the campsites were located, the major difference in impact related to campsite core size which tended to be larger in piñon juniper areas due to the more open nature of the vegetation and the less rugged nature of the areas on which it is dominant.
Recommended measures to combat this expansion include the planting of cacti in the core periphery and the on-site education of the public via publicity material emphasising the need for core confinement.
This and other studies (e.g. Cole and Fichtler 1983, Stohlgren and Parsons 1986) have led to the conclusion that the most appropriate management strategy for such wilderness areas is to restrict camping to a few designated sites, where activity can be sustained without excessive damage.
Cole and Marion (1988) have also examined visitor impact in three areas of east coast national parks to determine if the same conclusions apply to a different, more moist area than that of the and west.
All three sites investigated, in the Delaware River catchment, are accessible only by boat with camping  occurring in a variety of campsites including camp-grounds, designated primitive sites and undeveloped user-selected sites.
In each area Cole and Marion recorded a range of soil and vegetation characteristics from both recreational and undisturbed control sites.
Although variations were apparent from site to site in relation to pre-existing environmental characteristics and intensity of use, the study highlighted some general trends with implications for management strategies.
Most significant is the fact that the soil and vegetation characteristics on low-use campsites were more similar to those of high-use sites than to control sites, with significant tree damage, reduced tree regeneration, changes in and disappearance of ground flora and compacted soils.
Although the damage on user-selected sites was not as heavy as that on outfitter sites, which were almost completely devegetated, discarded rubbish was more abundant indicating that the provision of disposal facilities in the latter were effective.
The overall conclusion from the study was similar to that from west coast parks and Cole and Marion recommend that the provision of designated sites is the most appropriate strategy for minimising the effects of recreation in these wilderness areas.
Jim (1987a) has also addressed the problem of recreational impact in the Shing Mun Country Park in Hong Kong.
This is one of twenty-one country parks established between 1977 and 1980 in which there are more than 440 recreational sites where facilities such as barbecues and children's play apparatus are provided.
In view of the high population of Hong Kong (c. 5.5 million) and their proximity to urban areas, these sites are popular for informal leisure-time activities; already there is evidence that serious degradation has occurred due to heavy use (Jim 1987b).
Jim (1987a) states that in the 1985–86 period Shing Mung received some 600 000 visitors, mainly for picnics and barbecues in sixty designated sites.
For each of these sites Jim recorded data on a number of variables indicative of soil erosion and site attractiveness which allowed the compilation of three index sites relating to high, medium and low levels of use.
He found, for example, that cover values for vegetation, litter and bare ground were distinct between sites that had been moderately and severely affected with a less distinct gradation occurring between slightly and moderately disturbed sites, and that noticeable exposure of mineral soil occurred only after the vegetation cover was reduced by c. 40 per cent .
Once this had happened, however, the soil was subject to compaction and crusting as well as erosion by sheetwash.
At the most disturbed sites shrub and herb species were considerably reduced in density and diversity as the amount of bare ground, up to 45 per cent at some sites, increased.
Since there is little potential for the development of new recreation sites in the Shing Mun Country Park, Jim suggests that a management strategy designed to make the distribution of visitors between sites more equable would be appropriate to minimise damage and especially to protect those sites which are currently undergoing excessive damage.
Such a strategy would involve the provision of more facilities at, and better access to, under-used sites and the removal of some facilities from heavily used areas to reduce recreational pressure and to promote recovery.
Footpath erosion is also a common feature of landscapes that are widely used by walkers.
In the Peak District National Park, for example, a recent report (Clouston in The Guardian , 2nd May 1989) states that in this, the oldest of the UK's national parks, there are more than 4000 serious faults in the park's 4000 footpaths.
This is mainly the result of heavy visitor use; in 1987 the park received 18.5 million visits.
Footpath erosion is a significant  problem in all the UK's national parks and, as Edington and Edington (1986) have pointed out, there are several strategies that can be employed to mitigate walking pressures.
Visitors may be diverted from sensitive areas by reorganising car parking, picnicking facilities and footpaths.
Alternatively, artificial footpath surfaces, which are not as susceptible to erosion, may be provided.
Edington and Edington quote the examples of asphalt-surfaced paths in the Rocky Mountain National Park of the USA, the use of limestone chippings on a bed of plastic sheeting to protect erosion-susceptible peat in the North York Moors National Park in the UK and the use of wood chips on paths along the shores of Derwent Water in the Lake District National Park.
Apart from damage caused by trampling and erosion, more widespread and long-lasting degradation can occur as a result of recreation activities.
Accidentally created fires can have devastating affects on a landscape.
In the Fynbos heathlands of South Africa, for example,c. 13 per cent of fires are caused by camp-fires or smokers, while in southern France more than half the fires are a result of recreationists, notably accidents from discarded cigarettes and children playing with fire (from data quoted in Goudie 1986).
Fire, especially when high temperatures are obtained, will destroy the aboveground woody biomass and litter and may impair the reproductive potential of plants by reducing the seed bank in the soil.
Such accidentally created fires are usually most devastating after a long dry period when the organic content of the litter and soil is experiencing moisture deficiency and the presence of dry kindling provides a good fuel supply.
In such circumstances seed banks are impaired and even below-ground roots may be damaged.
Thus recovery of the ecosystem is slow.
Additional recreational impacts on countryside areas occur because of formal and informal sporting activities which will be discussed in section 8.3.3.
TOURISM
Tourism is a distinctive type of recreation which involves the movement of people, on a temporary basis, to destinations beyond their usual residence and the activities which they then pursue.
It is one of the world's fastest-growing industries which has burgeoned since the Second World War, and especially since the 1960s.
World Travel Organisation data (quoted in Pearce 1987) reflect a trebling of international tourist arrivals in the last 20 years, reaching 284 million in 1984 as compared with 93 million in 1963.
Domestic tourism has also increased within this period.
The reasons for this demand, mainly confined to developed nations where there is a large disposable income and significant holiday entitlements, have been discussed in detail by Boniface and Cooper (1987) and Pearce (1987) and are related to improvements in transport as well as financial considerations.
Although Pearce has demonstrated that the major generating and receiving nations are developed nations, especially in Europe and North America, there has been a marked increase in tourism to developing countries which is actively encouraged to generate foreign currency.
This latter has been discussed by Cater (1987) who states that ‘…the development of tourism has been regarded as a panacea for the economic malaise of many of the least developed countries (LDCs) faced with a narrow resource base and serious balance of  payment difficulties’.
In Nepal, for example, receipts from tourism constitute some 46.4 per cent of export earnings and while there are adverse environmental effects of this development, as will be discussed below, tourism is an important source of employment, as it is in many developing countries.
While much international tourism is undertaken to enjoy cultural attributes, much of it is also prompted by scenic, wildlife and marine features.
Thus, tourism and conservation are closely interlinked and, as Farrell and McLellan (1987) point out, it is essential that tourism and its policy-makers should take account of the sustainability concept which, while being particularly relevant to agricultural development and forestry practices, is equally important in the context of tourism.
On the one hand, heavy visitor pressures to a particular landscape feature may cause degradation to such an extent that it is no longer an attraction; tourism thus becomes self-defeating.
On the other hand, closure of a feature to tourism for conservation purposes is undesirable, because it defeats the purpose of conservation which is its preservation for future generations.
Some degree of accommodation between conservation and tourism is essential, involving the management of both place and people, possibly in a similar way to that employed in the US national parks (section 8.3.1).
Successful management policies have been employed in the centre of Australia, for example, where the major attractions   are Ayres Rock and the Olgas.
Until a decade ago, there was little control on campsites and motels were constructed at the base of Ayres Rock giving free access to climbers and walkers.
This began to promote excessive erosion and Aboriginal concerns relating to infringements of their sacred sites which abound in the region.
As a result, a new resort, Yulara, was constructed which as Fig. 8.3 shows is 19 km from the rock itself and 37 km from the Olgas.
This resort has a large range of facilities, including two luxury hotels, shops, restaurants, camp-grounds, an information centre and an airstrip.
Visitors to the area are encouraged to confine their living requirements to the resort and are bussed out to the various landmarks where rangers of the Uluru National Park provide guided tours and prevent entry to certain Aboriginal sites.
In this way, footpaths can be opened or closed according to erosional pressures and Aboriginal wishes are respected.
This is one example where conservation and tourism enjoy a sustainable symbiotic relationship.
Elsewhere, however, management strategies have not been as successful.
In the Galápagos Islands, for example, the attractions of natural beauty and a unique wildlife are leading to serious environmental problems.
This island archipelago is situated in the Pacific Ocean c. 1000 km west of Ecuador and is famous as the source of inspiration for Charles Darwin's evolutionary theory.
The islands have never been joined to South America and because of their isolation they contain large numbers of endemic organisms.
As de Groot (1983) reports, 90 per cent of the lad area was declared a national park in 1959 and the Charles Darwin Research Station was established in 1960 on Santa Cruz Island, the aim of which was to undertake scientific research and to begin a programme of goat eradication.
These animals, introduced by pirates and whalers between the sixteenth and nineteenth centuries, denude the vegetation and compete with the giant tortoise (Geochelone elephantopus ).
This programme, which is being undertaken in conjunction with the Ecuadorean National Park Service established in 1968, has successfully eradicated goats and a number of other introduced species on many of the islands.
Such conservation work is, however, being hindered by the huge growth in tourism that has occurred since 1970, and although there is in theory a master plan which in the mid-1970s allowed for a maximum of 12 000 visitors per year, de Groot states that since 1979 this number has been increasingly exceeded.
More cruise ships have been registered, aircraft capacity has grown and traffic in small locally operated tourist boats and private yachts has increased.
As a result, trails are being eroded and unofficial ones created by parties without an official guide.
Rubbish is discarded; that from boats is washed ashore and there is greater disturbance of the animal life.
Even before organised tourism on a large scale occurred, there was evidence that animal behaviour was being disrupted.
Harris (1972–73) reported that territorial breakdown among the islands' iguanas (Conolophus subcristatus ) was occurring because the animals were deserting their territories to assemble in visitor-frequented areas to be fed.
This impaired breeding activity and led to a complete ban on artificial feeding.
There are also fears that the increased tourist traffic will bring introduced plant and animal species which may bring about the extinction of endemic species.
Although Adsersen (1989) believes that the major threat to conservation is not from tourism but from land-use via agriculture and sand and gravel extraction, there is still much cause for concern, especially if hotels and tourist resorts are developed.
Moreover, de Groot's fears, expressed in 1983, have been  reiterated by Emory in 1988 who states that in 1986 some 26023 tourists visited the islands and that the problems of environmental protection are being exacerbated by the influx of mainland Ecuadoreans seeking wealth in the tourist trade.
In 1987, following an exceptionally high influx of tourists in August 1986, tighter regulations were introduced for tourist agencies, more guides were being trained and the waters surrounding the islands were declare a marine resources reserve.
Further protection, involving better supervised tour groups, should also ensue, following the decision in 1989 to offset a proportion of Ecuador's national debt in a debt-for-nature deal which requires Galápagos protection.
Tourism has also had a significant impact on many national parks in Africa which attract visitors for safari holidays, the forerunners of which were the big-game safaris of the late nineteenth century.
Today, hunting is no longer allowed and tourists visit these national parks to view and photograph the wildlife in their natural habitats.
In many of these parks, which are mostly located in savanna regions, tourists regularly drive off the existing game-viewing tracks into the dry terrain and there is concern that increased tourist traffic will detrimentally alter the environment.
This has been discussed by Onyeanusi (1986) in relation to the Masai Mara National Reserve in Kenya, where there are more than 40 000 visitors annually, involving a considerable amount of off-road driving in order to obtain close-up views of large carnivores like the cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus ), leopard (Panthera pardus ) and lion (P. leo ).
Such activity is necessitated by the provision of only 420 km of game-viewing in a reserve of 1673 km 2 and the fact that there are relatively low populations of the carnivores, individuals of which do not always locate themselves in convenient spots!
Onyeanusi's study involved an assessment of the impact of vehicle tyres on off-road tracks in a specific area of what is predominantly grassland savanna.
As would be expected, the amount of damage increased as the number of vehicles using the tracks increased but the greatest reduction in vegetation cover was caused by initial vehicle runs.
The study also shows that grasslands with a high above-ground biomass lose their standing crop more rapidly than those with a lower biomass.
Extrapolating his results to the entire Nature Reserve, Onyeanusi estimated that the actual loss of biomass was low.
Thus, while the visual impact of the extra trackways implied that significant damage was taking place, the actual ecological impact was relatively small.
Nevertheless there is clearly a negative impact on the environment, in terms of aesthetic qualities, which could be minimised by the provision of more primary, designated trackways.
There is also the possibility that increased tourist traffic could exacerbate this problem further and the formulation of a management plan in the near future could be beneficially prescriptive.
Another area where a policy of sustainable tourism is to be welcomed is the Himalaya.
In Nepal in particular, tourist attractions include eight of the world's highest mountain peaks, notably Everest and Annapurna.
Since the late 1950s especially, when Nepal opened its borders to outsiders, trekking and mountain-climbing groups have increased markedly and, as is the case in many developing countries, have been encouraged as a source of foreign income.
As Kohl (1988) has reported with a dazzling photographic portrait (by William Thompson and Galen Rowell) the fuelwood crisis, which is endemic to the region, is being aggravated by the fuelwood requirements of tourists.
Inefficient stoves are kept burning day and night to provide heat  and food for the tourist lodges in Sagarmatha, the Mount Everest National Park.
This situation may well be aggravated by the construction of an airstrip above the Sherpa village of Namche Bazar and the renovation of a Japanese-run hotel.
This village, which is situated along the trail from Lukla to Everest Base Camp, has undergone tremendous changes as the number of tourists to Nepal has risen from less than 10 000 per year in 1960 to almost 250 000 in 1988; there are also plans to increase that number to c. 1 million by the year 2000.
Approximately 20 per cent of these tourists will visit Sagarmatha and, while this is welcomed as a source of employment, there are drawbacks.
Apart from the increased pressures on fuelwood, rubbish disposal is disfiguring the landscape, especially along the trail from Lukla, through Namche Bazar, to the Everest Base Camp.
Climbing expeditions into the peaks themselves have also left behind piles of rubbish, and Cullen (1986) points out that the problem is compounded by the fact that in such a high Alpine environment decomposition rates are very slow so that discarded materials may persist for several years if not decades.
Moreover, expeditions tend to congregate in a few favoured areas which provide rapid access to peaks as well as adequate water supplies and shelter from natural hazards like avalanches.
Add to this the rapid growth in the numbers of expeditions, climbers and trekkers which has occurred in recent years and it is not surprising that the problem has reached massive proportions despite the availability of new access sites from Tibet which was opened to climbers in 1980.
Obviously, the harsh terrain and the inhospitable weather conditions mean that rubbish disposal is a subordinate concern, in relation to climbing goals and survival, of climbers in the mountain peaks, the major problem areas are the base camps.
Apart from transporting rubbish out of the area, which is costly, Cullen has discussed the advantages and disadvantages of four methods of on- or near-site disposal.
Incineration, for example, can effectively reduce the volume of rubbish but still leaves the problem of non-combustible material; covering with rocks is not an ideal solution because the rubbish may be uncovered by scavenging yaks, herders and climbers; incarceration in glacier crevasses is not recommended because it is likely that the rubbish will ultimately reappear.
Interring the rubbish in pits where there is suitable ground is probably the best solution but sites must be carefully selected to avoid contamination of water supplies and may require mechanical diggers in view of the huge volume of rubbish.
This is more costly and is not ideal but it is nevertheless feasible.
Moreover, expedition companies, individuals and host countries must play a more significant role in combating this problem.
Nepal's climbing permits, for example, require an undertaking that rubbish will be adequately disposed but it is rarely enforced.
Cullen suggests that peak fees, which are currently paid for the right to climb specific peaks, could include a refundable charge for environmental protection and that this should be sufficient to cover the costs of a clean-up operation if the expedition party fails to comply.
These examples illustrate the close interrelationships that exist between environment and tourism.
Neither is viable without the other and both require careful management to ensure that their viability is perpetuated.
SPORT
Sporting activities which utilise the landscape are many and varied and may be elements of both recreation and tourism.
In the broadest sense they are what Edington and Edington (1986) describe as ‘active physical pursuits’ such as skiing, climbing and sailing.
Some of these sports necessitate the use of motor-powered vehicles which can be the major agents of environmental change and in some cases, such as trail-bike racing, the environmental damage can be substantial.
Large-scale sporting events, such as the Winter Olympics, can also bring about environmental change which is not just a consequence of the sporting events themselves but is also due to the infrastructure necessary to provide facilities for a large number of competitors and spectators.
Edington and Edington have described the environmental impact of the ‘Hare and Hounds’ trail-bike race which takes place between Barstow and Las Vegas across the California Desert of the USA.
This is an arid, fragile environment that is easily damaged by the mechanical impact of motorcycle tyres and according to Luckenbach (1975, quoted in Edington and Edington 1986) the ‘Hare and Hounds’ race has resulted in the destruction of some 140 000 creosote bushes (Larrea divaricata ), 64 000 burro-bushes (Franseria dumosa ) and 15 000 Mojave yuccas (Yucca schidigera ) due to mechanical impact and the exposure of plant roots by subsequent soil erosion.
Other desert flora and fauna have also been adversely affected by this type of activity as well as the use of dune-buggies and jeeps.
Soil compaction by vehicle tyres in recreation areas of the Californian Desert has caused a reduction in the population of annual ephemerals by reducing water penetration that is essential to remove germination inhibitors from the soil seed bank (Webb 1982).
Changes in plant cover can subsequently influence faunal populations by altering food supplies and habitats.
Sailing, boating and water-skiing can also have adverse effects on aquatic ecosystems both directly and indirectly.
In the Norfolk Broads, Britain, for example, aquatic plants have been damaged by the mechanical action of propellers and boat hulls which have also accelerated bank erosion.
The discharge of sewage from boats has also contributed to eutrophication problems in the region (which is mainly due to runoff of fertilisers from adjacent arable land).
The popularity of the area, which attracts some 2000 hired boats and 3000 private craft in the summer months (Crawford 1985), is gradually causing the impoverishment of what is generally considered to be one of Britain's most attractive wetland areas.
There are also numerous reports that sailing and other water-based recreational sports can have adverse affects on water-birds that abound on many of Britain's artificially created reservoirs (e.g. Tuite 1982).
This is a particular problem when sailing is extended into the winter period and can result in a reduction of overwintering species.
Skiing can also have a significant environmental impact, since provisions for it extend over relatively large areas.
This has been discussed by Mosimann (1985) in relation to ski piste construction in the Swiss Alps.
His study of more than 200 sites in the cantons of Grison and Valais involved the collection of data on a range of variables relating to relief, the degree of site modification in piste construction such as the amount of levelling, soil  characteristics, vegetation cover and its disturbance as well as impact assessment, notably sheet, rill and gully erosion, sediment deposition and landslipping.
The relationships between site factors and soil erosion which emerged from this study are given in Table 8.5.
This shows that slope form and soil moisture status are particularly influential in determining erosion rates.
These factors are also important, along with altitude, in the establishment of new vegetation communities once piste construction has been completed.
Revegetation is particularly limited where intensive erosion has occurred at altitudes above 2200 m above sea-level where harsh climatic factors, as well as disturbance by erosion, restrict revegetation.
Between 2000 m and 1600 m above sea-level, vegetation recovery is more rapid but only where erosion is at a minimum and even then it may take between 5 and 8 years after seeding.
Below 1600 m above sea-level, revegetation is much more rapid except on poorly drained slopes.
Mosimann has also noted that on some revegetated pistes there are sharp boundaries separating well-vegetated and poorly vegetated areas.
This occurs because of local variations in soil properties; on the upper part of the slope the soil may be truncated but on the lower slopes the soils are mixed with layers of various depths.
Such variations affect nutrient and water transfers within the soil profile which in turn influence the vegetation communities and the degree of success achieved by reseeding.
Mosimann suggests that some of these problems could be overcome if particularly sensitive areas are avoided, especially those above 2000 m above sea-level, and if the topsoil is restored after levelling, etc.
A further study on the environmental impact of sport is that of Rodriguez (1987) who has examined the effects on the water quality and biota in the Rio Hondo watershed of New Mexico, USA, where a ski industry was established in the 1960s.
In terms of water quality, one of the most significant effects of this industry relates to the discharge of treated sewage into the Rio Hondo as the ski resort rapidly grew beyond the capacity of the treatment plant that was constructed in 1967.
A monitoring programme established in 1974 revealed that there was considerable deterioration in water quality in   the stretch of river between the sewage-treatment plant and the mouth of the canyon, including high phosphorus concentrations and high populations of faecal coliform bacteria which presented a health hazard.
A survey of the biota of the river between 1979 and 1981 revealed that the macroinvertebrate fauna had been adversely affected, involving loss of diversity and the proliferation of a few species which are tolerant of high levels of pollution.
However, the construction of a new sewage-treatment plant in 1983–84 resulted, in subsequent years, in a marked improvement of both water quality and biota illustrating that problems such as this are not irreversible but avoidable.
Kariel and Kariel (1988) have also examined the impact of new facilities constructed in Alberta's (Canada) Kananaskis Valley to accommodate the 1988 Winter Olympic Games.
Already a highly developed multipurpose recreation area, plans for further development have generated concerns about wildlife protection, especially in relation to a herd of bighorn sheep whose range includes Mount Allan that houses one of the main Olympic pistes .
Mitigating measures proposed to minimise the impact of large numbers of visitors include the cordoning off, by erection of a barrier, of the ski area to prevent people climbing the ridge and the provision of forage in specific locations to attract the sheep into areas that are least disturbed.
More passive sports, such as angling, can also have an environmental impact.
Discarded lead shot, lead weights and fishing lines can all adversely affect wildlife.
The latter can entrap adult birds and if it is incorporated into nests it can cause chick mortality.
Discarded lead shot-gun pellets and lead fishing weights are also considered to be a significant cause of game-bird mortality in both North America and Britain.
Game-birds are not the only species to be so affected and much concern has recently been voiced in the British media about the adverse affects of lead accoutrements on swans.
According to a Nature Conservancy Council Report (1981b) significant declines in swan populations in many parts of Britain are due to the ingestion of lead shot and weights which find their way on to lake and stream beds from where they are consumed as grit.
Hardman and Cooper (1980), for example, report that the swan herd on the River Avon at Strafford declined from a population of eighty in 1963 to just four in 1978, much of which is attributed to lead ingestion.
As Edington and Edington (1986) report, there are also numerous examples where wildlife populations have been adversely affected by recreational hunting as well as the particularly obnoxious practice of over-hunting of particular species to provide wildlife souvenirs.
The over-hunting of African elephants as a source of ivory for ornaments and jewellery is a case in point in this latter context.
However, in relation to recreational hunting, a classic example of overexploitation is that of the Arabian oryx (Oryx leucoryx ) in the Middle East.
Prior to the Second World War this species was hunted, as part of a traditional subsistence economy, by Bedouin tribes but with the development of the oil industry and the introduction of modern vehicles and weapons, hunting parties organised on a large scale rapidly reduced oryx populations to such an extent that they were virtually eliminated.
The only herds of the animals which now inhabit the area are derived from animals that have been successfully reintroduced since the late 1930s.
Sporting activities, like recreation and tourism, can, as these examples illustrate, have a considerable environmental impact.
Careful management can, however, mitigate such effects so that sporting activities do not have to be incompatible with conservation interests.
A NEW AGENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE: BIOTECHNOLOGY
Biotechnology is a general term that embraces aspects of biochemistry, microbiology and chemical engineering which, in combination, have harnessed the capacities of living organisms, mainly microbes and cultured tissue cells, to undertake specific processes with industrial, agricultural and medical applications.
Many of these applications have been used to tackle environmental problems such as pollution control, especially in the treatment of sewage, industrial and agricultural effluents as well as rubbish disposal.
These are examples of environmental biotechnology which are relatively recent innovations in comparison with the long-standing use of such techniques in industrial processes like brewing and fermentation.
Increasingly, environmental biotechnology is being heralded as a means of controlling and improving environmental quality and it is also being applied to mineral extraction and resource recycling.
The latter, as will be discussed below, is particularly important in a world where the resource base is diminishing rapidly.
What is of more environmental significance, however, is the subdiscipline of biotechnology that is known as genetic engineering.
Since its inception in the early 1970s, genetic engineering has been welcomed as a major scientific breakthrough because of the potential that it provides to manipulate organisms from the most simple life-forms, such as bacteria, to the most complex, including Homo sapiens sapiens .
At the same time misgivings have been expressed, mainly in relation to two aspects of the science.
Firstly, much of the research focuses on human embryos which raises ethical considerations hitherto unprecedented, and while such research is still in its early stages it is clear that the ability to manipulate human life itself requires well-defined and enforceable legislation.
Secondly, there is a need to determine how genetically engineered organisms will react when released into the environment.
This remains an unanswered question until such organisms are released and monitored but it does require a cautious and controlled approach if lessons are to be learnt from the often detrimental effects that have accrued from the introduction of organisms into non-indigenous environments as biological controls or as inadvertent introductions.
(Examples of both of these have been discussed in section 4.4.3 in relation to Australia.)
Such a cautious approach to the potential of genetic engineering is also to be applauded in the wake of the dilemmas that have been created by the harnessing of nuclear power, the science for which was developed in the 1940s in response to weaponry requirements in the Second World War.
Promoted thereafter as a source of cheap and clean energy, neither of which has actually been realised some 40 years on, nuclear power is a source of considerable debate in the late 1980s because of its annihilation potential in the case of warfare and the problems that characterise waste disposal from nuclear power plants (section 5.4.3).
While nuclear power and genetic engineering may appear on the  surface to be unconnected they have much in common; the term nuclear, for example , relates to nucleus which is a characteristic of both inorganic atoms and organic cells that comprise the fundamental components of living organisms.
In the former, nuclear power can be harnessed by splitting the nuclei of atoms that comprise the basis of all matter; in the latter the onus is on changing the nature of DNA which is the component of all living cell nuclei that have the capability of transferring characteristics from one generation to the next.
The manipulation of such traits is not new because a form of genetic engineering has been in operation since humans,c. 10 kyr BP (section 3.3.1), first began to select plants and animals for agricultural purposes.
Such selection has been continued throughout history, and is continuing today in plant and animal breeding programmes.
Whatever the drawbacks of genetically engineered organisms ultimately prove to be, and as yet there is very little evidence available, there are a number of possibilities that, at least in theory, could prove to be environmentally beneficial.
Some of these potentialities will be discussed below
ENVIRONMENTAL BIOTECHNOLOGY I: AGRICULTURAL APPLICATIONS
Biotechnology has an extremely wide range of applications in agriculture, among which are crop improvement, biological control of pests and the enhancement of nitrogen fixation, all of which influence environmental quality.
In the context of crop improvement, plant breeding programmes utilise several biotechnological techniques to produce stocks of plants with particularly advantageous characteristics such as disease resistance.
For example, it is possible to exploit the capacity that many plants have for asexual or vegetative reproduction to produce stocks from cuttings.
Stocks of potatoes, apples, strawberries as well as an array of garden plants are produced in this way.
Plants can also be produced using tissue culture techniques, as has been discussed in detail by Tudge (1988) and Cocking (1989), wherein complete plants can be produced from tissue cells, even single cells, grown in vitro .
The chief applications of tissue culture are given in Table 8.6 and range from the relatively simple production of large numbers of plants by cloning to the more sophisticated production of new species and useful chemicals, as well as facilitating genetic engineering which will be discussed in section 8.4.3.
As Tudge (1988) discusses, the facility of plants to regenerate from a few cells is related to the characteristic known as totipotency.
This means that each individual cell has the ability to develop into any kind of cell that the organism will require for survival.
It is characteristic of both plant and animal cells; in the latter totipotency is lost at an early stage in embryonic development but in plants all cells maintain this ability throughout the life span of the individual.
In theory, therefore, it is possible to produce new plants from any group of cells as long as they are provided with an appropriate growth medium.
In practice, most plant production using tissue culture utilises cells that are known as callus , a mass of undifferentiated cells which are produced to repair damage, or cells from leaves, roots or stems (see discussion in M G K Jones 1986), although it is not yet possible to  regenerate all plants in this way and in the context of agriculture, the cereals are the most notable exceptions.
Tissue culture has facilitated the production of several disease-resistant crops by side-stepping the tendency of plants to pass infections between generations via seeds, tillers or tubers.
For example, it is now possible to produce cassava seedlings, the parental line of which is usually affected by a mosaic virus, by culturing unaffected cells that can be propagated in sterile conditions (Tudge 1988).
This would be impossible using simple cuttings and such disease resistant strains would be an obvious advantage to many farming systems in Africa, where cassava is a major crop, especially if disease resistance can be combined with high productivity.
The cloning of plants using tissue culture is also being used to produce improved crop strains and, as Tudge points out, it has considerable potential for the improvement of oil palms, coconuts and tea, all of which are important economic crops in many developing countries.
As Table 8.6 shows, two further plant attributes are being exploited to produce new crop plants.
The first is somaclonal variation, a characteristic recognised in cloned species which exhibit variation in genetic structure.
As Skinner (1985) points out, plants or clones derived from the parent plant are not always genetically identical and those that differ from the parent plant are known as somatic variants or ‘sports’.
The ability of plants to give rise to such variation has both advantages and disadvantages.
On the one hand, clones produced with the object of reproducing desired attributes may be disappointing because the genetic deviation from the parent may mean that the attributes are lost.
On the other hand, somaclonal variation provides a new range of material by expanding the gene pool of a particular species, with which plant breeders can experiment.
This property has been recognised in many plant species.
For example, Kunakh and Savchenko (1988) have reported somaclonal variation in two related stocks of maize, of which one displayed a greater variety of morphological features and adaptability.
Similarly, Larkin et al.(1988) have reported somaclonal variation in cultivars of wheat which produced a range of traits in mature individuals, including variation in resistance to the herbicide glyphosate.
As Cocking (1989) points out, many of these traits would ultimately be revealed in conventional plant breeding programmes but tissue culture provides a much more rapid means of assay.
The recognition of desirable attributes in many cloned  species has already resulted in the improvement of crop plants like the potato, tomato, lettuce and sugar-cane.
Somatic hybridisation, which involves the same or different species to produce a new cell with two sets of chromosomes, is also being developed to produce new crop plants.
To date, successful experiments have been carried out on rice and tomato to produce hybrids, but no such crops are available on a commercial basis.
The potential of the method is, however, illustrated by experiments undertaken on a mutant variety of tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum ), which has an inbred resistance to the antibiotic streptomycin, and petunia (Petunia hybrida ).
The resulting hybrids were resistant to streptomycin, a characteristic inherited from tobacco, and capable of growing on nitrate, an ability conferred by petunia genes (Cocking 1989).
Crop improvement is only one aspect of the application of biotechnology to agriculture.
Attention has also been focused on the enhancement of soil nitrogen by the use of nitrogen-fixing bacteria which, if successful on a large scale, could go some way towards reducing environmental problems associated with the widespread use of nitrogen fertilisers (section 6.3.1).
As discussed in section 8.4.3, the bacterium Rhizobium spp. is one of the main bacteria involved in nitrogen fixation via its symbiotic relationship with leguminous plant species, and much work has been undertaken on the beneficial effects on crop productivity which may ensue if seeding with this bacterium is undertaken.
Johnston (1989) and Day and Lisansky (1987) point out that there are a range of Rhizobium spp. which individually are host-species specific, which fix nitrogen from the atmosphere only when present in root nodules and which vary considerably in their ability to fix nitrogen.
These characteristics suggest that a number of preconditions are necessary before the addition of Rhizobium to either plant or soil will be effective in promoting nitrogen enhancement.
Firstly, the crop has to be a legume; secondly, the Rhizobium species selected will need to be one that has the capability of forming a symbiotic relationship with the host (though there is the possibility as discussed in section 8.4.3, that genetic engineering could simplify this aspect of the procedure); and thirdly, it is important that the bacterial strain should be efficient at nitrogen fixation.
Moreover, Day and Lisansky point out that other environmental factors, such as soil type, are also determinants of nitrogen-fixing efficiency as is competition between naturally occurring Rhizobium spp. and inoculated species.
It is also important to realise that the efficiency of nitrogen fixation by Rhizobium spp. is determined to a large extent by the amount of nitrogen salts in the soil, so the application of nitrate fertiliser will actually inhibit bacterial nitrogen fixation.
The options thus include the development of Rhizobium spp., which are active even when nitrates are abundant, or to reduce fertiliser application.
The latter is preferable from an environmental viewpoint in order to minimise the potential affects of eutrophication.
Rhizobium seeding, either by direct inoculation into soil or by inoculating legume seeds, has been successful in North America where soya beans are widely grown in soils where there are no naturally occurring rhizobial bacteria.
This is chiefly because the soya bean and its naturally occurring symbiotic bacteria are natives of the Far East (Johnston 1989).
The implication of this is that the introduction of leguminous crops to non-indigenous areas might well benefit, in terms of productivity enhancement, by the associated introduction of rhizobial strains.
One of the more obvious applications of biotechnology in agriculture is that of biological control.
As Waage and Greathead (1988) have discussed, throughout the centuries, reaching commercial proportions by the 1900s.
Some examples of biological control have been referred to in section 4.4.3 in relation to Australia and in many instances it is clear that the introduction of alien species has proved ecologically disastrous.
Currently, however, biological control of plant, animal and viral pests is gaining new status as one component of integrated pest management strategies.
Pickett (1988), for example, has discussed the role of biological agents as components of crop-protection strategies which involve the use of pyrethroid insecticides (section 6.2.3).
The use of such organisms, Pickett believes, will help to overcome problems of pesticide resistance in target species and to reduce the hazards of chemical use to beneficial organisms and the environment.
Among the possibilities is the use of semiochemicals (behaviour-controlling chemicals), such as insect pheromones, to encourage the efficacy of biological control agents like fungal pathogens by ensuring closer contact between the target insect and the latter.
There are also a range of organisms, notably bacteria, fungi and viruses, which produce fatal infections in many insect species, and which have a restricted range of host species.
Many strains of Bacillus thuringiensis , for example, are insect pathogens because they produce insecticidal chemicals and, as Payne (1988) has discussed, there are now a number of commercially available strains which are used to control a variety of insects.
For example, it is used in West Africa to control blackfly which is a carrier of the disease onchocerciasis and which has developed resistance to many pesticides.
It is also widely used to control mosquito populations.
Similarly there are two commercially available fungi,Verticillium lecanii and Metarhizium anisopliae , which are used to control aphids and whitefly in glasshouse crops, and spittle bugs which are a pest of sugar-cane in Brazil.
These are just a few examples of the use of modern biological control agents, though as Jutsum (1988) points out, the commercial value of these is currently less than 1 per cent of the global market value of crop-protection and public health agents (mainly chemicals) which currently amounts to $16 000 million annually.
Nevertheless, many agrochemical companies are undertaking extensive research programmes on biological control.
Little work has so far focused on plant pathogens, but it is likely that this will ultimately develop as another component of integrated pest-management strategies.
There is also considerable potential for the development of novel biological control agents by genetic engineering.
How successful such efforts will prove to be will not only depend on commercial sales potential but also on the costs which will be incurred in laboratory and field testing procedures, similar to those discussed in relation to crop protection chemicals in section 6.4, which are necessary for registration.
While there are many further applications of biotechnology in agriculture, such as in the treatment of agricultural waste, the examples given above testify to its potency as a future agent of environmental change, a potency which is likely to increase exponentially as genetic engineering develops (section 8.4.3).
ENVIRONMENTAL BIOTECHNOLOGY II: OTHER APPLICATIONS
There is no specific title to this section because there are so many applications of biotechnology with implications for environmental quality.
Biotechnology is widely applied in the treatment of industrial effluents and sewage and reference has already been made, in section 6.3.2, to the potential that it provides for the denitrification of water intended for domestic consumption.
Obviously, any such processes that can enhance environmental quality are to be welcomed, provided that they themselves do not lead to inadvertent environmental deterioration.
Other applications of biotechnology which are relevant to environmental management include resource recycling, such as the use of organisms to scavenge useful materials from waste products, mineral extraction or biomining which involves the bacterial leaching of mineral ores, and energy production.
This latter involves the production of food energy and fuel energy which can supplement animal feedstocks and fossil fuels respectively.
In some cases, it is possible to combine several objectives such as the treatment of sewage to produce fuel or food energy.
The process of anaerobic digestion, which involves the use of mixed populations of microorganisms to produce methane and carbon dioxide from organic wastes, is used to treat industrial, agricultural and domestic wastes and has been discussed by Barnes and Fitzgerald (1987) and Hawkes and Hawkes (1987).
The processes involved are complex, involving a variety of bacteria that can break down organic molecules such as proteins, lipids and polysaccharides (cellulose and starch are included in the latter) in the absence of oxygen.
These reactions take place in a variety of digesters that are designed to deal with specific types of waste products.
Municipal sewage works have used such methods to treat sewage since the early 1900s and the biogas produced, which consists on average of 70 per cent methane and 30 per cent carbon dioxide (Hawkes and Hawkes 1987), can be used to power the digestion plant itself.
In addition, the resultant sludge can be used as fertiliser.
Biogas produced in this way is not widely used as an alternative energy source in the developed world, but is now widely used in China where several million small-scale digesters have been constructed to produce fuel for cooking and lighting at a local level.
There are also analogies between this type of energy production and that produced by the decomposition of organic rubbish in landfill sites where anaerobic conditions promote the often hazardous production of methane (section 5.4. 1).
As Richards (1989) discusses, there are currently 26 out of 300 possible landfill sites in Britain which are producing energy on a commercial basis, and there is considerable scope for increased biogas production as there is in West Germany and the USA.
Moreover, Richards also points out that burning of methane in this way is globally beneficial because it is a much more potent trapper of heat in the atmosphere than the equivalent carbon dioxide produced by its combustion (section 5.3. 1).
The aerobic treatment of sewage and wastes from food, chemical and pulp and paper industries is also a well-established practice and involves the microbial decomposition of dissolved organic compounds.
The chief aim is to reduce the solid volume of waste, offensive odours and to effect pathogen removal.
Like anaerobic digestion, the aerobic processing of waste material  produces methane which can be used as a biogas fuel.
The processes and technologies involved in aerobic waste treatment have been discussed by Best et al.(1985) and Forster and Johnston (1987) who point out that treatment plant must be designed according to the waste in question.
However, Litchfield (1989) has also described examples of how aerobic sewage treatment can be manipulated to produce single-cell proteins.
These latter are the agglomerated, and subsequently dried, cells of single-celled microorganisms like algae, yeasts, fungi and certain bacteria which can be cultivated on a large industrial-scale basis for the production of protein that can be used for either human or animal consumption.
This can be produced in two ways: by harnessing organisms that photosynthesise and by using biotechnological methods that involve the provision of non-photosynthetic organisms with oxygen, nutrients such as carbon, nitrogen and phosphorus, and energy.
Bacteria and algae are the most commonly used photosynthesising organisms in single-cell protein production and are best cultivated in shallow ponds where temperatures are high and an adequate nutrient supply is present.
For example, the blue-green alga Spirulina maxima has been produced on a commercial basis from Lake Texcoco in Mexico and, in common with similar projects in Hawaii, Taiwan, Israel and Thailand, the dried algal products are sold as health foods.
In Israel, sewage treatment has been successfully combined with single-cell protein production; the sewage provides the nutrients while the year-round high light intensities promote rapid algal growth.
The resulting biomass is thermally dried to remove pathogens and the final product is used as an animal feed.
Single-cell protein production from non-photosynthetic organisms has also reached the stage of commercial availability, mainly as animal feed.
Pruteen®, for example, is one such product which was developed by ICI plc in the 1960s and early 1970s mainly as an alternative to soya-bean meal.
The process involves the bacterium Methylophilus methylotrophus , which utilises methanol as its energy source, and the provision of nutrients such as ammonia (to provide nitrogen), phosphorus, calcium and potassium.
According to Litchfield (1989), the dried product consists of 72 per cent protein but, although it is an acceptable animal feed supplement, the drop in world soya-bean meal prices mean that it is now no longer produced on a commercial basis.
Technology such as this, however, is used in the production of a wide variety of other food products for both animal and human consumption, as has been discussed by Beech et al.(1985), such as yeasts, flavouring, gums and vitamins.
Of the products currently available for human consumption, Mycoprotein® is perhaps the best-known single-cell protein.
It consists of fungal mycelia, from the fungus Fusarium graminearum , which is produced by fermentation using glucose as the energy source and ammonia as the nitrogen source.
The end product resembles meat in so far as it is fibrous and can be flavoured and/or coloured accordingly.
Beech et al.(1985) have compared its dietary characteristics with those of lean raw beefsteak, and although it has a protein content of c. 47 per cent, which is nearly 20 per cent less than the beefsteak, it contains half the fat and is rich in fibre.
Mineral extraction using organisms is another aspect of biotechnology that is relevant to environmental quality and its increasing use as a mechanism for extracting minerals from ores or from mined materials simply harnesses the natural ability of many organisms to break down mineral-containing rock.
As Pooley (1987) discusses, bacterial leaching is relevant to  the recovery of metals that occur as sulphide ores and it involves the oxidation of sulphides to sulphates that are more soluble, providing solutions from which the metals can be more easily extracted.
The bacteria involved in this process are known as chemolithotrophs because they have the ability to produce energy for growth from the oxidation of inorganic sulphurous compounds.
According to Woods and Rawlings (1989) the most important organisms are Thiobacillus ferrooxidans, T. thiooxidans, Leptospirillum ferrooxidans and several Sulfolobus spp. which can not only utilise inorganic substances as their energy source but also survive in highly acidic conditions and work at high temperatures.
The chief metals that are being recovered using bioleaching are copper and uranium, though it is also possible to obtain cobalt, nickel, zinc, lead and gold.
The advantages of bioleaching over the conventional recovery of minerals are many.
Firstly, where near-surface ores have been depleted deep-seated ores may be extracted by in situ leaching, obviating the need to undertake extensive and environmentally damaging excavation (section 5.2.1).
Secondly, low-grade sources of minerals and waste dumps can be efficiently exploited.
Leachate must, however, be carefully controlled to avoid contamination of surface and below-ground drainage, though further economies can be made by recycling the leaching solution; if such a process was applied on a large scale the widespread contamination of land and water by natural mine-leaching processes could be considerably reduced.
One example of dump leaching is that used at the Kennecott Chino Mine in New Mexico, USA, from which there is a daily yield of cement copper of 45–50 t (Pooley 1987).
The cement copper, which is produced from the leachate by the addition of scrap-iron, can then be further refined by smelting.
These processes may also be used to remove impurities such as arsenides which detract from the value of mineral concentrates.
There is also the possibility that such processes may be useful in the desulphurisation of coal; this could be a useful adjunct in combating the acidification of ecosystems (section 5.3.2) due to fossil-fuel combustion.
Woods and Rawlings (1989) also point out that genetic engineering has considerable application in this field by developing improved strains of the relevant bacteria which are more efficient, can operate on a wider variety of substrates and in a wider variety of environmental conditions.
Such advances could also have considerable applications in the field of resource recycling, one aspect of which involving the use of sewage to produce single-cell protein has already been discussed above.
As yet, however, there are no well-established treatments than can effect the removal of, for example , metals and phosphates from waste water.
The contamination of land and water by such substances constitutes a pollution hazard that could be reduced by scavenging mechanisms which could provide a means of recycling these substances for industrial and agricultural use.
In consequence the pressure on primary sources would be reduced.
The prospects for such developments, along with others to assist in the reclamation of contaminated land and oil spills, have been discussed by Forster and Wase (1987).
Clearly, biotechnology will have an increasing role to play in environmental quality during the next few centuries, especially if existing methodologies can be improved by genetic engineering (see below).
GENETIC ENGINEERING
Genetic engineering involves the manipulation of DNA, the basic chromosomal unit that exists in all cells and which contains genetic information that is passed on to future generations.
Plant and animal breeding programmes have utilised a crude form of genetic engineering by crossing or interbreeding related species in the anticipation that the offspring will contain preferred characteristics.
In the case of plants, for example, the end product may be a species that is relatively drought resistant, a high carbohydrate yielder or one that is easy to harvest.
In the case of animals the objective may be high meat, wool or milk production.
Virtually all of the plants and animals that comprise the earth's agricultural systems have been manipulated in this way.
Such breeding programmes, in conjunction with the use of fertilisers and crop-protection chemicals, have given rise to what is commonly known as the ‘Green Revolution’ of the twentieth century.
Now, however, it is possible to identify specific gene components that contain the relevant hereditary information.
Moreover, the technology is available to transpose that part of the chromosome into a related species which will then produce offspring bearing the particular characteristic.
As Marx (1989) has discussed, the science of genetic engineering has been developed only since the 1940s and especially since the 1970s, but its origins really began with the efforts of Charles Darwin and Gregor Mendel who, in the mid-nineteenth century, established the principles of heredity.
Subsequent developments, including the isolation of cell components, the recognition of DNA in the cell nucleus as the purveyor of hereditary information and the determination of its structure in the 1950s by Watson and Crick, have all paved the way for the genetic engineering of the 1980s.
The basis of genetic engineering is recombinant DNA technology which is also variously known as gene cloning and in vitro genetic manipulation.
Recombinant DNA is produced by combining DNAs from different sources, the process of which has been discussed in detail by Gingold (1988).
In essence it consists of inserting foreign DNA — which contains the genetic information necessary to confer the target characteristic — into a vector.
The latter, which may be a plasmid (extrachromosomal molecules of DNA that exist in many bacteria) or a phage (normally a bacterial virus), must be capable of being recognised by the host in order for replication to occur.
This was first undertaken by Paul Berg and his research group at Stanford University in California who joined genes from the bacterium Escherichia coli with DNA from simian virus 40 (SV4O).
Using similar procedures it is now possible to engineer organisms that can produce relatively large quantities of useful substances.
For example, Gage (1989) has discussed some of the medical applications that have resulted from this type of work, notably the production of interferon which is a potential anti-viral and anti-cancer agent that until recently was only available in very small quantities by extracting it directly from human cells.
It is also now possible to manufacture human insulin, which is essential for diabetics who have become immune to animal-derived insulin, and growth hormones to treat children with growth-deficiency complaints.
How then are such developments likely to affect the environment?
Firstly, there are concerns that genetic engineering may, inadvertently, produce new  pathogens that are detrimental to the environment by interacting with naturally occurring species or which adversely affect human health.
Secondly, the techniques, although not widely developed to date, may culminate in the creation of more productive plant and animal crops that could help alleviate food scarcity problems in developing countries by increasing the viability of traditionally based agroecosystems, thus obviating the need for the cultivation of new lands.
Indirectly, this could lead to less environmental degradation by reducing land-use pressure in areas that are already heavily cultivated and subject to degradation via soil erosion and desertification, and by reducing the impetus for deforestation (Ch. 7).
Similarly the engineering of plants to produce their own crop-protection chemicals and nutrients, especially nitrogen, could go some way towards offsetting the often detrimental side-effects that artificially produced pesticides and fertilisers can exert on the environment (sections 6.3 and 6.4).
The potential of genetically engineered organisms to wreak environmental havoc have been discussed by Bains (1987) and Barkay et al.(1989).
The former makes the point that genetically engineered bacteria tend to be much less viable than their naturally occurring counterparts and thus tend to die off rapidly.
He also allays fears that such organisms might find applications in biological warfare since they tend to be target specific and would probably be more harmful to their producers than to their recipients in the light of the necessary sophisticated transmission technology that would be economically unfeasible.
Such fears, however, should not be dismissed lightly in so far as genetic engineering is still in its infancy.
Barkay et al.(1989) also draw attention to the fact that genetically engineered bacteria may affect global biogeochemical cycles by usurping the role that naturally occurring bacteria currently play in helping to control flux rates of nutrients from one pool to another.
Bacteria, along with fungi, are well established as agents of decomposition in soils wherein they break down organic matter to release carbon dioxide and nitrogenous compounds.
Any organisms that might lead to increased release of carbon dioxide, or methane, are clearly not to be welcomed in a world that is currently experiencing warming due to the enhanced greenhouse effect.
There is also the possibility that genetically released organisms might, while being beneficial to some plants and animals, prove to be harmful to others, including humans.
Because of such concerns there has been considerable opposition to the testing of genetically engineered organisms in the field, as is exemplified by the furore surrounding the release of the so-called ‘ice minus’ bacterium.
This was developed by recombinant DNA techniques from the bacterium Pseudomonas syringae which commonly occurs on the surface of many plant species and contains a specific protein in its cell membrane that promotes ice damage to plants by nucleating ice formation at temperatures in the range 0 to -2 °C.
Using genetic engineering it is now possible to remove the gene that produces this protein and to produce large volumes of the new bacterium which, if sprayed on a newly planted crops, will considerably reduce frost damage.
As Lindow (1985), the creator of this virus, discusses, it has the potential to save millions of dollars which are regularly lost in the USA as a result of frost damage to crops.
Objections to field trials in the USA have, however, resulted in considerable litigation and, more importantly, brought to public attention the potential dangers of released engineered organisms.
In this case the misgivings appear to be unfounded, but it does highlight the need for adequate controls on such experiments, both from a national  and international perspective, since it is always possible that genetic engineering firms, which are now proliferating in the USA, Japan and northwest Europe, will turn to those, usually developing countries, where regulations are not as strict as those of, for example, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in the USA.
In fact, regulations governing genetic engineering in the laboratory and the field are not yet well established in many countries and there are no internationally accepted guidelines.
Essentially, this relates to risk assessment but it is made especially difficult because genetic engineering affects so many regulatory bodies, including those concerned with public health as well as the environment.
The current state of regulation in the USA is discussed by Perpich (1989) who highlights the roles of the EPA, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the National Institute of Health (NIH) as well as the Biotechnology Science Coordinating Committee (BSCC) which was established in 1985 to formulate policies and coordinate the interests of the existing monitoring bodies in terms of public health and environmental implications.
A M Russell (1988) has also discussed the roles of these organisations as well as those in Britain and the necessity for international agreements.
Having discussed the potential drawbacks of genetically engineered organisms in the environment, it is important to remember that recombinant DNA techniques have presented possibilities that, in theory at least, may provide considerable environmental benefits.
There is, for example, the potential to manipulate crop yield by influencing the genes which control photosynthesis and respiration, the main plant metabolic processes which involve carbon fixation and its release.
As has been discussed by Jones and Lindsey (1988), it is now possible to clone the maize chloroplast genome and to synthesise the protein ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase (‘Rubisco’) which is crucial to carbon dioxide fixation.
If, eventually, it becomes possible to increase productivity in this way, and such crop plants are developed on a large scale and for use in a wide variety of environments, it may help to reduce the impact of the enhanced greenhouse effect as well as increasing global food supplies.
Moreover, it may also be possible to engineer plants that scavenge other greenhouse gases, such as methane, from the atmosphere.
Although this is a futuristic outlook it is clearly a long-term possibility now that science has revealed the nature of genetic composition.
The potential will, however, depend on the identification of ‘useful’ genes in both cultivated and wild plants.
This, as Tudge (1988) discusses, is a major reason why it is necessary to prevent plant extinction, as is currently occurring in tropical rainforest regions where deforestation is proceeding at a rapid rate (section 7.3.1), and preserve as large a gene pool as possible.
The earth's flora and fauna contain in their genetic make-up a huge, virtually untapped, resource and it is in the interest of future generations to keep it intact.
As well as the possibility of engineering plants to increase productivity, advances have already been made in the engineering of plants that are pest-, herbicide- or disease-resistant and in the development of nitrogen-fixing non-leguminous species (Jones and Lindsey 1988).
Genetic engineering has opened up possibilities for the introduction of genes which confer the ability to produce either insecticidal toxins or semiochemicals which alter insect behaviour.
For example, the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis has the ability to produce crystalline spores which act as natural insecticides.
They contain  the so-called ‘Bt’ toxins which are effective against a variety of insects including the budworm (Heliothis virescens ).
It is now possible to clone the gene that controls Bt production and experiments have proved successful in introducing the gene into tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum ) plants which subsequently develop resistance to the pest.
Moreover, Schell et al.(1989) point out that it is now possible to engineer plants, by introducing B. thuringiensis genes encoded for toxin production, that develop resistance to tobacco hornworm (Manduca sexta ) and the large white butterfly (Pieris brassicae ).
Apparently, different strains of the bacterium produce different toxins which are active against a wide range of insects.
This, Schell et al.believe, may one day facilitate the production of crop plants that have an inbuilt resistance to the specific insects that feed on them.
Similar advances have been made in producing plants that have engineered resistance to viruses and fungi.
For example, it is now possible to engineer tobacco and tomato (Lycopersicum esculentum or Solanum lycopersicum ) plants that are resistant to the tobacco mosaic virus.
The possibility that crop plants could be engineered to exhibit herbicide resistance is also significant because it may eliminate the need to produce target-specific herbicides such as those discussed in section 6.4.3.
While the crop itself will be resistant to herbicides the weed competition will not and can thus be considerably reduced by a broad-spectrum herbicide.
Although no such crops are as yet commercially available, agrochemical companies are actively pursuing this line of research and a number of potential developments have been discussed by Chaleff (1986) and Buck (1989).
Much attention is also being focused on the possibility of engineering non-leguminous crop plants that can fix nitrogen by developing a symbiotic relationship with nitrogen-fixing bacteria.
There are few naturally occurring organisms which have the ability to fix nitrogen from the atmosphere and those that can are prokaryotes (organisms with no membrane separating the DNA-containing organelles from the rest of the cell).
They include a range of bacteria, e.g. Azotobacter klebsiella and Rhodospirillium as well as several blue-green algae.
Some higher plants, notably the legumes like clover (Trifolium spp.) and lucerne (Medicago sativa ), can establish a symbiotic relationship with the bacterium Rhizobium spp. which is also a nitrogen-fixer and which forms root nodules on the host plant.
If such an association could be encouraged in crop plants like the cereals, the additional nitrogen made available by the bacteria would reduce, or possibly even eliminate, the need for artificial nitrate fertilisers and thus halt the eutrophication process in aquatic habitats and aquifers.
In addition, the ability to promote nitrogen fixation would be a great advantage in the reclamation of derelict land (section 5.2.3) where nitrogen is almost always a limiting factor to growth.
According to Jones and Lindsey (1988) the promotion of nitrogen fixation can be achieved in several ways, some of which involve genetic engineering.
For example, it is possible to produce strains of bacteria which will promote root nodulation by transferring plasmids (see p.299 for definition) from nodulating species to non-nodulating bacteria.
There is also the possibility that gene transfer could increase the efficiency of nitrogen fixation in symbiotic bacteria and promote fixation under nitrogen-rich soil atmosphere conditions.
However, the greatest potential lies in the possibility of promoting nodulation in non-symbiotic plants, as has been discussed by Johnston (1989) and Long and Ehrhart (1989).
The important factors that need to be identified to achieve this relate not only to the genetic components that promote  nitrogen fixation in Rhizobium spp. but also the nature of the host-bacterium interaction.
In nature, bacteria enter the host plant through root hairs via an infection thread and their presence promotes cell division to create root nodules.
The infection thread continues to grow through and between the host plant's root cells so that the bacteria in the infection thread are isolated and eventually released into the nodule cells.
Known as bacteroids, they then begin the process of nitrogen fixation and the resulting ammonia is absorbed by the host plant which combines it with glutamic acid to produce glutamine.
This latter then circulates the fixed nitrogen to the rest of the plant.
Thus the process is extremely complex and will require a great deal of scientific endeavour, though a recent breakthrough (Díaz et al.1989) regarding the role of root lectins, which are carbohydrate-binding proteins, in determining host specificity suggests that science is making considerable progress on this problem.
CONCLUSION
Although the topics discussed in this chapter are diverse, none can be lightly dismissed as a significant agent of environmental change.
In a temporal context, the state of modern forestry represents the culmination of woodland resource use that probably began with the earliest hominids.
Recreation, tourism and sport are products of the industrial era, and especially the result of increasing leisure time since the Second World War.
Biotechnology, in the form of plant and animal breeding, also has a long history, beginning with the first agriculturalists c. 10 kyr BP, but developments in genetic engineering in the 1970s and 1980s are opening up possibilities that have no historical parallels and thus there are no base-line data against which it is possible to predict future environmental changes that genetically engineered organisms may promote.
For all of these agents of environmental change, economic and political considerations are primary factors in their operation and future development.
Unfortunately, environmental considerations often play a subservient role to economic and political expediency and the concept of long-term sustainability is rarely attributed more than cosmetic attention.
In relation to forestry in the developed world there are a number of dichotomies.
Firstly, in North America foresight and management have promoted a vigorous sustainable wood industry, despite the early pillages of European settlers in the colonial era.
This is in contrast to Britain where woodland exploitation throughout prehistory and history has left a landscape largely bereft of natural woodland and where a mantle of alien conifers dominates many upland areas.
Secondly, there is the increasing demand in the developed world for wood and wood products which is placing more pressure on indigenous forests, while in many developing countries land and fuelwood scarcity as well as the need to earn foreign currency are prompting wood harvesting at a hitherto unprecedented rate and often under inadequate management.
Forest survival is thus threatened on a large scale.
The irony of this is reflected in forest destruction on the one hand and the apparent success  of agroforestry (social forestry) as a means of sustainable agricultural development on the other hand.
Dilemmas such as these have no obvious readily implemented solutions, nor are they conducive to gene pool conservation or to the amelioration of the enhanced greenhouse effect.
The environmental impacts of recreation, tourism and sport are insignificant in relation to those posed by forest demise.
Nevertheless, all three activities can adversely affect the environment and if uncontrolled they can result in the destruction of landforms, fauna and flora that first motivated the activity.
Planning and management, if the political and economic will is there to implement them, can effect sustainable recreation and tourism which is essential if such industries are to continue as a source of income in developed and developing countries.
Furthermore, all three activities could and should work to the advantage of environmental conservation by encouraging people into new landscapes and thus heightening their environmental awareness so that they themselves become part of the environmental protection movement.
Education is probably the best form of conservation because public opinion influences politicians, as is exemplified by the environmental debates of the late 1980s that figure so prominently in the media.
Finally, biotechnology has played a significant role in improving productivity via traditional plant and animal breeding programmes and in controlling environmental quality via waste-water treatment, and it is now beginning to feature prominently in mineral extraction.
Biotechnology has, however, brought civilisation to the verge of another environmental experiment in the context of the release of genetically engineered organisms.
The questions that must be asked relate to the promises that it presents, especially in the context of world food supplies and the alleviation of environmental pollution, and the caution that it necessitates in relation to the potential ecological havoc it may wreak.
Both proponents and protesters are right to present their views and it is incumbent on politicians to ensure that adequate regulatory controls provide as large a degree of environmental protection as is possible when dealing with the relatively unknown.