

INTRODUCTION
MAN possesses three things according to Seneca: the soul, the body and things external.
Which of these is the best?
What shall we tell mankind?
This book is about the growth and development of the mind.
For when one's mind broadens its horizons, one attains contentment, peace and, ultimately, happiness.
All life either grows or declines.
Every organism continues to grow till it has reached its peak and then as its growth stops, deterioration sets in.
Thus for a man whose physical growth stops early in life, it is necessary to continue to grow mentally, or he will start declining.
One should aim to cultivate one's mind to its utmost potential.
And this is a lifelong process; it can continue even when all other ambitions, for riches, power and the rest, have faded.
At first the growth of a child is dictated by biological needs.
He seeks safety and warmth and shelter and food.
Once he is assured of these, other needs arise.
He now wants the love of his parents and others of his kinship.
As soon as he is a little older, he develops the urge to feel competent and self-reliant.
When he is sufficiently reassured of this, he starts caring for being thought well of by his contemporaries, and later still comes the need to be a leader.
Every time he fulfils one of these needs, he grows in stature.
At each stage of their individual development, a number of men stop and grow no further because their needs are satisfied.
But other men, who remain unsatisfied, continue to grow step by step to new levels.
Some require what Abraham Maslow called self-actualization, which means that they must do the task that their nature demands.
A poet must write poetry and a musician must make music — or they will never  be happy.
If he has satisfied this task of self-actualization, then he may need to create art, or invent, or make some new discovery of science.
Later on if he is still not contented, he may need to go on to realise the peak experience, which Maslow spoke of as a desire for the beautiful.
At the point when a person has no more pressing desires and needs and he is contented and feels fulfilled, then he is ready for the most wonderful experiences and the real joy of life.
Nature allows some persons to pass through all the successive levels of biological growth and thereby attain their biological needs.
But there are many seemingly unfortunate persons whose growth is not so systematic.
Victor Frankl wrote of a survey which was conducted on a large number of Harvard University graduates who were very dissatisfied and regarded their lives as meaningless despite the high material success of their work.
In contrast was his finding that amongst the prisoners of San Quentin jail, there were some who had achieved fulfilment.
Thus, it shows that man has an inherent ability to overcome his misfortunes and that he is not dependent upon his material success.
Frankl himself came through four concentration camps with an unimpaired, nay an enhanced, mentality.
Frankl stresses the need to find meaning in life.
He would describe the Harvard men as having no meaning in life, whereas a few of the San Quentin prisoners had found meaning.
I like to think of Frankl's ‘meaning’ as being the steps in a person's growth to the ultimate fulfilment of his being.
Maslow showed that, by fulfilling themselves, men could reach contentment and happiness.
But those who, like the prisoners at San Quentin, can sublimate their needs present a far more hopeful, inspiring and noble example.
Diogenes, instead of building his own success and fulfilling himself, did the opposite and stripped himself of all pride so that there was no way anyone could hurt him.
Epictetus said of him that he offered no handle for another person to grip and hurt him.
Death he did not fear, pride he did not possess; he had no position or property, living as he did in a tub.
No detractor however imaginative or ingenious could find anything that would pain him or put him out of countenance.
‘His self-respect was his house, his door, his guards at the  entrance to his bedroom, his darkness.’
This is the speech of such a man: ‘Look at me, I am without a home, without a city, without property, without a slave.
I sleep on the ground; I have neither wife nor children, no miserable Governor's mansion, but only earth and sky, and one rough cloak.
Yet what do I lack?
Am I not free from pain and fear, am I not free?
When has anyone among you seen me with a gloomy face?
And how do I face those persons before whom you stand in fear and awe?
Do I not face them as though they are slaves?
Who, when he lays eyes upon me, does not feel that he is seeing his king and his master?’
(Epictetus on the Cynic).
The really vulnerable man is one who has much to defend.
We should make our being so open that it is like one of the old free cities — open to all eyes.
Let us make our being not a fortress but a sanctuary by dismantling all the positions of fortification.
And when we are satisfied and at peace, then we are ready for the endless joys of the mental life.
Darwin at the end of one of his books wrote that according to the unchanging world of his critics, there had been the fall of man into sinfulness and mankind were forever doomed to hopelessness, whereas in his (Darwin's) theory of evolution, man had come from an inferior form, and because of this continuous progress, he commands a limitless potential.
I can see developing in the mind strange and wonderful potentialities that are already discernible in rudimentary form.
Now from a creature of five senses, we might aspire to that creature that Voltaire conceived of that had a hundred senses.
Already in parapsychic phenomena, there are signs of senses.
But we do not have to refer to the para-normal, our understanding of art and poetry and our experiences in mysticism are developments of new senses.
Bertrand Russell and many others have described the journey into the mind as being the greatest adventure in life.
Such an experience is doubly rewarding for it involves invention, creation and brilliant visions, and it is unique to every man.
Beauty is in the eye of the beholder: so the poet will see beauty where another will see only ugliness.
For the seer, the journey of the mind is a creative journey through the beautiful.
The seeing of beauty comes from the mind's creativity.
Most creative ideas spring from analogy of some kind.
For instance, when J. Henry Thoreau wrote of the greyness of rocks, he described the air as the thin paint in which they have been dipped and brushed by the wind.
When we see swallows that sleep high in the sky, circling higher and higher until they are absorbed by the sky, we think of the air as the frail hammocks finer than gossamer in which they are rocked to sleep.
Arp the painter wrote of the universe as an immense hour-glass filled with stars, that is reversed.
It has been proved that creativity is a new development of the mind that can be cultivated.
This faculty is widespread among the population and there has developed a system for increasing creativity called synectics.
The mental progression from creativity to the perception of beauty is the essence of the peak experience.
Here is a passage of Thoreau which both demonstrates the creative process and also shows that it led him to the peak experience which he termed being charmed.
It also gives an initial view into the worlds of the mind and the wonderlands that are there waiting for all who aspire to them.
‘When some rare Northern bird like the pine grosbeak is seen thus far south in the winter, he does not suggest poverty, but dazzles us with his beauty.
There is in them a warmth that melts the icicle.
Think of these brilliant, warm-coloured, richly warbling birds, birds of paradise, dainty-footed, downy-clad, in the midst of a New England, a Canadian winter.
The woods and fields, now somewhat solitary, being deserted by their more tender summer residents, are now frequented by these rich but delicately tinted and hardy northern immigrants of the air.
Here is no imperfection to be suggested.
‘The winter with its snow and ice, is not an evil to be corrected.
It is as it was designed and made to be, for the artist has had leisure to add beauty to use.
My acquaintances, angels from the north.
I had a vision thus prospectively of these birds as I stood in the swamps.
I saw this familiar — too familiar — fact at a different angle, and I was charmed and haunted by it.
But I could only attain to be thrilled and enchanted, as by the sound of a strain of music dying away.
I had seen into paradisiac regions, with their air and sky, and  I was no longer wholly or merely a denizen of this vulgar earth.
Yet had I hardly a foothold there.
I was only sure that I was charmed, and no mistake.
It is only necessary to behold thus the least phenomenon, however familiar, from a point a hair's breadth aside from our habitual path a routine, to be overcome, enchanted by its beauty and significance.
Only what we have touched and worn is  trivial , our scurf, repetition, tradition, conformity.
To perceive freshly, with fresh senses, is to be inspired.
Great winter looked like a precious gem, reflecting rainbow colours from one angle.
‘If any part of nature excites our pity, it is for ourselves we grieve, for there is eternal health and beauty.
We get only transient and partial glimpses of the beauty of the world.
Standing at the right angle, we are dazzled by the colours of the rainbow in colourless ice.
From the right point of view, every storm and every drop in it is a rainbow.
Beauty and music are not mere traits and exceptions.
They are the rule and character.
It is the exception that we see and hear.
Then I try to discover what it was in the vision that charmed and translated me.
What if we could daguerrotype our thoughts and feelings!
For I am surprised and enchanted often by some quality which I cannot detect.
‘I have seen an attribute of another world and condition of things.
It is a wonderful fact that I should be affected, and thus deeply and powerfully, more than by aught else in all my experience — that this fruit should be borne in me sprung from a seed finer than the spores of fungi, floated from other atmospheres! finer than the dust caught in the sails of vessels a thousand miles from land!
Here the invisible seeds settle, and spring, and bear flowers and fruits of immortal beauty.’
This feeling that Thoreau had was ecstasy or the peak experience, and it is an emotion.
It is not one of the profoundest experiences of the transcendent world such as release or sartori; nonetheless it is one of the fundamental manifestations of the transcendent.
In its weakest form it can be a moistening of the eyes on hearing a moving poem or line of music.
A patriotic feeling or the witnessing of a noble or generous action can evoke the same emotion.
In its strongest form, at the  perception of a new and beautiful poetic or religious idea, mystics and seers will fall into a trance and remain in it for hours or even days.
At the sight of a temple or mountain, the mind is stirred and it is as if the soul has left the mundane and flown into the intangible.
Ecstasy is a flight of the mind in which the mystic describes himself as being transported to another world.
Lovely as the peak experience is, it is only the path to the transcendent.
Ecstasy is the door into the transcendent world and the mystical ideas that send men into ecstasy are tickets for the journey.
But the world of the transcendent is far more than an ecstatic journey.
When the human voyager has freed himself from his fears and accomplished all his physiological needs, it is as if he has climbed out of a deep pit and reached the top of a high hill from where he sees a vast land stretching in every direction.
He is like a poor man lifted into a limitless inheritance.
In this transcendent land are all manner of beauties, poetry and art and mysticism, and beyond are ideas and places of the brain that have not been explored or developed.
Towards Transcendence
FRANKL has written about a woman who found meaning in life despite unfortunate circumstances.
This woman was unhappy; she was ill and dying of cancer.
She spoke to Frankl who guided her to what is eternal and evanescent in life.
She found faith in her religion and at last died happy having been an inspiration to many people in her community.
This episode leads me to the idea that at the physical level, there is a need for a philosophy to overcome disasters and fear, and also to help that majority of people who do not fulfil all their biological needs, and who have to sublimate them.
This book is about the transcendent worlds but some of the ideas of the philosophers of old are so noble and inspiring that the emotions they arouse are of the peak experience.
They are, however, relevant to this book for that reason alone; but they are also instructive in showing the transition to the transcendent ideas of the mystics.
It was the philosophy of Epictetus that man must concern himself only with what is under his control; what is under his control is his opinion about things and nothing else.
All external things are beyond a man's absolute control — stronger men in greater numbers may thwart any aim, at any moment disaster can intervene, fortune is always fickle, and death is always at hand.
Epictetus wrote, ‘My father wrongs me.
There is nothing I can do about that for he harms himself, but I must still behave like a dutiful son and observe a son's obligations.’
In this way by not acceding to anger and resentment, he has made himself into a better son.
‘The bad neighbour is bad for himself.
But for me he is good for he exercises my patience, my good disposition and my kindness.’
This is what Epictetus called the magic wand of philosophy.
‘Bring what you will, poverty or reviling and with a wave of my wand I will turn it to good.
Bring me death and like Socrates I will turn it into my everlasting glory.’
When Epictetus was arguing with a rich man, someone said to him: ‘If I devote myself to philosophy, I shall not own a farm, or have riches, or own silver goblets and gold plate.’
Epictetus replied, ‘To all this it is perhaps enough to answer, I do not need them.’
But you, even if you acquire many possessions and need still others and whether you will or not are more poverty stricken than I am.
What then do I need?
What you do not have — steadfastness, your mind in a state of conformity with nature, freedom from vexation of spirit.
I am richer than you are; all this is an offset to your silver plate and your gold plate.
You have furnishings of gold, but your reason, your judgement, your assent, your choice, your desires of earthenware.
Everything you already have seems small in your sight, but everything I have seems important to me.
Your strong desire is insatiate ,mine is already satisfied.
For you will learn that none of these things which are admired and sought after are of any good to those who attain them — for when they do get them, the burning heat is just as bad, there is the same tossing about on the sea, the same desire for what they do not have.
For freedom is not acquired by satisfying your self with what you desire, but by destroying your desire.’
Socrates rejoiced day after day in the improvement in his own self.
‘Is it nothing in your eyes never to bring accusation against anyone?
Never to blame anyone?
Always to wear the same expression on one's face whether one is going in or coming out?’
Epictetus said, ‘You can keep festival day after day; today because you behaved well in this action; tomorrow because you behaved well in another.
A good action is its own reward.
You have lost nothing if you get a horse for an ass, a noble action for a small piece of money.
Since therefore I am able to get from myself greatness of soul and nobility, am I to  get a farm or money or some office from you?
Far from it!
I will not be so unaware of what I myself possess.’
‘And what if I do the opposite?
What if I cheat and lie and steal, what injury will I do myself?’
Epictetus replied.
‘No injury but that of not doing what you ought; you will destroy the man of fidelity in you, the man of honour, the man of decent behaviour.
You need not look for greater injuries than these.’
‘You have been entrusted into your own keeping as if an orphan had been committed to your trust.
God has delivered your own self into your keeping saying, ‘I had no one more faithful than you; keep this man unchanged from the character with which nature endowed him — reverent, faithful, high-minded, undismayed, unimpassioned, unperturbed.’
After that do you fail so to keep him?’
In essence behind the austere language is the fact that Epictetus had a philosophy and system that looked at all events from a higher viewpoint.
A riot in the ghetto of a city, is terrible for the ghetto dwellers.
For the mayor of that city it is less terrible but still a serious problem.
At the level of the Governor of the state to which that city belongs, the riot will be regarded only as a nuisance; above that the king or the premier will hardly be aware of it at all, and to the whole world, it will be trivial.
Thus each level insulates the individual from the event.
Epictetus looked at each event from the point of view of his whole life and its freedom and the courage and steadfastness that he wished to possess.
Even more insulation is given by looking at all things from the transcendent level, for then each event is looked at as if it is seen through coloured lenses that transfigure it and place it in another dimension and time.
Epictetus' magic wand can make poverty of no account.
This idea is echoed in a poem of Rabindranath Tagore; while Jalaluddin Rumi goes beyond negation and writes of a rare beauty to be found in poverty.
This is the transition to the transcendent worlds.
‘Gobinda the great Sikh teacher, sat on a rock and read scriptures, when Raghunath, his disciple, proud of his wealth, came and bowed to him and said, ‘I have brought my poor present, unworthy of your acceptance.’
Thus saying, he displayed before the teachers a pair of gold bangles wrought with precious stones.
The master took up one of them, twirling it round his finger, and the diamonds darted shafts of light.
Suddenly it slipped from his hand and rolled down the bank into the water.
‘Alas,’ screamed Raghunath, and jumped into the stream.
The teacher set his eyes upon his book and the water held and hid what it stole and went its way.
The daylight faded when Raghunath came back to the teacher tired and dripping.
He panted and said, ‘I can still get it back if you show me where it fell.’
The teacher took up the remaining bangle and, throwing it into the water, said, ‘It is there.’’
— Rabindranath Tagore
Someone said: In Khvarism nobody is a lover, because in Khvarism there are many beautiful women.
No sooner do they see a beauty and fix their hearts upon her than they see another still more beautiful, and the first one no longer appeals to them.
The master said: If there are no lovers for the beauties of Khvarism, yet Khvarism must have its lovers, seeing there are countless beauties in that land.
That Khvarism is poverty, wherein are countless mystical beauties and spiritual forms.
Each one you alight upon and are fixed on, another shows its face so that you forget the former one and so ad infinitum.
So let us be lovers of true poverty wherein such beauties are to be found.
— J. Rumi
The sick man became alive when he saw the Prophet.
He said, ‘Sickness has given me this fortune that this sultan has come to my side, at morn so health and well being have accrued to me from the arrival of this King without retinue.
O happy pain and sickness and fever!
O blessed anguish and wakefulness in the night.’
Pain is a treasure for there are mercies in it;(the kernel comes fresh when you take off the rind).
0 brother, to dwell in a dark and cold place, to endure patiently sorrow and weakness and pain, is the fountain of life and the cup of spiritual intoxication, for these heights are all in the lowliness. — J. Rumi
Men fear rejection, disdain and loneliness only because they have never experienced them or if they have experienced  them, they have felt only the normal reactions of despair and unhappiness.
But if these conditions are entered into with an open mind, the reality is wholly different.
A new emotion of tingling heat and cold intermingled, and this sensation is not despair but an austere joy.
These emotions and conditions then that men fear so greatly are really very sweet and delightful.
There are many stories of men who have deliberately sought out and chosen loneliness and contempt and poverty.
‘They said that Kabir the weaver was favoured of God, and the crowds flocked round him for medicines and miracles.
But he was troubled; his low birth had hitherto endowed him with a most precious obscurity to sweeten with sons and with the presence of his God.
He prayed that it might be restored.
‘Envious of the repute of this outcaste, the priests leagued themselves with a harlot to disgrace him.
Kabir came to the market to sell from his loom when the woman grasped his hand, blaming him for being faithless, and followed him to his house, saying she would not be forsaken.
Kabir said to himself, ‘God answers prayers in his own way.’
Soon the woman felt a shiver of fear and fell on her knees and cried, ‘Save me from my sin!’
To which he said, ‘Open your life to God's light!’
‘Kabir worked at his loom and sang and his songs washed the stains from that woman's heart and by way of return found a home in her sweet voice.
One day the King in a fit of caprice, sent a message to Kabir to come and sing before him.
The weaver shook his head but the messenger dared not leave his door till his master's errand had been fulfilled.
The King and his courtiers started at the sight of Kabir when he entered the hall.
For he was not alone, the woman followed him.
Some smiled, some frowned, and the King's face darkened at the beggar's pride and shamelessness.
Kabir came back to his house disgraced, the woman fell at his feet crying, ‘Why accept such dishonour for my sake, master?
Suffer me to go to my infamy!’
‘Kabir said, ‘I dare not turn my God away when he comes branded with insult.’’
— Rabindranath Tagore.
Ignorant men regard death with fear and avoid thinking about it, and for that reason it becomes like a terror to children.
Death must be thought about and with that thinking must  come triumph over it.
This is needed because the triumph over the fear of death is a fundamental human need and without it there will always be this fear looming in the background of the mind.
The contempt of death has its own body of literature, and in its way there is hardly anything that moves and inspires men with greater enthusiasm; and this enthusiasm sometimes ends in ecstasy and the peak experience.
A Belgian Count at the battle of Crecy charged with his hours into the enemy ranks without regard for his life and perished.
What singled this exploit out from many other similar ones was that he was blind.
The death of Socrates in Plato's Phaedo is one of the most inspiring stories, and the scholar Scaliger could never read it without tears coming to his eyes.
Those tears were tears of ecstasy at contemplating the nobility, courage and great heartedness of Socrates, rather than tears of sadness for the death of so upright a man.
Tears are the outward sign of the peak experience and they should be welcomed and encouraged rather than avoided.
Cato said at his death that all men are under sentence of death.
These are attitudes of the Stoics and it will be seen that though they are noble and inspiring, they are of this world.
When we come to the Sufis, death is seen from another world and it is seen transfigured.
Here then first is a passage from Epictetus to be contrasted with the story of Hamza by Rumi.
Epictetus said, ‘This is what I wish to be engaged in when death finds me, so that I may be able to say to God, ‘Have I in any respect transgressed Thy commands?
Have I in any respect misused the resources which Thou gavest me, or used my senses to no purpose, or my preconceptions?
Have I ever found any fault with Thee?
Have I blamed Thy governance at all?
I fell sick, when it was Thy will; so did other men, but I willingly.
I became poor, it being Thy will, but with joy.
I have held no office because Thou did not will it, and I never set my heart on office.
Hast Thou ever seen me for that reason at all dejected?
Have I not ever come before Thee with a radiant countenance, ready for any injunctions or orders Thou mightest give?
And now it is Thy will that I leave this festival; I go.
I am full of gratitude to Thee that Thou hast deemed me worthy to take part in this festival with Thee, and  to see Thy works, and to understand Thy governance.’
Be this my thought, this my writing, this my reading, when death comes for me.’
Rumi wrote, ‘The gallows (on which we are killed) is the buraq on which we ride to heaven.’
The buraq is the steed on which Mohammed rode to heaven.
It was such sayings as these that inspired the dervishes some of whom were in the armies of the Khalif and impressed the British soldiers as no other warriors ever did.
The dervishes looked on death from the transcendent world, and since to them this world is only a momentary separation from God, they regarded death as the union with God.
They spoke with contempt of the simpleton who regarded what was really death as life, and prayed that they would be shown what  everything really was in this house of illusion.
When Hamza was old, he went recklessly into battle with.
out armour, throwing himself at the enemy, and the ignorant sympathisers remonstrated with him.
‘Hast thou not read in the message of God,(the Koran): ‘Do not cast yourselves with your own bands into destruction.’
Then why art thou casting thyself into destruction on the field of battle?
When thou wert young and robust and strongly knit, thou did'st not go into battle without a coat of mail.’
Hamza said, ‘When I was young, I used to regard farewell to this world as death.
How should anyone go to death eagerly?
How should he come naked (unarmed) to meet the dragon?
But now through the light of Mohammed, I am not subject to this city (the world) that is passing away.
Beyond (the realm of) the senses, I behold the camp of the (divine) King thronged with the Army of the light of God.
Tent on tent and tent rope on tent rope.
That one in whose eyes death is destruction — he takes hold of the (divine) command, ‘Do not cast yourselves into destruction.
And that one to whom death is the opening of the gate — for him in the (divine) allocution (the Koran) there is (the command), Vie ye with each other in hastening.’
Rumi in Mathnawi 
Hamza did not belong to this world, he was subject to another King.
As he grew older, the villages and tents and  armies of this world were fading away but the white cities and the armies that lie beyond the senses shone more brightly by day and by night and Hamza hastened to death on roads lined by the army of Prophets.
Death in this way becomes a fellowship of the elect and the brave and there is in it no sense of loss, but only gain.
‘Success comes to the common man, and even to commonplace ability; but to triumph over the calamities and terrors of mortal life is the part of a great man only.
Truly, to be always happy and to pass through life without a mental pang is to be ignorant of one half of nature.’
— Seneca
As Demetrius said, ‘There is no man unhappy as one who has met with no adversity.’
According to Seneca the Gods desire above all other things to see great men struggling with adversity.
He who has gone through life without being tested is one who had been considered unworthy ever to gain the victory over fortune.
These are sentiments of the Stoics, and noble and inspiring though they are, there is even more advantage to misfortune than they show.
It seems that all the things that we met with in life and thought of as advantages in the beginning, are found to be grave disadvantages; and all those things that in our youth we thought of as severe disadvantages, at last come to be seen as benefits.
There is a certain Hubris in life, and by this word, the Greeks denoted a form of retribution so that in the end those who were very fortunate should suffer and those who suffered at first would receive succour.
But there is an even more certain and just retribution which renders life more fair and that is that sufferers are compensated by their senses becoming more acute so they are able to discerning a subtler beauty.
Sadness intensifies the perceptions of the eyes so that the inner eyes see a new form of beauty like Rimbaud or like the deaf Beethoven or the blind Homer and Milton.
These men are also frequently by their misfortunes raised into the greatest benefit that Charles Lamb wrote of as being his fortune to realise after long years of being a poor man in time to be lifted into a vast inheritance.
Surely the teaching of Epictetus came from his lameness and his slavish background.
The scholar Lipsius, mentor of Scaliger, wrote of him, ‘In origin low and servile, in body  lame and feeble, in mind most exalted and brilliant among the lights of every age.
Few more unfortunate poets can be imagined than W.H. Davies, yet there was no one more cheerful than he as an old man.
His youth and early manhood were spent in America as a tramp and he lost a leg trying to ‘jump’ a train.
Long years later, he ended up in a workhouse and it was from that vantage point that he ‘launched his attack upon the world of letters.’
His late maturity was his happy time —
My youth was my old age,
Weary and long;
It had too many cares
To think of song;
My moulting days all came
When I was young.
Now in life's prime, my soul
comes out in flower,
Late as with Robin, comes
My singing power,
I was not born to joy
Till this late hour.
He wrote a poem about his friend Francis Thompson, and in it there are many echoes of his own sad youth in which he must have wondered often if his mind would flower too late for good.
His life also was on the open deck.
Thou hadst no home, and thou couldst see
In every street the window's light;
Dragging thy limbs about all night,
No window kept a light for thee.
However much thou wert distressed,
Or tired of moving, and felt sick;
Thy life was on the open deck —
Thou hadst no cabin for thy rest.
Thy barque was helpless' neath the sky,
No pilot thought thee worth his pains
To guide for love or money gains —
Like phantom ships the rich sailed by.


Thy shadow mocked thee night and day,
Thy life's companion, it alone;
It did not sigh, it did not moan,
But mocked thy moves in every way.
In spite of all, thy mind had force,
and like a stream whose surface flows;
The wrong way when a strong wind blows,
It underneath maintained its course.
Oft didst thou think thy mind would flower
Too late for good, as some bruised tree;
That blooms in Autumn, and we see
Fruit not worth picking, hard and sour.
Some poets feign their wounds and scars;
If they had known real suffering hours,
They'd show, in place of Fancy's flowers,
More of imagination's stars.
So if thy fruits of Poesy
Are rich, it is at this dear cost —
That they were nipt by sorrow's frost,
In nights of homeless misery.
There is little great poetry that has not come from the frost of sorrow, and this is the supreme compensation that the creative man has this faculty of distilling from the very substance of sorrow, a beauty that transforms the world into paradise.
Such ideas as the development of the emotions are not transcendent but transitional.
Without developing the emotions, it will be difficult for men to reach such pinnacles of the transcendent as the peak experience.
The are therefore prerequisites of the transcendent journey.
Tranquility, calm, mirth, enthusiasm and benevolence are also indispensable attributes of men of the mystical journey; and this is even more true of meditation which is the very basis of the mystic life, for it is the means by which the mind is dyed and changed into a garden.
The movement of the mind into the transcendent should not be regarded as extraordinary or amazing.
Scientists have been penetrating areas beyond human senses, and they have developed more and more devices to augment our senses in order that we may see into the heart of matter or reach the ends of the universe.
It is this region beyond the senses which the mystics and the artists with their new schools of art are trying to describe or depict and which the scientists are trying to explain and understand.
These efforts should be regarded as exciting explorations and attempts to show the beauty that throngs around us, both within the senses and outside of them.
This is a wonderful adventure, beckoning all of us to participate.
There beyond the senses are worlds undreamed of — let us join together in this unending and eternal adventure, and escape from the boredom and unhappiness of the commonplace.
Although the landscape that the poet, the artist and the scientist see is similar in that it is beyond the senses, the way each one of them views, lives and works in them is different.
The poet, in the words of the Italian poet Leopardi, is ‘Naufragar’— shipwrecked in the infinite.
The shipwreck is sweet to him in that sea.
By comparison the scientist is burdened with his instruments and only a few of the greatest of them feel the infinite but the mystic is drowned in it.
Most of the philosophy of the transcendent is from the East, but there have been those in the.
West who have seen the beauty of it.
I conceive of Kant as one saddened by Hume's cold logic that destroyed for him the laws of causation in the physical world.
He sought and found another world of the mind.
Here was to be no outside elements, no objects or empirical fact or emotion; it was a world of the mind, stark, pure, austere and coldly beautiful.
The lord of the domain would be the will: ‘Even if the will should wholly lack power to accomplish its purpose, if with its greatest effort it should yet achieve nothing — then like a jewel, it would shine by its own light, as a thing which had its whole value in itself.’
— Kant
Into this pure atmosphere of the mental world would enter only the mind's intangible creations, the noumena; elements of the brain like images undefiled by any dross or dust emotion.
They were as synthetic flowers or even stranger cerebral  crystals of thought of myriad patterns, shimmering with an inherent light.
THE GARDEN OF THE SEERS
The beautiful images and thoughts of the mystics are like cocoons of butterflies which take the pupae from the earth world to the air world.
They take us across the frontiers between the material and the mystical.
But they are not merely carriages for we have reached the stage when the soil must be cultivated into gardens.
For me the transcendent landscape has taken on the aspect of patterned fields, or small patches of flower beds.
How are these gardens of the mind made?
The mind's gardens are composed of images that move us emotionally.
Each image that is formed in response to a beautiful thought must be placed in a schema which is one of the individual gardens of the mind.
The images are like fragile threads woven into tapestries.
Fairies are supposed to make tapestries of light beams, but these tapestries of the mind are made of thread even finer.
Gardens of the world were made by gardeners who found new and beautiful flowers in the wilderness and transplanted them to a garden.
In the same way we can transplant from the wilderness of our lives these images to our gardens.
I am a gardener of the physical who spend many hours tending my flowers but I am also a mental gardener and spend even more hours tending transcendent flowers.
As a boy I was given a little patch of our garden to cultivate.
It was only a few square feet in size and I made it into a carpet of flowers.
In my eyes it was a Persian carpet.
It made me think of a Bedouin taking out his prayer carpet and unrolling it in the vastness of the desert.
It is a garden of flowers of his long journey.
In the transcendent it is like unrolling a little carpet of flowers of the desert.
These carpets are very beautiful but they are very small and we have the infinitudes of the transcendent to fill with flowers.
Over many years I have visited some of the gardens Andre Gide wrote about in his book the Fruits of the Earth .
I have seen Shiraz and its roses and nightingales, which Gide wrote about but did not see.
I saw Fiesole in Florence and the  Alcazar in Seville, the garden Gide preferred to all others.
Of all the races of men, the Arabs learning from the Persians and the Indians and especially the Syrians and other peoples, make the most incomparable gardens.
After the thirst and aridity and inexpressible exhaustions of the desert, the Arab dreams of the oasis as a paradise, and he strives to embody his dreams in a garden of palms and fountains and airy walks and fragrance and fruit.
‘This is how Gide described those oases:
‘On that particular day, we arrived there about ten o'clock, and I refused at first to go any farther; the charm of those gardens and their flowers was so great that I wanted never to leave them.
Oases!
(Ahmet told me that the next one was lovelier still).
Oases!
The next one was lovelier still, fuller of flowers and murmurs.
Taller trees bent over more abundant waters.
It was noon.
We bathed.
Then we had to leave that too.
Oases!
What shall I say of the next?
It was lovelier still and we stayed there till evening…’
Of all the Oases Gide was moved most by Blidah —‘Blidah!
Blidah!
Flower of the Sahel!
Little rose!
I saw you once again in your warmth and fragrance, full of leaves and flowers.
Winter's snow had fled.
In the sacred grove your white mosque glimmered mystically and the creepers were bowed down with flowers.’
There can be in the mind enchanted flowers that blossom in the transcendent gardens:
Do not go to the garden of flowers!
O friend! go not there.
In your body is the garden of flowers,
Take your seat on the thousand petals of the lotus,
And there gaze on the infinite beauty.
— from Kabir, the Weaver
In different parts of the world I have seen many gardens and sometimes the most delightful aspect has been the sounds of birds and insects that add another dimension to the colours and fragrance.
In Italy money used to be paid for crickets so that they could be released in the garden to add their  harmony and endless cheerfulness to it.
In Bermuda I heard the sound of a pure, and celestial flute in the night.
Its note had none of the lisp of a flute but was bell-like in its clarity.
I was astonished and enraptured.
I saw in my mind some magic bird, a nightingale of the coral islands.
In the morning I saw the flute player — a small green frog, like an emerald brooch to adorn a tree.
I marvelled at it, a frog not even an inch long, no larger than a thumb nail.
I knew then that it was more inspiring than if the sound had come from an orphean bird.
I saw this frog as a small jewel box, a matrix in which the pure notes of music were formed and cut as by a skilled diamond cutter and then released as glittering, crystalline jewels.
In an American garden I heard another frog, a hyla, which is the world's best ventriloquist; you can hear him but you will never find him.
I  thought of this hyla as the nymph Echo, a dryad, an invisible sweet voice.
The songs of birds if listened to with a creative ear, can turn a garden into an enchanted place.
Thoreau wrote about those little flasks of music and these were his words when he heard the bobolink:
‘It is as if he touched his harp within a vase of liquid melody, and when he lifted it out, the notes fell like bubbles from the trembling strings…
It is the foretaste of such strains as never fell on mortal cars, to hear which we should rush to our doors and contribute all that we possess and are.’
A garden should be only partly physical, the greater part should be transcendent.
We must look at flowers with a new intensity and from different angles for the flowers when looked at thus can themselves inspire the observer.
The heathers when observed cursorily have insignificant flowerets but under a magnifying glass they reveal a new world.
One that I saw looked like harp in a chamber of pure light; and at that moment I could understand the frenzy and madness of the bees that visit these studios of paradise, full of sweetness, and cannot cease until they die.
Another flower that astonished me was the bloom of the Golden Abutilon.
From outside it looked like a faded bell but within was a brilliant and sumptuous chamber of fiery gold adorned with most exquisite tapestry, and it moved me  as much as I was moved when I saw the dome of the Blue Mosque at Isfahan, the most beautiful building I have ever seen.
The beauty of the flower is transcendent, and it has been a part of man's heritage since the beginning.
Scientists have found that the Neanderthal Man loved flowers, for he was buried on a mound of hollyhocks and phlox and fragrant pine needles.
Is it not a form of self desecration not to cultivate this primeval delight in flowers?
Meditation
HAPPINESS is a conditioned reflex that comes from the right thoughts.
Pavlov could train his dogs in a matter of weeks or months to be stimulated by a signal.
An apple tree heeds to be sown, weeded, grafted and pruned and then only after a number of years will it bear fruit.
Similarly the human being can attain happiness, but it will only be after many years that this fruit of the human mind will be tasted.
There are several kinds of thoughts.
Firstly then is purposive thought which a man uses when he tries to find a solution to some problem.
More advanced is creative thought which also has many of the attributes of purposive thought.
There is also rambling thought in which the mind is not pressed to solve anything and merely rambles aimlessly.
And finally there is meditation which is the specific thought designed to affect and train the brain.
In oriental philosophy and religion many devices like the mandala are used for the mind to meditate upon.
Meditation is the goad, the bit and the whip of the mind.
It changes the mind into a vast garden into which a man can retire at will.
Meditation on the spiritual life brings forth the peak experience in which the whole organism approaches release — therein are found the supreme joys of the spirit.
The dervish whose thoughts were sweet as the sugarcane could not remain perpetually in a state of ecstasy but he obtained from the stillness of the soul a sweetness which is the heirloom of the mystic.
In this state, the mind rests in its gardens of delight.
The still joy of the mind in its state of non thought has in it something beyond the rational and it defies explanation.
It is a strange harvest of a three dimensional garden.
This delight of no thought is an authentic world of  a new dimension.
To taste it is to see something as strange and intangible as Rumi's harvest of stars.
In the silence he feels the smooth operations of the mind's incomparable picture show.
There is joy in living in this very moment with the whole being.
There is no tomorrow or yesterday, but only the joy of this very moment.
There is a strange warmth and luminous glow that gives the being a sense of well-being and health.
Meditation is the class room of the spirit.
It is a journey or ramble through the field of the mind and its emotions.
I look at a garden before me as if I am a camera that can throw reality out of focus and can twist and contort and blur.
I consciously look with the object of transcending the commonplace and seeing it transformed.
Suddenly I see in the calm of the garden a change, as though time has slowed.
The birds in the sunlight are gliding through the polished clarity of the air; I see a manifestation of infinite power.
The sunlight is falling like a gentle rain and I see it as a silent, unpolluting fuel; which when it reaches the ground bursts forth in leaves and flowers and is the strength which upholds the trees, and if it failed, all life would fail.
I marvel at the way so great a power is falling so gentle on the earth.
A power whose only visible sign is the pure smoke of the clouds.
At that moment a strong sense of oneness is felt with all things because of our dependence on this power and our puniness and helplessness.
The value of meditation is as much in the thoughts as in the emotions that are aroused.
On one occasion, my thoughts brought out in me the emotion of compassion.
I had gone to bed and a storm arose.
The wind screaming and the rain lashing on the windows sent me into a reverie.
I sensed the cold outside and I felt a sensation of warmth; at the same time I felt a strong compassion for all the homeless of the world.
I thought of how Vinoba Bhave would regard the rain — to him all things are manifestations of the divine.
Those drops of rain are the tears of the sky, tears of the Lord falling upon the windows.
At the thought of those tears, my eyes felt as though they were being crushed and I wished that that moment would last forever.
In the transcendent world, there are new laws and men must  discard their habitual ideas of what is right and what is wrong; in fact to see the utmost beauty we must look at things with the eyes of a child.
Tibetans believe that men are what their thoughts make them.
Like gardeners, they must cast out the evil weeds and plough the matted earth into long fields and sow the seeds of future harvests.
Man must make his body a house of man pictures.
He must build between the moments a place of images and light.
Here time will be slowed and the light will be frayed to pure strands of colour; and the photons after their long space journey, will spread their thin sails of colour on the tranquil sea.
Or it is like the light pictures that enter the eyes lenses and escape into the vastness of the tundra and like ice crystals on the windows, they freeze and become the light flowers that bloom on the endless snow fields.
Painter!
You see a thousand colours but what avails it if your heart is grey?
In meditation bring out your pallet of the emotions and paint your mind with the colours of love.
When a man looks at nature as Thoreau did, he is moved by some invisible influence.
Sensing with all his faculties, his most subtle emotions are aroused.
He stands listening and if the time is right, he will feel what Aurobindo called the invasion of the infinite.
When Ramakrishna saw Kasi the Holy City, he did not see it as a physical city but as the dreams and hopes of holy pilgrims that had fallen on the city, stratum on stratum so that it became a city of holy ideas, a spiritual city.
On a more mundane level, I have felt delight in contemplating some phenomenon of nature which I have seen and felt with the emotions of a child when I have escaped from the prison house of our habitual thoughts.
Today I walk in the rain of this December afternoon, and I think of a mountain in Ceylon, Sinhala Kanda, the Mountain of Butterflies.
As I climb, I think of the butterflies, the dreams of the holy men, fluttering in a brilliant light.
We are an irreligious people, we do not see the silver water balloons on the trees and the tall beech trees clothed in their green armour of lichens like prophets.
We have no holy mountain and no holy river; though long ago before the  druids, the natives saw visions in these groves but aliens have come who have no love of this land and only love possessions.
The sun penetrates the mist and I am in a world of dazzling light and the rain running down the beech trees is like a tide of green blood and fire, its waves and bubbles sparkling in the sunlight.
I shake a birch tree and the silver balloons fall to the earth and shatter.
We have as many lovely things here as on the Mountain of Butterflies but we lack only a prophet and the eyes and emotions to see them.
When I see a spider's web, I no longer see the sinister aspects that I once saw.
Now I see the spider as a fisherman waiting near his nets at the side of the streams of the air.
During autumn he puts out his invisible lines that can only be seen under the microscope of the sun beams, and he is carried into the deep ocean, a balloonist travelling to an unknown destination.
I feel for the spider living in his strange world, this master craftsman who has been commissioned to beautify a small corner with his delicate work, and when the dew drops fall, for an instant, the world is made luminous and is transfigured.
During a break while attending a board meeting, I have looked beyond the faces and the smoke, and seen some idea that has carried me far away for a few moments.
When I returned, my perspective had changed.
For in those few moments I had seen another world of eternity and the meeting was relegated to the category of the fleeting.
The idea that carried me away was like the invisible seeds that Thoreau wrote about when he was in the swamp.
I do not know what happens when men feel the ecstasy that Thoreau experienced, but it is one of the highest joys known to man.
The same experience comes from some few words of a poet or a mystic; it is as if the emotions of the poet that he has graven in his poem strike a response and the mind is transported.
It is possible for a man to assemble a large number of these mystical phrases that move the mind and to use them as passports to the transcendent world.
To sit down in meditation and think of these mystical ideas is to poise oneself for the transcendent journey.
In a moment  are seen the paradisiac regions, as if the curtains of the moments have parted to show the gardens of reality that remain hidden to  everyday sight.
But the images of beauty may be lost and forgotten and a mnemonic is needed so that they can be recalled to the mind easily.
If they are worked into a framework of thought similar to Kant's schemata, then it is only necessary to bring up the general subject in which the images rest and they will come before the mind.
When I think of love or beauty or gardens, the images that moved me in my everyday life appear again and I feel the same sensations as when I first found them.
I think of these schemata as one from of the gardens of the mystics for images like flowers are transplanted to our mental gardens.
They are the wild flowers of our experience that are cultivated to bloom all our lives.
Maslow in his experiments found that amongst his highest men and women (those who had fulfilled themselves in life) there were two distinct groups.
One of these groups consisted of people who could feel the peak experience, and the members of the other group could not.
The members of the first group were more poetic, philosophical, mystical, and artistic.
The members of the second were practical men who were leaders and men of action in the material world.
The implication drawn seemed to be that these two groups were irrevocably separated the practical men being for ever excluded from the highest mystical experiences.
I deny such an idea; the human mind if it desires something strongly enough will achieve anything.
When I started on my mental journey; the way seemed to be dark and impossible, yet I slowly found my way; and so can everyone else.
I see the path to the peak experience as passing through the poetic, the emotional and the mystical regions.
For the person who appreciates the beauty of poetry, the path through ecstasy and the peak experience is easy to see and it leads directly to the highest mysticism, ending in release and beyond.
This is the way I know, and it is the only way I can write about but there are a hundred other ways to release and a hundred other ways for every intellect.
This is the profound hope and certainty, that there are ways for every type of intellect and it is necessary only  for each one to find the method that suits him.
The way of the mystics is not for everyone, but some will find their answer in it, and for others it will perhaps give an insight into the potential of the mental world.
In all religions there is a recognition of the two fundamental divisions of human beings.
In Christianity there is recognition of the practitioners of good works on the one hand and the contemplatives on the other.
In Hinduism three of the five main ways of reaching the truth rely on this difference.
Bhakti Yoga is the way of emotion and devotion and love and correspondence with the mystic way.
The practical ways are divided into Karma Yoga, the way of work, and Jnana the way of intellect.
The two streams of Buddhism are in consonance with this phenomenon.
The Hinayana (the little vehicle) is more to do with discipline and method while the Mahayana (the great vehicle) is to do with the mystical.
In Islam the mystical is especially pronounced in the brotherhood of the Sufis.
In meditation it is possible to dive deeper and deeper into the mind to a place where there is no disturbance and there is absolute solitude.
It is at this point in the profound stillness that the sound of the mind can be heard.
It is like the sea breaking on a far off reef, and it lulls the being into extreme calm.
Like the sea it is a music primeval and here is no storm, only the silken waves soughing.
When I listen to the sound of this sea, I sense that I am a voyager and this sound is a wind in the sails of a ship.
But this sound is not of this world for other sounds are heard distinctly and cause this sound to die, though it returns with the silence.
Sometimes I think it as a transcendent sound which speaks of unknown powers, of cosmic storms and sun winds sighing in the brain.
This is no earthly voyage, and I see visions of ships that sail on no earthly sea: Our ships sail on upon a silent sea; no wind, there is no sound but we move on.
Besides us are other ships in endless line.
Our oars and sails are put out but nothing alters.
Some men tire of the journey and throw themselves to the sea.
They find the shore before the surf has sounded.
Who knows?
One day we'll see the foam upon white cliffs, and this long journey to eternity will be ended, and we will walk upon the shore, and we and  the dead will take hands, and life and death and time will be no more.
This feeling of the sound of the sea which is like the sound when a sea shell is placed to the ear, is experienced by many people in meditation.
This sound of the sea gives promise of inexhaustible springs and powers lying behind the senses.
Creativity
WHETHER it is in science or art, the peak experience comes with appreciation of beauty.
No one denies that there is beauty in art but there is some controversy about its existence in science.
I believe that there is an authentic beauty in science and this is fervently avowed by many scientists.
M. Polanyi wrote that beauty can reveal truth about nature; thus Einstein's theory of relativity was extolled by a fellow scientist for the grandeur, boldness, and directness of the thought which made everything more beautiful and grand.
And it was this beauty that constituted its truth long before experiments could be made to prove it.
Bertrand Russell described mathematics as having an austere beauty like sculpture.
One research scientist, a friend of mine said that the setting up of a particularly apt experiment has lead him to a sense of the beautiful.
These ideas make me think that creativity and beauty are linked.
W.J.J. Gordon wrote in his book on Synectics about hedonic response being the joy and ecstasy of the creative process, and he mentioned a factor in the joy of creativity is the release of tension that builds up as a scientist strives to solve a problem and I would further add the pleasure and relief of self-fulfilment which is a fundamental human need.
Yet I believe that these are both secondary to the sheer fervour of creativity.
In fact the act of creativity whether it is in science of the arts is one of the highest joys of mankind; but its depth of emotion will depend on the level of mental maturity.
A mechanic when he hits on an idea that makes him some money in a suggestion scheme though the joy is of the same substance but he will not feel the same depth of emotion as Einstein or Dante did.
These last two must have felt the stirring of the soul at the sublime  beauty which causes the peak experience, and because this sweetness came out of their own minds, theirs was the most intense emotion.
When a poet is nearing the creation of a new image, it is as if he stands with stout Cortes:
When with eagle eyes
He star'd at the Pacific — and all his men
Look'd at each other with a wild surmise —
Silent, upon a peak in Darien.
Keats when he wrote that poem and was lost in his immaterial dream breathed the same intoxicating air as Einstein did, and both knew the same profound excitement and sublime delight.
The cultivation of creativity is the most important requirement of men who aspire to the highest reaches of the transcendent world.
And creativity like the emotions and the feelings of love can be cultivated and developed by anyone.
The skills needed are mostly those which our schooling found useless and it has atrophied them without irreparably damaging them.
Rational, methodical and traditional thought are wholly destructive of creativity.
Rather we must deliberately foster the grasshopper mind which is so scathingly crushed by the schoolmasters.
We must look at things in a new way, and from the wrong angle so that they are distorted and transformed.
We must fill our minds with the utmost of irrelevant information so that things we look at will remind us of other things and the more distant and more ridiculous the analogy, the higher the chance of the idea being really valuable.
Above all we must disregard any traditional idea and never, never, be put off by statements of ‘practical men’ who say it has been tried before or it will never work; these two feeble and slavish statements have destroyed countless ideas and they have been the rocks against which many brilliant minds have foundered.
Popper described science as the greatest adventure in the world for it is an endless search for new ideas and it is devoted always to creativity.
When he was in Vienna he had contact with the followers of Freud and Adler, and he found that even when a fact appeared to contradict their theories, they were always able to turn the fact around so that it could be taken as another example to prove their theory.
This led Popper to believe that there was something fallacious in the proofs, thought adequate for ascertaining truth.
While he was wrestling with this problem, he happened to go to a lecture by Einstein, and was struck by Einstein's remark that his theory of relativity would fall to the ground if any of several tests failed.
So Popper proposed the idea that a scientific statement was one which was capable of being tested to the point of destruction.
In other words, if the experiment failed then the theory was dead.
This meant that any statement that was not susceptible of testing was simply not scientific.
The effect of this when it is accepted is very far reaching because the more an idea is tested the more it is validated and criticism becomes not a threat but an opportunity to strengthen the idea; and what is more important scientists cease to have the same proprietorial attitude towards in idea.
They even make statements about it criticism that would otherwise be regarded as incomprehensible: ‘The man who welcomes criticism, will prize it almost above friendship,’ says Eccles.
This attitude has helped to transform science into a wonderland of the imagination.
All men even if they are not so fortunate as to be scientists or artists have still within them the capability to transform their  lives into ones of creativity.
There are many levels of creativity, from craftsmen all the way to poetic sages; even the creation of a good joke can be deemed an act of creation.
J.L. Lowes in his book The Road to Xanadu has given an account of how the mind's vats work.
He undertook the huge task of searching into Coleridge's past and trying to find where the images of his poetry came from.
This task was made especially difficult because Coleridge was a voluminous reader but he was aided by the fact that almost everything that Coleridge had read was recorded in a notebook.
Lowes did in fact trace many of the images unerringly to their source; and what was even more interesting was how Coleridge's mind took the raw material of some explorer, and twisted it and mixed it with many other ideas to produce the incomparable poetry of The Ancient Mariner and Xanadu .
The mind is like a vat in which time works on all the ideas and changes them.
It is this process which provides the material of creativity.
Coleridge had fallen asleep reading Purchas His Pilgrim where these words appear:
‘In Xamdu did Cublai Can build a stately Palace, encompassing sixteene miles of plaine ground within a wall, wherein are fertile meddowes, pleasant springs, delightful streames, and all sorts of beasts of chase and game, and in the midst thereof a sumptuous house of pleasure, which may be moved from place to place.
The beginning of the poem came from these images but they in turn roused other images from his past reading.
For instance, some of the poem's ideas came from Milton's  Paradise  Lost , some came from Bruce's account of the source and fountains of the Blue Nile in Abyssinia, whence also came the Abyssinian maid playing on her dulcimer.
The milk of paradise came from the story of the Old Man of the Mountains, Hassan, who drugged men and sent them forth as assassins.
Some of the images were traced to an account by an author on Kashmir, and some to another one of Florida by a different author.
All these images were twisted and changed and combined by the creative process of Coleridge's mind into the superb poem.
It can be seen that the raw material of creativity has a diverse background of information; in Coleridge's case he was  an avid reader of all the explorations that were the rage at that time.
In fact much of the Ancient Mariner came from the sea voyages of discovery.
The development of creativity is nothing less than the stocking of the mind with innumerable images and allowing the mixture to work as in fermentation to produce its astonishing results.
It is thought that biology is the richest source of ideas for scientific as well as poetic creativity.
The idea of the vats of the mind reminds me of an occasion when I was walking on the  Appalachian Trail in Pennsylvania with some friends, who showed me an oak gall.
The stinging of the tree by an insect causes the tree to make for it a house of green light, a balloon of anti-matter, a jewel to adorn the nakedness of the bough.
It is as if the molecules that form the flowers and leaves have been twisted and re-assembled into lovely globes, the nurseries of these insects.
This process is like the creative process of mind where ideas and images stored in the mind's vats join together and change through time and become the matter of poetry.
The eyes are harvesters in the fields of light and like the bees gather honey from mystic gardens.
But the soul's honey is not inert, it is living like a seed which takes root and forms into strange  hybrid flowers and even stranger fruits.
These become the gardens and orchards of the mind and are the supreme creations of the human being and it should be our life's task to tend our wild vines and taste the berries that hang in profusion in their many coloured flasks.
Here, then, is one such exquisite creation by the Taoist poet, Li Po, on his banishment from the court and his homeland
BRIGHT AUTUMNTIDE
I climb the mountain of Tsyu-I.
I look down on clear rivers.
Coldly the Syan speeds along, cold as it widens to meet the sea.
Clouds break into Autumn tints, the skies are flaked with golden foam.
I am now in the foreign regions of Tsin and U; and countless are the miles of the trackless way, brushed by the wings of birds alone, lying between me and my native  land.
Now with its half-disc leaning upon some island the evening sun sets.
The lake is beginning to glow.
There soars the moon from the rim of the far off sea.
And all my thoughts are plunged into the hardy loveliness of autumntide.
Northward I wander in dreams to Yun, Southward I search for Yuye…
The lotus is falling, falling.
The river is jewelled with autumn hues.
Long, long the wind blows…
Long, long the night wears!
Fain would I grasp the incredible…
Oh! to fly away seaward and dream for a little by its shores!
To take from an island in blue ocean the six monsters —
Alas, there is no such length of line.
My hand caresses the surging wind; I am deeper drowned in sorrow.
I will away! away!
Too strong is the life of men for me.
There in the magical land of P'eng Lai I will gather the grass of immortality.
— Trans. L. Cranmer Byng
Li Po is leaving the world of men for a far more perfect world but there is in his poem nonetheless the idea that he might have wanted both of these worlds, but he has lost one of them; thus he is chastened.
There is a fundamental sadness in his life, and this sadness stirs our emotions despite the centuries that have elapsed since Li Po lived.
He used to write his poems on silk and send them to his wife far down the river.
He launched his poems of silk down the Yellow River; and he never knew that his silken ships would sail on for ever.
The poet sees in life a truth that gives significance to the otherwise mean and trivial things.
In a way he sees the eternal and translates into human words the wonder of existence; for him the individual soul has eternal meaning.
Jnandas a poet of medieval India expressed the joy and aspirations of the humble soul who knows that within him is the divine spark, and he is therefore the All for which the festival is planned.
Had it not been realised that it was the work of a humble man, this poem would be thought a sacrilege and an  example of striking pride and arrogance, but instead it is an invitation to extreme exaltation of spirit for it comes from a man who has submerged his ego in the All.
Tagore wrote of this poem —‘The feeling that man is not a mere casual visitor at the palace-gate of the world, but the invited guest whose presence is needed to give the royal banquet its sole meaning, is not confined to any particular sect in India.
In this poem Jnandas addresses God's messenger, who comes to us in the morning light of our childhood, in the dusk of our day's end, and in the night's darkness:
Messenger, morning brought you habited in gold.
After sunset, your song wore a tune of ascetic grey and then came night.
Your message was written in bright letters across the black.
Why is such splendour about you, to lure the heart of one who is nothing?
This is the answer of the messenger:
Great is the festival hall where you are to be the only guest.
Therefore the letter to you is written from sky to sky.
And I, the proud servant, bring the invitation with all ceremony.
— Jnandas translated by Tagore
And thus the poet knows that the silent rows of stars carry God's own invitation to the individual soul.’
Beauty is the food of the soul like scent is the food of the Jinn, beauty is the elixir of the soul.
I try to understand what is the essence of beauty and I think I find it in its purest form in the transcendent.
We can only know an object by the sensations which it causes and are detected by our five senses.
What that object is in totality is the riddle of the philosophers and a perpetual mystery.
It is in this vast area of the unknown that transcendent beauty resides, When we clothe an object in the garments of this unknowable, our souls respond and we are moved.
Almost men have at some time an intimation of being more than the material, and the appearance and personality.
We have come from eternity and his shortlived being has a past  stretching beyond thought, and it will have a life stretching on; and it is this immortal part that is the hidden being.
It can never be utterly erased by our preoccupation with the self and our ignorance.
In the midnight hours and in times of solitude when the noise stops, we hear its voice.
It is when we think of the eternal and the infinite that this inner being is woken from its sleep, and our souls are stirred.
The mind is filled with floating images of the utmost brilliance.
They exist in a mirror world where they are suspended in a liquid like molten glass, and these images when seen from the mundane are brilliant but they are only mirror images of reality.
When we escape from the physical and the chains that bind us, we see the eternal and infinite being within us, then suddenly the mirror lake shivers and the images are stilled in frozen crystals.
We feel the savage assault and the cold breath of the infinite that causes this frost of many colours and the stilling of the images, with its beauty.
Physical beauty is limited but the beauty of ecstasy is of the transcendent and is limitless.
It is a crossing of frontiers and a transfiguring of images and their resetting in dream-like pictures.
Every idea that evokes the infinite is a magic wand that freezes the mirror lake, and it is like the climax of passionate love, only more subtle and beautiful.
Maslow wrote that beauty is the last aim of man; for when he has fulfilled all his drives and ambitions and has achieved self realization and creativity and success in his own eyes, there remains only this last aim of beauty.
Thoreau in the swamp saw a form of this beauty, and it has an analogy in the himma of the Sufis.
He wrote of it as seeds finer than the spores of fungi or dust caught in the sails of ships a thousand miles from land.
It is a substance like the ether or gravity or the waves of radar beyond human senses, that penetrates our being and causes this ecstasy within us.
After long years of thought we are conditioned to respond to this imperceptible stimulus of beauty, and we see the imagery in the small and insignificant, and feel the sensation of ecstasy that it causes.
When I look at a natural object for a long time, like looking into the burning embers and the flames of a fire, there appears a new vision or facet of that object or a new way of seeing it in relationship to some other world of thought.
Forests have a profound effect on me and often give me  feelings of beauty.
During the spring, I look at the new beech leaves.
They are like scrolls unrolling, only softer, and with an aspect of newborn creatures whose flesh is still crumpled from the matrix of the womb.
There has suddenly appeared a multitude of banners and pamphlets from these printing presses of the trees.
These little leaves are like tongues or hands to sing or conduct the wind music, for of all trees, the beeches have the supreme choir and orchestra and to hear them in a high wind is to know divine music.
When I enter the hushed assembly of the fir trees, I see the cathedral of all religions.
There is a scent of a pure and smokeless incense.
Sad and profound chants are intoned in the wind and I am in the presence of a numberless and devout congregation.
The needles splinter the wind into dirges and laments that tell of the long and tragic history of the trees.
The cones are like prayer wheels or the white prayer flags of the Bhutanese that forever send out their messages of desolation on the telegraph of the wind.
The wind has died and now from the brooding world of the floor of the forest there burst from on high the calls of birds that cascade through the dense branches like the chimes of Chinese wind bells.
These birds are the living bells of the tall spires of the fir trees, and they sound their carillon of sacred music.
They are the chimes and clocks and calendars of the trees for they mark the seasons and arouse the trees from their long slumbers and announce the dawns.
Sometimes when in the evening I lie down with half closed eyes looking at the sunset, I see the screen of the eyelashes and its wonders.
In the Himalayas there is a bamboo with each section of a different colour.
It is like a stalk of the material of the rainbow.
Similarly an eyelash in certain light is a prism and becomes a maypole of rainbow colours.
Beauty is everywhere, and even in the insignificant eyelashes there is seen a gateway worthy of the eyes — an archway of beams of rainbows more magnificent than the gateway of the greatest city.
What joy there is in looking for these images!
But the life that is devoted to the finding of beauty is far more wonderful.
It is the full joy of existence.
We must look at this quest for beauty as a purpose more real and noble than the quest of the knights of old for the Holy Grail.
And what sort of quest  should it be?
I do not think of it as a quest in the normal sense but as a drowning or shipwreck in the infinite.
Beauty is there thronging before the eyes in the intangible world and it is multitudinous as the photons that burst on our eyes' lenses.
But it is fugitive and becomes absorbed into the infinite like vapour.
The images that we make are not themselves beautiful, they are only the cages in which we trap the living birds and butterflies of beauty.
It is as if we have frozen the beauty or anaesthetized it in an image; but the images are like the humming birds of a museum case, the real and living beauty is incomparably brighter for those birds are gems that flash their  iridiscent colours in a tropical forest.
Many times I see a nameless beauty and my soul is moved, but my words cannot contort themselves into a likeness of this beauty.
I see all objects as mirrors and I am behind the mirrors in another world but the beauty eludes me and is gone and will never return.
My flocks of thought have dispersed and become lost for I have not marked them with the branding iron of the images.
I had been visiting houses and gardens that were open for the day to the public.
One house was the most magnificent on the island and its garden was considered to be the best of its kind in the whole of the nation.
That evening while I was strolling by the sea, I felt some small twinge of sadness that I could not possess such physical belongings.
And as I sat on the beach, I idly picked up some of the myriad stones lying on the shore, and one of them surprised me with its remarkable colours — it was pure marble glistening and sparkling with mica particles imbedded in it.
One after another I picked up other stones and began to marvel at the diversity and beauty of them, that I had never noticed before.
I thought of Tagore who said, ‘withhold from me the things that man desire and want; leave me only what they despise and overlook, they will be enough for me.’
At that moment I heard the grinding of wheels of the sea and the waves sounded like sieves sorting the stones.
The jewels of men are geometrical, but the jewels of the sea are of all shapes and they are jewels of a subtler quality of thought.
It is avarice that enhances a jewel and gives it an artificial beauty, but the stones of the sea are valueless so their beauty  is real.
The sea is a jeweller and cutter of gems who daily draws back the green felt covers and displays his precious work and then jealously hides them again with the green covers of the waves.
And even when he displays them again, he hides their beauty in the multitude.
I felt then an ecstasy of joy at this incomparable beauty.
That, in my own mind, though they cannot be opened for the day to the public to see are gardens by  comparison with which the most beautiful garden of this island is  tawdry and unkempt.
I walked further along the edge of the sea, and came to a point where the shore steepened into cliffs and there were large colonies of gulls nesting.
My presence disturbed them and they flew screaming about me for many minutes until they tired and began to settle on the dark water.
Each bird disposed itself on the sea like a great white flower.
And from the distance they looked like small stars of the sky that had formed into new constellations and drifted away on the still water.
Myths
What Epicurus could promise his friend I promise you, Lucilius.
I shall find favour with posterity, and can rescue some names which will endure as long as my own.
— Seneca
THE poet-philosopher is an interpreter or translator who turns the things of the moment into the eternal, the evanescent into the everlasting.
His mind is a wand more wonderful than the touch of Midas that could turn all things to gold.
Myths are eternal and will last as long as there are human beings.
They have come to us from a time before recorded poets.
Most men read them as prose but to the poet they are transcendent poetry or music that finds a response in the soul.
Myths form a large part of poetry or music for they are the ancient background of man's thoughts which the materialist world has spurned, but which a few poets and mystics have jealously guarded and preserved.
They are our mystical heritage and history of the sublime.
The myths closest to our personalities are those of our own culture and prehistory.
To them we should respond with greater fervour.
It is sad that in Britain we have lost most of our old heritage, but when I went to Ireland I was pleased to find that Yeats and others before him had rescued many of the stories and legends that had been in danger of being lost.
I felt so enthusiastic when I found this out and I began to read the stories, that I thought I saw the River of the Leprechauns, which is the crystal road to their kingdom ‘Undersea.’
The little stream wound among floating eyots of water flowers that looked like day stars reflecting a mystical heaven.
I thought I heard the music of fairies, which is believed to render men forever enthralled to wonderland, and it plays in a responsive  mind all life long.
There were extraordinary numbers of roads that had no signposts.
In my mood of delight, I thought of it as a beautiful idea for these were roads that go nowhere, nowhere that could interest men.
Roads they were then of the Sidhe and of those who have dealings with the impalpable and the evanescent.
I dreamt that I went down those signless roads to the assembly of Leprechauns by a river of stars, and we embarked in an armada of fairy boats, and sailed till the dawn to an unimaginable sea.
Gradually the music died and the image of the River of the Leprechauns faded, for these ideas are fugitive.
Yet I knew there was something familiar about them, as if these ideas from far off generations had revived in me and I had come in contact with ancestral faces.
That an idea can be selected and then clothed in words so that it will live forever appeals to me.
It is as if the idea of the moment can be compressed like those flowers that we as children used to press between the pages of a book; that they can be set like a jewel in the mind or as a picture in the mind's gallery.
The old legends have not only this factor of being immortal, but they have in them the property of conferring the peak experience.
I think of some of them as being almost hallucinogenic.
The one that has the most powerful  effect on me is the legend of the Pacific Islanders that Grimble wrote about in his book We chose the Islands .
To the Inhabitants of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands, the Earth was not flat; in fact living on points of land in a vast ocean, they were really sea dwellers, not land dwellers, so the curvature of the world was more obvious.
And they had sufficient imagination to see that if the sea could curve one way, then it could curve the other way also.
In their eyes the sea curves off into the heavens.
Had they not seen in the evening the clouds in the West with seas and lagoons, and in the night the lights of the canoes as they sail on for ever?
Such ideas are part of the cornucopia of the mind, man's endless heritage.
Through the generations they will be repeated and there will be a response in some poetic soul, and the idea will be reborn in a poem that will give a new impact to the ancient idea.
One such poem is by Wordsworth, where he repeats the old  legend that if anyone approaches the Isle of Man to do it harm, a mist springs up and hides the Island.
To me the mist seemed like a veil of a moslem bride that is used not to hide but to reveal a subtler beauty to the lover.
Here is a modern poet writing of an ancient legend:
LOWRI DAFYDD
My name is Lowri Dafydd;
Famous for nursing I was.
I road pillion on a winged horse
Through the high passes of cloud
To come to a queen's palace.
Airy fingers undid the knots
In time's stubborn bandage
About my green eyes.
Who knows how long I stayed?
My pay was the sweet talk
In sun-dusted rooms
Of folk, busy as flowers,
Praising my hands' skill.
When I returned, stars were out
Over my roof, the door fallen
About its hinges, and on the hearth
A cold wind blowing for ever.
— R.S. Thomas
THE NOMADS
The cultivation of the mind entails giving it freedom to soar like a bird into the mind's sky.
It should not be tethered to subjects that do not interest it but like the whole organism, it must find what is its bent and true interest and follow that all its life.
The world of the imagination is limitless and it is here that the mind must be freed, but it must also be given the spur of inspiration.
For this purpose such books as She of Rider Haggard, and Lost Horizon of Hilton, and Tolkien's Fellowship of the Ring , and Eddison's The Worm Ouroboros , help to give the imagination a new dimension.
The mind must be made to expand endlessly, its expansion is a sure emotional pleasure.
In this expansion lies the freedom that comes with it; for this  journey and enlargement of the mind is also part of man's endless quest for growth and self-fulfilment.
All our lives, we shall know that behind the veils of the transcendent is a world of freedom waiting for us, with its meadows of delight.
I have sometimes thought of this free life of the spirit as like the life of the nomads of the desert.
Man can never completely get away from his origins with out harming himself; he was a nomad, wandering from place to place with all his goods in tents, accompanied by his flocks of sheep and goats.
I have seen these nomads of the desert with their independent strength and self-reliance and habitual cheerfulness.
These proud people who carry all their possessions with them pity us for our rooted existence in cities.
All they possess are necessities which are easily replaced.
Their life is hard physically but easy mentally for theirs is an easy communion with their flocks and their kinsmen.
They follow the profession of shepherds, which has spawned so many prophets, for it is a contemplative, philosophical and benign occupation.
The nomads are the poorest people in the world and perhaps the richest spiritually.
In contrast, the very rich, who themselves in their travelling have  perversely become a kind of nomad moving from one luxurious place to another, are the poorest spiritually.
We cannot turn back physically and become nomads, but we can do what is almost as good, we can become spiritual nomads.
And if we do so we might call ourselves a nomadic and pastoral people of the transcendent; and we shall be able to pasture our thoughts like the flocks of the nomads.
We shall be wanderers, though we live in houses, for our thoughts will have gone far away and abandoned our possessions and entered the infinite heritage of the freemen.
We shall become poor men, nomads who possess nothing, just wandering minds who spend only as much time as is needed on our physical affairs and then depart free men.
This is the sort of poverty we should cultivate; on the physical side as ordinary men possessing what we have, but on the mental side — as nomads possessing nothing.
Each day then becomes a waking to a new journey, to new pastures, and new experiences which carry us spiritually farther and farther from the dead ideas of our physical side and its tawdry goods.
What we have done to ourselves is to destroy the adventure of life by  rooting ourselves to one spot in the physical sense, and demoralising ourselves by forcing the mind to spend its time on nuts and bolts and the rest of our shoddy interests, when it is thirsting for the trackless regions of the nomads.
There is a pure joy in this nomadic life of the spirit; and it confers on man the carefree delight of the gypsy, and all free men who issue forth each day untroubled upon the adventure of life which is the birthright of every man.
In the warm sunlight, I feel with certainty that my world is expanding and my mind with it.
This expansion of the mind is one of the true joys of life; and it entails the escape from the narrow cell of the self and the arrival in the all-enveloping and limitless mind in which all things are contained, not as aliens, but as part of the whole of life.
There is then no longer them and us, for the mind has expanded to include them and us in one larger us.
Every problem or alien thing can by a creative expansion of the mind be seen to be part of a larger whole within the mind.
Each day then comes to us with its light and its fruit and we, like the trees and the grass, can expand in the light.
At the same time we can relish the days more and more, and search in their interstices for the hidden treasures and thus our lives may become the supreme adventure and treasure hunt of the transcendent.
Emotions
THE  effect of a poem on a man is to stir his emotions.
All our joys and sadnesses come from our emotions, yet little consideration and thought is given to these factors that have a decisive  effect on our happiness.
The land of the emotions is an entire world of the utmost promise, and it can be a city of joy within us.
The emotions have been likened to a musical instrument and it is a man's task to play upon its uttermost strings.
Since thoughts are so important to the emotions and consequently to happiness, a man must learn to cultivate them.
When he thinks thoughts that enhance the good emotions, then the body responds; if those thoughts are conducive to compassion, then a feeling of warmth occurs and spreads through the mind.
If on the contrary, the mind thinks disturbing thoughts, like thinking of another man as having more riches or land, then feelings of envy, resentment and disappointment spread through the mind making the whole body cold and unhappy.
The way to happiness then is the cultivation of thoughts that lead to contentment, joy and emotional warmth, and the habitual and increasing devotion to them, and the pruning out and burning of the thoughts that conduce to unhappiness.
The range of emotions is wide and it takes in all, from the simplest emotion to the peak experience and the emotions of creativity.
There is a joy in looking for the kindly and generous action in the daily round; a kindly smile from some ordinary person whose responses have not been blighted by desire or greed or envy.
The afterglow from a small courtesy to someone in need and the momentary rapport in which the two souls coalesce, is a small but significant joy.
The simplest emotions are important for they are a base from which other deeper emotions can spring.
People like those  keen gardeners who talk to their flowers and love them, may not be helping the flowers but they are doing themselves much good, for love benefits the lover more than the loved.
The Indian love for all things gives inestimable gifts to those who practise it.
Such simple lovers are not so simple and their love can lead them to one of the profoundest insights of religion, for such love requires an abandonment of selfishness and egotism, and these people are far advanced on the spiritual roads.
Tagore described one of these lovers of all things: ‘One day in a small village in Bengal, an ascetic woman from the neighbourhood came to see me.
She had the name ‘Sarva Khepi’ given to her by the villagers, which means ‘The woman who loves all things’.
She fixed her star-like eyes upon my face and startled me with the question, ‘When are you going to meet me underneath the trees?’
‘Evidently she pitied me who lived (according to her) prisoned behind bars, banished away from the great meeting.
place of the All where she had her dwelling.
Just at that moment my gardener came with his basket, and when the woman realised that the flowers in the vase on my table were going to be thrown away, to make way for the fresh ones.
she looked sad and said to me, ‘You are always engaged in reading and writing; you do not see.'’
Then she took the discarded flowers in her hands, kissed them and touched them to her forehead, and reverently murmured to herself, ‘Beloved of my heart.'’
I felt that this woman, in her direct vision of the infinite personality in the heart of all things, truly represented the spirit of India.’
The greatest good we can do to people is to treat them with compassion, courtesy and respect.
Maslow went so far as to say that ill people who treat their fellow men with kindness are forces for mental health and those who disdain or belittle other men are forces for mental illness.
Nonetheless great as the good is that is done to other people, always it is the giver that is the greatest gainer.
The attitude of kindness should become habitual and develop into the ‘I and Thou’ relationship of Buber's existential philosophy; so that the subject and object can join in a transcendent meeting, defeating the isolation of the usual you and me relationship which contains no warmth and is a mere hailing as of two ships at  a distance from one another.
In total, this Buber relationship is the adding of the ingredient of emotion into all human relationships.
Men are emotional creatures, but we have amputated our organ of sensibility of our profound impoverishment.
The actions that possess no emotional warmth are of no value to the soul.
It is only when an action or a meeting moves us that we can find joy.
The region of the emotions is one of the largest countries of the transcendent world.
The ecstasy of the scientist or poet when he nears the goal of his aims, is called hedonic response by exponents of synectics.
So valuable is it that some scientists regard it as a scent and as soon as they detect it, they know that they are on the right track.
This makes me wonder if it is the creative thought that guides the discoverer or whether it is the emotion that is the creative force that impels him to the solution.
So beautiful is this emotion that some scientists and poets regard it as the elixir of life and pursue it for no other reason.
The Indians have cultivated this region of the emotions more than other people and their word for one of the phenomena is bhavana .
Vinoba Bhave who was a disciple of Gandhi and started the Bhoodan movement (by which rich Indians were persuaded to donate land to the poor) wrote of Bhavana in this episode:
‘I was once travelling in a train.
It was passing over a bridge across the Jumna.
A passenger sitting next to me flung a coin into the river with great enthusiasm.
There was a rationalist in the compartment who observed, ‘The country is poverty stricken and on top of that there are people who throw coins out of carriage windows.'’
‘You have not understood why he does it,'’ I said, ‘The bhavana, the mental attitude with which he threw the coin, is worth many such coins, is it not?
He was moved to do this because of the feeling that this is not a mere river but the Lord's compassion flowing before us.
Then his eyes saw one of his country's rivers, his heart melted.
Does love of country mean mere bread?
If on seeing one of the great rivers of one's country, the idea  awakens in  one's mind that one should immerse all one's possessions in it, and dedicate them to it, how great is that love!
All that wealth, those discs of gold and silver, the pearls secreted by the oyster, the hardened coal that men call diamonds — they are indeed worthy of being thrown into the waters.'’
Bhavana is the emotional content of an event, the real living part of it, more even than the blood — the ichor.
For those seeking bhavana, it is ready to be discerned in a hundred daily  occurrences : it will be manifested in a small or generous action; and there is a joy in the mere searching for this bhavana in the everyday world.
A poem is good because of its emotional content and the feeling of the poet which is placed in the symbols of words, and the true joy of poetry is in feeling the same emotions as the poet.
It is as if in looking at something, the poet discerns an eternal substance that is hidden behind the manifest sense impressions.
When the mystic returns from his transcendent journey, he puts his emotions into the bare code of human words.
The Sufis have an explanation for this eternal something that is discerned by the mystics and can also be discerned by anyone who wants to develop his emotions.
Their word for it is Himma.
To the Sufi the divine is in all things and manifested to the seer, and it is this divine attribute that he sees and which is transferred to the work of the poet and the mystic; and that work is authentic in so far as it depicts faithfully the himma or emotional part of the event.
The feeling of a painting comes through the centuries.
Turner's Slave Ship which was so highly praised by Ruskin, shows faithfully the horror and evil of that traffic and it is the emotion, not the technique that has given the painting its immortality.
All art and all the finest achievements of mankind have sprung from emotion.
Man's joy and happiness and all his higher attributes such as vision and creativity are dependent on his emotions.
ENTHUSIASM
Enthusiasm is a vital ingredient in all human endeavour.
It is a fundamental part of all human beings.
Children have boundless curiosity and enthusiasm until they begin to ‘Know’, and cynicism the arch destroyer of zest begins to take over.
Enthusiasm is closely linked with interest, for it is only when things cease  to interest us that we lose enthusiasm.
The cause of this loss is difficult to determine but in the  absence of any definite illness or fear or inhibition it may come from purposelessness; but once there is equilibrium, then enthusiasm will increase as part of the development of the whole being.
Mirth, tranquillity and enthusiasm are not directly part of the transcendent world, yet they are essential to it, just as they are essential for a successful and happy life.
And yet the most wonderful exercise of the mind to enhance its qualities of humour, zest and tranquillity is the journey through the transcendent.
It leads to refreshment from springs that never run dry.
The loss of enthusiasm is death of the soul, and means that growth has stopped.
Some lack of enthusiasm is caused by a habitual attitude of boredom and hopelessness, and the simple remedy to this is often to commence a regimen of positive thought.
In addition to this is the need to start expanding the mental horizons and to take interest in the endless intellectual sphere.
Part of the meditation in the transcendent should be with the aim of increasing the zest for life.
What is life but to live it more intensely?
There are degrees of life and the highest is the one that is most fervently lived.
Let us know that we are really alive and the only way we can do this is to live with ever growing joy and enthusiasm.
This zest should be carried into the transcendent and should bring us to the horizons of mental thought.
Our companions in this journey should be mirth, tranquillity and enthusiasm and we will never be bored.
Enthusiasm will help in the endless task of unfolding our own potential, and disclosing the hidden secrets about ourselves.
Kabir said he brought with him the thirst for the infinite.
This thirst is a form of enthusiasm and implies a desire to discover all secrets, to become immersed in all things, and never to stop learning.
Epictetus said that we have been placed in a festival and we must enjoy it and be full of delight in it.
‘He (God) needs those who join in the holiday and the dance, that they may applaud, and glorify, and sing hymns of praise about the festival.
God has no need of a fault finding spectator.’
At the end of our days let us be able to say that we have tasted life and found joy in it; that our enthusiasm never waned  but increased throughout life and that we regret nothing:
When I go from hence let this be my parting word, that what I have seen is unsurpassable.
I have tasted of the hidden honey of this lotus that expands on the ocean of light, and thus am I blessed — let this be my parting word.
In this playhouse of infinite forms I have had my play and here have I caught sight of him that is formless.
My whole body and my limbs have thrilled with his touch who is beyond touch; and if the end comes here, let it come — let this be my parting word.
— Rabindranath Tagore
JOY
The animals seem to be happy and contented in their lives, it is only man who is melancholy.
Our intelligence which should make us happy, has by perversity made us unhappy.
This in reality doesn't have to be so; for happiness is in the grasp of everyone, rich or poor; in fact more in the grasp of the poor than the rich.
Of the many books I have read, the ones whose authors showed that they possessed the most joy and happiness were Epictetus, Seneca, Tagore, Thoreau, Kabir, Raidas, Ramakrishna, Rumi, W.H. Davies, Vinoba Bhave.
Nearly all these men were poor except Seneca whose attitude was that of a poor man, and Tagore who never thought of money.
It is as if riches are an intolerable burden to the truly free spirit, and it is for this reason that many men have voluntarily thrown away then money.
As in example, the Theban Crates flung all his possessions into the sea saying I had rather drown you than you should drown me.
Wealth to those who deem it important has a destructive  effect on happiness because thinking about money is demoralising.
There are no elevating thoughts about money, all the emotions aroused by it are bad; pride and miserliness and greed are quickly followed by fear of losing the money, and not far behind is likely to be the emotion of jealously because money is a relative thing and seldom does a rich man not find someone still richer to be jealous of.
Riches confer a sort of exclusiveness which is more like a quarantine.
I saw the millionaires' mile in Miami, Florida, where the richest people live marooned on small islands in a bay.
The roads leading to these houses are guarded to prevent the general species of mankind from entering; and I felt a slight twinge of sorrow for these rich people who have isolated themselves in these strange colonies and deprived themselves of the society of humble and unpretentious men who add the savour to human society; for it is only in such men that the real spirit of joy, and freedom resides.
I thought further of the great fears that the rich must possess, of misfortunes that might reduce them at last to rejoin the human race.
Seneca said, ‘Poverty carries no pack, and has no cares.
When the trumpet brays, it knows the attack will pass it by.
At the cry of ‘Fire'’ it seeks only how to get out not what to carry out.,
Here is a poem by Kabir, the outcast and disgraced pauper, who was a free man in the sense that Diogenes was free:
What a wonderful Lotus it is,
that blooms at the heart of the universe!
Only a few pure souls know of its true delight.
Music is all around it, and there the heart partakes
of the joy of the infinite sea.
Kabir says; ‘Dive thou into that ocean of sweetness,
thus let all errors of life and death flee away!’
There millions of lamps, of suns and of moons are burning;
There the drum beats, and the lover swings in play.
Look upon life and death;
there is no separation between them.
There the whole sky is filled with sound, and there
The music is made without fingers and without strings;
There it rains nectar.
There the harp-strings jingle, and there the drums beat.
What a secret splendour is there in the mansion of the sky!
Joy for ever, no sorrow, no struggle,
Travelling by no track, I have come to the sorrowless land.


Joy and delight is part of the essence of life and it is there in the depths of the soul waiting to be found.
A seer was troubled when he became famous and the people started to throng to him.
He thought, ‘The savour of my words was transporting the peoples’ minds.’
I said, ‘This is a temptation bestow on me a gift hidden from all thy creatures.'’
Speech departed from me, I gained a joyous heart, I was bursting with rapture like a pomegranate.
I said, ‘If there is naught else in Paradise for me but this delight which I have in my own nature, no other blessing will I want and not even the houris and sugarcane of Paradise will divert me from it.'’
— J. Rumi
One of the greatest gifts known to man is the one he can give himself of a joyous heart and it can come from no one else, for it comes from the springs of a man's own spirit.
Once man has satisfied his basic needs, and has reached a state of equilibrium of contentment, the world opens for him and becomes a cornucopia of delight.
The arts are an inexhaustible source of joy.
Poetry alone is worldwide and limitless; and even through the mangling of translation, the images of beauty come through a hundred tongues unsullied.
To read the whole of European poetry would consume a lifetime.
The poetry of China is even more extensive than that of Europe, and only the surface of it has been scratched by the West.
The T'ang period was the main flowering of culture in China, and more poetry was written during that time than any other.
In the 19th century an anthology was made of all the surviving T'ang poetry and someone complained that what he saw was only a meagre yield from the vast harvest of its origin.
Nonetheless this meagre yield consisted of 900 volumes of 45,000 poems by 2,300 poets.
Here in China is an unending prospect for the lovers of poetry; its poems are like delicate threads of mosaics of brittle glasslike images that flow in streams of little pictures over water-falls that cascade from the scrolls.
Then there are the poems of Persia and India that I love above all others; they have gone the farthest and have been freest of the world's gravity.
And close to the poetry of Persia is that of Arabia, so singularly pithy and elegant.
I have found joy in  the poetry of many races — the Japanese with their economical haiku verses — such superb Russian poets as Pushkin and Blok — I have enjoyed poetry from the U.S.A. and Australia and recently from Africa, for this is a heritage of the whole world.
To illustrate the vastness of the choice, here is a poem from South America that I have come across and which seems to haunt me.
SONETO
Peregrina paloma imaginaria
que enardeces los ultimos amores
alma de luz, de musica y de flores,
peregrina paloma imaginaria.
Vuela sobre la roca solitaria,
que bana al mer glacial de los dolores
haya, a tu paso, un haz de resplandores
sobre la adusta roca solitaria
Vuela sobre la roca solitaria
peregrina paloma, ala de nieve
como divina hostia, ala tan leve
como un copo de nieve; ala divina,
copo de nieve, lirio, hostia, neblina,
peregrina paloma imaginaria…
(Wandering imaginary dove, kindling the last loves, soul of light, of music, and of flowers…wandering imaginary dove.
Fly over the solitary rock washed by the glacial tears of sorrow, let there be at your passing, a radiant beam over the gloomy solitary rock.
Fly over the solitary rock, wandering dove, snowy wing like the sacred host, wing as weightless as a snow-flake: divine wing, snow-flake, lily, host, mist…
Wandering imaginary dove…)
— Ricardo Jaimes Freyer
It is often impossible to say what moves you in a poem; somehow in this poem there is something that touches my  heart and links me in sympathy to this Bolivian poet whom I shall never meet.
This is the wonder and delight of poetry that men from different centuries and far off countries meet in the transcendent.
Tagore had this feeling of being on a seat where poets of all times brought their tribute —
‘You have made me great with your love, though I am but one among the many, drifting in the common tide, rocking in the fluctuant favour of the world.
You have given me a seat where poets of all times bring their tribute, and lovers with deathless names greet one another across the ages.
Men hastily pass me in the market, never noting how my body has grown precious with your caress, how I carry your kiss within as the sun carries in its orb the fire of the divine touch and shines for every.’
We must also give music its place in the crown of the arts.
Music plays directly on the emotions of the mind, without the go-between of words, so it has a more direct impact on the mind.
Joy in a Strauss Waltz or in Tchaikovsky is purer than the joy elicited by words.
This is not to say that the one is better than the other, music and poetry are for ever different and it is the difference that accords us the added joy.
Music when it advances into more subtle and profound regions, explores new emotions that will never be encompassed by words.
Poetry and prose when they advance into the most mystical regions will depart farther and farther from music.
The Asian music like its poetry is predominantly sacred and it moves Indians powerfully.
To Europeans, this music is unfamiliar and in many cases the technical level of orchestration and harmony is deficient by world standards, but in place of technique, the Indians have something else that should interest us.
It is the fervour and ecstasy with which many of them listen to music and songs.
The orchestra is viewed as one instrument for playing on the strings of the emotions for this is the main aim of music in India.
The  flutist regards himself and his flute as one instrument through which the Lord's breath is blown.
Each instrument becomes a device to transform the truth and beauty into the vibrations that find their response in the heart.
So when we listen to music we should allow ourselves to be carried away into the musical paradise.
We must develop our musical emotions so that we can be  moved by new and subtler feelings.
In this way we shall transform music into another transcendent oasis.
The world is a treasure house of free delights; beyond music and poetry are painting and sculpture and these are only the arts; the joys that come from the mystics compared to those from the arts are like seeing masterpieces instead of prints.
Men should be walking about on Earth in a state of intoxication and delight, yet here we are amid these real riches and most people are miserable and peevish.
We live in a house of treasure but some disease of the eyes has blinded us so that we search always for vulgar and expensive toys.
This house of treasures, the immaterial ideas, the cups of truth that Gide wrote about, cups that can never run dry!
These immortal ideas, things barely perceptible are the most precious things of life.
And like the swallows that harvest the thin fields of air, we must become harvesters of ever more intangible fields.
We must search even where we least expect to find riches; just as there are hidden joys in one's own pain and suffering, there are subtle delights in the compassion and pity aroused by other men's Gethsemanes — their gardens of sorrows.
Gide sang the fruits of the earth, lavishing on many of them his elegant and poetic prose, but he did not sing.
the grenadilla.
To me the grenadilla is without compare; its flowers are sweet like the flowers of roses, but its fruit is like no other fruit and I would choose it before the nectar of the gods.
What can I say about the sculptor that designed the molecules of the grenadilla whose shape causes this ecstasy in the matrix of the senses?
But even more wonderful is the design of the matrix that can taste the savour of the grenadilla.
I visualise a matrix even more subtle to taste the most intangible fruit of the soul; and one day men will fall heir to a Golconda of the most beautiful emotions and joys, and from being mere trappers and hunters we shall become harvesters.
and miners of the emotions.
LAUGHTER AND MIRTH
Religion in the West is considered to be serious and solemn and without much humour.
This is because Western religion  has come from a Semitic origin where life was serious as befits a desert people.
The desert is not a place conducive to jest and pranks.
This inherent seriousness has been increased by such dour teachers as Calvin and Luther.
That this has not always to be the case in religion is demonstrated by religions like Buddhism and Hinduism where laughter plays a big part.
Even the old pagan religions placed laughter in a position of importance for in Greece there was a Goddess of Laughter.
Mirth is close to creativity for to see the absurd in something is to twist reality around in a way creative thought is fashioned — a good jest is a delight and should be regarded as much more than just a bit of frivolity.
Mirth is part of the happy life for it confers an effervescence and scintillation that is otherwise lacking.
Burton in his Anatomy of  Melancholy  showed how the ancients specially praised it.
‘Grave men should resort to it frequently.
Machiavelli in his Florentine history gives this note of Cosmus Medices, the wisest and gravest man of his time in Italy.
He would now and then play the most egregious fool in his carriage and was so much given to jesters, players and childish sports, to make himself merry, that anybody who saw his gravity on the one part and his folly and lightness on the other, would surely say that there were two distinct persons in him.
Grave Socrates would be merry by fits, sing, dance, and take his liquor too.
This and many other means to exhilarate the heart of man have been  practised in all ages, as knowing there is nothing better to the preservation of man's life.
As concludes Marsillius Finicus, ‘Live merrily, O my friends, free from cares, perplexity, anguish, grief of mind, live merrily,(Heaven created you for mirth).
Again and again I request you to be merry, if anything troubles your hearts, or vex your souls, neglect and contemn it, let it pass.'’
‘It was Tiresias the prophet's council to Menippus, that travelled the world over, even down to hell itself, to seek contentment, and his last farewell to Menippus, was to be merry.
‘Contemn the world'’(Saith he)‘and count all that is in it vanity and toys; this only covet all thy life long; be not over-solicitous in anything, but with a well-composed and contented estate to enjoy thyself, and above all things to be merry.'’
Mirth is never the most important part of a man's life and can indeed be irksome in times of depression or trouble.
Nor can it lift a man unaided from his melancholy.
Yet when a man's life is in balance, mirth is a spice and exhilarator that gives to life an added delight.
In the midst of laughter and joy, the mind is often poised to enter the transcendent and see the revelry from another world.
Mirth is an escape from the humdrum just as the transcendent is an escape from the mundane.
Too much seriousness is a bar to both humour and the mystic life.
The Buddha, when he was in despair and near to death from hunger, heard some dancing girls:
Lightly tripped they down
From ledge to ledge and through the chequered paths
To some gay festival, the silver bells
Chiming soft peals about the small brown feet,
Armlets and wrist-rings tattling answer shrill;
While he that bore the sitar thrummed and twanged
His threads of brass, and she beside him sang —
‘Fair goes the dancing when the sitar's tuned;
Tune us the sitar neither low nor high,
And we will dance away the hearts of men.
The string o'erstretched breaks, and the music flies;
The string o'erslack is dumb, and music dies;
Tune us the sitar neither low nor high.’
So sang the nautch girl to the pipe and wires,
Fluttering like some vain painted butterfly
From glade to glade along the forest path,
Nor dreamed her light words echoed on the ear
Of him, that Holy man, who sat so rapt
Under the fig-tree by the path, but Buddh,
Lifted his great brow as the wantons passed,
And spake: ‘The foolish oft times teach the wise;
I strain too much this string of life, belike,
Meaning to make such music as shall save.
Mine eyes are dim now that they see the truth,
My strength is waned now that my need is most;
Would that I had such help as men must have,
For I shall die, whose life was all men's hope.’
— Edwin Arnold in The Light of Asia 
Tagore, who was one of the great lovers of life, told a charming story of a heaven that was well organised and serious:
In this paradise, our man saunters along the road only to obstruct the rush of business.
He stands aside from the path and is warned that he tramples on sown seed.
Pushed, he starts up; hustled, he moves on.
A very busy girl comes to fetch water from the well.
Her feet run on the pavement like rapid fingers over harp-strings.
Hastily she ties a negligent knot with her hair, and loose locks on her forehead pry into the dark of her eyes.
The man says to her, ‘Would you lend me your pitcher?’
‘My pitcher?’ she asks, ‘To draw water?’
‘No, to paint patterns on.’
‘I have no time to waste,’ the girl retorts in contempt.
Now a busy soul has no chance against one who is supremely idle.
Every day she meets him at the well, and every day he repeats the same request, till at last she yields.
Our man paints the pitcher with curious colours in a mysterious maze of lines.
The girl takes it up, turns it round and asks, ‘What does it mean?’
‘It has no meaning,’ he answers.
The girl carries the pitcher home.
She holds it up in different lights and tries to con its meaning.
At night she leaves her bed, lights a lamp, and gazes at it from all points of view.
This is the first time that she has met with something.
without meaning.
On the next day the man is again near the well.
The girl asks, ‘What do you want?’
‘To do more work for you.’
‘What work?’ she enquires.
‘Allow me to weave coloured strands into a ribbon to bind your hair.’
‘Is there any need?’ she asks.
‘None whatever,’ he allows.
The ribbon is made, and thenceforth she spends a great deal of time over her hair.
The even stretch of well-employed time in that paradise  begins to show irregular rents.
The elders are troubled; they meet in council.
The guide confesses his blunder, saying that he has brought the wrong man to the wrong place.
The wrong man is called.
His turban, flaming with colour, shows plainly how great the blunder has been.
The chief of the elders says, ‘You must go back to earth.’
The man heaves a sigh of relief, ‘I am ready.’
The girl with the ribbon round her hair chimes in: ‘I, also!’
For the first time the chief of the elders is faced with a situation which has no sense in it.
Mirth is one of the gifts of men for it is an opener of the closed mind.
A humourless man is one whose muscles of humour have fallen into disuse and have petrified; he is also an uncreative man for humour may be thought of as the first rung of the creative ladder.
Democritus, it is said, never appeared in public without laughing, so little did the serious pursuits of men seem serious to him.
We can at will like Democritus develop this faculty of laughter, so that when we look at our fellowmen we can  smile and even in the labyrinth of our own thoughts we can resort to humour and thus our lives can be less drab.
We were given humour to discern our own ridiculous airs and pomposities, and it is even valuable in the transcendent lest we lose ourselves in arrogance and pride and stray far from the real beauty of life.
All through the pages of Ramakrishna's biography appears his gentle humour which often acted as a prelude to his flights of ecstasy.
I see in my mind the laughter of Ramakrishna transformed into a transcendent substance which echoes down the mystic roads.
I feel imaginary laughter pervading the mind and like a liquid trickling through the paths of the mind, feeding the soul; for laughter is a mystic food.
Mirth and humour, though not the highest peaks of the mystic world, are vital to it and they play a large part in it.
In deep thought, there appears a change as if a soft wind blows through the mystic lands.
It adds a scent to the landscape and softens the aridity and intenseness that might otherwise  prevail.
In imagination I hear angelic laughter as a background to the life of the other world.
It is a hum like the sound of crickets in the summer, a sound urging men to joy and mirth.
TEARS
Recognise the travellers on the path of his love by their pallid cheeks.
Know that the pearls of love are tears.
— J. Rumi
There are two kinds of tears: the childish tears of disappointment and frustration, and the mystic's tears that flow at the contemplation of sublime objects.
‘A man shouted out when at prayer and wept.
Is his prayer void or not?
The answer to this question differs according to the circumstances.
If he wept because he saw another world beyond sensible things, that, after all, is called ‘Water of the Eyes’, then he has seen a thing which is a congener and perfecter of prayer, that is the object of prayer and his prayer is in order and even more perfect.
If on the other hand he wept on account of  worldly things, or out of wrath because an enemy prevailed over him, or envy of another man because he possessed such abundance whilst he himself possessed none, then his prayer is docked, defective and void.’
— J. Rumi
Tears come from the deepest emotions, from joy and beauty and often they are tinged with nostalgic sadness.
Happy is that man whose eyes have tides like the sea and are drawn by a mystic moon.
Ramakrishna tells a story of a devotee who was in tears while a holy man was expounding the Gita.
‘Now this devotee did not know the letters.
He could not follow a single text of the Gita.
Upon being asked why he shed tears, he replied, ‘It is indeed true that I do not know a word of the Gita.
But I could see with my inner eye the form of my Lord Krishna, seated before Arjuna in the chariot on the battlefield of Kurukshetra, and I heard the sublime thoughts, and this filled my eyes with tears of joy and love.'’
This man who had no letters, had the higher learning, for he had a pure love.’
The Sufis say that the stains of the soul will be expunged only by the water of the eyes.
Your heart must melt in love, and your eyes become two rivers, if you aspire to the other world.
‘You are yourself the water of life; what shall discover that water, save the tearful eye?’
Wordsworth wrote of a sadness too deep for tears.
Perhaps he plumbed a depth beyond human sensitivity.
This world of tears and the deepest emotions is where some of the sublimest felicities possible to men are hidden.
In this world sadness and joy seem to be inverted, and the soul is transported by strange emotions.
It is as though we have reached a plane beyond normal feelings.
It is a sort of looking-glass land where through a veil of tears we see profound beauty.
These tears are both a veil for the eyes and a screen for the transcendent mind, which isolates man from his environment and shows him a land of ecstasy and delight.
When the mind contemplates mystic and sublime objects, there is a tingling behind the eyes and this signals the welling of the eyes' fountains.
This mystical sensation can be induced almost at will with practice; and like all things, with repetition, the feeling comes more quickly and easily.
In looking at any scene, I have learnt to throw it out of focus, and at the same time to blur the mind so that the scene becomes hazy; then sometimes the sublime images well up in place of the mundane things; rather the mystical things come from a transformation of the mundane.
At that moment, there comes a new way of seeing and the sensation of tears is felt and with it the ecstasy of seeing the eternal or divine.
This sensation of tears is like a scent which guides the mystics; and men on their journey in the transcendent know they do right when they are accompanied by this phenomenon of tears.
Rumi compared the tears and the  effect they have on the soul to drops of rain on the desert.
In the translation of Rumi's odes by Eva de Vitray-Meyerovitch and Mohammed Mokri in French, he says:
Le ciel a repandu des perles sur la poussiere de la plaine miserable,
C'est pour cela qu'elle supporte sa misere, par amour de ceux qui ravissent notre coeur.
Ce nuage est comme Jacob, cette fleur comme Joseph dans la prairie.
C'est a cause de nos yeux qui repandent des larmes que le visage de Joseph est epanoui:
Une de ces gouttes sera perle, une autre narcisse…
To Rumi the tears are far more than a guide in the spiritual quest; they are the very water of life.
These drops when they fall on the soil of the mind become pearls or narcissi.
For anyone who his felt the sensation of mystical tears, this idea must surely be one of the most beautiful of all mysticism.
The mystic tears have the effect of distorting the vision so the eyes see through a veil; but even more is the mind distorted and the interior vision is transfigured.
Richter in one of his analects wrote of a child who cried because the sun bad burned up the dew drops.
At that moment a rainbow appeared in the sky.
‘There are thy dew drops marvellously reformed in the heavens, and the clownish foot will trample them no more.’
I read the analect of Richter many years ago and this quotation is from memory.
I still see those dew drops like our tear drops that also marvellously appear in the heavens.
The philosophy of the Sufis is like that of Epictetus for it also uses the magic wand to transform the bad into good.
It takes death and makes it so beautiful that dervishes hasten to it; it takes tears and makes of them a substance more precious than pearls.
I and Thou
MARTIN Buber in his books about the I and Thou relationship meant the change from the relationship of mere contact to one of real meaning.
Involved in the idea is the injecting of emotion into the relationship so that it has some substance and the subject and object are linked by feeling.
There is also in it the idea of fusing the I and Thou together so that the usual dualism ends and the relationship takes on an independent existence.
This idea is close to the Indian search for the destruction of the ego in the relationship.
Emotion is the whole of friendship or any other relationship; if there is no feeling when a man thinks of his friend then that is no friend but only an acquaintance.
But emotion is even more than that; all art springs from feelings; vision and creativity and everything that is truly valuable in life has its origin in emotion.
The emotion that goes into art is subtle and it is the faculty of being able to feel this emotion that constitutes our appreciation of art.
The strange brooding power and expectation in some of Moore's statues is this emotion, carved and chiselled into stone.
It is easy to see beauty in a garden but how can it be seen in our fellow-men?
How can we see it in our everyday relationships, or when we are walking along the street shopping?
I believe this beauty can be seen in the emotions.
Emotions are the eternal in human relationship; although other things have changed, the emotions of the Greeks as written by Homer and Plutarch are perfectly understandable by us even today.
So when we have real emotions about someone, we lift ourselves from the shallow level of selfishness into the real and eternal.
In this way, though we do not rid ourselves of the ego, we do transcend it and make it softer and enable ourselves  to see things calmly.
There is a joy to be found in these emotions of friendship.
As we become more proficient in meditating about the ‘I and Thou’, so will we find more beauty.
If instead of going through life having shallow relationships, a man diligently makes each of his friendships an emotional one of real compassion and regard, life for him will be transformed.
No longer will there be any threat or coldness, for the compassion softens everything and all life can take on a new meaning.
Every moment then has significance and an aura of delight surrounds everything and it is as if he had found a rare wellbeing and joy.
‘Love all men and you will dwell among flowers!’ is what the mystic said.
Once man has habituated himself to the world of emotions which is a form of the transcendent, it is possible for him to cross into it at will.
Thus, when he suffers what in the past he would have regarded as a disaster, he can move now into the transcendent and in a few moments compose himself.
An eminent preacher claimed that he could overcome even the worst disaster if he could have fifteen minutes of contemplation.
Some people might claim that this is the equivalent of a retreat from reality; but I wonder if the world of the emotions is not more real than the superficial actions that men think of as reality and I wonder if the world of the mind which is the highest evolutionary factor of man is not more real than the ordinary facts that we are really so far from understanding.
My own belief is that while the ordinary, naive world of facts is real, so are the emotional, the transcendent and the ideal worlds which are only a newer form of perception or area of thought and have scope for limitless extension.
Although love between human beings has in the first place a physical basis, in that two people are physically attracted to each other, ultimately it is not physical but mental.
Human love is transcendent.
If it is not, then it is mere lust and desire.
The fact that it is transcendent confers on it the boon that its enduring is not dependent on appearances but on mental factors.
Therefore it is a matter of cultivating the interior images which last as long as the human being lives.
Meditation is the just judge that can look at the present and put it into perspective; the images of the past, the faithfulness, the many joys and sadnesses give to the present a continuity so that the  nearness does not warp the judgement.
Meditation corrects life's errors of parallax, for it contrasts the present the eternal against verities of one's own being.
Love has to become like the ‘I and Thou’ relationship, only far more intense.
The true love relationship is not of the ordinary world, this meeting is of another world, partly of emotions and partly of the mystical.
One's wife is the super ‘Thou’.
All things and all relationships can be studied, and with the right attitude and creative effort, a new way of seeing them occurs.
Suddenly a new aspect appears beyond the obvious and very gradually takes form.
But there must be the desire to see in a new way or the vision will never come.
I look at my wife and see the long journey that we have come.
I thought of life as the Whirlpool of Corrievrikin, where all men struggle helplessly and eventually are sucked into the vortex of death I see that we men have nothing that we can do in this whirlpool except find another creature that will share the  hopelessness .
Here we are together in the immensity of space, two people bound only by our love in the wastes of space and eternity.
Love is the one thing we have against the implacable tyranny of time.
Love is a strange force like gravity that holds us together in the transcendent and will suffer no parting.
It is a mystic power not of the world of material facts, a divine gift in compensation for our ephemeral life.
Love must be the most beautiful flower than can be cultivated in transcendent garden of the mind.
If we think about it in a creative way the blossoms will come.
Most of the supreme mystics have been celibate, so we have few guides in discerning the beauty of conjugal love.
But in a way what we have is more exhilarating because this is new ground we are breaking.
We must be our own mystics.
Meditation is the cultivation of the mind; thoughts and images are the flowers; and ideas of eternal love of the transcendent are everlasting flowers whose blooms can never fade.
The images in our minds of ourselves never change.
The eyes that see ourselves see always the same creature throughout life; in our own mind the child and the youth and the mature man are the same.
In exactly the same way, the image of the lover can be preserved unchanged as long as life endures; rather, the image can be enhanced and made  more perfect.
Let us close our eyes with the eyelids that are the drop curtains of the mind's theatre, and let the great show commence.
We are our own illusionist and scenarist and we have the whole of life to produce the show of shows.
We will journey onto other worlds and reach a land beyond the awkward mule's path of words, and we are free to savour the sensations that are wordless.
Words are only arrows pointing in a vague direction; somewhere there amongst the lights of the horizon is a place where love scintillates in its own domain, the land of ‘I and Thou’, my love.
Here the world of the mind that I build will not be same as another man builds; each one of us must build his own world of I and Thou.
However lovely someone else's world may be, it will never match ours.
For creativity is of the peak experience and the imagery in it is part of our own substance and it is in sympathy with our very being — so it is incomparable.
In meditation it is therefore wise for us to record all our images and visions and remember them as being of supreme value to ourselves.
They can be used as counters for they are the tickets to our mystic world.
In many religions, men make idols and images to represent their deities; in a similar way these mystic images are mental icons or sacred images of the other world.
When we recall them, they conjure up other images and lead us to the peak experience.
These ideas of ours are draughts drawn straight from the vats of ecstasy.
We have tapped the very essence of the wine that wells from our own souls and there is no wine like the wine from the grapes of mystical vineyards.
To taste the elixir of life, become a drunkard in that mystic tavern!
Men who think with pride of themselves as gourmets, relish rare vintages and affectedly enthuse over a Romani Conti or other costly wine.
But those wines give only momentary pleasure and thereafter the senses are dulled and the mind is clouded.
The mystics speak of a rare wine pressed in a high valley of the Pamirs of the mind whose property is not to charm the palate but the soul; a wine that, like the opium of De Quincey, can overturn the sentences of unjust judges.
To think of the super Thou and link it with emotional thoughts such as compassion is to bind us together with  invisible but powerful bands.
It is like the mind spinning a cocoon around the I and Thou.
It will become in the mind a small place that is a sanctuary.
These bonds are more subtle than gossamer strands of spiders in the grass and are like the fields of force of electricity or gravity.
These forces are strong and can alter the mind permanently.
It is as if the emotions form the landscape of the mind like water forms the valleys by long erosion.
And these bands always hold the I and Thou together.
These bands make me think of Robert Bridges' poem of love,I Will Not Let Thee Go .
I will not let thee go.
The stars that crowd the summer-skies
Have watched us so below
With all their million eyes.
I dare not let thee go.
I will not let thee go.
I hold thee by too many bands:
Thou sayest farewell, and Lo!
I have thee by the hands,
And will not let thee go.
It is with such bands of love that the words of I and Thou can be built.
LOVE
Do not count as life that which passes without love.
— J. Rumi
Love has many aspects and many forms, and it is without doubt the most important element in the life of the spirit.
Love is not a primary emotion like compassion or pity, but is more like happiness which is derived and not achieved directly.
It is, therefore, complex and individual and has to be cultivated.
Soren Kierkegaard's concept of love is calm and homely but it is in authentic part of the reality of love.
He thought erotic love was self-love.
Real love is calmer and less intense and more  universal .
The real lover loves all beings, and he regards all beings as loving him.
A deceiver does not deceive for the  real lover is above deception.
He is a universal being and is therefore above the pettiness of deception; he loves all things and he knows all things love him.
‘But the true lover regards the very requirements of reciprocity to be a contamination, a devaluation, and loving without the reward of reciprocated love to be the highest blessing.’
— Soren Kierkegaard
In contrast, the love of Rumi and Ibn' Arabi and Tagore is utterly different.
It is more mystical and far more intense and  possesses passionate fervour:
‘Wherever you are and in whatever circumstances you find yourself, strive always to be a lover, and a passionate lover at that.
Once love has become your property you will be a lover always, in the grave, at the resurrection, and in Paradise for ever and ever.’
— J. Rumi
The cultivation of love is to think of all things as lovers, and the whole mind should be pervaded with thoughts of love.
Love is subtle and grows in the heart only slowly and after long and painstaking work.
‘To love human beings is still the only thing worth living for; without this love you really do not live.’
— Soren Kierkegaard
If, day after day, the mind is habituated to the compassionate idea of love for all people, then at last, it seems to fill with a substance that makes all the moments of life sweet.
This cultivated form of love is universal and is magnanimous and it conquers all: ‘If when another says, ‘I cannot love you any longer,'’ one proudly answers, ‘Then I can also get along without loving you.'’
Is this independence?
Alas, it is dependence, for whether he shall continue to love or not is dependent on whether the other will love.
But he who answers, ‘Then I will still continue to love you nevertheless,'’ his love is made eternally free —‘— Soren Kierkegaard
There is  something small and pitiable and mean-spirited  about the first; but the second is a universal spirit whose love is noble and all-enveloping.
It can be imagined that the soul of such a man will be laved always by waves from the ocean of his love; he is at once carried away from all bitterness; and enmity has no meaning for him.
Love will have raised him to a place far above human strife.
There is no thing in all the world but love
No jubilant thing of sun or shade worth one sad tear.
Why dost thou ask my lips to fashion songs
Other than this my song of love to thee?
The Camel Rider (from the Arabic)— Wilfrid Scawen Blunt
Romantic love is the nearest most people reach to the peak experience, for the lover loses himself in the beloved and while he is in the state of love, he forgets all his problems and is happy for perhaps the first time in his life.
Love is a sort of narcotic in its effect, and it is like drunkenness or the rapture of the deep that sea-divers write about; but there are many other kinds of love, though not exactly the same but as brilliant and more lasting.
Love of God is one of the aims of many religions and in it is found a rare joy:
‘Love of God is the greatest virtue a man can ever cultivate, and through that develops this love for the creation of God; kindness, compassion, tolerance, and helpfulness to others emanate when the love of God grows in the heart.
Fortunate are those whose hearts melt in love of God.’
— Maharishi Mahesh Yogi
Tagore wrote about a tribe of mendicants in Bengal called Baül who though totally illiterate, had a unique religion of love.
They had no temples or houses of worship.
For them their bodies were their temples and the trees and fields were their places of worship.
The lack of material symbols of religion seems to have brought them closer to their God.
Here in this poem a beggar addresses his God:
My longing is to meet you in play of love, my lover:
But this longing is not only mine, but also yours,
For your lips can have their smile, and your flute,
Its music, only in your delight in my love;
And there you are importunate even as I am.
The poet proudly says: ‘Your flute could not have its music if your delight were not in my love.
Your power is great — and there I am not equal to you — but it lies in me to make you smile, and if you and I never meet, then this play of love remains incomplete.’
The Baül poet is fully conscious that his value in the marketplace of the world is pitifully small; that he is neither wealthy nor learned, yet he has this great compensation, for he has come close to his lover's heart.
In Bengal the women bathing in the rivers often use their overturned water jugs to keep themselves afloat when they swim, and the poet has used this incident for his simile:
‘I keep floating by your side.
The full vessels are left on the empty shore, they are for use but I am carried to the river in your arms, and I dance to the rhythms of your heart-throbs and heaving of the waves.
The great, distinguished people of the world do not know that these beggars can in the pride of their souls, look down on them as the unfortunate ones, who are left on the shore for their  worldly uses, but whose life ever misses the touch of the lover's arms.’
— Trans.
Rabindranath Tagore
The love poetry of Saadi and Hafiz though seeming to be about physical love was really about transcendent love.
Similarly the poetry of Rumi is about mystical love; and in this poem can easily be felt the fervour and intoxication of divine love:
If you do not know love, question the nights, ask of the pale cheeks and the dryness of the lips.
Just as the water relates about the stars and the moon, even so the physical form relates about intellect and spirit.
From love the soul learns a thousand manners of culture, such culture as cannot be found from the schools.
Amongst a hundred persons, the lover stands out as plain as the shining moon in heaven amongst the stars.
The mind though it be apprised of all the doctrines of the sects, knows nothing and is bewildered by the doctrine of love.
The man who has a heart like Khidar, who quaffed the water of life of love, to such a one the most limpid fountains are nothing worth.
Toil not in the garden; behold within the soul of the lover, Damascus and Ghuta, rosebowers and all Nairab.
What is Damascus?
For that is paradise full of angels and houris; minds are amazed at those cheeks and rounded chins.
Fly on wings of love in the air and to the skies, be exempt like the sun from all riding beasts…
Beggar of love, for all the joys that the world contains, reckon that love is the goldmine and those other things but gilded.
Love, you have filched my heart by trickery and cunning, you lied — God Forfend! but sweetly and charmingly.
I desire to mention you, Love, with gratitude; but I am distraught with you and my thoughts and reason are confused.
Were I to praise Love in a hundred thousand languages, Love's beauty far surpasses such stammerings.
Love has inspired more mystical utterances than any other human emotions; for some saints and mystics, it has been almost the whole of religion.
One of these spirits was St. Catherine of Genoa and her eulogy emphasises her tendency.
‘At Genoa, the blessed Catherine, widow, distinguished by her contempt of the world and love of God — it was now, on this canonization day, two hundred and sixteen years since Catherine Fiesca Adorna, that keen and ardent spirit, had flown to God her love.’
She described the exquisite pains of love when one day she could not rise from her bed because of the anguish from a scintilla of pure love that had pierced her heart.
At the time of her conversion, she was sometimes ecstatic with love; on one occasion she returned home, and was so on fire with  love which God had manifested to her that all she could utter was: ‘O Love, can it be that thou hast called me with so much love, and revealed to me, at one view, what no tongue can describe?’— Von Hugel.
Love is in never considering whether one is loved but how one can increase one's love.
How can one cultivate and cherish this rare fruit of the soul?
The gain is in the emotion of love not in the greed of wanting some other person's love which is only a form of acquisitiveness and immediately defiles love.
The gift of love is the greatest gift a man can give himself.
Love is the largest region of the transcendent world and it has many forms — there can be love of God, love of nature, and the love of a human being and love of our fellowmen.
Of this last Rumi wrote:
‘Love all men and speak well of them.
It is like a man who sows round his garden flowers and aromatic herbs; whenever he looks out, he sees flowers and aromatic herbs and is always in paradise.
Now since you are able night and day to see flowers and a flower garden — Love every man so you may always dwell among flowers.’
Love is the mystical marriage celebrated in the bridal chamber of the heart with its matchless splendour.
This love can be transcendent and timeless, and in no way can it be tarnished.
It is in our power to develop our love and burnish it, for the image of love can have an existence separate from the beloved.
Thus a man can make his love more and more brilliant throughout life.
I wondered how our love would be marked in the annals of the universe.
I thought of the far nurseries of the stars and how many days' sail through the thin seas of hydrogen would take us beyond the space lamps and the burial grounds of the stars.
Our love is a wayside flower by the roads of the hurrying stars.
But I cannot accept this smallness.
Love is like the perfect pearl of the sea, but more precious, a pearl of the transcendent; it did not come from the earth but from the pollen of the stars and sowed itself here like the seeds of the palms.
Vision
THE images of the mind are the emotions like tears forming and crystallising into brilliant coloured pictures.
At first I thought of these ideas as jewels formed in a matrix of rock like a diamond or like a fragile vase fired in a kiln at Ching-Te-Chin — an emperor's gift.
But now I think of these ideas as coming from a principle far more subtle.
The myriad cells of the brain are like the shells where pearls are born but incomparably finer, and in these cells the ideas sleep through time, and are cut and polished and made perfect and they at last enter a crucible where the new crystal is reborn and is grown.
We should tend the mind as a precious jewel box and factory that makes  intangible but immortal gems.
I conceive of the brain as like a colour television screen whose many particles light up to form pictures.
But the brain is three-dimensional with inconceivably more cells, and those cells are far more wonderful for not only can they light up in patterns to show pictures representing outside vision, but they can subtly change the material and they can remember everything.
The creations of the mind, the transparent jewel-like pictures are sent in the mind like the molecules of D.N.A.
And here is the miracle wrought of changing mental thought into the material and enshrining it in the chemistry of the body for ever.
I see this marvellous mechanism as giving us the  certainty of immortality, for the impact of our thoughts and personality becomes imprinted in the brains of other men and they will continue in the minds of future generations.
Our physical characteristics are handed on through the genes but the far more important part of us, the mental, lives on in the minds and eventually in the memory of the human race.
Can it be supposed that the Doomsday Book is the only sort of  writing in which immortality is achieved?
What of the scriptures written in the rocks?
What of the messages in the pollen of flowers that can be translated thousands of years later?
And what of this pollen of the mind, the ideas that are immortal?
Can anyone doubt that celibate men like Christ.
Epictetus, Kant are not immortal?
Even at less exalted levels of intellects, men's thoughts and personalities live on in the minds of other men.
What greater occupation then can a man have than to be tending this jewel box and factory and searching for ideas?
Surely, happiness will spring from the husbandry that turns the gross mind into this magic box with its promise of immortality?
The images of vision are of the same order as creative ideas, but the mind must be aimed at the horizon, and the thoughts must be concentrated in the emotion of creativity.
At the same time, the mind must be in readiness for new ways of seeing so that it is already poised for the marvellous and even the illogical.
The emotion of visionary creativity acts as a catalyst to produce new ideas, and this emotion is different from the emotion of ordinary creativity.
In a book by Rosenau, I saw drawings of buildings designed by Etienne-Louis  Boullèe that both moved me and astonished me.
His Metropole is a Cathedral of such awe-  inspiring magnificence that no one can look at it without feeling he is in the presence of a concept beyond human scale.
 Boullee was the architect of the sublime, and he said that there should be poetry in architecture, and that men should be moved emotionally by it as they would be by a poem.
Of cenotaphs, he said they should freeze our hearts.
Surely his Cenotaph to Newton was the greatest tribute one visionary could pay to another?
What  Boullée showed above all was a new dimension of the vision of a man's mind.
In his work there was never anything small or mean.
Everything he designed stood out in majestic size, and in every way passed beyond human values into the transcendent.
None of his designs that we now possess was built, and my first thought was of regret that this should be so, but on reflection I knew that it was right.
I saw in my mind Boullée in his room in Paris, deep in thought, his eyes  on the horizon — not your horizon or mine but a far more distant one.
Before him is a plan of a building.
It is in monochrome; the very starkness and bareness showing the greatness of the vision.
Like the Seer whose visions are always ideal and beyond human senses, his buildings were his poems and they were beyond human scale and to build them would be to defile them.
Boullee demonstrated one aspect of vision and I mention it because it is so clear and so obvious.
There are many other aspects and dimensions of vision for it is one of the authentic senses of men.
It can also confer one of the true joys of existence and it is an aspect of the beautiful and the peak experience.
Men go up high mountains to achieve a new perspective; thus all prophets have done this so they can dissolve the nuts and bolts of difference and see in their place the unity.
In the same way they look up into the night sky to see the stars and feel the awe and wonder of the infinite worlds with their infinite distances into which may be submerged all our preoccupations as if we had washed our souls in the oceans of space.
The idea of a view and the vision of Boullee are of the same order of thought and sight.
Appreciating the sublime and subtle aspects of a view and the imagining of vision are concepts that are closely linked.
In all fields of human endeavour there are opportunities for this seeing of great visions.
Great visions are the signs of great minds and there were few greater visions than those of Newton and Einstein.
Popper in his book The Unended Quest quoted a passage of Boltzmann in a reply to Zermela.
The argument was about the Law of Entropy and the arrow of time.
‘We have a choice of two kinds of picture.
Either we assume that the whole universe is at the present moment in a very improbable state.
Or else we assume that the aeons during which the improbable state lasts, and the distance from here to Sirius, are minute if compared with the age and size of the whole universe.
In such a universe, which is in thermal equilibrium as a whole and therefore dead, relatively small regions of the size of our galaxy will be found here and there; regions (which we may call worlds) which deviate significantly from thermal equilibrium for short stretches of those  ‘aeons'’ of time.
Among these worlds the probabilities of their state (i.e. their entropy) will increase as often as they decrease.
In the universe as a whole the two directions of time are indistinguishable, just as in space there is no up or down.
However, just as at a certain place on the earth's surface we can still call ‘down'’ the direction towards the centre of the earth, so a living organism that finds itself in such a world at a certain period of time can define the ‘direction’of time as going from the less probable state to the more probable (the former will be the ‘Past'’and the latter the ‘Future'’) and by  virtue of the definition he will find that his own small region, isolated from the rest of the universe, is ‘initially'’always in an improbable state.
It seems to me that this way of looking at things is the only one which allows us to understand the validity of the second law, and the heat death of each individual world, without invoking a unidimensional change of the entire universe from a definite initial state to a final state.’
While Popper thought Boltzmann's idea untenable, he described it as ‘staggering in its boldness and beauty.’
It is not whether the idea is correct but the great scope o f the vision that should interest us.
Surely our aim should be to think visions like that of Boltzmann, and not only think them but turn our minds into these vast thought scapes.
It is as if we put on our telescopes of the mind and magnify infinitely our habitual thoughts.
There is a sense of savagery in the vastness and coldness of the law of entropy as seen through the eyes of Boltzmann.
Against this all-pervading force, there is only the principle of life.
Is life the countervailing force, now pitiably weak but  always improving from its lowly origins, which may lead eventually to a future beyond even the imagination of men like Boltzmann?
Could the future see a species capable of engaging in the defeat of the law of entropy in a final Armageddon?
There seems to be a fundamental need in man to produce a world vision.
The Isles of the Blessed, the Chinese Isles of Orchids and their peach blossom spring, such ideas as Eldorado, Shangri La, heaven, nirvana are examples of this need.
There is, however, more than just a need; for there is fundamental necessity for vision at all levels of human affairs; all groups of people, even small teams as well as nations, must have a vision, or everything subsides into confusion and what is worse, lets power fall into the hands of practical, and unseeing men who press only their own interests, leading to strife and despair.
The visionary can see not only utopias but he can find a goal that reconciles difference and towards which all men can strive and work.
The decline of countries has as much to do with the loss of vision as any other factor.
Thoreau wrote of an Eternal City of the West, and for long, I groped to understand what he meant by it and I still do not know; but one evening I saw in the brick red mass of cloud and fire of the sunset what seemed like a great city of the West and I wondered if this was Thoreau's vision of America.
America was conceived in vision as one of the greatest dreams of men; it was to be the first nation ever to escape from oppression and the freed spirit would bring forth a splendid nation.
Lovers of freedom throughout the world looked to this vision with hope and it is with profound sadness that they see the vision momentarily dimmed, and with this dimming has come a confusion of purpose and a sense of despair that was never known before in America.
We must have the faith that vision can be developed in men just as creativity can be — it is trainable and represents only a higher evolutionary development and it is, therefore, open to all human beings.
Vision has in it something of the ‘himma’ of the sufis.
The visionary places in the ordinary the elements of the eternal and raises it to a higher plane of reality.
This cultivation of the vision of man is one of the highest achievements of the mental life, and throughout human history the seer has been accorded superhuman attributes.
Part of the achievement of the visionary comes from inspiration that arises from considering the highest flights of imagination.
Reading the most imaginative stories and ideas is to participate in a mental adventure and to be lifted by the unchainable spirit of man.
The stories of Homer — his legends of  Ulysses and the Gorgons and the Amazons are such examples.
So would be the One Thousand and One Nights ; and a later times stories such as She by R. Haggard, and Lost Horizons by Hilton would come in the same category.
To read Tolkien, Morris, Hodgson, Wells and Verne, to mention a few of the most imaginative of authors  is to expand the confines of the mind and to jolt it out of its habitual furrow.
There are many sorts of visionaries, and one of the highest is the sort that forms in the mind a complete system of existence.
As examples of the achievements of these minds, I think of the Gandavyuha and the Sufis' planes of reality but there have been many others whose level of vision is as extensive though in no sense more penetrating or more brilliant.
One of these visions is that of the Indian Aurobindo in which he applied the theory of evolution to the cosmos.
He argued that scientists have shown that even in some metals there is a vestige of the spark of life, and there are some metals of which it is difficult to say whether they are alive or not.
Aurobindo sees all things as having the same principal of life at different levels, but in all of them is the potentiality and inevitability to reach higher and higher levels.
He believed that some people are already moving to higher and higher planes of the mind, and there is here an endless potential.
In his multi-faceted vision was a glowing hope in the eventual salvation of man that is inspiring:
‘There are two successive movements of consciousness, difficult but well within our capability, by which we can have access to the superior gradations of our existence.
There is first a movement inward by which, instead of living in our surface mind, we break the wall between our external and our subliminal self; this can be brought about by a gradual effort and discipline or by a vehement transition, sometimes a forceful involuntary rupture — the latter by no means safe for the limited human mind and accustomed to live securely only within its normal limit — but in either way, safe or unsafe, the thing can be done.
What we discover within this secret part of ourselves is an inner being, a soul, an inner mind, and inner life, an inner subtle-physical entity which is much larger in its potentialities, more plastic, more powerful, more capable of a manifold knowledge and dynamism than our surface mind, life or body; especially, it is capable of a direct communication with the universal forces, movements, objects of the cosmos, a direct feeling and opening to them, a direct action of them and even a widening of itself beyond the limit of the personal mind, the personal life, the body, so that it feels itself more and more a universal being no longer limited by the existing walls of out  too narrow mental, vital, physical existence.
This widening can extend itself to a complete entry into the  consciousness of cosmic mind, into unity with the universal life, even into a oneness with universal matter.
That, however, is still an identification either with a diminished cosmic truth or with the cosmic ignorance.
‘The consciousness secretly indwelling in matter, the occult inhabitant, is able to make its way upward from the lower to the higher gradations, taking up what it was into what it is and preparing to take up both into what it will be.
Thus having first laid down a basis of material being, material forms, forces, existences in which it seems to be lying inconscient, though in reality, as we know always subconsciously at work, it is able to manifest life and living beings, to manifest mind and mental beings in a material world, and must therefore be able to manifest their supermind also and supramental beings.
Thus has come about the present status of evolution of which man is the apparent culmination but not the real summit; for he is himself a transitional being and stands at the turning point of the whole movement.’
Aurobindo writes of a supreme vision that the human being can aspire to reach.
‘That all that we know of ourselves is an unimportant  encrustation over the true seed of the eternal idea which lives inside us, using us as a vehicle merely, which develops in spite of us.
To enter into the eternal is to bring ourselves in contact with this movement within us, which is the movement of the eternal.
‘Knowledge shows us high above the mutable transactions of the soul with the mortality of nature our highest Self as the supreme Lord of all her actions, one and equal in all objects and creatures, not born in the taking up of the body, not subject to death in the perishing of all those bodies.
That is the true seeing, the seeing of that in us which is eternal and immortal.
As we perceive more and more this equal spirit in all things, we pass into that equality of the spirit; as we dwell more and more in this universal spirit, we become universal beings; as we grow more and more aware of this eternal, we put on our eternity and are for ever.
We  identify ourselves with the eternity of the self and no longer with the limitations and distress of our mental and physical ignorance.
Then we see that all our works are an evolution and operation  of nature and our real self not the executive doer, but the free witness and Lord and unattached enjoyer of the action.
All this surface of cosmic movement is a diverse becoming of natural existences in the one eternal being.
All is extended, manifested, rolled out by the universal energy from the seeds of his idea deep in his existence; but the spirit even though it takes up and enjoys her workings in this body of ours, is not affected by its mortality because it is eternal beyond birth and death, is not linked by the personalities which it assumes because it is the supreme self of all these personalities…’
The quotation is not the supreme vision of Aurobindo; the supreme vision was something far more all-embracing and grand.
A few pages would not suffice to describe an idea that he required a thousand pages of his Life Divine to illumine; my purpose in giving these few passages is to point in one of the directions that the creative mind can travel to find other worlds of serene delight and magnificence.
The greatest visions of men are the fruit of these expanded minds.
For thousands of years a few men have searched for these human fruits; they have filled their minds with the lovely ideas and have taken up their long search and watch on the lonely shore of the other world.
The seeds of eternity have mixed with the beautiful human ideas and have formed some strange hybrid blossoms.
Surely this is the worthiest human task; to cultivate this magic box and make of life a splendid and beautiful vision and creation?
UNITY
In his book,I'm O.K., You're O.K. , T.A.
Harris shows the division of the mind into three categories — the child, by which he means the part that feels the emotions and fears.
The child is the psychological state of the little person who has been the victim of his huge parents and their orders and inconsistencies.
So bad are those inconsistencies and such the maladroitness of parents that most people come through the ordeal of childhood permanently scarred and possessing what Harris calls an I'm not O.K., You're O.K. personality.
By this is meant a severe inferiority complex.
The second part of the mind is the parent — this has nothing to do with the child's  actual parents rather, it is to do with all the rules and prejudices that a child absorbs from its parents.
Both these areas of the mind grow rapidly and engross a person's thoughts.
Later the rational part develops add it is called the adult.
All psychological fears and sadnesses stem from the child; and all the dogmatic assertions stem from the parent; and the adult part may be recognised in a person's speech by such qualified remarks as, ‘I think such and such is true,’ or ‘If we try that, it might result in…’
All the experiences of life are remembered in such exact form that it would seem that we possess inside us a high fidelity recorder.
In particular the fearful and horrifying episodes of life with their accompanying pain are played back so that time after time we are made to suffer the same agony that we felt as a child when we had the original experience.
Apart from deep psychiatry and hypnosis which can sometimes disclose these events and thus heal them, the only way to overcome these fears is to expand the adult part of our mind and tune out the child and the parent as much as we can.
What I have advocated is to expand the adult infinitely.
The further we expand the adult the further we take ourselves away from the fears of our primitive self.
Entering the transcendent and feeling the beautiful ideas of creativity is to escape from the sad feelings of the child.
Sadness comes from the incessant playing of the primeval recordings of the mind; and these recordings are not noise alone but they are like films of horror.
It is when the noise becomes unbearable and we can no longer think rationally that we have to seek the aid of a psychologist.
Sometimes electric shock treatment his been given to quell the uproar and the ensuing calm gives the adult the opportunity to reassert itself and the tormented soul can have a few days of peace.
While the battle of the mind goes on there is great advantage in the separation I have advocated, for it enables a man to live in the two worlds instead of in hideous confusion.
There is calm and joy, too, when the mind can focus on the magnificence and beauty of the transcendent.
But in the end when the mind has become permanently calm and we have released ourselves from the enslavement by the child, we can relax our  guard and bring together the diverse parts of life in a total unity,
The mind was a faulty mechanism at first which had to be dismantled so that it could be put together again in a more perfect harmony.
In another analogy, our mind can be thought of as a huge tapestry in which the many episodes of life were originally isolated and there was no relationship between the parts; but at last we must make a unified scene of our whole life.
There will be peace and interior calm and a harmony of our thoughts and there will be absolute consistency.
Thus, when we think of a person, the impression we give to him and the one we wanted to give to him and what we really think of him, and what we say to other people about him are all exactly the same.
Then if we are taxed with what we said about someone, we shall be calm for we shall know that everything we said was benevolent.
There is calm and joy in having such consistency of thoughts.
We are then able to rise above the petty considerations of ordinary life and are able to see what is most important — the beauty of human beings.
Pity and compassion must flood our souls when we think of our fellowmen, and especially those who seem to trouble us the most.
There is a story of Tukaram in Ranade's Mysticism in Maharashtra .
For many years Tukaram's enemy Rameshwar had incited the people against Tukaram and been instrumental in having Tukaram's poems thrown into a river.
Later Rameshwar became ill and his conscience pricked him because of his evil treatment of Tukaram, and he asked to be forgiven.
Tukaram sent this message to him.
‘If your mind is pure, your enemies will be your friends, tigers and serpents will approach you but they will not devour you.
If men revile you, you will think they are speaking gently to you; flames of fire will feel cool to you.’
When Rameshwar read this he went to Tukaram and praised his greatness and goodness.
But Tukaram said, ‘I am a man of low degree; I beg you will show me your kindness and favour.’
Rameshwar answered, ‘I shall go home no more but will make my home forever at your feet.’
And so he became one of Tukaram's disciples.
In this modern world we must both see that people obey the law and also be compassionate.
We must be corrective like a parent who yet loves the child he has chastised.
Sometimes at work I feel I have had enough and I am overwhelmed  by the material so that I thirst for meditation which can be a rededication and a balancing of our lives.
In meditation I see that my fellow man is my friend and I try to think of him in the way Thoreau thought when he said, ‘I knock on the earth for my friend.’
In that short phrase is poignancy from the abyss of his soul.
We can also think of our friend and feel the same joy, for in the idea of the transcendent friend there is a strange wonder and delight.
The unification of the mind is far greater than the resolving of the dichotomy alone.
Even time and space are harmonized and this moment is made the focus of all time and all space and all history and all art.
The man of unity possesses no rivals for the very meaning of unity is to be at one with all men and all things.
It was of no account to Vinoba Bhave a Brahmin, whether the man before him was a Brahmin or an outcaste.
It was of no account to Tilak or to Kabir or Tukaram whether God's light came via Benares or Jerusalem or Medina.
Vinoba in his pilgrimages around India asking for land to be distributed to the poor said, ‘I myself went one day to the temple of Deogar, but the priests beat me because I brought my brothers, the pariahs (outcastes) there.
Thus was I punished for wanting to go to these places, which I knew to be prisons for God.
It is in you my brethren, that I behold Narayan, for Narayan signifies ‘God in man'’, and I am happy to go on pilgrimage from village to village in order to win every day the vision of God in the faces of my brothers.’
We could also regard the visiting of our fellow men as a pilgrimage.
Most pilgrimages are to a dead place, whereas this is surely the noblest and best of pilgrimages.
People who were comparatively poor would come to Vinoba and offer all their land.
He would accept 20% of these offerings insisting that the bulk he kept for children and dependents.
Tears would come to his eyes at the bounty of the poor.
These gifts were the fruit of a singular enthusiasm and joy.
The multitudes were overcome with joy by the spirituality and the nobleness of Vinoba's words, and their hearts were stirred by his exalted aims.
In the enthusiasm of these people is a delight in which all men could participate.
In our beings we can abandon the material and become winged men.
Is there not serenity when we meet each other high above material things?
Are these  thoughts not better than the cold and hostile meetings of men?
When men show love and compassion they are surely showing the hidden and lasting beauty.
At the mention of winged men, I think of Paavo Haavikko.
In his poem The Winter Palace there is a unity, though he shows many planes of existence and his lines go from one world to another.
The world is a great jewel, a blue and green jewel that shines from a million facets.
Here at the bottom of the sky, I went with him in imagination by the rocks of the mind's shore and I saw that the sky was thin and could not hold and my mind was set free.
Haavikko's world seems to be coldly fragile, eerie and wisplike; there is the sound of other worlds as we stand on the mind's shore and feel the spume on the windows of the soul.
His poem exemplifies for me the many wonders and the brilliant light of the transcendent; and also the unity of our soul as it basks in the warmth of that light.
At the end, a man must find his own soul.
We must knock on the earth for ourselves.
We must find the eternal friend that has been bidden within us throughout time and which is the profound mystery of man.
I feel compassion for my soul that has been indelibly marked with the rubber stamp of religion and nationality and defiled by innumerable stains, not the least of them being those caused by myself — for we scourge ourselves terribly.
And now at last I feel that I am emerging from the defilements, I have reached my own self as a swimmer reaches the shore.
It is as a stranger that I greet my own self, and see it as an unknown fellow traveller through time.
From an enemy I am becoming my own friend.
and we shall journey in unity that have been separated so long.
My search for myself was throughout the universe and this is the moment of meeting and I wish that all my life will continue in the joy of a lasting reunion.
FREEDOM
The main criticism of transcendent philosophies is that though the ideas are beautiful and those who live by their precepts can be happy, yet men ask what relevance the philosophies have for our modern world of materialism where we must make progress and raise humanity out of starvation and ignorance.
It is true that most of the mystics rejected life and lived far from it, for the two worlds can never be mixed.
As we saw, Kant showed that the two worlds fell under different laws; and to mingle them together can only lead to meaningless nonsense.
It was the Indians who showed that man is capable of separating the two worlds and living in both of them, not at the same time but alternately.
Men in the West seem to fear this dichotomy, although it is not a separation but more a reorganisation of life so that the spiritual gains the most important part and the rest of life falls into place beneath.
It is like the Buddhist priest who went to nirvana and when he returned, the world had changed into nirvana.
It is not only the Indians that divide life into two compartments but also the Buddhists.
For instance, the Japanese Chanoyu (tea ceremony) is a transcendent practice.
For a few hours the Tea Master and his guests perform an artistic ritual in which the mundane is washed from their minds.
They leave their mundane business and material world outside the garden, and perform the rites of the perception of beauty.
We in the West try to keep the spiritual and the material together and our minds are confused and jumbled; the mundane distracting us from the  spiritual , and the spiritual distracting us from the mundane.
The separation of the two worlds has many other advantages.
It simplifies life so that the mind can comprehend itself better.
In the mundane it is impossible to eliminate the ego, but in the transcendent all is possible.
The idea of the transcendent helps to reconcile philosophies.
For instance, Epictetus is valid in the mundane, it is only in the transcendent that his ideas do not apply.
The separation also resolves the problem of remorse when we tax ourselves about an unphilosophical action we may have taken.
If the two worlds are not separated, this remorse can lead to confusion and vacillation, but when they are separated there is no morbid introspection.
In the mundane we have to live by the laws of the mundane and these do not always concur with the laws of the transcendent.
Separation enables a man to live in the transcendent and yet redress wrong in the material world.
In the mundane, we live within the laws of the mundane  and see that others obey the laws; but in the transcendent we pass beyond physical and man-made laws and beyond even good and evil.
In this way, there is a total freedom for we are free in the mundane, unhampered by transcendent principles and we are free in the transcendent.
Sometimes loss of money or the loss of a job causes fears such that men may wonder what will become of their families.
All fears are of the material world and we have to give some thought to them for the sake of our ambition and our  dependants and our own physical well being, but they are not transcendent things and have no meaning there.
The separation of the two worlds enables us to live more fully joyfully and with less care.
When we are in the material world doing work or playing, we should do them with enthusiasm and be wholly committed to them.
It is not right to do things half heartedly; looking at them with the eyes of philosophy.
Separation releases the brakes of the inhibition and frees us in the two worlds.
But the calm of the transcendent will nevertheless influence but not interfere with our lives.
Separation gives us so much else, for it turns part of our minds into a sanctuary.
On the one side of the mind is the entire world we have known since childhood, and on the other, beyond curtains like the stars is eternity.
Whenever I am assailed by unhappiness, I know that I am in the mundane, for in the transcendent there is no unhappiness.
The world of the mundane is to do with success, status, respect, money, desires of all kinds, and fears, that lead to unhappiness.
The world of the transcendent is of poetry, music, love, courage, vision, beauty, creativity, emotions, and release and freedom.
And in these there is nowhere unhappiness can enter.
Freedom is found by taking up our abode in the transcendent and looking at the world objectively.
All the seers and prophets saw the world as worthless.
The Buddha went up a mountain and looked down on Samsara (the mundane word) and saw it was trivial.
The Prophet said that the goods of this world are snow melting.
Christ spoke of the lasting treasure of heaven.
The whole of creation is like an iceberg, for only one-eighth of it is visible to men.
The mundane is a vast playground worthy not of our scorn but its inhabitants deserve our pity.
To look at them and see their incomprehension does surely  move us to sadness; for we aspire to Thoreau's Great City of the West, but these men are blind.
The view from the transcendent is as from a great height and brings calm and dispassion and certainty.
At any time we know that we can change our earthly vision for the sublime.
I have it in my power to choose my thoughts and lead them as if they are flocks and herds.
Like Epictetus, I can set my sentry to challenge the thoughts as they arise.
‘You are of the mundane, I know what to do with you!’
But ‘You are of the transcendent, welcome!’
In the mundane we can pursue our ambitions and shall feel anger and frustration and despair.
Yes, and we shall feel exhilaration and pride and power.
For all these things are the toys in the playground of the world.
But as soon as we are tired of them and we have discharged our duties to society each day, we can say to ourselves: ‘All those things are of the mundane, but I am of the transcendent, and therefore far above them.’
Thus we free ourselves from our chains, and are raised into regions high above sadness and a calm engulfs us and a burden falls from our shoulders.
It is then that we have a sense of wonder and extreme well-being.
This must be a human felicity as high as any that is possible.
Thoreau described a similar state that is beyond words to express adequately: ‘There comes into my mind such an indescribable, infinite, all absorbing, divine, heavenly pleasure, a sense of elevation and expansion, and I have had nought to do with it…
The mornings and evenings were sweet to me, and I led a life aloof from society of men.
I wondered if a mortal had ever known what I knew.
I looked in books for some recognition but, strange to say, I found none.
Indeed, I was slow to discover that other men had had this experience, for it had been possible to read books and to associate with men on other grounds…
The maker of me was improving me.
When I detected this interference I was profoundly moved…
For many years I marched to a music in comparison with which the military music of the streets is noise and discord.
I was daily intoxicated yet no man could call me intemperate.’
Like Thoreau, I am bewildered by whit caused this joy in my being.
He wrote of it as coming from invisible seeds or spores.
Sometimes I wonder if the inspirational ideas of the seers  are not a transcendent food — an ethereal substance blown on soft winds from heaven.
I feel 1 am transported into paradise where I am taken by the hand by Kabir the Weaver and led into the enchanted gardens where Li Po and Kalidas and Rumi sing forever.
It is as though I have left the dull class rooms of the world and the discordant sound of the trampling feet and I have reached a place far from men where my mind is moved by universal rhythms.
And I march to an unseen drum that is the metronome of an infinite host and like Thoreau, I am lifted and inspired by a music that no one else hears.
Retirement
Because I have loved life, I will love death also.
— Rabindranath Tagore
SINCE life is the entire period until we die, a philosophy of life must apply to every part of a man's life, not just the productive part.
In the West, the time of retirement for many people is the end of their usefulness and it means for them no more than a hopeless waiting for them.
Large corporations in business make pitiful efforts to persuade men to attend lectures on retirement, as if a few hours of instruction could shield a man from the cold wind of eternity.
Still worse off is the man who dies in harness at an age far beyond the normal age of retirement.
I feel for him, for he is a man who has never lived the life of a man, but only that of an overgrown schoolboy.
It is as though he continued to play with toys all his life and never reached maturity.
His whole life was passed in the nursery of the three dimensions; the wings of his mind were never used, so they atrophied and he was all his life a prisoner of his own ignorance.
Retirement should be the time of the greatest joy in life.
It is the time of the Indian Sanyasa — the leaving of the material life.
Again and again I think of Vinoba Bhave's words on a different aspect of Sanyasa .
The whole matter is surely most rare and exalted.
It has in addition a resplendent meaning in that life before retirement is only childhood and the period of retirement is the time when we reach maturity and realise the full significance of life.
We can learn very much from Thoreau most of whose adult life was a kind of retirement.
He wrote of it as, ‘My  vacation, my season of growth and expansion; a prolonged youth’.
Yet great as his gifts were to us, they would surely have been even greater if he had had the knowledge we now possess and especially the translations of the poets and mystics of the orient.
This is the reason why our opportunity is so much greater than his and why our potential for joy is limitless.
The separation of the spiritual from the physical parts of life entails a switching back and forth.
But at retirement, when the physical part ends and the material part of life is completed, this switching back and forth can lessen.
Then a man can spend almost all his time in the transcendent.
There seem to be two states of the transcendent.
One is release in which we walk as through a landscape, seeing the sublime aspects of nature and life, sometimes feeling the euphoria of release.
The second is the peak experience of ecstasy, which is not a habitual state but rather rare at first, occurring between periods of calm and emptiness and dryness.
The thoughts and images that bring about ecstasy should be accumulated from every source so that when one fails, then there will be others that can be tried.
At first the joys of freedom and release will seem more reliable and beneficial, but in ecstasy there is one of the great potentialities of the transcendent for one day we may reach a state of perpetual ecstasy.
Many men will have arrived at retirement having ‘rotted away at other men's doors and having said and done many slavish things’.
But now we can it last become what we really are and that means we shall become different from other men.
Seneca wrote that ‘when we want to reach a city or marketplace, we watch where the people are going and we follow them; but in life we should watch where they go and then we should go in the opposite direction.’
When men live in the transcendent they become lost to the world; it is as if they speak an unknown language and are no longer understood by other men.
It is a strange feeling to be in the company of men and sense the great joy in your soul and yet no one recognises it and your joy can not be communicated.
Epictetus wrote about being different from other men.
He would recommend his students to become Senators or Consuls.
When he was asked why he himself did not become one, he replied that all men wanted to be Senators but he did not; he did not want to be the same as other men who were as the uncoloured cloth of the Toga but he wished to be the red, that small and brilliant portion which causes the rest to be comely and beautiful.
‘Why then do you say to me: ‘Be like the majority of people?'’
And if I do that, how shall I any longer be the red?’
In retirement we must achieve a state of calm, for we cannot expect large segments of our lives to be filled with ecstasy.
Losing the desire for material things — in fact the total spurning of them — gives calm and release as long as that desire is not replaced by the desire for such mental delights as ecstasy.
We should have a detached preparedness for mystical states and no anxiety for them.
One afternoon I lay down and looked through a large attic skylight.
I saw clouds passing swiftly by and I sensed my own movement in another time and space.
I felt that in my mind was a compass, not of our short journey here but of oar life to eternity.
I knew that I possessed a sidereal compass and that I belonged to another world.
We are all citizens of an Imperial City like Augustine's City of God.
Our long history from the beginning of life has assured us a place in the eternal, above temporal Kings and Lords.
We are all Lords of the Eternal Kingdom.
Without arrogance each one of us can be detached from the world of men, wearing splendid and brilliant mental uniforms as Legates of the other kingdom.
I rose this morning after a few days of calm without mystical experience and I walked through a steep valley in a golden light of dawn that was like a rich but transparent garment covering all things.
I felt as if my soul was filling with honey and manna and that I was being brought to a mystic feast.
Far below me the sea was making its lacework on the water and flinging wreaths of gold on the shore.
All day long I felt calm and joy, and it was the same when I went to the town and talked to the serving people and friends that I met, for I looked at people from the universal viewpoint of the Eternal.
I saw in all of them the potential of poets and mystics.
I pierced the mask of the temporal that is a facade made hideous by the graffiti of desires and I saw behind it  the real of human beings, that is, a masterpiece on the wheel of Eternity.
This state of detachment is in some ways like the discrimination of Shankara in which all things are seen to be the same though they possess the illusion of being different.
There is a story in Ramakrishna of a man who when he was hungry and had no food joined a dog at its meal.
He threw one of his arms around the dog and ate from the same dish.
When he was asked his philosophy, this man said that freedom and release could only come when you saw a muddy ditch as being the same as the beautiful Ganges.
This was a man entirely under the sway of the Eternal and not of the material.
What other men might say or think was nothing to him; his detachment would carry him far above earthly matters.
Many men buffeted by fortune will reach retirement prematurely; some have had great success to be followed by even greater failure.
Others may have lived always in obscurity.
For some, there will be the contempt of the world, and some will have seen the pride of a wife turn to despair, her sorrow mingling with contempt that she cannot hide.
There is sadness when such thoughts are contemplated in the material world but when the mind is turned to the transcendent there is only the emotional joy of the poignancy.
This is the miracle of the transcendent for all men are made equal once more.
It is a rebirth of the soul and what went before however grievous is erased.
I know that in the mundane, the thought of never having been understood or recognised rankles; but the  transcendent joy is the greater and I get instead the hidden flowers of sorrow of my own soul with their scent and their beauty.
Surely there was an austere pride in the words of Thoreau when he wrote that he was regarded as the least important man in his village, and there is no doubt in my mind that he must have savoured the aroma of that rare emotion.
Like Thoreau we must go out forever in search of ourselves.
Konrad Lorenz wrote that birds even in total isolation are able to produce a recognisable version of the song of their species.
He surmised that every bird possesses a form of template upon which it tries different notes until it finds the correct ones.
In man also there seems to be a similar principle to guide him on his journey.
In joy and the quest for beauty and the  ecstasy that accompanies them, we possess a template.
When we feel the peak experience, it is as if we have struck one note of the human nightingale, but the human song will be very long and very beautiful and few there are that have heard the symphony of their own being.
In doing so we may part far from our contemporaries but come closer to our eternal heritage.
A man must take up his pilgrim's staff and set out on the farthest journey of all towards the very horizons of thought and dwell there always.
Surely then he becomes the free man, the wandering spirit, the enjoyer of the limitless life?
And we need not fear the pain and weakness.
From them a new vision and emotion will emanate to solace the soul and give it joy.
Epicurus had a mundane philosophy yet despite suffering intense pain of the intestines, he enjoyed a blissful last day on earth.
How much more blissful can we be armed as we are with transcendent philosophies?
As we enter more and more into the transcendent, the material world recedes and it is as if we mount the carriage of the transcendent and speed through a blurred landscape of the mundane, seeing it only as scenery, not as something threatening or important to us.
We live in a world like the Gandavyuha — a place of transparent beauty.
Here there is no loneliness for we live with the host of poets and mystic of all ages.
This time of Sanyasa is a harvest.
It is now that a man may pick the flowers and fruit of his lifetime, and complete his gardens of philosophy.
Great houses have many different sorts of gardens in the total plan.
There may be Italian formal gardens, Japanese gardens and Moorish gardens — all adding to the whole.
In the same way, we must make a plan of our spiritual garden and have in it many different gardens.
But the world of the mystic is more than a garden or harvest, we must become the painters and dyers of our thoughts so that our minds will become great landscapes.
Like Michelangelo we can paint the ceilings of the Sistine Chapels of the mind.
We must make our bodies into Rumi's house of many pictures but also of many windows and many gardens.
Poetry and vision are the sails to take us to a universe as vast as that of Boltzmann.
What we must do is to create the greatest visions of our lives and live them.
This time of the building of the gardens of our minds  makes me think of the Pacific Ocean where insects spin the sunlight and the salt water, and weave them into the most beautiful oases of the sea.
All men go through life clinging to an idea of an earthly paradise.
Now we can sail to the Pacific of the mystics, and go beyond the dreams of Cook and Bougainville for we are pilots and navigators of an infinite sea.
The whole of the transcendent is virgin land whereas the mundane is filled with the debris of a lifetime.
We have been living in a jungle all our lives and we have struggled to bring our minds into cultivation but without hope and suddenly we have found this meadow of cleared land on which we can plant our gardens.
Earlier we saw that the images of the mind can be collected into schemata.
The single image is like a photograph but a schema is a film that blazes in the mind's theatre.
Do these schemata not transform the mind into Rumi's house of many pictures?
The schemata are vines that choke the weeds of unhappiness.
When I think of these schemata, I see bright images like the constellations of the heavens.
When I think of the schema of oases, I see the images of Gide.
I see also the ideas of the desert poet who wrote: ‘In the noonday when the sands dance and the hillocks put on their robes of the mirage.’
And then my mind shimmers in the great heat and all things appear to me as through coloured veils.
There is the camel rider of Blunt in the glaring light and the thorn bushes clutching at him with their crooked hands.
The schemata are gardens of meditation and when I think of poetry, I am taken to the far country of Li Po, and then I see Thoreau and Jnandas and Rumi and a hundred poets; their images throng my mind and I am moved and tears come to my eyes.
In India at Diwali, the festival of lights, houses are lit with candles and the Earth becomes like the heavens.
Each image is like a candle and it is for us to embroider our minds so that they are like the constellations of the heavens — Rumi's harvest of stars.
Each schema is like a web placed in the mind's heavens where its images glitter like the stars.
One Christmas I was flying over the city of Boston in America it night and I saw the Christmas lights like networks  of jewellery flickering through the freezing air; and hardly ever in my life had I seen anything more dazzling or beautiful.
We must make our minds into a festival of lights like those of Boston.
The brightening of the interior mind needs a form of mandala ; so let us practise seeing colour and light and make our mind's pictures full of colour.
If we see all objects of the mind in colour and light then all our thoughts will be bright and become habitually full of colour.
All our seasons then will turn to spring and all times will be changed to sunlit mornings.
Thoreau told of rising early and when his neighbours woke to mist and rain, he spoke of a clear sunrise.
I myself have woken to a misty morning and climbing reached an upland meadow above the clouds where the sunlight reflected from the mist was blinding.
Above me were swifts scything their blue and white fields.
On the meadows were harebells pointing away from the mountain and its winds.
They were like small windsocks of a mystic airport.
Far away I heard the cry of the curlew like a bell tolling a lament for an ancient wrong unrighted.
Later I descended with the songs of the skylarks still in my ears and I listened to the grumbling of the men in the mist of the grey streets.
But we must go further and when men speak of dark skies, we must think of our own bright interior skies.
It is never the exterior light that really matters.
All people see the same light but to some it is all shadow.
The interior light is like returning home from the world in the evening to the cheer and warmth and light.
To close the eyes should be to see a carnival amongst friends.
For most men the interior light of the mind is dark as in a black and white picture but we can make the dawns rise and colours come as in a coloured picture.
Let us make schemata of coloured mandalas and hang them on the mind's screens as objects of meditation.
They will be our gardens of light and colour.
And as we grow older and the villages and tents and armies of this world fade, we will see with Hamza, the white cities beyond the senses shine more brightly by day and by night.
Let us be able to say with the Seer:
Do not regard me from (the standpoint of) your infirmity; to you 'tis night, to me that same night is morningtide.
To you 'tis prison, to me that prison is like a garden; to me the most absolute state of occupation (with the world) had become (a state of spiritual) freedom.
Your feet are in the mud; to me the mud has become roses.
You have mourning; I have feasting and drums.
— J. Rumi
The schemata are individual gardens and when they are joined together we have a spiritual world of boundless scope.
Conductors of music and composers and poets have mental worlds in which they live and work.
For a man such as these artists, the world of art is almost his entire life and he pursues his calling until his death.
The world we can build of philosophy can include both music and poetry, and in addition religion and art and much else so it is far greater in extent then poetry or music alone.
It can be our work, our play, our recreation and our whole existence and it can fill our minds and take us to regions beyond thought.
The mind can generate its own creative images and it will show us colours and visions that will bewilder our eyes and take us to regions beyond the schemata, where words no longer have meaning.
Here on the horizons of thought such ideas as Kant's noumena come to life.
Here are to be found experiences more wonderful even than mukti, moksha , sartori, or grace.
We can be bathed in our heart's blood.
This is a higher freedom and a greater release to worlds beyond intellect and understanding.
At this point we go on to plant noumenal gardens that are not to be contemplated or comprehended by the understanding or conveyed in words.
Here is a place of pure abstraction and perfection, free of earthly contamination.
The very idea of the gardens of noumena gives calm for the mind is turned into a sanctuary forever impregnable, for ever hidden and unknown and unknowable.
It is as though the intangible stimuli of beauty in the mundane have their counterparts in the farthest transcendent.
It is a beauty of the next generation of the mind's images.
In that nursery of the images of beauty we feel indistinctly, a strange sensation beyond intellect.
The seers, when they  approach the farthest regions of mysticism, describe how they return baffled from the ultimate experience.
They return in delight but with sadness too, for even the memory fades because there is nothing in the rational mind with which the ideas may be linked and there are no images to fix them in the memory.
I think these blooms of the noumena are fragile like flowers that fade when they are picked.
The seer returns with eyes glazed past doors of forgetfulness and the flowers fall from his hands and there is left only a vague fragrance.
They are blooms of the transcendent only for here they die.
They are of the substance of dreams and of an  intangible reality — hybrid ideas of the mind.