

round up the usual suspects
The idea for this book began in the back of a taxi, the night a friend told me that a famous Scottish football manager had enjoyed rampant sex in a television studio with a well known TV presenter.
It was a story that was tinged with fabrication, told by a notorious liar with a warped sense of reality.
It had to be true.
In the.process of researching and writing Hampden Babylon , the story has been recounted on at least four separate occasions.
The manager has always remained the same, but the TV presenter has not only changed each time but there have been serious discrepancies in the age, gender and sexual proclivities of this mysterious media personality.
By the time I had heard it a fifth time, one of football's most respected managers stood accused of everything from gross indecency to impotence.
It was obviously true.
SUPER ALLY
Scotland is a small country with a pernicious passion for football.
Apocryphal tales gallop across the country with lightning speed, and there is rarely a moment when some bizarre story is not being spread in the interests of gossip and exaggeration.
When the controversial striker Maurice Johnston played for Celtic, he once turned out in a summer match wearing a long-sleeved strip.
For the player it was simply sartorial preference, but as he explained in his autobiography, for the over-ripe imaginations of Glasgow — a town called malice — it was all the proof they needed to spread the rumour that MoJo was a heroin addict disguising his needle marks.
Football thrives on scandal, it is a highly competitive game that offers untold wealth to the most talented players, sudden and often tragic decline in the lives of those whose youth or skills desert them, and the extremes of pain and passion to those who follow the game.
Hampden Babylon deliberately draws on a style of writing pioneered by the writer and film-maker Kenneth Anger in his book Hollywood Babylon , a text that remains a milestone in the history of cinema and scandal decades after its initial publication.
Throughout his book, Anger patiently exhumes the sordid remains of dead film stars, robbing their graves for any evidence that might undermine the official stories that the Hollywood studio system revealed to an adoring public.
Hampden Babylon picks up the challenge, but shifts the spotlight away from Hollywood and its tinsel stardom to the less  glamorous football grounds of Scotland, where a cast list of rogues, reprobates and reckless drivers star in the most squalid film never made.
Although it is ostensibly a book about football,Hampden Babylon is littered with images drawn from the cinema, pop music and the tabloid press.
It is a book about anti-heroes, fallen angels and faded stars which concentrates on the side of football that administrators and officialdom would prefer to suppress.
Throughout the book, the reader will be continually reminded of the famous words from Casablanca : ‘round up the usual suspects.’
It is a phrase that aptly captures the spirit of the book and the characters who populate its pages.
A number of players crop up with alarming regularity.
Hampden Babylon could not have been written without the help of their triumphant indiscretions.
As Scotland's footballing anti-heroes stagger from one notorious incident to another, a number of themes can be plucked from the debris.
Curfews are broken, drinks are tanned, discos are dismantled, golden opportunities are recklessly squandered, and matches are won and lost with a callous disregard for the nation and its emotional stability.
At the core of Hampden Babylon is a titanic struggle between the forces of good and evil.
Beleaguered generations of managers, referees and disciplinary committees try to impose order on a succession of players whose skill, talent and natural aggression spit in the face of overbearing discipline.
But who is good and who is evil?
One of Scottish football's greatest achievements is the way it has turned virtue on its head.
Most fans have more respect for the rogues than the reliable officials of the game.
The photograph that best captures the spirit of this book was taken in 1963 at Wembley.
An unknown Scotland fan, in an advanced state of euphoria hugs and kisses the ecstatic Jim Baxter.
Reduced to ten men after captain Eric Caldow had been stretchered off with a broken leg, Scotland had just defeated England, and the flamboyant Baxter, an irrepressible rogue in a dark blue jersey had scored both goals.
The victory against England, Baxter's impudent role on the day and the fan's moment of sublime passion, conveys a brief glimpse of the joy and vulnerability that Scottish football embodies.
KING FOR A DAY
Hampden Babylon is a book about the sordid and seedy underbelly of Scottish football, but in many respects it is also a book about Scotland itself.
It feeds off the passions of a small and economically dependent country and the emotional demands it places on the game.
It searches for heroes in the knowledge that villains are thick on the ground.
It wallows in the worst excesses of sentimentality and adopts a moral tone that condemns and condones misbehaviour in the same breath.
Hampden Babylon is unmistakably Scottish in its love of football but like all love-affairs, Scotland's relationship with the game has been stormy and impetuous.
The book assumes that by now the reader is accustomed to disappointment and  knows more about the tragedy of defeat than the drunken elixir of triumph.
The history of Scottish football is scarred with dismal nights and sporting indiscipline, but neither the memory of failure nor defeat has ever extinguished the flame of fascination that flickers around the game.
Such is the importance that Scotland attaches to football that disappointment is inevitable.
Unlike conventional football books, which tend to skim across the surface of disappointment in chapters entitled ‘The Lean Years’,Hampden Babylon finds a certain self-mocking delight in disappointment.
The events in Argentina in 1978 provide sufficient proof that we are past-masters in the art of lean years.
In some respects this is a profoundly unreasonable book, focussing not only on scandal but on the scapegoats that the Scottish nation has turned on when its dreams have been badly short-changed.
In the process of reflecting on the history of the game,Hampden Babylon can barely conceal a loathing for our near and dear neighbours England.
It gloats when we win and goes in the huff when we lose.
But in reporting this highly selective history of Scotland's footballing campaigns Hampden Babylon remains loyal to the great myths of the game, and to the undoubted disgust of the Scottish Football Association, places its faith in the anti-authoritarian players who have come to Scotland's rescue in the past and brightened our mediocrity with a touch of madness.
DON'T PLAY ON THE GRASS
Every book has an attitude.
Some conceal it and hide behind the fence of balance and objectivity but Hampden Babylon wears its attitude as a badge.
Any book about Scottish football inevitably brings the reader into direct contact with the major Glasgow clubs, Rangers and Celtic, and such is the passion they arouse, that a degree of false diplomacy has grown up around the way the clubs and their players are treated.
Hampden Babylon breaks with this tradition.
It is crammed with incidents involving Rangers and Celtic players but it has no great love for either club.
It is a provincial book, written from the heart and soul of the other Scotland, that bit of forgotten countryside where pies outnumber the fans.
Undoubtedly, there is a sectarian crank somewhere in Scotland who will count the references to the two clubs and imagine the book to be biased.
It is.
It is biased in favour of misbehaviour and treats the bad-boys of Scottish football with the indulgence they richly deserve.
Football is often hidebound by facts.
Throughout its history, the game has been pursued by statisticians and pub bores who can recite teams like some moronic mantra and remember facts that are best forgotten.
This book is not for them.
On the contrary it is a book which looks beyond the statistics, preferring to place its confidence in the dross and disasters of the Scottish game.
Statistics can be notoriously  unreliable, particularly in a sport as emotionally excitable as football.
The game's real magic resides in bias and illusion rather than fact.
England won the World Cup: that is a fact.
England are a good team: that is an illusion.
Football is possibly the most over-protected modern entertainment.
It would be inconceivable for pop musicians or film stars to be charged with bringing their profession into disrepute, but footballers are different, they are expected to bear the burden of representing values that few individuals can live up to.
Footballers are seen simultaneously as representatives of a club and its traditions, of a community and its collective sensibility and most importantly of a sport beloved by young and impressionable people.
Ironically, the players who exert the most influence are not the worthy professionals nor the solid artisans, it is the daring wingers, the vicious defenders, the arrogant bastards and the uncontrollable wide-boys whose image is remembered by fans.
Football may be an athletic profession but it's also a borstal for wayward genius.
Although Hampden Babylon will be distrusted by managers, administrators, footballers and agents, it has been written from inside football.
It is a view from the terraces written by a fan who has spent a lifetime supporting two of the world's great lost causes, the Scotland national team and St Johnstone FC.
It would be insipid to say this book loves football, it doesn't, it lusts after it with a taste for the perverse and the painful.
Hampden Babylon is a sado-masochistic history of Scottish football and it is dedicated to the imperfections that  makes the game great.
SHOOT THAT POISON ARROW
WALKING THE DOG
Stuart Cosgrove Glasgow 1991
gallacher's last goodbye
Drink, drugs, sex and scandal are part of the fabric of Scottish football, but remarkably, in the entire history of the game, only one player has stood accused of being drunk in charge of a football.
His name was Hughie Gallacher.
Gallacher was the personification of scandal.
Throughout his brilliant career with Airdrie, Newcastle, Chelsea and Derby, controversy followed his every move.
Troubled by a broken marriage, bankruptcy, a drink problem and inflamed by a wild and uncontrollable temper, he was football's answer to Benny Lynch, a genius in search of tragedy.
Hughie Gallacher was born in 1903 in Bellshill, Lanarkshire.
His father was an Ulsterman who emigrated to Scotland to work in the mines, where he married a local woman and presided over a strictly protestant household in which both parents were active members of the Orange Lodge.
Despite his protestant upbringing Gallacher and his teenage school-friend, the legendary Alex James of Arsenal and Scotland, were both fanatical Celtic fans.
At 16 Gallacher signed for Tannochside Athletic, a Lanarkshire juvenile team and barely a year later he married a catholic girl, Annie McIlvaney, causing untold disputes within his family.
The marriage was a mistake.
The couple stayed together for little more than a year and their son died before he was 12 months old, an incident that was to haunt Gallacher throughout his precociously successful playing career.
After a spell with Queen of the South, Gallacher moved to Airdrionians to become a vital part of the club's famous cup-winning team of 1924.
Only 5′2″ tall, he turned his diminutive height into an asset, wriggling through towering defenders in the old ‘tanner ba’ tradition.
The sight of his small and snake-like frame weaving through packed defences virtually established the image of the tiny and recalcitrant Scottish forward, a mantle that was to be worn with tetchy pride by successors like Willie Henderson, Jimmy Johnstone, Gordon Strachan, David Speedie and Mo Johnston.
In one season alone Gallacher scored 46 goals for Airdrie, striking up an almost telepathic relationship with the club's left winger Jimmy Sommerville, a name that conjures up images of late '80s gay-disco rather than Broomfield Park in the midst of industrial depression.
In the mid '20s Gallacher established himself as Scotland's first-choice striker and ultimately became the only Scottish international to score four hat-tricks for his country.
Such was Gallacher's prowess that he once scored five goals in a 7–3 victory against Ireland.
At half-time a note was passed to the Scottish dressing-room telling the young striker that he would be shot if he did not ease off in the second half.
Gallacher ignored the threats, played a blinder, then woke the next day with the intention of visiting friends in Belfast.
As he passed by the city's Queen's Bridge a bullet ricocheted off a nearby wall as the Scottish internationalist dived for cover.
Hughie Gallacher
It was with Newcastle United that the legend of ‘Wee Hughie’ was born.
In the true spirit of a scandalous soccer star, Gallacher was flamboyant and temperamental on and off the park.
He was idolised in the working men's clubs of Newcastle and delighted his fans by publicly flaunting his style.
Dressed in fashionable double breasted suits, white spats, a gangster's hat and a rolled umbrella, Gallacher projected the image of a dandy and a desperado.
He frequently waved wads of money at passers-by, but like most footballers of his era, Gallacher was never a rich man.
The clothes were a prop and according to his club mates the money was made of carefully clipped strips of newspaper.
Hughie was a poseur of uncontrollable proportions.
Gallacher made 174 league appearances for Newcastle, steering them to an English League Championship victory as captain in 1927, and eventually amassing a remarkable 143 goals for the club.
At the basis of his outrageous talent and inevitably the root of his temperamental insecurities, was his diminutive height and the almost vindictive treatment he received at the feet of much bigger and stronger opponents.
The Scottish goalkeeper Jack Harkness once claimed ‘I never saw any forward with as many scars and hacks,’ and Gallacher's brother-in-law, the Gateshead player George Mathieson remembered: ‘You had to see his legs to believe the treatment he was given.
They were pitted, scarred.
You couldn't blame him for losing his cool.’
Hughie Gallacher specialised in losing his cool.
His disciplinary record was appalling and in modern times only Willie Johnson of Rangers and Billy Bremner of Leeds come remotely close to seizing his crown.
Soon after he met his second wife, Hannah Anderson, a publican's daughter from Gateshead, Gallacher was arrested for brawling with her brother under Newcastle's High Level Bridge.
Both men were bound over to keep the peace, but the incident was the beginning of a long history of misbehaviour which was to drive a wedge between Gallacher and the unfortunate clubs who tried to tame his wayward spirit.
‘THE HITMAN & HER.’
MR & MRS HUGHIE GALLACHER
we'll deport you evermore
At the height of his career, Gallacher played at Wembley in Scotland's famous 1928 victory over England.
Although he broke his regular Saturday habit and failed to score, two of Hughie's former Bellshill school friends, Alex James and Alex Jackson, scored five goals in a breathtaking display of unfettered football, magically achieved by a forward line of five irrepressible midgets who will be forever etched in the history of Scottish football as ‘The Wembley Wizards’.
Ironically, Gallacher's capacity for tragedy did not leave him for long; at the end of the game he was told his sister-in-law had died in Scotland, and as the tartan army led a ragtime jazz-band through the streets of London, Hughie Gallacher was on his way to the funeral.
Like many of his fellow compatriots in the rogues' gallery of Scottish football, Hughie Gallacher compulsively disliked authority.
He treated the club directors with withering contempt, and he had a life-long battle with the disciplinarians of the English Football League, but like so many inspired players he reserved his loathing for referees, that brotherhood of unfortunates whose eyesight and parenthood are the subject of weekly abuse.
Gallacher had a running vendetta with a famous English referee, Bert Fogg, which came to a head on New Year's Eve 1927.
In a home match against Huddersfield Town, Newcastle were 3–2 down after conceding a questionable penalty to the visitors.
Gallacher led the Newcastle protests which increased in their ferocity after he was pulled down in the box and denied the penalty that would level the score.
The incidents that followed border on the absurd and completely contradict the nostalgic fallacy that players of the past played in gentlemanly accord with the rules.
Irritated with Gallacher's perpetual arguing, the referee threatened to book the Scottish striker.
When he was asked his name, Gallacher replied with typical arrogance, ‘If you don't know me, you've no business being on the field!
And what's your name?’
Clearly taken aback by the striker's impudence, the referee replied ‘I'm Mr Fogg’, to which Gallacher speedily replied ‘Aye and you've been in one all afternoon.’
If the dispute had ended there, the exchange of words would have passed into football folklore as further evidence of Gallacher's greatness, but the bad boy from Bellshill had only just begun.
Gallacher continued to argue with the referee throughout the game and followed him off the pitch at the end wagging his finger in the official's face.
When the temperature cooled down a few minutes later Gallacher headed to the referee's dressing room to apologise.
As he opened the door he saw the official, stripped naked, leaning over  the bath.
It was a moment of such farcical proportions that Gallacher could not resist.
He kicked the unfortunate Mr Fogg, shoving him head first into the bath.
The English FA took a draconian view of what was described as Gallacher's ‘improper conduct’ and he was suspended without pay for two months.
It was on an overseas tour with Newcastle that Gallacher earned the dubious notoriety of being the first player to be accused of being drunk in charge of a football.
In May 1929, Newcastle United played a series of European games in Italy, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Austria.
The tour was a disaster, Newcastle lost by two goals to Ambrosiana, the team that eventually transformed into Inter Milan, and were thrashed 8–1 by the crack Czech team FC Slovak.
By the time they arrived in Budapest to play a Hungarian select, the Magpies had lost interest and were beaten 4–1 in what by all accounts was more like a pitched battle than a football match.
Newcastle's fullback Maitland was sent off, followed almost inevitably by Hughie Gallacher after a fight with a Hungarian player.
As he headed for the sanctuary of the dressing-room, accompanied by armed soldiers, the home fans spat, threw coins and jeered at the tiny Scot.
After the game, Hungarian officials lodged a complaint against the Newcastle team, specifically Gallacher, accusing them of being drunk and disorderly.
The appearance money due to Newcastle was withheld.
Gallacher was on the verge of being deported and the team returned to England to face a full enquiry at the English FA Headquarters in Lancaster Gate.
Gallacher admitted at the enquiry that he and his team-mates had been thirsty prior to the game, and rinsed their mouths out with whisky and water.
The football authorities in England accepted the explanation and sided with Gallacher and the Newcastle team, probably as a gesture of national protocol rather than with the conviction that the Scot was telling the truth.
dressed to kill
There must be something in the Gallacher dynasty that provokes scandal.
If Hughie Gallacher was the first Scot to be accused of being drunk in charge of a football then his namesake, Patsy Gallacher, had already gone one better.
Very few transvestites have actually played for Scotland.
Patsy remains one of the very few sexual renegades who have dared to wear women's clothes in front of their teammates.
Patsy Gallacher was a ship-builder, who played for Celtic when they were a dominant force in Scottish football  in the first decade of the century.
He was one of the smallest players in the game and was known throughout his career as ‘The Mighty Atom’, a tribute to his size, speed and dexterity.
GONNA MAKE YOU AN OFFER YOU CAN'T REFUSE
At the height of Celtic's success, the club's disciplinarian manager Willie Maley took his team to a luxury hotel in Dunbar for a period of training and relaxation.
Even in the infant days of Scottish football, managers had realised the wisdom of a night-time curfew, and Gallacher and his team-mates were given strict instructions to remain in the hotel.
In what must rank as one of the most ingenious ruses in the history of Hampden Babylon , Patsy Gallacher struck up a relationship with the hotel chambermaid and borrowed her clothes for the night.
Dressed in a maid's outfit and disguised by a black veil, he wiggled through reception, bidding the club's manager goodnight in a high-pitched voice.
Willie Maley, a pearl among swine, dutifully held the door open for the departing damsel.
It was weeks later before he realised it was one of his team, heading for a dram in Dunbar High Street.
Patsy Gallacher went on to play for Celtic for 15 years and scored the winning goal in their famous cup-winning side of 1925, when he beat the entire Dundee defence and somersaulted into the net with the ball between his feet.
Although Celtic has had its fair share of scoundrels, none of their current stars, not even the rock'n'roll Pole, Dariusz Dziekanowski, have gone to such admirable lengths for a late drink.
If Patsy had a penchant for a pretty frock, Hughie Gallacher had a drink problem.
He was a long way from being an alcoholic, but he was vulnerable to heavy social  drinking and was a sucker for the old Scottish adage ‘One For The Road’.
During his period at Newcastle and later in his career when he briefly played for Grimsby Town, Gallacher was known to drink with fans in pubs near the ground, and on more than one occasion a search party had to be sent to get him in time for the kick-off.
It is reassuring to know that Gallacher was one of the players chosen to represent Scotland when the national team played its first overseas international against France in May 1930.
The team included the Celtic goalkeeper Johnny Thomson playing one of his last games for Scotland a few months before his tragic death.
The team also included two of Gallacher's sparring partners, the Huddersfield Town winger Alec Jackson and Aberdeen's bustling striker Alec Cheyne.
Neither of them could be described as a sobering influence.
In a premonition of things to come, the team were under strict instructions to respect a curfew imposed the night before the game.
Knowing the Scots were in town, the ‘Moulin Rouge’ warmed up for a busy night, and predictably Gallacher led a rabble of players through the hotel window to the forbidden pleasures of Parisian life.
Scotland won 2–O, the offending players were censured, and the ritual of the broken curfew began its long and illustrious career as one of Scottish football's greatest contributions to the game.
Later that month, the former Rangers and Scotland forward Andy Cunningham was appointed manager of Newcastle and although he had played alongside Gallacher in the Scotland team a few years before, there was no great bond between the two.
‘Once Cunningham arrived as boss,’ Hughie once said, ‘I knew my days were numbered.’
The two players came from different sides of the Scottish footballing psyche.
Gallacher was a renegade, a prototype of the Scottish Babylonian, a  skilful but troublesome footballer always at war with the world and perpetually trying to be ‘gallus’.
He was the natural ancestor of Jim Baxter, Jimmy Johnstone and the rascals that followed them into Scotland shirts.
Cunningham was a rationalist, a member of that more stern, censorious and dour breed that was to produce disciplinarian managers like Bill Struth of Rangers, Jock Stein of Celtic and Jim McLean of Dundee United.
Throughout the history of Scotland's footballing scandals, a titanic struggle between wild-men and disciplinarians would be played out, again and again.
This time discipline won and Hughie Gallacher was transferred south to Chelsea.
the smoke gets in your eyes
London had never witnessed a footballer quite like Hughie Gallacher.
In his opening game he scored twice in a 6–2 victory over Manchester United and continued to score with astounding regularity throughout the season.
His encounters off the field became even more dramatic.
He was arrested for disorderly conduct after a fight with a gang of Fulham fans outside a cafe in London's Walham Green.
On another occasion he was spotted by an opposing Derby  County player lying drunk in the street the night before an important league match, a scene that he repeated on several occasions in London's late-night jazz clubs.
By 1932 Gallacher had been joined at Chelsea by his two fellow internationalists Jackson and Cheyne and the three Scots became the focus of an acrimonious dispute about wages, trade unionism and bonus payments.
In what amounted to a fledgling display of player-power and a dress rehearsal for the player's campaign to secure greater freedom of contract, the Scots players argued bitterly with the Chelsea board.
Jackson was virtually forced out of the game at the age of 26 and never played professionally again, and Cheyne was driven overseas to the French club Nimes.
Only Gallacher survived.
But not for long.
farewell my lovely
Throughout his days at Chelsea, Gallacher had been contesting a long and painful divorce case with his first wife.
He had lost the first action in 1926, failed on appeal and finally won the action in 1934.
After years of expensive legal fees, the court revealed that Gallacher had debts of £787, a massive sum for the times, and he was declared bankrupt.
It was at this crisis point in his career, now aged 32, that Gallacher signed for Derby County.
A £200 signing on fee was paid directly to London's Carey Street Bankruptcy Court.
Hughie Gallacher's career was a microcosm of the kind of scandals that would decorate Scottish football over the next 50 years.
Drink, on-field violence, erratic behaviour, public notoriety, breaches of the peace, disputes with management, broken curfews, acrimonious transfers, divorce, headlines, bankruptcy and skirmishes with the law were to become the unofficial milestones which marked Scottish football's ascent into the realm of creative corruption.
Sadly, for Hughie Gallacher, the man with the magic feet, the man with the greatest goal scoring ratio that ever played for Scotland, the worst was still to come.
GALLACHER & SON 1950
In May 1957, seven years after his wife Hannah had died of a heart attack, Hughie Gallacher hit rock bottom.
Drink was an increasingly important and self-deceiving prop in his life.
He had long since retired from competitive football and like his tragic contemporary, the boxer Benny Lynch, Gallacher only had memories to live on.
After a domestic fight, his son Matthew was taken into care by the NSPCC, and was summoned to appear before Gateshead Magistrates Court, charged with child abuse.
The day before the case was due to be heard, Gallacher walked towards the railway line near his Gateshead home.
As he passed two small boys on the banking, he brushed against one of them and simply mumbled ‘Sorry’.
It was Gallacher's last goodbye.
Driven to the edge of despair and traumatised by the prospect of a court-case that deeply injured his pride, he threw himself in front of an express train bound for Edinburgh.
Hughie Gallacher was killed instantly and the decapitated body of one of Scotland's greatest footballers lay by a railway line near Gateshead in contorted peace.
The Newcastle Journal's final epithet was a simple but sentimental headline.
‘Hughie Of The Magic Feet Is Dead’.
GALLACHER & SON 195O
Jim Baxter
the birth of the blues brothers
Despite the forces of law and order, The Kray Twins have emerged as the most enduring and romanticised figures of the pernicious underside of '60s society.
They instigated a reign of terror in London's East End, controlling their manor with a ruthless disregard for others.
But there was something about them, maybe their mohair suits, maybe the hard men they imported from Glasgow or maybe their bonding as brothers that made them seem  glamorous .
The Kray Twins were pure London.
The way they manipulated their gang members, the way they deferred to their adoring mother Vi and the way they disposed of smalltime enemies like George Cornell and Jack ‘The Hat’ McVittie, were all done with a tangled misunderstanding of vice and virtue.
In the confused laws of the cockney underworld, they were good blokes in the community they terrorised.
But the Kray Twins had no hold outside London, where myths were woven in different cloth.
Scotland was well endowed with its own gangsters in the '60s, but local sociology ensured that most of them never became famous, unless of course they spent a lifetime suffering in brutal prison cells and re-emerged as award-winning sculptors.
In '60s Scotland, local hard men like Jimmy Boyle didn't have a look in, the role of working-class hero was inevitably played by footballers, and in particular a group of young men who dressed in a continental style and made The Kray Twins look like artless thugs.
In the demonology of Scottish football, Jim Baxter and Denis Law were the personification of the '60s.
Dressed in Italian loafers and blessed with an elegance that even the most swinging Londoner was yet to discover, they were football's likely lads and the undisputed leaders of the gang.
Jim Baxter will always have a special place in Scottish football.
Scandal came easy to him, it was simply a way of life, a way of raising himself above the ordinariness of his upbringing in Fife.
Born and raised in Hill O'Beath, one of the unfashionable heartlands of Scottish Junior football, Baxter was wafer-thin and in the persona of ‘Slim Jim’, he rose to become one of the most elegant and arrogant players in the game.
Slim Jim Baxter will always be cherished for his brilliant and belligerent performance against England at Wembley in 1967.
He acted out all the schoolboy fantasies, weaving his way past English defenders with consummate ease, beckoning them to take the ball with gestures of smug superiority, scoring now and again, and sitting on the ball when being brilliant became a bore.
It was national absolution: they won the World Cup but we played football.
Baxter encapsulated the '60s.
He had everything, the mod sense of dress, an upwardly mobile lifestyle, a healthy contempt for authority and a irrepressible belief in his own creativity.
But like most of his colleagues in Hampden Babylon he had an uncanny knack of pushing the self-destruct button.
His career never produced the rewards his   talent merited, he frequently turned to drink as a way of escaping football's built-in disappointments, ounce by ounce the slim frame turned to flab, and in the end Baxter turned ‘60s social mobility on its head, grabbing failure from the jaws of success.
PAT CRERAND AND JIM BAXTER PREPARE FOR ANOTHER SCOTTISH MISSION
As a footballer, Baxter travelled each and every highway.
‘I don't possess a mansion with a swimming-pool, a Rolls in the garage, and a business to pay for it all,’ he admitted in a recent biography.
‘The fault is mine.
The choice was mine, and knowing myself well enough — I think — there wasn't any other way.’
There was.
But Jim Baxter wouldn't take it.
The self-destructive streak in Scottish football is a legacy that has been handed down from Hughie Gallacher in the '20s to Mo Johnston in the present day, but it finds its most bloated expression in Slim Jim, a player whose massive reputation was built on his slender athletic frame but whose downfall has been a rake's progress of late nights, seedy bars and relentless beer bellies.
Throughout his schoolboy days Baxter was a Hibernian fan, enchanted by the Edinburgh club's Famous Five forward line, and in particular the intelligent skills of the Scottish internationalist Gordon Smith.
As miner in the Fife coalfields, he blew most of £7 a week on trips to Edinburgh to buy clothes, firstly the drape suits and the boot-lace ties of the old Teddy Boy style, then on signing for Raith Rovers, the more tutored continental clothing that was to become his hallmark in the '60s.
Baxter's career at Raith Rovers flourished and it was only a matter of time before he became won of Scotland's most sought after young stars.
In what seems like a scene from ‘How Green was My Valley’— or in Baxter's case ‘How Blue Was My Nose?— he was still working shifts at Fordel Colliery when his name was associated with the Scotland under 23 team.
Full-time football and a career at a more  glamorous club were both a matter of time.
black watch beatle
Jim Baxter was transferred to Rangers for £27, 000 but in a strange inter-club arrangement he was retained at Starks Park for a further three months.
In July 1960, literally weeks after Baxter officially arrived at Ibrox the military moved in.
Someone at general command had a great idea, a cheap-rate sequel to GI Blues in which a young Scottish footballer plays the part of a handsome conscript.
Elvis Baxter, the right-half with the rock ‘n’ roll style was on his way to Perth and a period of basic training with Scotland's most physically demanding regiment The Black Watch.
Baxter's military career was a resolute failure, it proved beyond reasonable doubt that the codes of discipline would never tame Slim Jim.
Although his ‘cultured left foot’ helped Rangers to three championships, four league cups and three Scottish cup victories, Baxter was as much a star off the pitch as on it.
He became a cult figure in Glasgow, stalking the streets in leather pork-pie hats, wandering into darkened pubs wearing shades, and setting up an unofficial headquarters in the lounge of the St Enoch's Hotel where he could survey the talent and go about the more important business of being Baxter.
Prior to the '60s Glasgow Rangers had an image built on iron discipline.
It had been welded over the preceding decades by the authoritarianism of manager Bill Struth, staunch Presbyterian traditions, the famous ‘iron curtain’ defence and tough captains like Big George Young.
At last the bastion had met his match, a fly-boy from Fife, who was out to prove he was bigger than the club itself.
In his single-button Italian Suits, Jim Baxter was adamant that he would live life to the full and fashion the club's alternative image.
He became ‘The Lone Ranger’ a player who seemed to want to disprove the old disciplinary theory that no player is bigger than the club.
Throughout his year as a Rangers player, Baxter flaunted his style, flouted authority and bended the club's hard and fast rules to breaking point.
He loathed the institutions, avoiding the club's blazer and tie in favour of more unorthodox clothes, and along with his partner in '60s style, Denis Law, he preferred his strip to hang scruffily outside his shorts.
He was Scotland's first official pop star, a Black Watch Beatle used to crawling home when the dancing turned out.
At a time when the rivalry between Rangers and Celtic was rising to a new level of competitiveness, Baxter turned tradition on its head, and befriended a group of like minded Celtic players.
Although the more  bigoted supporters resented his corrosive friendship, the blue and the green frequently enjoyed nights out at Hampden Bowling Alley divided in the minds of Glasgow by religion but united in their common interest in Bacardi and blondes.
THIS REGIMENT BELIEVES IN ORDER, DISCIPLINE & THE STRICTEST CODES OF CONDUCT, SO YOU WON'T BE HERE LONG’,
After a morning pretending to train hard, Baxter would lead a stream of Ibrox reprobates to his St Enoch's lair.
By his own admission, football and fly moves had to be executed with equal style.
His memories of the period are a mixture of Glasgow patter-merchant and re-cycled Hollywood cool: he was a Blues Brother who had never been to Chicago.
‘Comfortably ensconced in front of the TV set, with a handy line to the bookmaker, we would have a pleasant  afternoon with champagne, smoked sandwiches and the like.’
But with typical Baxter arrogance there was always a twist.
‘Naturally, I arranged for the bill to be sent to Ibrox,’ he added, barely disguising his contempt for dull issues like club discipline.
Baxter's hatred for authority did not end at the foot of Ibrox's hallowed stairway.
Like so many of his partners in the  glamorous underground of Scottish football, he was perpetually at loggerheads with the Scottish Football Association, and saw the administrators of the game as artless bureaucrats obsessed with rules and regulation.
At the peak of Slim Jim's career, the secretary of SFA was Willie Allen, an administrator with a rigid adherence to the letter of the law.
Baxter used to delight in taunting him with the nickname ‘Oor Wullie’ and in his biography described Allen as ‘a pillar of the church, a model of rectitude and, not to labour the point, a pompous pain in the neck.’
Willie Allen and Jim Baxter clashed on many occasions but by far the most bizarre was the Scottish cup final replay of 1963 when Baxter played an influential role in Rangers 3–0 victory over Celtic.
At the end of the game, Baxter stole the ball, stuffed it up his jersey and despite the requests of the gigantic Clarkston referee Tommy ‘Tiny’ Wharton, he swaggered off the pitch imitating a heavily pregnant woman.
In the dressing-room after the game, the victorious Rangers team presented the ball to the ‘Wee Prime Minister’, Ian McMillan, the club's veteran inside forward who was about to retire.
SLIM JIM.
BAXTER AT HIS HEIGHT, SCORES FOR RANGERS
THE BLACK WATCH BEATLE.
JIM BAXTER INSPECTS HIS KIT AT THE BLACK WATCH BARRACKS IN PERTH
In what must rank as one of the most petty letters ever to emerge from the SFA, an organisation that has never been known for its broad-mindedness, the secretary demanded that the ball be returned.
‘The ball belongs to us,’ whined Willie Allan's letter, ‘and if it doesn't turn up we will take steps to see that it does.
There is no question of the SFA turning a blind eye to the incident…
If we ignore the business, then it would be a case of the law of the jungle taking over.’
A ball was dispatched to the SFA but it was a dodgy replacement and the issue was dropped.
Throughout his career with Rangers, Sunderland, Nottingham   Forest and Scotland, Baxter befriended players cast in a similar mould, that army of renegades who were born with a natural gift for football but were easily disenchanted with the disciplinary structures of the professional game.
Along with the Dundee and Chelsea forward, Charlie Cooke, Baxter had a notorious reputation for shirking training.
MAFIA BEWARE SLIM JIM IN FULL MOBSTER STYLE PLANS ANOTHER ESCAPADE
In 1966, he was chosen to represent Scotland in a friendly against Eusebio's Portugal at Hampden.
Cooke and Baxter followed the ritualistic path to the local bars, breaking an enforced curfew, and staggered back to the hotel at 4.00 am where, predictably, they were caught by trainer Walter McRae.
The next morning, in what must rank as one of the most undignified clashes between authority and undisciplined players, Cooke and Baxter were forced to do press-ups until they were physically sick in front of their team-mates.
Baxter's lust for clothes, drink and women became a legend in Glasgow.
Many footballers have matched him for decadence but few have lived out their decline quite as publicly as Slim Jim.
In the parlance of Scotland's street — talk, Baxter was ‘dead gallus’, everything had to be done with a swagger and a smile.
He was a regular at fashionable Glasgow nightclubs like ‘La Ronde’ in Sauchiehall Street but when the mood took him, which was most nights ending with a ‘Y’, he would wander into corner pubs and hold court.
If Baxter's ‘gallus’ personality was his trademark it was also the seeds of his downfall.
The warning signs were written large one famous night in Vienna in December 1964.
With Rangers two goals up, Baxter was stamping his mazy authority on the game.
At times his ball play bordered on creative terrorism as he taunted the Austrian opposition; it was Wembley envisaged, but this time disaster struck.
Baxter's right shinbone was broken after a clash with Rapide Vienna's tough centre-half Skocik.
Stretchered home in a plaster cast, Baxter reflected on his own part in his downfall, ‘I probably took the mickey too much,’ he said.
‘A frustrated player can strike out in anger.
I asked for it.’
STRETCHER-CASE.
JIM BAXTER IS FLOWN HOME FROM VIENNA AFTER RANGERS' 2–0 EUROPEAN CUP WIN AGAINST RAPID IN DECEMBER 1914
baby you can drive my car
Pushing the system to the limit was Slim Jim's most significant role in life.
One of the favourite stories in Baxter's bewildering repertoire of personal anecdotes tells of his friendship with the great Hungarian player Ferenc Puskas, who he first met in 1963 when Baxter was chosen to represent a World Select against England.
No one is quite sure whether Baxter's stories are fact or fiction but like that other legendary wordsmith, the former Liverpool manager Bill Shankly, Slim Jim never let reality get in the way of a good yarn.
Baxter and Puskas renewed their friendship a few years later in Glasgow when Real Madrid came to play a European Cup against Rangers.
After the match, Baxter allegedly took Puskas on a right royal bender which ended in a flat in Drumchapel, an area not normally associated with high class society.
The two ended up in a night of drunken sex in separate beds in one of the city's most infamous housing schemes.
Had genealogy been kinder to Scotland that night of illegitimate sex might have produced two players around whom Jock Stein could have moulded the Scotland team of the early '80s.
Although Baxter's career coincided with some of Scottish football's most flamboyant characters including Charlie Cooke, Billy Bremner and Wee Willie Henderson, his most loyal partner was his own cousin, the Sunderland player George Kinnell.
By an unfortunate twist of fate, Sunderland were to experience the full might of the cousins playing in the same team.
Ian McColl, the former Scotland boss, had taken over as manager of the English First Division side and gratefully paid £70,000 for Baxter.
After years of straining the system at Ibrox, Slim Jim, the player whose skill defined the great Rangers team of the early '60s, was transferred to England.
Baxter and Kinnell were football's answer to Jake and Elwood.
Bound by family ties and always capable of influencing each other for the worse, they prowled the hotel bars of Britain as the Blues Brothers, dressed in single — breasted suits, presenting their manager with a wealth of disciplinary problems.
After a midweek game in London, the cousins went on to a two-day binge.
On the return train journey to Sunderland, they were told that a group of journalists were waiting at Sunderland station, forcing the two players to decamp at Durham and sneak home via the back door.
Baxter was fined £300 by the club.
If the police were to open their vaults on footballers it would make Hercule Poirot  .
Jim Baxter's name would crop up more often than Ronnie Biggs.
In 1969 he was fined £25 at Dunfermline Sheriff Court and was disqualified for driving for a year for failing to give police a  blood or urine sample.
He had been arrested a few hours after a friendly between Rangers and Cowdenbeath and appeared in police records under his full title James Curran Baxter.
Although he had a stylish vulnerability when it came to cars, driving was not Baxter's strong point.
In 1982 he was back in court for further charges.
Baxter's BMW was involved in a collision with another car near his home in Bearsden.
Jim—who by this time was not quite so slim — was fined £415 and banned for six months.
After his playing career ended, Baxter took the inevitable route into pub management.
For years his pub in Glasgow's Paisley Road West was a Mecca for itinerant football fans, attracted by Baxter's bonhomie and by his inexhaustible supply of soccer stories.
in 1971 the pub attracted the police's attention when a supply of electrical goods were found on the premises.
He was acquitted of charges of resetting stolen property and being involved in what his defence lawyer Joseph Beltrami described as ‘a rogue's bargain’.
If the Scottish police files have their reasons to remember Baxter then their counterparts in Vancouver could add their ten dollars worth.
In the late '60s Sunderland were invited to the USA and Canada to take part in a summer tournament with Aberdeen and Dundee United.
For Baxter and George Kinnell it was an opportunity for a spot of transatlantic trouble and on arrival at their luxury hotel, the cousins ordered huge quantities of drink to be brought from a local liquor store.
They willingly paid cash.
But all was not well.
In a transaction that has never fully been explained, and to this day baffles Baxter, the two Scottish players handed over counterfeit Canadian dollars, and within hours were facing police accusations that they were involved in a forgery ring.
Charges were never pressed and the image of Scottish football lived to die another day.
Partnership is one of the fundamental flaws of football.
Players on tour are normally paired together as room-mates, a simple organisational expedient that over the years has created an explosive chemistry of scandal and misbehaviour.
However diligently the football authorities in Scotland have tried to manage the psychologies and sensibilities of the national team, they have inevitably put the wrong people, in the wrong room at the wrong time.
As one former Scottish team manager put it, ‘Picking a team is easy, getting them to bed is heartbreaking.’
la dolce vita In the great partnerships of Scottish football some names stand out more than others.
Tommy Gemmell and Bertie Auld were a thorn in Jock Stein's side.
Soon after Celtic's European Cup success he was forced to send them home from a pre-season American tour when their behaviour failed to meet his standards.
Bremner and Jimmy Johnstone made Willie Ormond's period as Scotland manager into a nightmare of infuriating incidents and in the '60s, the city of Turin was to be treated to some memorable scandals when Denis Law and Joe Baker both signed for the Italian League side Torino.
If Jim Baxter — the pit-boy turned pop star — was one of Scotland's most  glamorous working-class heroes in the '60s, then Denis Law was a worthy rival.
Born in Aberdeen, the son of a trawlerman, Law joined Huddersfield Town from school in 1955, despite the club's reservations about his stature.
Law was a frail kid with a squint that national health glasses could barely disguise, but his control of a football was awe inspiring.
After five years in Yorkshire he was transferred to Manchester City for £56,000 and a year later made the fateful move to Torino.
His spell in Italian football was a disaster and he eagerly accepted the chance to join Manchester United for a record fee of £115,000.
After winning two league championship medals at Old Trafford, Law eventually returned on a free transfer to Maine Road.
In 1964 he was voted European Footballer of the Year and in a long career with Scotland he won 55 caps and earned the interchangeable nicknames ‘Denis The Menace’ or simply ‘The King’.
It would be a disservice to Denis Law to mention him in the same breath as some of Scotland's more notorious hell-raisers.
He was not the most guilty man to pull on a navy-blue jersey, but he was hardly an angel either.
Unlike Jim Baxter, who was over subscribed with confidence, Law was a more nervous and reluctant anti-hero, a blonde on the fringes of misadventure.
Throughout his career he seemed to be around when it happened but the finger of accusation rarely pointed in his direction.
In Italy his partner was the surrogate Scot, Joe Baker; at Manchester United he teamed up in a devastating  triumvirate with George Best and Pat Crerand, and at international matches he was part of a group of wayward senior players including Billy Bremner and Jimmy Johnstone.
THE SLIM UNDERBELLY OF SCOTTISH FOOTBALL
Law's period in Italy was particularly prone to incident.
He was one of the first British footballers to play in   the highly competitive Italian league and throughout his short stay in Turin he regularly appeared in the tabloid press alongside actresses like Sophia Loren and Gina  Lollibrigida , as part of Italy's mythical La Dolce Vita: the sweet-life of  cappuccino , Ferraris and Gucci shoes.
Predictably, the designer charm of '60s Italy was to be rudely interrupted by Law and Baker.
Denis Law
‘I'LL TAKE THE NEAR POST, YOU GET PISSED ON ‘WOGAN’.’
GEORGE BEST TAKES SOME TACTICAL ADVICE FROM THE VISIONARY DENIS LAW.
Law arrived at Torino when the club were desperately trying to recapture their status as one of Italy's major clubs.
In 1949, Torino had been the victims of one of the worst air disasters in footballing history when their championship team, including the great Italian captain Valentino Mazzolla, were killed when the team's aeroplane crashed into the Superga hillside outside Turin.
Mazzolla's infant son, Allesandro , was raised by his mother and became a prominent Italian internationalist in the '60s, scoring Milan's only goal against Celtic in the European Cup Final in 1967.
With a whole generation of players wiped out, Torino's fortunes slumped and they faded under the shadow of their great local rivals Juventus.
Law and Baker's joint transfer was greeted as the second coming.
It was around these two precocious strikers that Torino intended to reclaim their rightful crown as the city's top club.
It proved to be a naive if eventful wish.
Law and Baker had huge problems adjusting to the more cynical professionalism of Italian football.
On the pitch they were easy targets for unscrupulous defenders and were frequently cautioned for retaliatory violence.
In one incident against Lanerossi, Law retaliated against the rugged defender Fusato, and in Law's heavily ironic words ‘accidentally’ stamped on his ankle.
He was sent off and fined £10 and banned for one game.
In a stunning leap of logic Torino fined him a further £200 when he failed to take the field the following week against Inter-Milan.
The monastic discipline of the Italian game proved equally trying.
Both Law and  Baxter liked a good time, but language problems, an over-attentive press and the sheer tedium of living in a big city hotel, conspired against them.
Incidents were sure to follow.
At an away game in Venice, Law and Baker decided to take a late night stroll along the banks of the Grand Canal.
With journalists stalking their every move, Baker flipped.
He turned on the cameraman, assaulted him and threw his camera into the water.
Italy's delighted  paparazzi  were watching and got the story of the season.
With the Italian press still buzzing with the story of the Grand Canal assault, Denis Law's brother Joe arrived for a short holiday from Aberdeen.
In order to break the boredom of hanging around hotels sipping soft drinks—Torino had advisedly banned Law and Baker from drinking alcohol in public—the three men took off in Baker's Alfa Romeo sports car.
The image of '60s decadence was to end in further disaster.
The car ran out of control and all three were stretchered to hospital; Law was fortunate but Baker had a broken nose and a badly injured eye.
La Dolce vita had turned unimaginably sour and it was not long before the Italian stallions were heading back to the English First Division.
Baxter and Law's careers were small but significant commentaries on '60s society.
The social mobility of the era allowed them to rise from apparently mundane working class communities to live a more  glamorous life in the company of the rich and famous.
As the continuing rise of pop music consumed footballers in its circus of celebrity and style, a new breed of players including George Best and Peter Marinello began to gauge their appeal by hairstyles as much as half chances.
In a permissive society where officialdom and authority were being questioned at every turn, misbehaviour and impetuousness became a badge of courage and style.
Rebellion was a mark of achievement more than a sign of weakness.
Pop music had Lennon, Jagger and Keith Moon; the world of fashion and photography had David Bailey; the nightclubs had Christine Keeler and the underworld of crime had the Kray Twins.
In the far north beyond the celebrity of swinging London, Scottish football had its own particular hold on style and scandal.
Jim Baxter, Denis Law, Willie Henderson, Charlie Cooke and a thousand young pretenders, some special, some sad and some whose names would appear on team-sheets when the '60s were long gone.
In a profile of Denis Law written in 1962 the late great Scottish journalist John Rafferty summarised the '60s in a few short condemnatory words.
He was describing Denis Law but it could have been this era.
Rafferty found Law to be ‘expensive, aggressive, big-headed, eccentric, moody and petulant.
He was a scandal.’
God knows what he thought of Slim Jim Baxter.
BRING ON THE WORLD.
TWO OF SCOTLAND'S GREATEST PLAYERS DENIS LAW AND JIM BAXTER TRAIN TOGETHER
will you still need me will you still feed me when i'm sixty-four
UNDER THE INFLUENCE.
PETER MARINELLO (FAR RIGHT) JOINS SCOTLAND'S UNDER-23 SQUAD FOR THE GAME AGAINST ENGLAND IN 1970.
HE IS JOINED BY TOMMY MCLEAN & BILLY DICKSON OF KILMARNOCK & THE EVERGREEN WILLIE JOHNSON
Scottish football is littered with morality tales but none of them capture the tragedy of success quite like the story of Peter Marinello.
The 19 year old Hibernian winger with his jet black hair, flamboyant skills and star-struck image was the typical innocent abroad, a player of immense natural talent who was lured to London, to find fame and fortune, but found a city caught in the fanfare of pop culture, desperate for another toy to play with.
They must have seen him coming.
Marinello rose to fame on the back of one of Hibernian's greatest eras.
On a famous night at Easter Road in 1967, the Hibees dismantled the Italian side Napoli, putting five goals past the legendary Italian keeper Dino Zoff.
Over the next few years, they re-established themselves as one of the most  skilful and attack-minded teams in Scotland.
In a side which included Pat Stanton, Peter Cormack, Colin Stein and John Blackley, the teenage Marinello quickly became one of the rising young stars of Scottish football.
The wheel of fortune played tantalising tricks on Peter Marinello.
His boyish good looks, his jet-black Beatle cut and the unusual film-star name which was a product of his Italian parentage, made him a magnet for instant attention.
Unfortunately his looks and to some extent his adventurous playing style provoked easy comparisons with George Best, the ultimate wayward genius.
Best's skills mesmerised defenders and charmed the fans but his lifestyle attracted the press, the police and the parasitic attention of the Creatures who thrive on the back of stardom.
Marinello was cast in his likeness.
In what must now rank as one of the most well worn cliches of modern football, Peter Marinello was dubbed ‘The Scottish George Best’, and with predictable results, the machinery of pop music, fashion and advertising pursued the young Hibernian player as if he was guaranteed to be the next big thing.
The careers of George Best and Peter Marinello parallel each other with pathetic symmetry.
Best was always the more gifted and famous.
From his origins in Protestant East Belfast, his exhilarating ball control and deceptive change of pace marked him out as a unique prospect in an area accustomed to discovering football talent.
From his foreboding beginnings as a homesick teenager at Manchester United,
Best suppressed his shyness and awkward incoherence to become one of the rising stars of Matt Busby's famous '60s side.
Alongside the effervescent Denis Law and his unofficial minder, the ex-Celtic half-back Pat Crerand, Best enchanted the Stretford End by day and the dancefloors of Manchester's discotheques by night.
On one notorious incident, Crerand was fined for assaulting a man who dared to disappear with Best's girlfriend.
Marinello never had Best's capacity for drink nor did he share his good fortune when it came to choosing clubs.
Best played at Old Trafford during Manchester United's modern  heyday , Marinello was consigned to an Arsenal side never quite sure whether it was mediocre or downright crap.
The heights of Best's career are easily brought to mind the night he destroyed Benfica in the 1966 European Cup quarter-finals, the night in 1967 in Belfast when he was sent off after single-handedly dismantling a superior Scotland side, and of course the famous night in 1968 when he led Manchester United to a European Cup victory in extra time.
The career   of Peter Marinello is much harder to piece together: highlights were something you had in your hair.
The Arsenal manager Bertie Mee watched Marinello on a good day.
He tore the heart out of Rangers at Ibrox scoring two goals in a 3–1 Hibernian victory and soon after the game Arsenal paid the fashionable sum of £100,000 for what one of their board of directors described as ‘the nearest thing in football to The Beatles’.
By the end of the season it was apparent that Arsenal had signed the nearest thing in football to David Berry and The Cruisers.
Marinello's arrival at Arsenal was greeted like the second coming.
His transfer was reported on the Nine O'Clock News , he was swamped by media attention, he was given a lucrative contract to advertise milk and even appeared on 20-foot advertising hoardings throughout London.
‘I didn't realise I was a commodity rather than a footballer,’ he said self-consciously ten years later.
‘I wish I'd understood it more at the time.’
To compound the hype, Peter Marinello played a blinder in his first game at Arsenal, scoring a goal against Manchester United to the delight of the Arsenal faithful.
A few days later he was ghost writing his own columns, succumbing to the flirtatious attention of some of London's most infamous debs, having voice tests for his first hit single, drawing £500 in wages and huge sums from advertising and personal appearances.
But the wheel lurched out of control.
In the next 50 matches Marinello only scored another three goals, he was dropped by Arsenal and one by one his new friends in the press and the pop business deserted him.
Marinello's drift into melancholy uncannily predicted the future that Charlie Nicholas would have to endure when he moved from Celtic to Arsenal two decades later.
During a period of pitiful loneliness and depression, Marinello made the ill-advised decision to compromise his skills and try to win his way back into the Arsenal first team as an auxiliary midfield player rather than an avaricious dribbler.
It failed miserably and after rancorous and protracted argument with Arsenal, he was transferred to Portsmouth in the lower depths of the English Second Division.
To be dismissed as a failure at 21 years old was depressing enough, but Marinello's experiences at Portsmouth brought no let up.
After only five days in the south coast town, he was charged with drunk driving after his mini-clubman car collided with a motor-scooter.
Defending Marinello, a local solicitor Mr Richard Hewitt was at pains to point out that the accident was not a by-product of ‘Swinging London’ nor the result of a reckless bender.
‘It was not a drunken spree,’ he told the court.
‘It was a very quiet dinner party with his wife.’
The Muscadet had clearly mellowed Marinello.
He was well over the limit and was banned from driving for a year.
After an unfortunate and ill-timed brush with the law, it was almost impossible for Marinello to arrest his downward spiral.
He returned to Scotland to play for Motherwell but in 1978 set his sights on London yet again.
In his debut for Fulham on Boxing Day 1978 he played a miraculous game against Cambridge United, and the media hype threatened to rekindle itself.
as if frightened by more unwanted exposure Marinello crept back into his shell.
After periods with Hearts and the American club Phoenix Infernos, he settled in Edinburgh and bought two pubs, an ill-advised business venture which eventually collapsed.
Now at his lowest ebb, Marinello can reflect on life in the fast lane.
His house was re-possessed.
His marriage has collapsed and he lives in the south of England with his two sons.
He claims he has lost over £250,000 in his life and at the age of 40 is forced to survive on state  benefits of £63.
The nearest thing to The Beatles now lives in a modest flat near Brighton.
Throughout his career, Marinello was forced to live in the shadow of George Best; he could never match the Irishman's natural skill and in his defence, he never demonstrated Best's incredible appetite for self-destruction.
When they fell from grace, George Best fell from a greater height.
Throughout the '80s, when Marinello lived out his decline in quiet pain, Best paraded his drink problem through the press and on one memorable occasion humiliated himself in front of a nationwide audience on Wogan.
Fortified by a few bottles of champagne, he told a disbelieving audience that his main love in life was ‘screwing’.
In an interview that trawled the depths of self-pity and degradation, Best emerged from his pool of drunkenness for a brief moment when he lucidly described England's football team as ‘shit’.
Best's decline was conducted in the full glare of self seeking publicity.
Marinello's was played out in relative obscurity.
By a strange quirk of fate, Best ultimately joined Hibernian, the team Marinello graced as a teenager.
What had Easter Road done to deserve both of them?
As Best defied his own name and went from bad to worse, the former United star had pellets injected into his stomach in a failed bid to combat alcoholism; he spent time in jail for drunk driving, police assault and jumping bail, and at his most desperate offered his services to any football team willing to pay £1,000 to include him in their team.
One of his last appearances in Scottish football was playing as a mercenary for Scone Thistle in the Perthshire juvenile league.
For Best and Marinello the George and Ringo of football stardom was a thing of the past and as the ‘60s receded into the '90s all that was left was a future that football would ultimately disown.
Will you still need me, will you still feed me when I'm sixty-four?
FOR RICHER FOR POORER.
PETER MARINELLO MARRIES JOYCE MURRAY.
THEIR MARRIAGE COLLAPSED WHEN MARINELLO'S CAREER HIT THE SKIDS
READING THE RIOT ACT.
WILLIE JOHNSON IN A SORRY STATE
BLACK EYED BOBBY.
CELTIC'S BOBBY MURDOCH BEARS THE HALLMARK OF ANOTHER LEAGUE ENCOUNTER
THE SWEET SCIENCE OF BRUISING.
RANGERS’ WINGER, WILLIE WEE HENDERSON, SPORTS A SERIOUS KEEKER
BAND AID BILLY BREMNER SIGNS ON THE DOTTED LINE
RIPPED OFF.
DENIS LAW RETREATS IN TATTERS
battered and bruised
what shall we do with the drunken sailor
There is a song in the repertoire of Scottish football fans which reflects unkindly on the character of those gallant heroes who have made untold sacrifices to represent their country.
The song is usually sung when the fans are possessed with passion and wandering through the streets of some unsuspecting city on the way to a match.
It is a story of disrepute.
‘We drink beer, we drink wine.
We're the Scotland forward-line.’
The fact that Scotland fans seek refuge in a debauched image of the team reflects a special relationship between the supporters, their heroes and a magical elixir called bevvy.
THE ‘TIC ON TOUR: JIMMY JOHNSTONE WITH NOTHING TO DECLARE
Stories of drink and debauchery are legion with Scottish football.
Every fan has a personal memory, a wild weekend at Wembley, a night at the dancing, a rammy at the taxi-rank, and sooner or later a Scottish footballer staggers through the story adding a new level of absurdity to the proceedings.
Some are true, some are false, most have been embroidered in the interests of enjoyment and several have been told so often they are part of the apocryphal armada of football.
So what really happened the night that Jimmy Johnstone set sail on the seven seas?
It was a tranquil, Spring night on the Ayrshire coast.
Local fishermen pulled in their nets, seagulls hovered elegantly over-head, a mild breeze caressed the coast, the ripple of the incoming tide would have made Barbara Cartland swoon.
The only noise that could be heard above the gentle contentment of seaside Scotland was the sound of the national team arriving at the Queens Hotel in Largs.
This was no ordinary bus-load.
Among the merry passengers were a group of Scotland's most adventurous old tars, hell bent on celebrating a mid-week victory over Wales.
In order to avoid inflicting worry and pain on the long suffering team manager Willie Ormond, a gang of players bypassed the hotel and headed for the sanctuary of a nearby bar which was owned by a generous Scotland fan called Ross Bowie.
The drinking session that followed stretched until 4.00 am; the players disproving the theory that time and tide wait for no man.
Time was never called and the tide was soon to discover it was on a hiding to nothing.
As the drink flowed, two of the team's most ancient mariners, the captain Billy Bremner and his legendary bosun Denis Law told tales of yore and led their gallant crew in a hearty chorus of merry football shanties.
As they finally rose to leave, it became obvious that one of the crew had spliced the mainbrace once too often.
Jimmy Johnstone, the outstanding Celtic winger whose mesmerising dribbling skills had earned him the nickname ‘Jinky’, was busy mesmerising himself.
By his own admission, the man who had won a European Cup medal destroying the best defences in Europe was having trouble finding the door.
As the merry band rolled noisily back to the team headquarters along the sea-front at Largs, they indulged in what football managers often describe as ‘horseplay’.
It is a peculiar expression but one that managers are often forced to  resort to when players go too far.
In this case, the term does a great disservice to horses.
In the entire history of equestrianism, there is no record of a horse pissing on a park bench and singing the immortal words ‘We hate Jimmy Hill.
He's a poof, he's a poof.’
According to Jimmy Johnstone's very forthright biography, the ‘horseplay’ reached its peak a few yards from the Queen's Hotel when the Leeds and Scotland goalkeeper David Harvey climbed on top of a beach hut and began throwing stones at his team mates.
Wilting under a hail of stones and a hefty dose of the hard stuff, Jimmy Johnstone darted for cover and along with Rangers defender Sandy Jardine found himself hiding in the vicinity of a group of rowing boats.
Johnstone was not entirely at fault.
‘In my drunken stupor I looked at Sandy and mumbled: ‘Fancy a wee trip on the water’,’ he recalled.
Jardine agreed letting Johnstone in the boat first.
‘I sat patiently waiting for my buddy to join me,’ Jinky continued.
‘Eventually I shouted ‘Sandy are you in yet?’
Before I knew it I was out to sea.
Sandy had given the boat a hefty kick before collapsing on the beach in stitches.’
around the world in 80 nips
As the boat drifted along the Firth of Clyde towards the open sea Johnstone staggered to his feet and sang a rendition of the Rod Stewart song Sailing .
In the ensuing commotion lost one of the oars over board.
As the oar disappeared into the distance, his last chance of returning to the team's hotel with dignity drifted away.
A desperate rescue mission was launched.
The Celtic player Davie Hay and the late Hibernian full back Erich Schaedler made the first brave attempt, but they chose a defective boat and capsized almost immediately.
As the remaining renegades shouted and cheered from shore, the noise woke local residents and members of the official party who dutifully called the coast guard.
Hay and Schaedler were rescued but the Johnstone was on a one way ticket to Atlantis.
Although Scotland fans remember Jimmy Johnstone as the drunken hero of the Largs boating trip, a passing thought should be spared for a couple of local brothers, John and Tam Halliday, two old men who luckily owned a boat and had a lifetime's knowledge of the maritime area.
When the local police realised Johnstone was out of control and heading for danger, they turned to the Halliday brothers for help.
The brothers dutifully responded to the May-Day request and immediately set out in their 36 foot launch to search for the bevvied buccaneer.
When the Halliday brothers eventually sighted Johnstone, the boat was drifting aimlessly with the tide.
Like a scene from Whisky Galore they approached the boat stealthily, initially believing it was a matter of life and death.
The two old men, neither of whom were football fans, had no idea how important the cargo was.
The oldest brother asked the culprit what the hell he was doing ‘I was just going out to fish,’ said Jinky.
By the time Johnstone was helped ashore, the manager Willie Ormond had been alerted and the story had taken the first few faltering steps into football mythology.
Denis Law was on hand with a blanket and presented the shivering Johnstone with the commodity he least required: a glass of hot whisky.
The next day as breakfast was being served, the team gave the tiny winger a standing ovation, greeting him with a rousing chorus of the old bar-room classic What Shall We Do With The Drunken Sailor ?
A few days later, Scotland played England at Hampden in front of 100,000 fans.
The drunken sailors won comfortably and the delirious home support cheered Johnstone's every move.
What better way to taunt the auld enemy than to treat them with such reckless contempt?
For weeks after the game Scots fans jokingly demanded that the team abandon traditional training methods and prepare for every match with a raging bender.
In the years that followed, several players were to take the suggestion at face value.
Although Johnstone's maritime adventure has entered the folklore of Scottish football, he was never actually disciplined over the incident.
The manager Willie Ormond claimed the players had been given the night off and therefore a breach of discipline had not taken place.
After all, being drunk in charge of a rowing boat is no big deal, just part of the everyday rituals of preparing for a big match.
Mr Ormond's compromise revealed another unpublicised chapter in the shady saga of Scottish football, a new era of player power was brewing which threatened to usurp the manager's authority.
Johnstone was almost certainly excused because a group of very vocal team mates under the leadership of Billy Bremner were exerting a powerful influence over Scottish footballing affairs, an influence that probably undermined and eventually curtailed Ormond's period as manager.
If the manager had wanted to take tough disciplinary action against Johnstone another opportunity arose a few days after the drunken sailor saga.
On Thursday 23 May 1974, little more than a week after Jinky had set out on his transatlantic crossing, the player was the focus of a controversial legal wrangle when a judge at Airdrie Sheriff Court postponed a trial involving the Celtic winger to allow him to prepare for Scotland's forthcoming World Cup campaign in Germany.
Johnstone and two other Celtic players, Jimmy Quinn and Pat McCluskey, had been charged with assaulting a Paisley man James Cairney outside ‘Casanova's’, a Coatbridge nightclub.
Johnstone's defence lawyer was none other than Joe Beltrami, champion of the legal underdog and a lawyer who enjoyed a virtual monopoly on Scotland's most controversial court-cases.
Such was Beltrami's legal skills that he had already secured one postponement of the trial, citing Celtic's European Cup commitments as a bona fide reason.
In those days Celtic were a force in European football and a successful run in the tournament was virtually guaranteed.
It is a legal manoeuvre that declined in currency in the '80s.
Knocked out of Europe in the first few rounds, most Scottish footballers are readily available for mid-week court cases, and cannot draw on Jimmy Johnstone's range of excuses.
WILLIE HENDERSON ON ANOTHER GOVAN NIGHT
the lion sleeps tonight
Johnstone is the mercurial imp of Hampden Babylon .
Throughout his career he has captured the magic  and the frustration of Scottish football, darting arrogantly down the wing in a surge of skill then retreating into a shell of indifference.
Jinky was James Dean with a ginger hairdo, an Uddingston rebel without a cause.
Born in a small council house in Viewpark in 1944, he rose through the ranks of local schools football and almost joined Manchester United as a teenager before Celtic stepped in.
Johnstone's size was both his trademark and a source of torment.
As a youngster, growing up in the declining Lanarkshire coalfields, he trained at a local Junior ground wearing his father's pit boots, trying to add strength and shape to his diminutive body.
Celtic farmed him out to Blantyre Celtic to toughen him up and it was in the killing fields of Blantyre that he won his first honour, a Scottish Junior cap.
Despite the rigours of Junior football and Celtic's body building sessions, Johnstone remained a midget, a dwarf amongst giants who spent most of his career infuriating psychopathic defenders with his slippery dribbling style.
Although he will always be compared to the Rangers winger Willie Henderson, a diminutive showman who won the hearts of the other Glasgow, Johnstone had more than impudent skill on his side.
His career coincided with the rise of the legendary Celtic side of the late '60s which not only won the European Cup in Lisbon in 1967 but exerted such a dominance in Scottish football that the rest were also-rans.
Johnstone charmed his way through football, showing the kind of tempestuous skill that either wins games or starts fights, and at his height was the most sought after winger in the world.
Apparently, the free spending Italian club AC Milan were so taken with him that they offered Celtic a fee of £100,000 for his services, only to recoil in fear when the club's manager Jock Stein told him they could only rent him for one game for that amount.
THE MORNING AFTER THE NIGHT BEFORE.
A BLEARY-EYED JOHN GREIG REACHES FOR A CUPPA
‘JIMMY, TAKE THAT TIE OFF, I'M THE ONE THAT WEARS THE TASTELESS GEAR.’
JIMMY JOHNSTONE LEAVES COURT WITH NICHOLAS FAIRBAIRN QC
Johnstone's professional career ran the gauntlet of scandal from boat trips to benders and back again.
His international appearances were restricted by injury and suspensions; although he was one of Scotland's top players for years, his longest run in the national team was only four matches, and he was actually dropped from a game against England for ‘not being mentally attuned’ after he refused to act as a  makeshift linesman in a practice match.
Johnstone was always more sinned against than sinning.
Unlike some of the self-deluding egotists who have played football alongside him, he was a simple and some might say painfully honest man.
His playing style belonged to a bygone era when wingers like Gallacher, James and Morton were part of the nostalgic greatness of Scottish football.
To this day, Jim Baxter maintains that Johnstone's display against Leeds United in Celtic's famous European Cup semi-final is one of the most outstanding solo performances in the history of the game.
‘What he did to Terry Cooper should be prohibited by Act of Parliament,’ was Slim Jim's personal homage.
Johnstone's naively gifted style was in many respects complemented by an equally naive honesty with the press and public.
If his fragile skills made him a figure of immense vulnerability on the pitch, then off the pitch, in the press and in the corridors of football power, Jinky was hacked to bits and fullbacks were rarely to blame.
Like so many Scots of his social background, Jimmy Johnstone liked a drink.
But in the heady tour of parties, testimonials, public houses and charity functions that come with footballing success, many footballers have discovered to their cost that drink can be an obligation more than a pleasure.
In the mighty jungle of Celtic's past, ‘Wee Jinky’ stood tall, but after 1967 the tiny Lisbon Lion spent many mornings sleeping it off.
‘of all the bars in all the world’
When Johnstone left Celtic to move south to Sheffield United, by his own confession, he had strayed perilously close to alcoholism.
‘I began to treat Sheffield like one long party,’ he once said.
‘Maybe I wasn't disgracing myself on the park, but I was cheating the Sheffield fans and manager Jimmy Sirrell.
Sometimes I would go on the wagon for a few days then have a binge.
Looking back it was a serious situation, something I wouldn't wish to go through again.
I was going to the dogs.‘
MAKING HAY: THE FOOTBALLER AS PUBLICAN
Johnstone's recollections are a sad but reassuringly honest appraisal of a career on the skids and although drink and football are part of the untamed humour of Scottish society, they are also a major part of the untold pain.
Alcohol abuse in Scotland is its own special problem, and for all their importance as the working-class aristocracy of Scottish society, footballers are more vulnerable to drink than most.
Behind the myth of the big drinkers like Hughie Gallacher and Jim Baxter, are the people who didn't quite make it to the realm of myth, the lonely bores, the manic depressives, the failed fullbacks and the defeated unfortunates who had to retire early and find a job in the real world.
When a football career ends and reality tackles back, many footballers are attracted like a magnet to the world they know best.
For some  it's coaching, for others  it's journalism and the media but for most  it's the fairground of small businesses and professional scams.
When it comes to earning a living there is no more enticing environment than a pub.
Jimmy Johnstone's life after football has been a catalogue of defeats and dismal failures.
After Celtic he spent periods of time with San Jose Earthquakes and Elgin City, and watched his hair and his money gradually disappear.
‘Barmen all over the world acquired a fair percentage of my money,’ Jimmy regrets ‘And the rest went down the plughole with various business ventures.’
The venture that did most damage to Jinky's bank balance was the ‘Double J Bar’ in Hamilton, a pub designed to cash in on his name, but destined like so many footballer's pubs to become a financial nightmare.
The pub suffered from Johnstone's overtly friendly attitude, to genuine misfortune and to the age old problem of rubber legs and rubber cheques.
The footballer's pub is a peculiarly Scottish obsession.
Although they undoubtedly exist throughout the world, only Scotland could resort to something quite as  sad as turning a pub into a museum of dispirited sport.
Every Scottish town has a local pub owned by an ex-footballer, where the die-hards can drink in the company of former heroes and where old programmes and framed football strips decorate the walls.
Amongst the many who have owned pubs at one time or another, Willie Johnson runs ‘The Port Rae Bar’ in Kirkcaldy, Doug Smith the ex-Dundee United centre — half runs ‘The Athletic Bar’in Dundee's Hilltown, Joe McBride the former Celtic striker runs ‘The Wee Mill’near Shawfield, Danny McGrain runs ‘Danny Mac's’at Parkhead Cross, Davie Hay briefly managed his own pub and Dixie Deans of Celtic runs Carluke's ‘Station Bar’.
By far the biggest concentration of football boozers is to be found in the streets around Hibernian's Easter Road ground where players like Alex Cropley, Jimmy O'Rourke and Peter Marinello have all had bars.
For some enterprising footballers like Celtic's Harry Hood or Aberdeen's Willie Miller, the pub is a business opportunity run to the highest standards, but for others it can be either a modest earner, an extension of their drinking or a desperate attempt to grab a livelihood from the cinders of football, an industry that has never fully protected the talent it exploits.
‘JINKY CAN YOU SPARE A DIME.’
JIMMY JOHNSTONE HAS A PIECE BREAK AT LAFFERTY'S CONSTRUCTION
MRS DAVIE HAY: ‘OF ALL THE BARS IN ALL THE WORLD’
When Jimmy Johnstone's bar closed, he was forced to take a series of menial jobs as a lorry driver  firstly with Lafferty's Construction Company and then a labourer's job with a gas contractor's, where, ironically, he had to dig gas pipe-lines which ran past Willie Johnson's pub.
The pathetic image of one of Scotland's greatest players, labouring outside a bar owned by another soccer genius, is a far cry from the corporate image of drink and football peddled at Ibrox, where they sell a specially bottled vintage Rangers wine and where the name of the club's sponsors McEwans Lager is brazenly emblazoned on the club's shirt.
Football is a drama of extremes, and in the case of Jimmy Johnstone he became both the partner and victim of drink.
Johnstone has confronted his fall from grace with the kind of honest self-awareness that is rare in habitual drinkers.
His thoughts border on the day-at-a-time religion of the reformed alcoholic.
‘Today I can have a drink like the next man without going over the top,’ he wrote in his self-confessional biography, ‘I suppose I have learned my lesson the hard way.’
But on the terraces of Hampden Babylon Johnstone's lesson will never be fully imbibed.
Drink and football are linked by such a strong umbilical cord in Scottish culture that it is virtually impossible to talk about one without the other encroaching.
Even the jokes drip with alcohol!
Have you heard the one about the two Scottish footballers who were condemned to death in Panama?
They are forced to face a firing squad in the prison court-yard and predictably, one is sober and the other is steaming.
The prison governor tells them they are about to be shot and offers them the choice of dying like men or wearing blindfolds.
The drunken winger goes berserk and tells him to stick his blindfold sideways up his arse.
Fearing that the outburst might make their predicament worse, the sober team-mate recoils with fear and says ‘Calm doon wee man.
You'll get us intae trouble with the SFA.’
Jimmy Johnstone was that winger.
‘MINE'S WIZ A DOUBLE’: THE LISBON LIONS PREPARE FOR ACTION
doctor strangelove
Thomas Henderson Docherty was born in 1928 in Glasgow's notorious Gorbals, the son of a steelworker and a Glasgow Corporation lamplighter.
At the age of eight his father died, by which time the family had moved to ‘The Bowery’, an area in the Shettleston district of Glasgow's East End.
It was the archetypal hardman upbringing, a tale of single-ends, the social, and supporting Celtic.
In his infant years he slept with his mother and two sisters in a single bed, a plank of wood jutting out of the wall.
Thomas Henderson Docherty was born to be wild.
Raised in some of the toughest and most deprived areas of Glasgow, he was a gifted schoolboy footballer with a precocious ability to use poverty to his advantage.
From his first sip of welfare orange juice, he was cut out to be a professional Glaswegian.
But none of the boys who played with him at St Mark's Roman Catholic Primary School in Shettleston could ever have guessed they were in the company of a very special talent.
The world was to christen him ‘The Doc’ but those who followed his bewildering career as it lurched from one club to another will always know him as Dr Strangelove, a man with a healthy appetite for the physiotherapist's wife.
Scandal has permeated Docherty's career.
His greatest moment came in July 1977 when he was sacked from the manager's post at Manchester United after disclosing the fact that he was having an affair with Mary Brown, wife of the club's physiotherapist, Laurie Brown.
In what remains one of the most touching and compassionate statements of his flamboyant career, The Doc told waiting newsmen ‘I've been punished for falling in love.
This is the most shattering experience in my footballing life.’
The idea that The Doc — one of football's dressing-room disciplinarians — could be capable of an emotion as fragile and complex as love, struck his players at Manchester United as one of the great paradoxes of all time.
Surely this love-struck lothario was not The Doc that bullied them to a successful FA Cup Final.
Surely it was not the same Glasgow hard-man that had described football management as jungle warfare.
‘Lots of managers have to be cheats and conmen,’ he once told a Football Writers' Association dinner.
‘People say we tell lies.
Of course we tell lies.
We are the biggest hypocrites.
We cheat.
In our business the morals are different.
The only way to survive is by cheating.
That's the law of our life.’
The law of Docherty's life has taken him on a rollercoaster through football management.
He had 17 management jobs in total including Scotland, Chelsea, Manchester United, FC Porto and Queens Park Rangers, and he will be immortalised by his own self-deprecating one-liner, ‘I've had more clubs than Jack Nicklaus, but he used them better.‘
Docherty's greatest gift is his comic resilience.
When he was sacked from the manager's job at Preston in  1981 he immediately told the press.
‘They offered me a handshake of £10,000 to settle amicably.
I told them they would have to be more amicable than that.’
Docherty's prodigious talent as a footballer and a disciplinarian flowered in the late '40s during his National Service.
In an attempt to solve the Arab-Israeli crisis, the Highland Light Infantry sent Docherty to Palestine, where he played for the British Army XI.
As Docherty covered every inch of the Palestinian pitches, he was spotted by Walter Waddell, brother of the famous Rangers star Willie Waddell, and on the day of his demobilisation he signed for Celtic.
The club paid him the princely sum of £8, a fee that has not risen much over the years according to some of Celtic's more dour stars.
After playing only a handful of games for Celtic, Docherty moved south to Preston North End, where he made his debut on Christmas Day 1949, eventually displacing his mentor Bill Shankly and rising through the ranks to captain the Preston side.
Docherty's thoughts on football management diverted from Shankly's in one crucial respect: scandal.
If FIFA ever had the foresight to forego football and organise the World Cup for Misbehaviour, Scotland would undoubtedly be the bookie's favourite and Thomas Henderson Docherty would be an inevitable choice as manager.
In the mid '70s, while he was still manager of Manchester United, The Doc frequently appeared on ITV in a commercial for Gillette 2 razor-blades.
His catch line was, ‘I can honestly say it's the closest shave I've ever had.’
Of course it was a complete lie.
Nobody has brushed with the law quite like The Doc.
In October 1967, when he was manager of Chelsea he was suspended by the English FA for 28 days for alleged misconduct during a friendly match in Bermuda, where he persistently swore at a black referee.
It was a strange misdemeanour but it launched The Doc on a career of unparalleled misbehaviour, which included regular confrontations with the footballing authorities and inevitable conflict with the law.
By his own admission The Doc is a lawyer's dream come true.
In one of those disarming quotes that make him both loathsome and likeable, he once said ‘I've been in more courts than Bjorn Borg.’
For once in his life he wasn't exaggerating.
At the time of his controversial dismissal from Manchester United, the News Of The World revealed that a team of private detectives, hired by a group of businessmen closely linked to some of the club's directors, had been pursuing The Doc for nearly two years.
None of the allegations were ever substantiated and in that respect Docherty was the victim of an over-zealous media campaign against him.
However, a series of related allegations eventually led to a High Court libel action involving Docherty and two of Manchester United's most prominent players, Denis Law and Willie Morgan, who perhaps predictably were both Scots.
LIMPING INTO LOFTUS ROAD.
DOCHERTY AFTER HE WAS ASSAULTED BY MANCHESTER CITY FANS
gunfight at the trafford corral
The Morgan affair cuts to the heart of Docherty's character.
It was a bizarre incident, which created a vicious and public rift between some of Scotland's most gifted players, and ended up in the ignominy of a High Court hearing.
The trouble began in November 1978 when Docherty attempted to sue the Scottish international winger Willie Morgan over remarks the player made about his style of management on a Granada TV sports programme called Kick Off.
Docherty claims he was ‘written off’ by Morgan who described him as ‘about the worst manager there has ever been.’
Although the case collapsed and Docherty admitted telling ‘a pack of lies’ in court, it opened up damaging wounds within Manchester United, and created a climate of fear and loathing among leading players that stretches to the present day.
The Willie Morgan Case was re-opened by a pseudo — investigative television programme entitled The Thought Police which has yet to be broadcast.
It revealed Docherty to be a witty, compulsive and outspoken man who feels cheated by the past.
In research for the programme, which sought to build a dossier of evidence on Docherty's life, the Manchester United halfback Pat Crerand painted a picture of extraordinary conflict within the club.
‘Doc was a bully with the players, he treated them like dirt,’ claimed Crerand adding that several players disliked him so much they threatened to ‘do’him.
Although he had an unrivalled ability to motivate players, Docherty's approach often bordered on theatre of cruelty.
He revelled in his ability to inspire players either by encouragement or ridicule.
In his autobiography he dismissed Gerry Daly as a player ‘who lacked grey matter’ and during his days as manager of Derby County he once told a player ‘You're very deceptive son — you're even slower than you look.’
The image of bullying boss is confirmed by the Willie Morgan affair.
Ironically, he admired Docherty when they first met during the ‘mini-world cup’ in Brazil in 1972.
Morgan remembers him as a ‘breath of fresh air’ as a manager who single handedly rejuvenated the Scottish team with his incredible ability to motivate players.
When their paths crossed years later at Manchester United, Morgan admits that he ‘thought the world of The Doc’ but slowly, bit by bit, it began to emerge that Docherty was mistreating some players and scheming against others.
The turning point was Denis Law's infamous transfer debacle in 1973 when he was given a free transfer by United and crossed Manchester to Maine Road to join Manchester City.
According to popular myth, Law discovered he was on the list to leave Old Trafford from a TV report when he was visiting his sick mother in Aberdeen.
The disputes that followed were to drive a wedge between Law and Docherty which persist with increasing bile and acrimony to the present day.
In 1979, when United were travelling home from a game in the south, Docherty was attacked by a gang of Manchester City fans.
He was hospitalised and needed 28 stitches to a leg wound.
Denis Law was reportedly on board the train but kept a careful distance from the fight.
Although Law will no longer be drawn on his relationships with Docherty, Crerand and Morgan are forthright in their opinions.
Crerand bitterly resents Docherty who dismissed him as Manchester United's assistant manager and according to the ex-Celtic halfback, the late Jock Stein once described Docherty as ‘nothing but a Glasgow corner   boy.’
Crerand's withering comment was simply ‘I didn't think he was even that good.’
THE HAPPY COUPLE.
TOMMY DOCHERTY AND MARY BROWN ARRIVE AT THE OLD BAILEY DURING DOCHERTY'S PERJURY TRIAL
It is not a description Docherty takes lying down.
He believes appointing Crerand was ‘the second biggest mistake of my life,’ and claims that the ex-Celt tried to pick a fight with him in the toilets at a function after Manchester United's unsuccessful FA Cup Final against Southampton in 1976 and dismisses Crerand as a player who had a jealous envy of greater talents.
But undoubtedly, it is the former United and Burnley player Willie Morgan who has most reason to distrust and dislike Docherty.
Bitterness set into their relationship after a mid-week international, when Morgan returned to Manchester from Hampden to find that the Daily Mail had run a sensational story about a behind-the-scenes bust up between Morgan and his boss.
According to Morgan, when he challenged Docherty, The Doc denied being the source of the story and went through the deceptive rituals of ringing the journalist to complain.
Then when it appeared the problem had been solved, Morgan alleges he hid outside Docherty's and overheard him ringing the journalist again to apologise for his outburst claiming it was only done to fool the player.
throwing punches in an empty house
Most players are baffled by the animosity that set in between Morgan and Docherty, although one former.
‘the Northern Ireland international Jimmy Nichol, who later played for Rangers and Raith Rovers, believes it was a simple case of professional jealousy.
He believes Docherty perceived Morgan as a threat to his power base and a player who had the raw potential to rise to the status that George Best had enjoyed in his early years at Old Trafford.
‘There could only be one winner, and that would be The Doc,’ Nichol has said.
‘He is the kind of person who thrives on arguments, he could start an argument in an empty house.’
Arguments were a daily occurrence at Old Trafford.
The more resentful and unforgiving Willie Morgan, was taken to court and then had to terminate a lucrative six year contract after only nine months.
He feels bitterness and betrayal to this day.
‘Docherty tried to ruin me, my career, and my family.
I hate him.’
The animosity towards Docherty resurfaced years later on a memorable episode of the BBC chat show Wogan , when a clearly drunken George Best outlined his reasons for leaving Old Trafford.
In a slurred voice he blamed Docherty calling him ‘a liar and a bullshitter’.
Hatred is hardly the emotion that attracted Man Brown to The Doc.
When they met she was happily married to her first husband Laurie Brown, a member of Manchester United's back-room staff.
Docherty was betrothed to his first wife Agnes, an unpretentious Glaswegian who he had met in the late '40s at a social club dance when The Doc was an aspiring player with Celtic.
Agnes and Tommy Docherty's marriage was in many respects typical of their generation and typical of their catholic upbringing in the west of Scotland.
With four children and a stable lifestyle, the break-up of the Docherty's marriage came as a devastating blow to those closest to him.
His children have never fully forgiven him and the scandal that surrounded the very public break-up of his first marriage has scarred everyone involved in The Doc's love-life.
The affair happened at the most inopportune moment.
Docherty was on the verge of signing a new contract with United who had just won the FA Cup and in an act of either remarkable honesty or unmitigated stupidity, he decided to inform the board that he was romantically involved with the physiotherapist's wife.
At first the club treated it as a private matter and The Doc shook hands on a new four year contract.
But within a few hours the mood changed and what Docherty now describes as ‘unforeseen forces’ began to operate.
He was summarily dismissed from his job and the scandal broke on the front pages of Britain's national press.
Thomas Henderson Docherty was born and raised a catholic and undoubtedly Catholicism contributed to his downfall.
His brother-in-law Stewart Milne, who is married to The Doc's young sister Margaret, maintains that the catholic legacy at Old Trafford conspired against The Doc.
‘There are lots of priests at Manchester United,’ he said in typical Docherty style, ‘and some of them are on the board.’
They wanted to protect the public morality of the club, and wanted Docherty out.
Like the Celtic team of his childhood, Manchester United's catholic heritage ultimately strangled Docherty's faith in the holy scriptures and to a lesser extent in that more endearing religion called football.
TOMMY DOCHERTY MARRIES HIS FIRST WIFE, AGNES MCKEOWN
If Docherty's dismissal from the manager's job at Manchester United had unspoken religious undertones, it had its greatest impact on a close-knit catholic family back home in Glasgow.
Margaret Docherty believes the   marriage break-up had a devastating effect on The Doc's aging mother.
She was nearly 80 years old at the time and had been a devoted parent and strict catholic all her life.
Part of her annoyance was brought about by the fact that she had never met nor heard of Mary Brown but part of it was fuelled by the fact that her son had broken with the faith.
On hearing the news, The Doc's mother broke down in tears.
To comfort her a friend said –These days it can happen to anyone.’
Mrs Georgina Docherty, Mother Glasgow to the end, said ‘He is not anyone.
He is Tommy Docherty.‘
Tommy Docherty
It would be unfair to Docherty and his family to end there.
At the time of the scandal, many.
people dismissed the affair as a rash mistake which would never last.
Margaret Docherty describes Mary as being ‘like a schoolteacher and very proper’— the most unlikely woman that a smart-ass street kid from Shettleston would ever marry.
But love and scandal move in mysterious ways.
Although 18 years separate the couple, they are happily married and live in Derbyshire with their two daughters Grace and Lucy.
As a divorcee, Docherty can no longer take communion and has distanced himself from the catholic faith, an institution he believes deserted him in his hour of need.
He no longer attends the church.
But if the Vatican believes it has banished The Doc, the Pope should think again.
Incorrigible to the last, the high priest of scandal has even turned his worst moment into a punch-line.
In 1987, he walked into the dressing room at non-league Altrincham and turned to the club's physiotherapist Jeff Warburton.
With a smile on his face, The Doc turned years of anguish on  its head.
‘How's the wife,’ he joked, and walked out the door.
‘HE'S NOT ANYONE, HE'S TOMMY DOCHERTY’.
MRS GEORGINA DOCHERTY, MOTHER GLASGOW TO THE BITTER END, HOLDS A PHOTO OF HER BELOVED SON
MR & MRS CHARLES TULLEY
MR & MRS YOGI HUGHES
MR & MRS PATRICK CRERAND
MR & MRS STEPHEN ARCHIBALD
MR & MRS JOHN GREIG
MR & MRS ASA HARTFORD
MR & MRS FRANCIS HAFFEY
til death do us part
five go mad in denmark
British society is riddled with miscarriages of justice.
The trials of the Birmingham Six and the Guildford Four, provide damning evidence of the state's corrupt disregard for the rights of innocent people unfortunate to be caught in the wrong place at the wrong time with the wrong kind of Irish accent.
But it would be naive in the extreme to believe that the system is always unjust.
The name of the Birmingham Six may haunt the British legal system, but it can always gloat about one of its greatest triumphs, the case of a notorious bunch of Scottish footballers who go by the name of The Copenhagen Five.
On the night of 9 September 1975, during a long and contentious meeting at the SFA's headquarters, the case of The Copenhagen Five was heard in camera.
Like a Presbyterian version of Judge Dredd, the association's assistant-secretary, Ernie Walker, solemnly placed a black cap on his head and passed sentence.
The five players were found guilty of bringing the game into serious disrepute and banned for life.
In the most draconian punishment ever handed out to Scottish internationalists, Billy Bremner, Joe Harper, Pat McCluskey, Willie Young and Arthur Graham were told they would never play for their country again.
It must have been some bender!
It seemed an ordinary enough night when Anne Simonsen set out to work at the Marina Hotel in Copenhagen where she had a job as part-time barmaid.
The reception had told her the Scottish Football team were residents in the hotel which increased her hopes of picking up the odd tip in order to ease her way through University.
The last thing on Anne Simonsen's mind was that she would end the evening being drenched with a glass of rum and coke and would become the femme fatale in a low-budget ‘B’ movie called Hampden Babylon .
It was downstairs in the hotel's night-bar that the unfortunate Simonsen met her undignified match.
In a front-page story entitled ‘Blonde Blames Bremner’, the Daily Record reported that the hotel's assistant manager, Lars Borch was attempting to calm a group of noisy Scottish players down, when he heard a chant of ‘1-2-3’.
He watched in disbelief as Bremner reportedly drenched the barmaid with a glass of drink.
‘I am not a football fan,’ said Ms Simonsen, shaken but not stirred.
‘Bremner spoke to me earlier but I just ignored him.
I don't know whether it was because I ignored him that he threw the drink over me,’ she added.
Ironically, a few days earlier, when Simonsen heard that the Scottish team were at the hotel, she had told a friend it was an ideal opportunity to brush up on her English.
An evening in the company of William Bremner was hardly her idea of night-school.
The plucky Ms Simonsen, not accustomed to being on the wrong end of a double Bacardi, took a principled feminist stance, complained to the management and insisted that the local police were called.
It was the phone-call that blew the whistle on one of Scottish football's biggest blow outs, a night of post-match revelry which will be warmly   remembered as ‘Five Go Mad In Denmark’.
According to police files in Copenhagen, the five players treated  Scandinavia to the  seamier side of Scottish culture.
It was an evening of song and celebration.
The Aberdeen striker Joey Harper scored the only goal in a hard fought international against Denmark, and the Scots set out to party.
In their infinite wisdom, the SFA had arranged for a Scotland Under 23 side to travel with the senior squad, in the admirable but ultimately naive belief that it would be a learning experience for the young stars of the future.
It was.
Three of the players, Willie Young and Arthur Graham of Aberdeen and the Celtic sweeper Pat McCluskey were all members of a Scotland under 23 team who had won the night before in Frederikshavn.
They learned to their cost the subtle art of starting a rammy in a Danish disco.
Billy Bremner led by example.
The wee ginger-haired midfielder who was once described as ‘a volcano looking for somewhere to explode,’ took his men on a drinking spree that stretched from the downstairs bar of the Marina Hotel to an exclusive Copenhagen night club called ‘Bonaparte's’, and back again.
the soft shoe shuffle
As the entourage stalked the streets of  Scandinavia , they left a toll of chaos in their wake.
The police were called to ‘Bonaparte's’ after customers complained of rowdy behaviour.
When they arrived, they discovered the five Scots in various stages of alcoholic disrepair.
The barman, on that fateful evening, had the unfortunate name of Bent Dorf.
He claimed that customers were appalled by the players' language and that when he asked for order they threatened  to punch out his lights.
By this time Pat McCluskey's sense of balance was not of the required athletic standard and the police were called.
An eye-witness claims that at the height of the commotion, McCluskey motioned to hit a policeman and had to be physically restrained.
As the other four offered their own inimitable advice, the police hustled the Celtic defender downstairs and out into the streets where he was thrown over the bonnet of a police car.
Not content to go quietly, McCluskey took off his shoe and threatened the Danish cops with a sound thrashing.
It was at this critical moment that good sense got the better of the others, Big Pat was calmed down and a semblance of order was restored.
It is with a huge sigh of relief that Scottish football fans can reflect on this crucial moment.
Drawing with Iran and getting beat by Costa Rica are a great enough indignity, but coping with the knowledge that star players were on the verge of assaulting a policeman with a Hush Puppy is pushing loyalty to the limits.
It was a turning point in Pat McCluskey's career.
With the stigma of a life-ban hanging over him, his club form never realised its early potential and he now works as a storeman on an off-shore oil rig.
Fortunately, the Danish police were in a Ghandi mood.
Fearing the arrests might cause an embarrassing international incident, they merely lectured the five Scots and allowed them to weave their way back into the night, to more drink and more disruption.
As the night grew older incidents multiplied.
Manager Willie Ormond's 1.00 am curfew was not simply broken it was annihilated.
The five players returned to the hotel's night-bar, where they had been asked to calm down earlier in the night.
A member of the SFA council Jock McDonald had his hotel bedroom wrecked.
Rumours of a punch-up were rife.
Billy Bremner is Scottish football in miniature.
If FIFA ever gets round to creating an identikit picture of national footballing types, the Scottish player will be short, stocky, aggressive and ginger haired.
He will have a fiery temper, a bad disciplinary record and a passionate spirit.
He will come from a rough housing scheme in Stirling and his name will be Billy Bremner.
Like Celtic's Paul McStay and West Ham's Ray Stewart, Bremner was a Scottish Schools captain.
Even as a teenager he stamped his authority on games, pursuing players until they made mistakes and bullying those around him into raising their game.
Although he never grew much above 5′5″, Bremner was always in the thick of disputes and played according to the old motto, when the going gets tough, the tough get going.
NOBODY TAMES THE ‘TIGER’ MACKAY OF SPURS THREATENS TO BEAT UP BILLY BREMNER
One famous photograph from the past captures a rare moment of fear when the impetuous Bremner playing an early game for Leeds United is threatened by an even tougher adversary, the Spurs and Scotland halfback Dave ‘Tiger’ McKay.
Had the two been at their prime in the same era Scotland's midfield would have made Dirty Harry look   like a wimp.
Billy Bremner
During his first ten seasons as a professional, Bremner lost almost half a season through misconduct.
He was banned five times between 1964 and 1967 but his flexibility as a player was such that Bremner played as a winger and a sweeper for Leeds United before he became the club's midfield dynamo.
He won his first Scottish cap in 1965 against Spain by which time he was known as ‘the prince of nigglers’, and one of the most unruly players in the professional game.
Bremner once tried to rile an opponent by drawing attention to his pock-marked face by shouting ‘Go and get it filled in with polyfilla’, but the crunch came when he was sent off in 1967 for fouling the Nottingham Forest keeper Grummitt.
Manager and mentor Don Revie lost patience with Bremner and demanded he keep his temper in check.
For several years it looked like Billy Bremner had calmed down, the excessive niggling was more controlled and the bristling temper was kept on a leash, but trouble was always brooding just beneath the surfaces.
When he was voted the English League's Player of the Year in 1973, the Sunday Telegraph marvelled at his new maturity, and described his transformation as being ‘like Attila The Hun giving up fighting for sculpture.’
They spoke too soon, Attila Bremner had his eyes on the prize.
One of the great distinctions that can be drawn between football culture in Scotland and England is in the public's attitude to heroes.
With the recent and spectacular exception of Paul ‘Gazza’ Gascoigne, England's heroes have been consistently straight.
Whilst England favours sterling and upstanding professionals like Billy Wright, Bobby Charlton and Gary Lineker, Scotland has traditionally lionised the anti-heroes, players like Alex James, Jim Baxter, Jimmy Johnstone and Mo Johnston, men who seem to be at war with authority and traumatised by their exceptional skills.
Scotland loves the bad boys, England prefers the creeps.
In the creep-show of English international football the man most Scots loved to hate was a perm-headed striker who went by the name of Kevin Keegan.
Beloved by the English media and blessed with the irritating air of a professional nice guy, Keegan was the ultimate yes-man.
In the eyes of Scots fans everywhere, he needed a good doing over and if Tiger McKay was too old to give him, one then there was always Wild Bill Bremner.
billy bites back
Bremner has never done anything by half.
At the height of the club rivalry between Leeds United and Liverpool, he chose the showpiece Charity Cup Final of 1974, to vent a nation's revenge on Keegan.
After a series of physical exchanges in which Bremner rarely came second, the referee detected that the increasing levels of animosity were about to spoil the game as a spectacle and sent both Bremner and Keegan for an early bath.
Disgusted with their treatment, the two players tore  off their shirts and threw them to the ground in full view of the royal box.
They were banned and fined £500 for bringing the game into disrepute.
The Wembley square-go was more of a blot on Keegan's copy book than on the already soiled jotters of William Bremner.
As a Scottish paper remarked at the time, it was not his first dismissal, ‘Bremner has had more early baths than a miner on night-shift.’
In a career that was both long and eventful, Bremner played 770 games for Leeds United and characterised the team's tough-tackling professional image.
His drive and energy helped Leeds to four FA cup finals and two league titles, before he moved to nearby Hull City where he played another 61 games.
He won 52 caps for Scotland but there is no doubt that a mixture of club commitments and the carry-on in Copenhagen prevented him from winning many more caps.
Bremner is one of many Scottish players who made a remarkable transformation when he took up a career in management.
Like Tommy Docherty at Manchester United, Graeme Souness at Rangers, Alex Ferguson at Aberdeen and Alex McDonald at Hearts, he became a born-again disciplinarian, a man with a short memory when it came to chastising players who misbehaved.
One Scottish player who played under Bremner when he managed Leeds, said, ‘Being bollocked by Billy is a bit hard to take, it's like Dean Martin telling you stop drinking.’
Despite being fined £500 for making foul and abusive comments to match officials whilst managing Doncaster Rovers, Bremner wielded a rod of discipline and rarely bothered to reflect on his image as a rogue newly attuned to respectability.
The roots of his disciplinarianism go back a long way.
He was a tough and uncompromising player with a hard man image but he was also a supremely loyal competitor who stayed with Leeds at a time when a big money transfer might have been more lucrative.
Bremner was never a mercenary player, but he believed implicitly in player power and was always the dressing-room shop steward, demanding, hustling and manipulating until the Leeds United board capitulated.
In one memorable outburst, he once made a plea for more money, claiming that professional footballers were little more than ‘white slaves’.
At club level, his persistent niggling paid off, but at international level, it often acted as a destabilising influence, and may well have led to the premature departure of Willie Ormond as the national team manager.
Bremner was a midfield bandit willing to stretch the referee's tolerance to breaking point but football was his personal code of honour.
A series of scathing and ultimately unfounded articles published in the Sunday People , accusing him of bribery led to a High Court appearance and an early end to his playing career.
It was a press vilification that deeply injured Bremner's sense of personal integrity, and like a tackle from behind, he refused to take it lying down.
The bribery scandal sickened Bremner.
In an ill-advised piece of muck-raking the newspaper printed comments  by two former Wolves players, the ex-Irish Internationalist Danny Hegan and the former Scottish defender Frankie Munro.
Both told the People that Bremner had offered them bribes before and during a crucial league decider between Leeds United and Wolves at the end of the season in 1972.
The sums varied.
It was claimed by the witnesses in their evidence that Hegan was the poor relation, he claims he was offered £1,000, and swore he heard Bremner say ‘Give us a penalty and I'll give you a grand.’
Munro was more upmarket.
According to the evidence he was offered £5,000.
COWBOYS ON THE WARPATH.
BILLY BREMNER WITH A WESTERN NOVEL IN HAND SHOWS PETER LORIMER & EDDIE GRAY THE APACHE PEACE SIGN
KING BILLY.
SCOTLAND FANS SWARM ROUND THE WEE MAN
The highly publicised court case brought unwelcome notoriety to Bremner, casting a shadow of doubt over his career and causing untold misery to his family.
From his home in Maltby in Yorkshire, he told journalists that the  accusations had devastated his children.
‘It was terrible,’ he said, ‘my children were taunted at school with ‘your father is a fixer’and my wife got reactions going shopping.’
In his final few league games, Bremner was taunted unmercifully by rival fans.
Always a figure of abuse from the terracing, the taunts of ‘fixer’, ‘cheat’ and ‘bribing bastard’brought a level of loathing that he found unacceptable.
Bremner's decision to sue the Sunday People by taking out a libel action against the owners Odhams Newspapers Ltd and the player Danny Hegan, was an attempt to clear his name and retrieve his integrity rather than a money making scheme.
But Bremner won the day.
He was given £100,000 in damages, more than a testimonial at Elland Road would ever have reaped.
The law was on Bremner's side and the evidence painted Hegan and Munro in a sleazy light.
At the time of the trial, Hegan was living in Coatbridge and earning a pittance as a Butlin's Redcoat and Munro was living in Australia.
The hearing admitted he had only agreed to appear in court if his wife and children were flown back to Britain with him at the cost of £4,000.
It was Frankie Munro's holiday in hell.
After an inevitable return to Leeds United for a brief spell as manager, Billy Bremner was finally sacked by his old club when results went against him.
His sacking at a critical period for Leeds, when the hooligan element within the club's support had brought them widespread contempt.
Typically, Bremner hated the hooligans and demanded heavy punitive action against what he had described as ‘the moronic mob’, but ironically the image that Leeds had fashioned over the years owed as much to his barbed-wire aggressiveness as the behaviour of the fans.
Leeds sup– porters may have terrorised most of England but they weren't around in Copenhagen on the night the volcano erupted.
BREMNER and& JOHNNY GILES LEAVE THE F.A.
HEADQUARTERS AFTER CHARGES OF BRINGING THE GAME INTO DISREPUTE
don't shoot i'm the goalkeeper
STEWART KENNEDY: ‘I'LL GIVE THEM FIVE.’
Disasters are part of the tragic landscape of history.
Volcanos, earthquakes, landslides, explosions and raging infernos have engulfed whole communities leaving a trail of death and destruction in their wake.
Scotland has never had much time for earthquakes: the national football team already has a monopoly on disasters.
Leading powers in world football like Brazil, Italy, West Germany and Argentina measure their greatness in triumph.
They remember history by evoking magical names from the past, players who captured the hearts of the nation.
For Brazilians the names are Leonidas, Pele and Zico, for Germans  it's magisterial defenders like Fritz Walter and Franz Beckenbauer, in Argentina  it's Stabile and Maradona, and in Italy players like Schiavio, Mazzola, Rivera, Rossi and Toto Schillaci.
By a farcical inversion of football's heightened history, Scotland has turned its back on triumph and measures its footballing encounters by the barometers of disaster and The most memorable in Scottish football are defined by calamity rather than magic.
When disaster strikes, the people of Scotland have been quick to shed their mask of tolerance and search the dressing-rooms for a scapegoat.
Over the last 30 years, when names like Pele, Eusebio, Cruyff, Müller and Maradona were igniting world football, the people of Scotland could retaliate with their own itinerary of hapless dupes and national scapegoats.
Some have been managers: Andy Beattie, Bobby Brown and Ally McLeod.
But most have been members of that lonely fraternity of misfits called goalkeepers.
When the firing squad finally arrives, six men in blindfolds will be strung out along the prison wall: Freddie Martin, Frank Haffey, Stewart Kennedy, Jim Blyth, Alan Rough and Jim Leighton, you have one final wish.
On 12 June 1990, the morning after Scotland had lost to an unfancied Costa Rica side in their critical opening match in the Italia '90 World Cup, the Daily Record led with an agonising front-page story which wallowed in alliteration and dredged the dire, dismal and deplorable depths of defeat.
The headline simply said, ‘Stop The World We Want To Get Off’.
It was the perfect epitaph for a nation accustomed to World Cup disasters and finely attuned to an endless chorus-line of infamous goalkeepers.
Scotland's capacity for World Cup disaster began in earnest in 1954.
In the qualifying stages they were drawn against Finland and Norway and staggered unconvincingly towards the finals, after only 13 members of the pool turned up for a training session at Ayr before the vital away match in Oslo.
‘I'll take the rap,’ said Harry Swan the SFA President, ‘I got the dates wrong.’
This simple, naive and incomprehensible blunder established Scotland's reputation as the team most likely to screw up when it came to a big match preparation.
The image died hard.
The 1954 finals verged on the surreal.
An SFA selection committee had made the odd decision to pick a team months before the finals and conspired to select a pool of only 13 players which barely reflected the best talent available.
The team was chosen so far ahead that the monumental Rangers defender George Young was omitted because of an injury that cleared up weeks before the team left Scotland.
Nonetheless, the unlucky 13 departed for Switzerland under the tutelage of manager Andy Beattie.
There were two goalkeepers, no obvious captain and an embarrassing shortage of cover should injury  strike.
It did.
The Hibernian forward Bobby Johnstone was injured and the  skilful Aberdeen player ‘Gentleman’ George Hamilton was called in as a replacement.
Hamilton resolutely destroyed the patriotic myth that most Scots would kill to wear the navy jersey when he told the press, ‘I'd rather stay home and play golf.’
Hamilton never actually played in the ‘54 World Cup but his remark was etched in Scotland's unforgiving memory.
Within a few days Caledonia was in complete agreement: the entire team should take up golf.
Scotland's 1954 World Cup team will go down in history as one of the most disastrous and ill-prepared rabble that has ever represented the country abroad.
In the opening game of the tournament against Austria, Scotland had forgotten to bring a pennant to exchange with their opponents.
It was not the only oversight.
The Celtic player Neil Mochan claims to this day that the 1954 squad were nicknamed ‘The Liquorice Allsorts’.
According to legend, the SFA, who insisted on picking the team by committee, had forgotten to provide training strips and the team were forced to wear a multi-coloured melange of club strips and borrowed jerseys.
The blue of Rangers, the green of Celtic, the tangerine of Blackpool and the yellow and red of Partick Thistle clashed in a blinding flash of psychedelia.
Scotland had inadvertently invented Acid-House.
But it was years later that the ecstasy of drugs would join their repertory of World Cup disasters.
The 1954 campaign ended in ignominy.
Disillusioned with managing the national team, Andy Beattie chose the most inappropriate moment to tender his resignation.
He announced his departure just before the kick-off and so Scotland's ramshackle team of liquorice allsorts went out to face the world champions Uruguay stripped of all confidence and tactical direction.
They were thrashed 7–0.
A bewildered SFA selector Tom Reid could manage the only Scottish response.
‘It was like me playing Joe Davis at snooker,’ he muttered.
The goalkeeper on that fateful day in ‘54 was Fred Martin of Aberdeen, a talented but unfortunate keeper who let in another seven goals the following year against England at Wembley.
Misfortune between the posts apart, Martin was lucky in one crucial respect.
At the time, very few Scottish homes could afford television sets, the nation could not witness his performance and judgement was withheld.
History and the action-replay would be less kind to Scottish keepers in the years to come.
By the '70s, when Freddie Martin was playing for a whisky company's office team in Perth, his successors between the sticks were being subjected to intense TV scrutiny.
THE AYATOLLAH'S REVENGE.
ALLY MCLEOD SUFFERS AT THE HANDS OF TEHERAN
100 years of solitude
Disaster, defeat and dismal performances are part of the bungled heritage of Scottish football.
In a country that invests so much energy and passion in the game, the frustrations that defeat and incompetence arouse, inevitably breeds resentment.
In 1954, the accusatory finger of fate pointed at Fred Martin and his manager Andy Beattie, a relatively successful club manager with seven English league clubs including Huddersfield and Nottingham Forest.
Nearly 25 years later, agitated by the fake euphoria of Argentina, the finger once again turned on a manager and his hapless keeper.
The 1978 World Cup campaign in Argentina will go down in history as the absolute nadir of Scottish football.
The myths and memories it releases could fill a book.
Fist fights at the team's base camp at Dunblane Hydro, a bender in Perth where two players were caught pissing up a close next to the town's ‘Shanghai Takeaway’, a euphoric send-off at Hampden Park, followed by defeat against Peru, a disgraceful match with Iran, a drug scandal and a piece of eleventh-hour magic which nearly overwhelmed the beaten finalists Holland.
They were all part of the real or imaginary story of Argentina.
By the end of May 1978, the nation was at fever pitch.
England had failed to qualify for the finals, Scotland had defeated Wales in an emotional match at Liverpool's  Anfield Stadium and Ally McLeod, a supremely patriotic manager given to hyperbole and heart-wrenching nationalism had amassed one of the finest footballing sides for years.
Among the many outstanding players in the Scotland squad were the elegant Manchester United captain Martin Buchan, the toothless warrior Joe Jordan, the mercurial Kenny Dalglish, the effervescent Willie Johnson and an over abundance of creative midfield players including Don Masson, Bruce Rioch, Asa Hartford, Archie Gemmill, John Robertson and Lou Macari.
The first signs of rust came on the day the first battalion of the tartan army arrived in Cordoba.
The Daily Record revealed that an acrimonious dispute over cigarette sponsorship was splitting public opinion.
Back home in Scotland, money was to become an increasingly divisive issue throughout the campaign and it all began with a packet of fags.
Despite protests from the anti-smoking group ASH and in spite of the advice of Scotland's highly vocal health lobby, the team, the manager and the SFA accepted a share of £2 million sports sponsorship from the British American Tobacco Company.
Dr David Player, then head of the Scottish Health Education Unit, counselled the team to withdraw from the deal.
But in a reply that summed up Ally McLeod's capacity for humorous catastrophe the manager responded by saying, ‘I told him several of our players smoke and it would be untruthful to back an anti-smoking campaign.’
If McLeod's twisted logic was taken to its ultimate conclusion, events over the next two weeks would demonstrate that the Scottish team were ideally suited to sponsoring the work of Alcoholics Anonymous and the Drumchapel Drug Dependency Clinic.
By the time the Scotland team had arrived at the Sierras hotel in Alta Gracia the rot had set in.
The bonus deal the SFA had offered the team to win the World Cup did not match the players expectations.
Behind the scenes squabbles broke out.
Ally McLeod, a man not generally regarded as a subtle diplomat, was left to dampen the flames and Scotland's preparation inevitably suffered.
On the first night, three members of the squad, the goalkeeper Alan Rough and the Rangers pair Derek Johnstone and Sandy Jardine, left the camp to visit a local casino.
‘There was no question of them gambling,’ McLeod insisted, before adding his own inimitable proof.
‘They did not have Argentinian money.’
On their return to the hotel, the three were caught climbing a security fence by armed guards who mistook them for Scotland fans.
According to legend, Rough told the guards to put their guns away shouting the apocryphal line ‘Don't shoot I'm the goalkeeper.’
It was a remark he should have reserved for an aging Peruvian marksman called Cubillas.
Scotland collapsed in their opening game losing 3–1 to Peru.
The defeat opened the sluice gates and venom flowed through in raging torrents.
Drunk?
Unfit?
Simply crap?
Every accusation was thrown at the team, even Tunisia got in on the act.
The Tunisian national team had the questionable pleasure of sharing a training camp with Scotland, their manager Abdelmajid Chetali claimed that Scottish players spent most of their time shirking training.
‘They smoke and drink a lot — especially whisky,’ he said, trying to reconcile his Muslim abstention with the profligacy of Scots on the rocks.
When it seemed impossible to sink any lower, the team rose to the challenge and sputtered their way through a pitiful draw with Iran, in which an own goal saved them from defeat.
‘Shamed.
Humiliated.
And shown up to be fourth rate in front of the world,’ screamed the Daily Record .
Like a row of cascading dominoes, scandal followed scandal.
Willie Johnson was sent home for taking drugs, Chrysler withdrew an advertising campaign which showed Scotland supporting the Avenger Saloon, Rod Stewart's Ole Ola plummeted down the charts, then finally Scotland got something  right.
In their final game they defied normal logic and won the hardest game in their section by defeating the much fancied Holland, courtesy of a piece of outstanding arrogance by the diminutive midfield dynamo Archie Gemmill.
Triumphing against all odds and losing when it seems easier to win is one of Scotland's most endearing faults.
WEMBLEY 1961: ‘NINE PAST HAFFEY.’
alone again naturally
Although Gemmill's goal was voted the best in the tournament, the sight of a mesmerised Alan Rough watching in disbelief as a Peruvian free kick flew past him into the net will remain one of Argentina's most bleak moments.
The goalkeeper's agony is a specifically Scottish condition.
If Franz Kafka was to re-write The Trial and set it in Hampden Babylon,the novel's alienated victim would be a goalkeeper, a solitary figure trapped between the posts, perpetually fearing the penalty.
His name would immediately conjure a mood of lonely alienation.
The name might be Jim Leighton, Jim Blyth or Stewart Kennedy.
But if Kafka was really laying on the angst, he would choose a name synonymous with pain and defeat, a name like Frank Haffey.
The first month of 1961 witnessed profound activity throughout the world.
Yuri Gagarin  orbited the earth in the first manned satellite, Stalin's body was unceremoniously removed from the Moscow Mausoleum, counter revolutionaries attempted to overthrow the Castro regime in Cuba and Scotland were drubbed 9–3 at Wembley.
The goalkeeper that fateful Saturday afternoon in April 1961 was Frank Haffey, who to this day remains the most unfortunate victim of Scotland's greatest footballing disaster.
Haffey was part of Scotland's erratic tradition, a keeper capable of inspired performances and indescribable blunders, who had edged his way into an unconvincing Celtic team in the early '60s.
Frank was never Scotland's first choice keeper, that position was held with secure dignity by the Dundee and Tottenham Hotspur  keeper Bill Brown, a player who generally defied the image of incompetent Scottish goalkeeping.
An eleventh hour injury to Brown brought Haffey into direct competition with an England forward line at the height of its form.
Bobby Robson opened the scoring, and by half-time England were winning 3–0; within minutes of the re-start Scotland had pulled the game back to 32, and then the proverbial roof caved in.
A Jimmy Greaves hat-trick and two goals each from Bobby Smith and Jimmy Haynes left Scotland reeling from its worst ever defeat.
The next day the headlines gloated with the kind of effusive unction that only the English press can muster.
‘This was slaughter in the spring sunshine,’ wrote the Sunday Express ; next to the report were nine horrific photographs, each one showing the tragic Frank Haffey in poses of utter desperation as he dived, slid and fumbled his way through the afternoon.
When the whistle blew to end the Scottish agony, Haffey left the field with his head bowed in a mixture of humiliation and loneliness.
Scotland fans crowded at the entrance to Wembley threatening to lynch the Celtic keeper, and in an act of sad resignation, Haffey was forced to hide in a suburban house near the stadium.
As the Scotland fans dispersed in shame, heading for the bars of Soho and the long train journey home, they created one of the country's most enduring jokes.
‘What's the time?
Nine past Haffey!‘
History was cruel to Frank Haffey.
He is remembered for the Wembley disaster and little else, but the following season he inspired a poor Celtic team to pursue Dundee and Rangers for the League flag.
In more than one crunch game when the pressure was off and the ball was in the opposition's half, Frank would climb on to the bar and endear himself to the Celtic faithful by pretending to sleep on the woodwork.
But an unbelievable blunder at Airdrie in March 1962 ended the Parkhead challenge.
Grabbing defeat from the jaws of victory, Haffey let in a shot it seemed easier to save.
The unforgiving finger of fate always seemed to single out Frank Haffey but eventually the fall-guy had his day.
The following season he was Celtic's star player in a memorable cup final when his heroic saves and faultless display of goalkeeping held the great Rangers side of the early ‘60s to a 1–1 draw.
Rangers won the replay but the final became known as ‘Haffey's Day’.
It helped a little but could never erase the bitterness of the nine England goals.
as if running away from his own mind the tragic Haffey emigrated to Australia where Scottish exiles still see him as a figure of unrivalled fun.
fumbling balls
The image of the disastrous goalkeeper has haunted Scottish football for the last 30 years.
In some respects it is a misnomer.
The keeper is an obvious fall-guy, a last line of lonely defence whose faults and deficiencies are easy to expose.
But Scotland has added to the disastrous image in the most masochistic ways.
In May 1975, at Wembley, the site of Haffey's worst nightmare, Scotland entrusted the role of goalkeeper to Stewart Kennedy, a keeper of such startling mediocrity that many Scotland fans believed it was only his association with Rangers that led to him being chosen.
His performance was pitiful, five goals flew past him from a bewildering array of angles, and in one pathetic ritual he ended up wrapped round the goal-post, in a knot of utter hopelessness.
Three years later in a midweek international against Wales, a look of solitary bewilderment was written on the face of Coventry City's Jim Blyth.
Playing one of his few games in goal for Scotland, the Perth-born keeper, rolled the ball out to the experienced Manchester City fullback Willie Donachie; with a shot of slide-rule perfection, Donachie lobbed the stranded Blyth, scoring a perfect own goal which gave Wales a fortunate draw.
Blyth, exposed to the cruelty of a Hampden crowd tired of goal-keeping ineptitude, wandered through the rest of his career with a guilt-complex, another victim of the big-match blunder.
‘…
AND THE FINAL SCORE FROM WEMBLEY IS ENGLAND 9 SCOTLAND 3.’
FRANK HAFFEY DREAMS OF BETTER DAYS
But when it comes to fumbling balls there are very few Scottish keepers who can rival the Norwich City custodian Bryan Gunn.
According to salacious press reports he was unfairly implicated in what the tabloids refer to as ‘a three-in-the-bed’ scandal.
The incident reportedly happened in Hollywood in 1989 and involved Gunn and another Norwich player.
A newspaper report claimed the players ‘staged a  sex orgy in a Beverly Hills hotel with a beautician.’
Although Scottish goalkeepers have been accused of all sorts of malpractices, troilism is rarely mentioned.
Gunn's most vociferous defender was his own father.
‘He's just a healthy young lad, I don't know what he gets up to in his sex life,’ he told the leering press.
The incident did little harm to Gunn's career and in many respects endeared him to Scotland fans.
In a country so used to dismal performances the prospect of a player scoring with such consummate style was rare indeed.
One of Scotland's smallest ever keepers, the diminutive Rangers and Third Lanark custodian Jocky Robertson, will go down in history as a scapegoat with a sore head.
John Greig, the Rangers' captain during Robertson's spell with Third Lanark takes great pleasure in recounting an infamous tale during a New Year game at Cathkin Park.
Wee Jocky was apparently steaming after a particularly hospitable Hogmanay and played a blinder.
Unfortunately, for Third Lanark's dwindling fans, he sobered up at half-time and duly let in five goals.
The mantle of scapegoat was passed down through Scotland's goal keeping history from Martin to Haffey, to Kennedy to Rough and then to the most unlikely scapegoat, the Aberdeen and Manchester United goalkeeper Jim Leighton.
For years, Leighton seemed to have ended Scotland's fixation with goalkeeping disasters.
Throughout the '80s he had been a tower of strength as the last line in defence and had single-handedly reversed the image of the inept Scottish keeper.
History never had the heart to tell him that great keepers use both hands.
Jim Leighton, a product of Johnstone in Lanarkshire, established his reputation with Aberdeen where he won league and cup medals and was a rock solid member of Aberdeen's European Cup Winner's Cup Team.
He rose to become the most capped goal keeper in the history of Scottish football and was chosen to represent Scotland in three consecutive World Cup Finals.
Leighton's fortunes changed when he left Aberdeen to rejoin Alex Ferguson at Manchester United.
His form fluctuated in front of a porous and unconvincing Manchester United defence and his Scotland place was endangered by the form of the ex Oldham and Hibernian keeper Andy Goram.
When he least needed a vote of no confidence, Leighton was sensationally dropped from Manchester United's 1990 Cup Final replay team and punished for a slump in form during a suspect season in front of a United defence that bordered on the arthritic.
Psychologically scarred by missing the replay, haunted by press humiliation and troubled by conceding a soft goal in the final World Cup qualifying game against Norway at Hampden, Leighton joined the Scotland squad in Italy.
He was down but not out.
In an act of admirable but ultimately misguided loyalty, the national coach Andy Roxburgh stood by his dispirited keeper.
After an indifferent game against Costa Rica and an inspirational performance against Sweden when he saved Scotland's skin on several occasions, Leighton's luck finally ran out.
In Scotland's 1–0 defeat by Brazil he was noticeably slow to respond in the run up that led to Brazil's winning goal and was unfairly attacked by the press.
Once again a Scottish keeper was cast in the role of the disastrous fool.
Leighton was the most unconvincing scapegoat.
Several other players, most notably Mo Johnston and Paul McStay had performed well below expectation but they were not keepers and somehow their footballing impotence was glossed over.
In a history of disasters stretching across 30 years, Scotland has been plagued by calamity, lapses in concentration and self-induced tragedy.
The goalkeeper is always to blame and always will be.
But in a land of careless hands, Jim Leighton had the safest pair around.
He was a victim of a land so accustomed to blaming goalkeepers that deep in his heart he even began to blame himself.
The heart is a lonely hunter.
COUNT DRACULA: THE KEEPER WHO HATED CROSSES
Willie Johnson
a bitter pill to swallow
Mrs Margaret Johnson, a 32 year old housewife living in Sutton Coldfield, came on like a country western singer.
‘I love him and whatever happens I'll stick by him,’ she sobbed as the sound of Tammy Wynette's Stand By Your Man , seemed to echo through the air.
Her man was Willie Johnson, the player at the centre of the most emotional scandal in the history of Scottish football, and a figure of such sentimental intensity, he should have played for Nashville.
The passage of time has played tricks on Willie Johnson.
He will be forever remembered as the player sent home in disgrace from Scotland's disastrous World Cup campaign in Argentina after being found guilty of taking banned drugs in Scotland's ill-fated opening game against Peru.
But the details of the incident have been lost in the mists of history and for most people all that remains is a fleeting memory of the dejected player arriving at Heathrow Airport to face a miserable future as one half of a very well worn footballing joke.
Scotland had a great new strike force: Jinky on one wing and Junkie on the other.
Although the Argentina drug scandal is such an integral part of Scottish footballing history, very few people can actually recount the circumstances that led to Willie Johnson being banned for life.
He took drugs.
Most people know that!
But what drugs?
Crack, heroin, cocaine, speed, dope?
Unfortunately not, that would have been too clearcut, too unambiguous a crime to cast before a Scottish court.
Johnson's offence surrounded a drug called Reactivin, which in the days after the controversy broke was described as a pep-pill, a pick-me-up, an anti-depressant, a psycho-motor stimulant and ‘a substance normally taken for post-natal depression’.
When he admitted his offence to the SFA, poor Willie told them he had taken the drug to alleviate hay fever.
If he'd only told them he'd just had a baby, things might have been different.
Johnson was a typical product of Scotland's working-class footballing heritage.
Raised in Fife near Jim Baxter's birthplace, he worked as a pit-boy in the collieries, and established his early reputation with Lochore Welfare, one of the Kingdom's traditional mining teams.
As a teenager he signed for Rangers, winning a League Cup Winner's medal at 17, and establishing himself as a prominent newcomer in the Scotland Youth Team.
In a long and controversial career in football which included spells with West Bromwich Albion, Vancouver Whitecaps and Birmingham City, Johnson's career ended in his 39th year at Hearts.
But it was his two spells at Rangers, where he was affectionately nicknamed ‘Bud’ that the mercurial Johnson established a reputation as a daring winger with a short emotional fuse.
Sent off no less than 20 times in his career, Johnson is a surprisingly quiet and tender man who lashed out at opponents, either on the spur of the moment or in the heart-felt belief that rational behaviour was for lesser talents.
Johnson was an explosive winger, an athlete with such a burst of natural speed that he once competed in the  Powderhall Sprint and was capable of holding his own against international sprinters.
Beyond that he was a showman, a player in the tradition of Alex James, Charlie Tully, and Peter ‘Ma Ba’ McKenna, players who did not simply believe in beating defenders but in humiliating them.
Along with his contemporaries Willie Henderson and Jimmy Johnstone, he formed a troika of wee wingers whose precocious ‘tanner-ba’ skills provoked comparison with the diminutive wizards of Scotland's famous footballing past.
‘Bud’ was the end of the assembly line, one of the last wee wingers the game produced before tactical reorganisation and a change in athletic stature turned his breed into a piece of football nostalgia.
The myths that grew up around Willie Johnson are incredible in the extreme.
His blistering turn of speed, cavalier attitude and rank bad discipline made him an instant hit with the fans and yet another scourge for the beleaguered authorities to cope with.
In the first few years at Rangers, he was sent off for striking five different opponents.
In a tense cup tie a rival fan threw a can at him and in a moment of pure pantomime ‘Bud’ picked up the can, motioned a greeting of ‘cheers’to the terracing and drank some of the can's unknown contents.
‘Bud’ had a split-personality.
Off the field he was a quiet and relatively withdrawn family man, but with the ball at his feet and open space in front of him he became a demon.
In the land where the SFA was sheriff, Johnson was Billy The Kid, a bandit in pursuit of an early bath.
His image directly appealed to the hard core of Scotland's tartan army, a group of supporters whose profile in the ‘70s was more notorious than the visigoths.
‘WEE BUD.
— WILLIE JOHNSON, THE UNCROWNED KING OF THE TERRACING
In his second spell at Rangers, Johnson's sporadic acts of violence became so common they were almost obligatory.
In a game against Aberdeen, he was sent off for the  13th time in his career for fouling John McMaster, and the Pittodrie player was taken to hospital with neck injuries.
Two months later in a game against Hearts he moved down the human anatomy, this time fouling the opposition fullback Steve Hamilton, who was helped off the pitch with stud marks on his stomach.
the little dictator
Ironically, Johnson's lawless image endeared as much as it repelled. he was obviously a player who was easily unhinged but in the odd chemistry of Scotland's footballing psyche, his recklessness made him a dangerous but likeable rogue.
When Bud moved south to West Bromwich Albion in 1976, he found himself in a deep trouble after a game against Brighton, when he was sent off for the unpardonable offence of kicking a referee.
Fortunately for Johnson, his kick just missed the posterior of a leading English League official, Derek Lloyd of Worcester and he was banned for only five matches.
In what must be the most liberal judgement ever handed down by a football authority, the FA disciplinary committee decided it was unintentional.
‘If Johnson had deliberately intended an attack on the referee,’ the committee reported, ‘his right foot would not have missed the target.’
Along with the bearded maestro Archie Gemmill, Johnson was the undisputed star of Scotland's 1978 World Cup squad.
In the team's acclimatisation tour of Latin America, he kicked his way into the public's imagination and sowed the seeds of notoriety which eventually led to his life ban.
‘BOOK ME AGAIN AND YOU'RE DEAD ‘BUD JOHNS0N IN DIPLOMATIC DISCUSSION WITH A SENIOR OFFICIAL
The tour was marred with controversy from the outset.
Scotland's first game was against Chile in Santiago.
It coincided with international opposition to the Pinochet dictatorship and its appalling human rights violations.
The stadium chosen for the game was literally the killing fields, a place where supporters of deposed Allende government had been tortured and assassinated.
Although Scotland's trades union movement opposed the game, it went ahead regardless, and the players stripped in changing rooms with bullet holes along the wall.
Scotland stuffed Chile and salvaged a victory out of the mouth of repression.
It was in the following game against Argentina in Buenos Aires that Willie Johnson stole the show.
In a display of breathtaking arrogance he virtually destroyed the career of the Argentinian defender Vincente Pernia, who he tormented with twisting runs and terrific ball skills.
In a moment of desperation, the defeated Pernia, struck out at Johnson, the inevitable fight ensued and the two were sent off.
The humiliated Pernia never played for Argentina again and the normally partisan crowd jeered at the referee for dismissing Johnson.
In a stroke he had become the most famous footballer in the much fancied Scotland side.
The roots of the Willie Johnson drug scandal had been firmly planted.
just say no
The actual events that led to Johnson's life-ban are shrouded in confusion, mystery and appalling bad luck.
Although the team had been instructed by the Scottish team doctor to avoid taking any medicinal substances which might be banned by the laws of the game, Johnson frequently took either smelling salts or the mild psycho-motor drug Reactivin at club level to make him more alert when he went out to play.
Neither the salts nor the drug were illegal in either Scotland or England and Johnson, along with other team-mates, had taken them as part of their pre-match rituals on many occasions.
In that respect, Johnson's only crime was naïvety.
As part of his emotive pre-match build up, Ally McLeod promised Scotland would dismantle Peru in their opening game in the 1978 finals.
As the British media hung on his every word, Ally announced to the world that Willie Johnson would ‘terrorise their full backs’, and the rest would be academic.
It wasn't.
With Scotland it never is.
Feeling unusually low and depressed from a bout of hay fever, Johnson did the natural thing and reached for a couple of Reactivins.
The small yellow tablets coated in sugar and containing nothing more stimulating than a couple of stiff cups of coffee became the most bitter pill that Bud Johnson ever swallowed.
Johnson was dire.
He played like he'd been on tranquilisers for a month and drifted out of the game into a deep and ineffectual sleep.
The rest of his team mates were hardly conspicuous in their greatness, the team lost three goals and conceded the match to their massively underestimated opponents.
Recriminations would come thick and fast, but not even the voracious Scottish press could have guessed what would happen next.
HOLIDAY IN HELL.
ALLY MCLEOD AT THE HEIGHT OF THE DRUGS BUST
In keeping with standard FIFA practice, officials walked on to the pitch and handed red coupons to two of the most famous Scottish players, Johnson and Kenny Dalglish.
Johnson was used to red cards, but this particular coupon was to signal a different kind of brush with authority, a sign that the player had been selected for a random dope test.
As Johnson passed his urine and reflected on the result and his uncharacteristically quiet performance, he wearily joked, ‘It would be typical if they found something.’
They did.
Bud was on drugs.
At 10.00 pm on the night of the game, Ally McLeod received a telegram at the Sierra Hotel at the team's training base in Alta Gracia.
The telegram had come from FIFA's headquarters in Buenos Aires and informed the Scotland manger that one of his players, William Johnson, had traces of the proscribed drug Fencamsamin in his urine.
At first Johnson denied it, in the sincere belief that he had not taken illegal substances, but when the doctor asked if he had taken Reactivin, Johnson endearingly replied in his strong Fife accent ‘Aye, but they're no drugs.’
Confusion reigned in the Scotland camp.
FIFA regulations permitted an appeal, a second urine test and an independent analysis.
Many other countries would have grabbed at the straw, but with Johnson virtually admitting guilt, the SFA representatives were unwilling to appeal.
The time could not have been worse, defeat by Peru was bad enough but the entire Scottish party had been invited to a reception with the Minister of Sport Denis Howell, a former referee and a declared opponent of drug abuse in sport.
In a night of frantic desperation, rumours of the drug scandal were leaking by the hour.
Out of the blue, the   Scotland midfield schemer Don Masson, who had missed a penalty in the game against Peru, approached McLeod and admitted that he too had taken the banned drug.
In a mood of increasing depression Johnson, a West Brom player at the time, rang home to Sutton Coldfield.
Back home it was 6.30 am and ironically the morning of his wedding anniversary.
His wife picked up the phone believing it was an anniversary treat from her husband.
Willie simply said, ‘I think I'll be home quicker than you imagine.’
Then the phone went dead.
Back in Argentina, Don Masson had been called in front of a hurriedly convened SFA meeting, where he changed his story, admitting that he had only said he had taken the drugs as an act of loyalty to his friend and roommate.
McLeod called the rest of the team together and asked the entire squad if they had access to prescribed drugs.
Several other players owned up and the manager collected as many as two dozen pills from the squad.
The next day, racked by pressure, confusion and the desire to get something right, McLeod dumped the drugs in a field near the hotel.
Scotland's trip to Argentina began with a wave of nationalist euphoria and ended in the complete ignominy of their exuberant manager scuttling around a field hiding pep-pills.
The flower of Scotland had well and truly wilted.
‘i feel like a leper’
The media thrived on Johnson's anxiety.
On the morning of 5 June 1978 the press was alive with speculation.
Because England had failed to qualify for the finals, the entire weight of the British media inevitably fell on Willie Johnson's head.
He was smuggled out of the Scotland camp but it was only a matter of time when his pursuers caught up.
At first Johnson was contrite and ashamed, ‘I am heart-broken,’ he said in one of the first press reports ‘I am a disgrace to myself and my country.
I don't know how I am going to face my wife.’
In what seemed like a bizarre dress rehearsal of the fate awaiting his namesake, the Olympic sprinter Ben Johnson, words like ‘drugs’, ‘disgrace’, ‘cheat’ and ‘liar’recurred in almost every newspaper.
Bud Johnson had never been so alone.
Reduced to tears, exiled from his team-mates and already banned from playing for his beloved Scotland for life, the sad and victimised figure of Willie Johnson arrived back at Heathrow Airport to be met by his club manager Ron Atkinson.
In an emotional reunion they hugged each other as West Brom's chairman Bert Millichip told the assembled press that Johnson's career at the Hawthorns was secure.
Millichip told them that Johnson had not breached any of the club rules and was generally regarded as one of their most loyal players.
In the whole sorry saga, West Bromwich Albion were one of the few parties to emerge with dignity.
Unlike the censorious and supremely moral SFA, they rallied round their player when he most needed their support.
Johnson was rushed away from the airport in a police motorcade.
Over the next few days he was never out of the press and in one emotional moment he confided to a journalist that he felt betrayed by Scotland.
‘They are trying to sling mud at me to cover up the defeat by Peru,’ he said, rising to his own defence and pointing a brave if belated finger back at the SFA.
‘I feel like a leper, all they need to do now is put a bell round my neck.’
If they kept bells at Park Gardens they might have.
Over the years of football authorities have become obsessed with rooting out drug abuse in the game.
After the Johnson saga, FIFA demanded a far-reaching investigation into the misuse of drugs in English League football.
For weeks it threatened to be a cesspit of scandal, and not to be outdone the controversial English striker Stan Bowles, whose behaviour over the years made him seem like a surrogate Scot, admitted that he frequently took drugs.
Bowles was awarded a big cheque from a tabloid newspaper and if his own self-professed myths are a guideline it could have been squandered at the nearest bookies.
The more reliable FIFA enquiry found no significant evidence of the misuse of drugs.
Unlike the athletics scene  where the use of anabolic steroids was rife, football had very few cages to rattle; almost all the significant incidences of drug abuse were overseas.
‘STAND BY YOUR MAN.’
MRS WILLIAM JOHNSON AT HOME
In 1969 a doping scandal at FC Bologna in Italy led to the entire team being found guilty; in Uruguay the following year two  internationalists admitted using an exotic African drug and in the World Cup prior to Argentina, FIFA banned the Haitian internationalist Ernst Joseph for taking the proscribed drug  phenlmetrazin .
Since then the serious pushing has taken place in Colombia where the cocaine cartels have literally ruined football by using Medellin and FC Cali as laundering centres for drug money.
When set next to the assassination of players, managers and referees in Colombia, Willie Johnson was a choirboy.
Well not quite.
The traumas of Argentina would have dampened a lesser spirit than Bud's.
But the wee winger from Fife bounced back in a way that says much for the survivalist instincts in the human spirit.
After a successful career in England, Willie Johnson followed the exodus of ageing British professional players to the US Soccer League, where he joined the Canadian team Vancouver Whitecaps.
Johnson was the shining star in an excellent Whitecaps side which included former English internationalists Alan Ball and Jon Sammels. his performances put an estimated 6,000 on the team's home gate; within a season Johnson had led them to the Soccer Bowl final against Tampa Bay Rowdies.
But it was in a game against the famous New York Cosmos that Willie Johnson rediscovered himself.
Never fully attuned to the intricate histories of football, the New York team sided a former Argentinian international, and instructed him to mark the mercurial Johnson out of the game.
In a display of spiteful professionalism, the Argentinian defender pursued Johnson like a villainous Latin American stereotype from Roy Of The Rovers trying to unsettle the emotional Scot with the scurrilous taunt ‘Droogs, droogs, Johnson swallow droogs.’
Sick of being subjected to the Argentinian's taunts Johnson simply replied ‘Come near me sunshine and you'll be swallowing your teeth.’
Later in the game he was sent off for his part in a vicious brawl.
The leper had long gone and the real Bud Johnson was back.
THE FIVE O'CLOCK SHADOW.
ANDY GRAY SPORTING DESIGNER STUBBLE AND A SPROUTING CHEST, STRUGGLES WITH THE QUICK CROSSWORD
‘SIX FOOT TWO EYES OF BLUE, BIG JIM HOLTON'S AFTER YOU.'
INDECENT EXPOSURE.
BERTIE AULD BARES HIS BODY AND HOLDS HIS BALL ALOFT
beauty's only skin deep
‘TORSO TOMMY GEMMELL SKINS UP FOR CELTIC
PAPER BOY.
THE UNUSUALLY SLENDER FIGURE OF BOBBY MURDOCH POURS OVER THE BACK PAGES
rough justice
Football fans can be cruel.
They can be sadistic.
And on a big day when there's a trophy at stake or a local derby with old scores to settle, they can make the Marquis De Sade look like a good guy.
Picture this particular scene.
It is a warm Saturday towards the end of the 1989–90 season, leagues are being decided, the unfortunates are being relegated and Scotland's itinerant football fans are weaving their way to the citadels of Brechin, Forfar, and Cowdenbeath.
Among the happiest band of travellers are 5,000 St Johnstone fans heading for the seaside and a match against Ayr United which will decide the First Division Championship.
Two points away from winning the league flag, Christmas has come early to the Perth fans; ensconced in a new all-seater stadium, they are visiting an Ayr team under Ally McLeod's managerial direction.
In his infinite wisdom, Ally has returned to the repressed traumas of Argentina and selected goalkeeper Alan Rough to defend the home team's honour.
In the days running up to the match Rough had been cruelly accused of stealing meat from a local supermarket.
To the delight of the away fans, an unexpected victim is between the posts and a new song has entered their vocal repertoire.
As St Johnstone won by two goals their fans chanted ‘Who's the tea-leaf in the goals’, proof if ever it was needed that some football fans are sadists in scarves.
Alan Rough was born and bred in the Gorbals in Glasgow and had his upbringing in a closely knit family that supported the prodigal son from Ballater Street Primary School, to Partick Thistle Amateurs and ultimately to the Scottish International team.
On 17 April 1990, the Daily Record broke the news that Rough had been charged in connection with £5 of meat taken from an Ayr supermarket.
He was allegedly detained at the town's Safeway Supermarket after a Friday afternoon shopping expedition went wrong.
Police were called and Rough was later charged with the theft of butcher meat.
‘SHOP ‘TIL YOU DROP’ ALAN ROUGH & ANDY GRAY
In what must rank as the most offal moment in the history of Hampden Babylon , the paper reported the sonorous tones of a senior Strathclyde police spokesman: ‘We can confirm that a 38 year old man is the subject of a report to the procurator fiscal.
This follows a charge of shoplifting of an amount of meat from an Ayr superstore.’
The amount of meat was never specified, but football fans throughout Scotland had no doubts, it must have been Caledonia's most famous culinary repast: a pund o' mince.
Alan Rough is the typical anti-hero.
Although he stumbled into football as much by accident as design, he rose to become one of Scotland's most charismatic players.
In a career that began at Partick Thistle and included spells with Hibernian, Celtic, Ayr United and Orlando Lions, he briefly held the record as Scotland's most capped goalkeeper and played more than 800 games in a career spanning 18 years.
the loyal joke
It is to Alan Rough's eternal credit that he developed a sense of humour which carried him through experiences that ranged from the sublime to the ridiculous.
He was a dressing-room joker, a loyal club player and an outstanding international despite the inevitable victimisation he suffered as one of football's most put upon figures, the Scottish goalkeeper.
But the accusations of shoplifting completely devastated the player and his family and have left him bitter about the way Scottish newspapers pursue the private lives of football's master race.
By his own admission, Rough is one of football's midnight runners.
On two separate occasions, he was soaked to the skin when the Scotland manager Jock Stein caught him out.
Humiliation was at the centre of Jock Stein's disciplinary philosophy.
Rather than send a player home in disgrace and implicate the footballer's family in a public scandal, Stein preferred the football equivalent of a damn good caning and used to enjoy throwing a drink over offending players.
On one occasion before a match against Northern Ireland in a high security hotel in Ireland, Rough joined a journalist for a quiet drink.
He ordered coke but unknown to Rough the journalist laced the drink with a stiff dram.
Stein came along, smelt the drink, refused to listen to Rough's explanation, picked up the glass and threw it at the keeper and marched off.
In the run up to a Home International game at Hampden, the Scotland squad were assembled at a hotel in Troon.
Always in search of alternative entertainment, Rough led the team's other two keepers George Wood and David Harvey on a late-night expedition to a local hostelry known as ‘The Marine Grill’.
In time honoured tradition, the players returned well after the curfew time had expired.
For once they managed to evade the searchlights, dodge the guard-dogs, tunnel under the barbed wire and make it back to the sanctuary of their bunks before Stein and the Stalag Squad knew they were gone.
It was a great escape for a team so used to getting caught, but Rough and his fellow revellers chanced their luck and noisily ordered room-service when they got back to the hotel.
The sandwiches were quickly followed by the wrath of the Scotland manager, who charged into the bedroom and threw a glass of milk over the startled keeper.
Rough was forced to face the ultimate humiliation the next morning.
He was forced to train until he was physically sick.
Rough was lucky to miss out on one of Scottish football's most infamous scandals, when he missed the taxi that whisked five if his international team-mates to the notorious bender in Copenhagen which led them to being banned for life.
In fact, luck played tricks with Alan Rough throughout his career.
He was discovered playing on a local works pitch in Glasgow's Anniesland, when a Partick Thistle and Manchester United scout stumbled on the game after another local match was cancelled.
He made his international debut in April 1976 against Switzerland and once again luck played its part.
The first choice keeper, David Harvey of Leeds United called off in what remains the most unlikely circumstances in the history of the game.
Harvey had a farm in Yorkshire and two of the cows were about to give birth.
‘I'LL SUPPORT YOU EVERMORE.’
MRS ALAN ROUGH MODELS FOR SCOTLAND
look no telly!
If luck was kind to Alan Rough it also paid him a monstrous disservice.
His career was riddled with spectacular match winning saves and unbelievably calamities.
When Scotland played Wales at Liverpool in the dramatic World Cup qualifier, he miraculously pushed a John Toshack lob onto the bar, a save that turned the game in Scotland's favour, and set the seal on Scotland's trip to Argentina.
At a party after the match in the team's luxury hotel at Thornton Hall on the Wirral, the Aberdeen striker Joey ‘The Budgie’ Harper led a vocal and very eventful celebration party.
When Rough returned home to Glasgow the CID swooped on his house trying to recover a colour television set that had been stolen from the hotel.
Rough was innocent, but his endearing biography leaves a shadow of doubt over the innocence of other Scots who were in Liverpool   on that famous night.
ROUGH JUSTICE ALAN ROUGH LINES UP FOR SCOTLAND
Towards the end of his playing career when he was with Hibs and contemplating a move to the Orlando Lions, a short lived soccer team in Florida, Rough's business interests not only brought him appalling bad luck but imposed a series of financial set-backs that were to affect him in the years to come.
Like many footballers at the twilight of their careers, Rough looked round for a suitable business interest and eventually opened his own shop in Musselburgh.
He may have been an outstanding goalkeeper but he was hardly a product of the Harvard Business School.
Money passed through his hands with the slippery insecurity of a wet ball.
ROLL OUT THE BARREL.
ALAN ROUGH LAUNCHES A BUSINESS VENTURE
By April 1990, when over a third of the Scottish populace was avoiding the poll-tax, Alan Rough had his own reasons for fearing a Warrant Sale.
At the eleventh hour he managed to prevent a sheriff's officer from taking goods from his home to pay off outstanding business debts.
Just when it looked like the proverbial music centre was to disappear out the front door and into the sheriff's van, Rough managed to contact his solicitors who paid the £250 Rough owed to an Edinburgh Sports Company.
‘It's all very embarrassing, but that's me in the clear now,’ said a relieved Rough.
It was his third warrant sale scare in six months.
Alan Rough has given more to Scottish football than he could ever take and for that reason alone he stands on the terraces of Hampden Babylon like a colossus.
Not only is he one of the best goalkeepers the country ever produced, but the only Scottish internationalist who can honestly claim he was involved in the mysterious case of the missing meat.
If TV's investigative programme Rough Justice was to test  its forensic mettle on Ayrshire meat Alan Rough would get off scot free.
In an unusually tender story which appeared in the Sun's sensitive and soaraway issue of 3 August 1990, Alan Rough was allowed the dignity of a personal reply.
He told the paper that his life had been a torment after his arrest and explained that a simple error had led to his misfortune.
Rough told how his wife Michelle had taught him to keep fresh food away from detergents.
‘I was careful to put the bleach in the front of the trolley and the meat at the back,’ he explained.
‘But as I was packing the stuff into a carrier bag at the check-out I missed the butcher meat and sat a carrier bag on top of it by mistake.’
In an embarrassing exit from the shop the misplaced meat fell to the floor and Rough was wrongly suspected.
It was twelve weeks of torment before the player was informed the charges were to be dropped.
The case of the missing meat exposes the more sordid extremes of Scotland's obsessive fascination with the private side of football.
Within days of the episode, vicious rumours had spread throughout Ayrshire, Rough's children were pilloried at school and his wife was humiliated on future shopping trips.
After a nerve racking and mentally exhausting three months, complicated by a threat of sequestration proceedings brought by the Marine Highland Hotel for an alleged unpaid bill of £750, Rough's career continued on a downward spiral.
He left Ayr to become player-coach of junior side Glenafton for a fee of £1,000 and less than £100 per match.
In his opening game Glenafton were beaten by Ayrshire rivals and local legends Auchinleck Talbot; yet again the case of the missing meat was the talk of the crowd.
GOTCHA.
ROUGH SAVES AT KENNY'S FEET
For St Johnstone fans, on one of their rare away trips to glory, Rough's ordeal at the supermarket was the perfect opportunity to unsettle the opposition keeper with terracing malice.
The incident obviously jogged memories of the infamous time when the England captain Bobby Moore was wrongly accused of stealing a bracelet.
Throughout Rough's grey day at Ayr they chanted an age old football insult to the tune of My Darling Clementine —‘Where's the mince-beef, where's the mince-beef Alan Rough?
 It's in your pocket, it's in your pocket, it's in your pocket Alan Rough.’
For a group of supporters who show such an unnatural interest in sheep, St Johnstone fans would be well advised to keep meat talk to a minimum.
first past the post
The Scottish Premier League has generated more than its fair share of jokes, and many still get a game.
But by far the most convoluted joke to emerge out of Premier League football coincided with the arrival of Dundee United's Finnish international striker Mixu Paatelainen.
Within days of arriving at the club, were asked confused passers-by to name four players in the Premier League who were involved in gambling for cash.
The answer was Campbell Money, Tommy Coyne, Jim Bett and Mixu Pit-A-Line-On.
The joke was hardly likely to have them holding their ribs in Helsinki but it did reflect on the inordinate importance that gambling plays in the lives of Scottish footballers.
In the boring afternoons when training has finished and the snooker hall is closed, the major haunt of Scottish professional players is a noisy and accommodating emporium called the bookies.
The list of Scottish footballers who have frequented their local turf accountant is longer than the starting lineup for the Grand National, but when it comes to identifying the ante-post favourite one player stands out above the rest.
In the land of yankees, trebles and accumulators, the Scottish midfielder Lou Macari has always been the player that puts the amble in gamble.
Macari's reputation for betting stretches back to his days with Celtic, when he rose to prominence under the tutelage of the club's great manager, the late Jock Stein, a man who had his own formidable reputation when it came to an each way bet.
Macari signed for Celtic in 1966, and was an exciting reserve prospect during the Lisbon Lion era, when the club became the first British team to win the coveted European Cup.
He eventually established himself as a regular first team player for the Parkhead club before he was transferred to Manchester United in 1973.
Rumours have always been rife about Macari's interest in turf accountancy.
Throughout his successful career in which he won 24 Scottish caps, Macari was pursued by a cruel terracing joke; if he could pass the bookies as well as he passes a ball he would be a millionaire in ten years.
His playing career was occasionally graced with other controversies.
In 1974 he was fined £75 and banned for three matches when he refused to leave the pitch after being sent off in a Manchester United  match.
His career as a Scottish International ended after the ill-fated Argentina campaign when he vociferously criticised the SFA's handling of the tour and complained about the standard of accommodation.
The laconic Ernie Walker, President of the SFA at the time, urged future managers not to put Macari to any future discomfort.
Gamblers and horse traders have permeated Scottish football.
Wee Willie Henderson, Rangers' wing wizard in the '60s went on to fulfil one of his greatest fantasies when he became an on-course Bookie.
Resplendent in outrageous fly — boy career that would make Del Boy Trotter green with envy, Henderson stuck firmly to the turf long after his career was over.
He was by no means the only fool with horses.
According to several international team-mates, Alan Brazil, the Ipswich and Scotland striker frequently donated money to sick animals, although he was generally unaware they were sick when he backed them.
Davie Cooper, the Rangers and Motherwell winger once told the press he was a bad example for young players to follow: he spent too much time in the bookies.
The influence had already rubbed off on former team-mate Ally McCoist, who was dropped from a vital old firm derby in 1991 for going on a prohibited trip to the Cheltenham Gold Cup.
But somehow it was the Celtic team of the '70s and particularly their manager Jock Stein and his Italian darling Lou Macari who fashioned the most memorable images of betting.
In 1975 when Jock Stein was almost killed in a car crash, he lay in a Dumfries hospital dangerously close to death with a fractured skull.
It was difficult to forget that the Mercedes car he was travelling in — which lay in a tangled mess by the roadside near Lockerbie — belonged to the famous bookmaker Tony Queen.
Macari's story was no less dramatic.
In 1984, when his successful playing career still had a few years to run, and his gambler's mantle had been taken by the rugged striker Alan Brazil, Macari moved into management with Swindon Town.
In many respects it was a compulsive and unexpected decision which flew in the face of other better offers.
Manchester United had offered him increased terms to stay on the club's playing staff; several years later Chelsea offered him even more money to leave Swindon and he became the elite London club's assistant-manager, but on both occasions Macari put the unspectacular west country side first.
His apparent obsession with Swindon Town was in many respects the beginning of the end.
Macari, a tee-totalling hardline disciplinarian, took the club from the fourth division to the second and established himself as one of the most ambitious and sought after managers in the game.
When he arrived at Swindon, he found the club in shambolic crisis and in a fraught confrontation with his board, stormed into the boardroom at the Club's County Ground holding a mouldy, moth-eaten jockstrap.
WILLIE HENDERSON, PROFESSIONAL BOOKIE, DEVOURS A MORNING ROLL BEFORE THE PUNTERS ARRIVE
Macari threw the corroding garment down in full view of the club's directors he told them it reflected the state of their club.
‘They were a shambles and very tatty,’ said Macari years later.
‘It was a petty, senseless and stupid  gesture,’ he recalled.
‘I will never make the same mistake again.’
It was not the only mistake he made at Swindon Town.
Throughout his stay at Swindon, Macari became embroiled in a series of highly public incidents.
He was fined on two occasions for making abusive comments to referees, he caused a storm by branding his players as ‘boozers’, and his name was mysteriously connected with a local Swindon bookie.
According to the People newspaper, Roy Heaney took out local advertising to promote his new shop, Crown Bookmakers.
The ad said, ‘Fancy a Flutter?’ then went on to boast about Macari's involvement in a new betting venture in the Stratton area of Swindon.
lucky luciano
In February 1990, by which time he had moved to become manager of West Ham, Macari became embroiled in financial scandals dating back to his years at Swindon and eventually ended in the newly promoted club being relegated from the First Division to the Third, a draconian punishment which was partially decreased on appeal.
The Swindon Affair was a cesspit of intrigue and counter — intrigue involving several members of the board including the chairman Brian Hillier who was banned from involvement in football for six months.
To this day Macari is adamant about his innocence.
The club were accused of making illegal payments to players and more dramatically, Macari was fined £1,000 for his part in a betting scandal after a bet of £6,500 had been placed on Swindon to lose in a cup match against Newcastle.
‘When you are innocent, even the fine of one penny would have been a penny too much,’ he told an excited press corps who were already working over-time on the scoop.
At his lowest ebb, Macari was threatened with imprisonment and his wife rang friends to secure bail money of £50,000.
The People was the most assiduous in digging the dirt.
It returned to the belly of the beast and trawled the fag-strewn floors of Swindon's betting shops hoping for a scandalous morsel.
A bookmaker who was not named because of the code of confidentiality between bookmakers and punters told the newspaper that Macari was a frequent client.
‘Lou was a regular.’
revealed the unnamed and effusive turf accountant.
‘In the end I asked him not to bet with me anymore because of the size and frequency of his bets.’
The very co-operative and talkative source also described Macari's old betting slips, in almost retentive detail, adding ‘on one occasion he'd emptied his pockets while in my place, I cleaned up his used betting slips and there was £800 worth.’
It would be wrong to paint a portrait of Macari as an incompetent gambler, or a hopeless loser; by all accounts his gambling in the Swindon area was relatively successful, but Lucky Lou's golden touch deserted him when he joined West Ham.
His disciplinarian approach was seen to be at odds with West Ham's tradition as a freewheeling and creative team.
The club and its supporters saw themselves as part of the mythical ‘aristocracy’ of football but Macari insisted they were out of touch with modern football and embarked on a mission to toughen the team and its image.
Soon after his arrival at Upton Park, Macari had major disputes with players and coaching staff alike.
Paul Ince and Mark Ward both left the club, the former Celtic player Frank McAvennie was fined £6,000 for an alleged fracas with the team's commercial manager, and the club were fined £20,000 for pitch disturbances during a Littlewoods Cup tie against Wimbledon.
In his last 16 games as manager, Macari's West Ham won only three matches and were knocked out of the FA Cup by Fourth Division Torquay.
By a desperately ironic twist of fate he found himself confronting an away match at Swindon at the height of the press exposure about his betting.
He failed to show up for the match amidst rumours that he had resigned as West Ham's manager.
THE HUSTLERS' CONVENTION.
STEVE ARCHIBALD & ALAN BRAZIL SHOOT IT OUT ON THE GREEN BAIZE
Macari's public image was a satirist's gift.
His Italian background and film-star looks made him the appear like an Al Pacino character or the Sicilian reincarnation of a Scottish footballer.
A few days before he resigned from West Ham, the club had been beaten 6–0 in the first leg of a crunch match against Oldham.
To commemorate the cockney team's unceremonious hiding, the Sunday Mail's resident cartoonist, Malky McCormick, drew a caricature of Macari in a gangster suit furtively avoiding a crowd of shifty looking punters.
‘You'll never pull back a 6–0 deficit’ said one onlooker.
But in the cartoon Macari replied with his usual irrepressible confidence, ‘Waana bet?’
After his unexpected departure from the managerial post at  West Ham, Macari spent several months of personal self-reflection in the wilderness of football unemployment.
But it was inevitable that he would return to the game.
Fast, quick-witted and determined as a player, demanding and insistent as a manager, there was little doubt that he would snatch his career back from the brink of failure.
In February 1991, he was offered the manager's job at Birmingham City, an English Third Division club, who at the time were so down at heel they resembled an inveterate gambler staggering from one bad bet to another.
Macari used his appointment not only to begin his personal return to form, but as an opportunity to put further distance between himself and the squalid affairs at Swindon.
‘No one knows what I've been through in the last 12 months,’ he said.
‘I can cope with football but one thing I can't cope with is treachery, and that's what I had at Swindon.’
At the time of his appointment to Birmingham City, Macari and two others implicated in the Swindon controversy, Chairman Brian Hillier and ex-accountant Vince Farrar, faced charges of intent to defraud the Inland Revenue.
The charges related to extra inducements made to players over and above their club wages, an area of football so steeped in secrecy and subterfuge, that the problem is unlikely to go away.
Whatever happened in the smoky offices of Swindon Town Football Club, Lou Macari clearly felt his honour was questioned, and he remains ruthless in the pursuit of his innocence.
Such is Macari's sense of insult to his personal integrity that he once he once defended himself in an ominously dramatic tone.
‘I would never set out in life to assassinate anybody, but some people have made sure that the mud will stick to me.’
The images of honour and assassination could have been culled from the pages of a novel by Mario Puzo.
The only thing that's missing is a severed horse's head.
Lou Macari still likes horses.
‘YOUR HORSE FELL AT THE FIFTH.
— JOCK STEIN GETS BAD NEWS FROM THE LOCAL CONSTABULARY
UNDER HEAVY MANNERS.
DAVID HAY IS TOLD TO SHUT IT
‘YOU ARE NOT OBLIGED TO SAY ANYTHING…’
COME BACK BERTIE ALL IS FORGIVEN
BROKEN HARTFORD.
A TRANSFER TO LEEDS FALLS THROUGH WHEN MEDICAL EXPERTS DETECT THAT SCOTLAND'S ASA HARTFORD HAS A HEART DEFECT
hounded to hell
DAVE COOPER DENIES IT ALL
WORK THAT SUCKER TO DEATH.
JOHN GREIG LEADS HIS IBROX TEAM-MATES ON ANOTHER GRUELLING ASSAULT ON THE GULLANE SAND DUNES
HOUNDED TO HELL.
SCOTLAND'S JIM BETT RETURNS FROM RAPALLO
i'm no killer says butlins boy
So!
Now you see him now you don't.
There is something unsettling and unsettled about Graeme Souness.
He's handsome, he's fit, he's a self-made millionaire and he's the strident enigma who spent five years dragging Glasgow Rangers into the twentieth century.
Then out of the blue, out of the real true blue, the Messiah with a droop moustache did a runner.
Suddenly the Ibrox revolution was on hold.
With the club teetering on the brink of another League title, Aberdeen threatening the impossible and the SFA snapping at his heels, Souness moved to Liverpool.
The man in the iron mask melted.
At a nervous and hurriedly arranged press conference, the Ibrox publicity machine could barely paper the cracks between the departing boss and his bewildered chairman.
For the first time in his over-confident reign, Souness looked lost.
Big transfers, big talk, big doubts.
‘You've caught me on a bad day,’ grunts Graeme Souness, as he ambles across the mahogany lined reception at Ibrox.
It is a Tuesday morning in 1989, clouds are settling over the Southside and Rangers are due to play Dundee United in a re-scheduled Scottish Cup match.
Souness has just heard that the SFA have banned him from sitting at the touchline for the remainder of the season, and yet again the tabloid press has pushed his tolerance beyond the limit.
Stories of his private life are rife, the latest headlines are about a broken marriage, custody of the children and the inevitable dressing-room disagreements.
Souness is fixing me with the glare he reserves for the enemy, the look that countless midfield players must have known to their terror, a look that threatens to rupture my Achilles tendon, if I hover on a question too long.
Soon after his arrival, Souness reversed the dominant trend of football transfers by bringing expensive English stars to play in Scotland and towards the end of 1988, the club was the subject of an inspirational takeover bid which made Souness and his personal friend, the business man David Murray, the new owners of the club.
Dallas is dull by comparison, at last Scottish football has thrown off the mantle of miserable weather and abortive pies, the  glamorous dynasty of soap-opera management had arrived.
J.R.
Souness first hit the headlines as a teenager when he absconded from his first club Tottenham Hotspur and ran away from London to his home in Edinburgh.
Homesickness, the love of a teenage girlfriend called June and a premature belief in his ability had encouraged the young Souness to jump ship.
‘I was totally wrong, it was immature, pure arrogance,’ Souness confesses, in what must be one of the few confessions to take place inside Ibrox.
‘I was 17 and thought I had a god given right to be in Spur's first team.
At that time their midfield was Peters, Mullery and Perryman and I simply wasn't good enough.
But I was young and Scottish and I thought I was the greatest.
Spurs did me a favour, I left with a chip on my shoulder and a point to prove.’
Self-confidence bordering on arrogance is one of  Graeme Souness' most abiding characteristics.
As a player for  Middlesbrough , Liverpool and Scotland he was Renoir with a razor-blade, an artistic hardman, whose flamboyant style of play was world class.
When he hung on to the ball there was a strange, self-assured almost narcissistic side to his game.
When Souness played, a part of him always stood aside, literally watching his own skills.
Of the seven deadly sins, only pride really matters to Graeme Souness, the other six come on as substitutes.
the chocolate soldier
As a manager he remains his own greatest fan and although his playing days are over, he was probably the most creative player on Rangers' books: a genius in search of a mirror.
But the arrogant and self-confident side of Graeme Souness is always guaranteed to split public opinion.
As a player for Scotland his peacock style and brasserie good looks made him a figure of considerable loathing.
Some of his fellow professionals were equally dubious.
The diminutive midfield player Archie Gemmill once called him ‘the chocolate soldier’, adding with barbed wit, ‘if Souness was chocolate he'd eat himself.’
‘Archie was 90 per cent right’, says Souness never slow to admit his failings, ‘there was a lot of truth in what he said.
We are going back to 1978, maybe I was a bit vain and thought the world revolved around me, but it was my way of motivating myself, and it worked with Archie Gemmill, every time I played him after that I kicked him up in the air.’
Souness has never shrugged off his vanity.
In a career that took him to Genoa where he played for the local side Sampdoria, he assumed an almost Italianate sense of style.
He was a regular in the designer bars that pose in the sun along the Portofino coastline and although he only drinks moderately, he has developed a taste for vintage champagne.
He wears the kind of exaggerated Giorgio Armani suits which never quite blended into the Govan landscape.
If clothes speak then Graeme Souness's jackets are complete gossips.
Italy had a profound and sometimes farcical effect on the way he managed Rangers.
‘The professionalism in the Italian league is unbeatable,’ he once claimed, doubting that Scotland has the cultural capacity to compete.
‘The Scottish mentality is different.
In Italy they accept going into retreat during pre-season training, they have strict codes on players’ sex lives, it's almost religious.
Scottish players simply don't understand that.
I want to bring the good bits of that system to Rangers.’
WHEN YOU SIGN FOR RANGERS I'LL SHOW YOU WHO'S BOSS.’
SOUNESS GETS BUTCH WITH RAY WILKINS
SOUNESS LEAVES AN SFA DISCIPLINARY HEARING AT PARK GARDENS
There is more than passing irony in the very thought of a celibate Rangers.
The Italian rituro system is monastic in its rigour, players are kept away from wine, women and song for weeks on end, in order to concentrate on their game.
Keeping some of the Rangers first team squad away from a disco would be like keeping moths from a lightbulb.
But Souness deplores the heritage of scandal and misbehaviours and insists that players like Baxter and Best are anachronisms.
‘Today the body is a footballers only  asset.’
he claims, adamant that fitness and dedication now have primacy over wayward skills.
‘If you don't look after your body you have no place at this club.’
THE DARKEST DAY.
SOUNESS WALKS TO THE DRESSING ROOM AS THE INJURED GEORGE MCCLUSKEY IS CARRIED OFF
The body is the hidden key to the real Graeme Souness.
At the age of 12 he went on holiday to Butlins in Ayr with his parents and had his first taste of competitive success.
Standing stripped to the waist, cheered on by Redcoats in a packed arena of wooden chalets and Beachcomber bars, he won the body beautiful contest.
Was this the first signs of narcissism?
‘Oh come on, give me a break,’ he argues.
‘There was a free holiday as the first prize.
I was in there trying to win.
It wasn't vanity it was a free holiday I was after.’
His will to win has become a compulsive passion, a virtue that makes him a figure of  loathing in the eyes of opposition fans.
Nonetheless, a Butlins body contest is a disarmingly appropriate beginning to his career.
To this day Souness is obsessed with fitness, healthy dieting, pectoral pride and keeping his body in trim.
In what must rank as one of the most homoerotic quotes in the history of football, Jim Steel, a trainer with the Scotland squad which played in the Mexico World Cup said of Souness: ‘His body is absolutely beautiful.
He was never off the massage table.
I used to spend an hour a day on him.’
Graeme Souness is the photograph Robert Mapplethorpe forgot to take.
‘my boss is a hooligan’
On his return to Scotland, Souness chose to live in Edinburgh, a decision that has not endeared him to some of the more primitive members of the Glasgow community.
But his luxury home, complete with a trout farm and stables, is a million miles from the council prefab he was brought up in during the '50s.
Although he has travelled the world, Edinburgh and the family memories it evokes, are still profoundly important to Graeme Souness.
Every Sunday he turns out at a hall on a council scheme in Edinburgh to play 5-a-side football with his friends, trying by his own admission to re-live some of the opportunities he missed when he left Carrick Vale Secondary School at 15 to pursue a professional football career in London.
Edinburgh, his childhood past and nostalgia for missed opportunities are the emotionally tender side of a man whose public image is tough and uncompromising.
As a player Souness has a highly flammable temper; when he loses the head, something snaps.
In 1985, he claimed defensively, ‘There's black and white proof I'm not the killer I'm supposed to be, I've only been sent off twice.’
When he moved to Rangers as a player and the red cards flourished it was a quote he was destined to regret.
Jan Bartram, the Danish fullback who played for Rangers under Souness fell into disrepute at the club after a newspaper article led with the incriminating headline ‘My Boss Is A Hooligan’.
In Copenhagen's biggest selling daily newspaper Ekstra Bladet , Bartram claimed the Rangers' boss had given players strict instructions intimidate the opposition.
Bartram's dispute with Souness was the first of several highly publicised fights with players.
Despite his popularity with Rangers fans, the English midfield hardman, Graham Roberts, was banished from Ibrox after a dressing room argument with Souness.
To emphasise his authority the unforgiving Rangers boss exposed Roberts to a humiliating period as a reserve team substitute.
The following season the wayward Derek Ferguson and the English international Terry Butcher also left Ibrox in a hurricane of dressing-room disagreement.
In his defence, Souness believes his no-nonsense approach has made him a marked man.
He remains adamant that a campaign bordering on conspiracy has highlighted his misdemeanours and that referees take an over exuberant interest in his style of play and management.
Despite the fact that he has been involved in more intimidating tackles than most professionals of his generation, he thinks a line has to be drawn between hard edged professionalism and pathological violence.
Not normally thought of as an apologist, Souness is still traumatised by the tackle which left Hibernian's George McCluskey needing nine stitches in a knee wound.
But he insists regret should never make a footballer   compromise on toughness.
Graeme Souness
even hard men cry
Souness openly admits that the foul on George McCluskey was possibly the lowest moment in his career.
‘I've never been more depressed than the time I was sent off against Hibs.
It was the first game of the season.
I was brought up in Albert Street near the Hibs ground, my whole family came from that area, my dad used to sneak into the ground at night to play football on the grass at Easter Road, and I got sent off in my own backyard.
I remember seeing the red card and looking up, there was 30,000 people jeering and I could see my dad in the front row of the directors’ box.
I can still feel the shame now.
I know it sounds like Hollywood, but I've never felt so alone.
I'd let my dad down, humiliated him in his own street.
That was my lowest moment in football.’
Did the hardman cry?
‘No.
Not then.
I just sat in the dressing-room with my head in my hands hating myself for what I'd done.’
Does the hardman ever cry?
‘No.
Never,’ says Souness defensively.
Never?
‘YOU'LL REGRET THAT SON I BELIEVE ME YOU'LL REGRET IT’
‘Okay I've cried three times in my adult life,’ he finally admits: ‘When my sons were born and when my mother died.
 It's the anniversary of my mum's death this week,’ he says, almost visibly remembering her.
‘I sometimes feel a great sense of loss and disappointment that she never saw me grow up.
I left home at 15 to become a footballer, she was really proud of me; she encouraged me to go but I know she wanted me at home.
She wanted to see me grow up, it was as simple as that, but it's those simple things that are sometimes the hardest to accept.’
According to the tabloids, Souness has had remarkable success with women.
In the '70s great play was made of his love affair with the former Miss World Mary Stavin and his brief flirtation with Karen Berlinski, one half of an appalling Euro disco duo who briefly graced the German hit parade.
It was his marriage to his wife Danielle, the heiress to a family fortune, which finally secured the soap-opera image.
Like an out-take from Falcon Crest , Souness and his wife moved from villa to mansion and back again, but his incurable obsession with football ultimately led to divorce and to a painful separation which distanced Souness from his children.
With his mother dead and his divorced wife living in Majorca, there is a side of Graeme Souness that the tabloids never acknowledge, a more solitary side of his life, walking his dogs over the hillsides near Edinburgh, wrapped up in football, obsessed with success and a wealthy victim of Scotland's passion for football.
Despite his financial wealth and his high profile public image as one of Scotland's most successful businessmen, Souness is a loner with lots of mates, the man who never quite fits in.
The Lone Stranger has always had a love — hate relationship with Scotland.
‘I've always felt I was never popular with the Scottish crowd.
I played once for Scotland against Wales and got booed every time I touched the ball.
I was upset because I was proud to play for Scotland but the crowd's reaction only acted as a spur.
I never backed off.
‘There's a parochial side to Scotland that I've never  been able to accept.
When I came to Rangers I knew I'd have to change attitudes.
Let's face it, Rangers are the biggest club in Scotland, but they had an attitude that seemed to be against change and against progress.
For me it's forward or nothing and if you don't believe that you deserve to be a second-rate club or second-rate country.’
His uncompromising image and his pursuit of success has made him a figure of unmitigated resentment.
Soon after he joined Rangers he was involved in a nasty and bitter dismissal, sacking the club's long standing groundsman.
His defenders saw it as efficiency, his detractors saw it as the uncaring side of Graeme Souness.
He spent millions and made millions.
Despite signing the odd turkey, in the uncharacteristically naive belief that if they were English they must be good, Souness dismantled the old Ibrox Calvinism, and replaced it with a corporate attitude finely attuned to the modern world.
But his ruthlessness made him as much a figure of fun as a minister of fear, and whatever his future holds, Souness will always be pursued by a sense of resentment in Scotland.
Maybe it is small-minded jealousy.
Maybe it's the nations healthy suspicion of flash gestures and big bucks.
Or maybe it's just that Scotland is too familiar with lads from the back streets of Edinburgh claiming they have a license to kill.
My name is Bond, Graeme Bond.
‘THIS IS A ROLEX IT IS NEVER WRONG’ SOUNESS DISCUSSES THE THEORY OF TIME WITH A RELUCTANT LINESMAN
there's a guy works down the chip-shop swears he's charlie
Charlie Nicholas is a one man morality tale.
Throughout his career he has lurched from one extreme to another, noisy then quiet, a prolific goal scorer then a famine victim, a superstar then a substitute.
When it comes to his footballing image he never seems to know which mask suits him best.
But when it comes to haute-cuisine , Charlie Nicholas knows where he stands.
Chips with everything!
To the football fans who have followed his exploits Nicholas is ‘Champagne Charlie’, the John Travolta of Scotland and the uncrowned king of the late licence.
But when the chips are down and he's feeling blue, Charlie sees himself as ‘The Maryhill Hermit’, a victim of his public image, and a man who would rather have a quiet night with the wife than a night out with the wild bunch.
Will the real Charlie Nicholas please stand up!
Charlie was born and raised in Glasgow's Maryhill, where the Jags hailed, the Mental Fleet sailed and the neighbourhood had an obsession with football.
Raised on the Wyndford housing scheme, where he lived next door to the Celtic, Dundee and Partick Thistle player Jim Duffy, Nicholas was a pupil at St Columba of Iona, a local catholic school.
‘I hated school,’ he claims.
‘Getting a game of football on a Saturday for the school team was great.
I enjoyed P.E.
except for odd occasions in the winter when we had to go into the gym and dance with the birds!’
By the time he was 20 and the most prodigiously gifted Celtic player of his generation, Charlie was to discover that dancing with the birds had its own special charm.
After a long apprenticeship with Celtic Boys Club, playing as a winger then a defensive sweeper, Nicholas attracted the attention of several English league teams and was invited to trials at Ipswich, Wolves and Manchester City.
It was the Ipswich set-up under the management of Bobby Robson which most impressed him and the East Anglia team offered the teenager £4,000 to sign.
Unfortunately, they played in blue strips and Nicholas could not face the prospect of signing for a team that wore the same colour of shirts as Rangers, and so he returned to Celtic Boys Club to await his calling from Paradise.
Celtic are an institution but there are those inside the game who feel the club is run like a destitution.
As it made the historic journey from being a charity team for Irish immigrants in Glasgow's East End in 1888 to being a European Cup winning team in 1967, there is a widely held myth that the club resents spending money and keeps its funds in the infamous biscuit tin, a closely guarded money chest under the Parkhead bed.
Compared to the freewheeling Rangers team under David Murray and Graeme Souness, critics have dismissed Celtic as a club that has taken its roots in poverty and charity to extremes.
Charlie Nicholas is no exception.
By December 1982, when Celtic lifted the League Cup for the first time since the mid-'70s, Nicholas had established himself as the young sensation of Scottish football.
In a season where  he could do no wrong, he scored a remarkable 51 goals, became the undisputed Player of the Year, and dispelled the illusion that the former Celtic hero Kenny Dalglish would never be replaced.
His goal scoring prowess won him Scotland's Golden Boot Award, a magnum of Moet Chandon and the nickname Champagne Charlie.
But at the height of Charlie's love-affair with Celtic the romance turned sour when the player flatly rejected what he believed was an insulting financial offer from the Celtic board.
It was with a feeling of animosity that Nicholas accepted an improved offer from London and was transferred to Arsenal for £750,000.
‘It's a sad fact that Celtic have taken advantage of their top players,’ he claimed, in his ghost-written biography, ‘The kind of players who have supported Celtic and been really loyal to the club have been the ones who have suffered the most.’
This image of Celtic was one that dated back to the '20s when the club tried to sell the free scoring centre-forward Jimmy McGrory when he was en route to a catholic pilgrimage at Lourdes.
But if Nicholas felt he had suffered at the hands of Celtic, then the suffering he experienced in London at the hands of the media was to force him out of the limelight and into a melancholic shell where scoring goals seemed harder than pulling Mother Theresa.
Champagne Charlie's move to London was a tactical disaster.
Although he had a choice of several clubs, including Liverpool, Manchester United, Inter Milan and Torino, Nicholas inadvisedly chose London.
Critics of his move to Arsenal, including Graeme Souness, claimed he was putting his social life, his image and his pop marketability before football.
Charlie denied it.
Charlie would.
But the warning failed to prevent a catastrophic decline in his footballing fortunes.
Nicholas was not the first Scottish star who has made the error of moving to London in the belief that the terraces are paved with gold.
Hughie Gallacher's move to Chelsea in the '30s; Peter Marinello's transfer from Hibs to Arsenal in the '60s, and Frank McAvennie's return to West Ham are positive proof that the Soho night is enchanting to high-living Scots.
‘…
AND THE WINNER OF THIS YEAR'S UNPRONOUNCEABLE NAME GAME IS YOUR FRIEND & MINE ‘JACKI’ DZIEKANOWSKI.’
cheque point charlie
At Centre Point, the Soho reception centre for runaways, social workers advise young Scots to avoid the pitfalls of drug abuse, sex offenders and Soho amusement arcades.
No one had the foresight to tell Charlie Nicholas, the young Glaswegian in a white leather suit, about a species infinitely more troublesome than rent-boy racketeers: cockney football agents with their eye on the main chance.
In his career, Nicholas has had more agents than Rangers Pools.
In his first season at Arsenal he was cast in the role of footballer turned male model.
Although he endeared himself to Arsenal's North bank and played impressively enough on the outskirts of the box to sustain his reputation for  skilful adventure, he rarely found the net at Highbury and began to look like over-paid hype to the footballing public.
At his most impressionable, Nicholas allowed himself to be talked into publicity stunts that horribly backfired.
He appeared on stage at Wembley as part of a Tory rally in support of Margaret Thatcher.
The move apparently upset his father — a redundant trade unionist — and provoked derision in the anti-Thatcher heartlands of central Scotland, where Nicholas was caricatured as a dupe and a dullard.
The sympathetic voices preferred to argue that Charlie's champagne bubble had burst and he had been smitten by the sentimental Scottish condition called homesickness.
They vowed his form would improve if he quit Arsenal and returned to Glasgow.
There was enough historical evidence to support these claims.
Nicholas was only one in a long line of young Scots including the 16 year old Spurs player Graeme Souness who found London to be a lively but ultimately lonely city.
As goals at Arsenal became fewer, most people plumped for the most obvious explanation; Nicholas was a victim of the magical trinity of bevvy, birds and big-headedness.
The evidence seems overwhelming.
There was Stringfellows' night club, that appalling leather suit, the friendship with an aerobic gymnast, newspaper photos of him stripped to the waist, the gold earrings, and his nights on the town.
Teresa Bazar of the pop group Dollar remembered   her night with Nicholas and it seemed to capture the predicament to a tee.
Her thoughts on the champagne kid were recorded for posterity in The Book of Football Quotations.
‘We talked about football but all he wanted to talk about was sex,’ she said, before adding, ‘I hear he's not been scoring many goals recently and that's why he left Arsenal, but all I can tell you is he certainly scored a hat-trick with me that night.’
holiday in hell
NICHOLAS SCORES FOR ARSENAL IN AN F.A.
CUP TIE AGAINST ROTHERHAM
Charlie Nicholas
Charlie's reputation was dogged by misfortune.
When he least needed the attention of a photographer one was sure to be on call and when he most needed a month of solitude away from screaming headlines, something from his past was inevitably dug up.
If scandal was the sorcerer, Charlie was a reliable apprentice.
He summed up his own fate in a brief description of life as one of football's miscreants: ‘If I go into a bar and have a lager shandy,’ he said in 1984, ‘word goes back that I'm knocking back bottles of champagne.
By the time it gets to the papers or my manager at Arsenal, it's me lying in the gutter.’
Haunted by an over-imaginative press, Charlie Nicholas was to confront his worst ordeal in September 1986 — the case of the stolen chip, a bizarre and unbelievable affair which will haunt Nicholas until he retires from top class football.
The incident took place when Charlie and his long time friend and fellow Celtic Boys' Club colleague Willie McStay were on holiday together in Ibiza.
In what seemed like an innocuous joke, Nicholas allegedly tried to steal a chip from a holiday-maker outside the ‘Confusion Bar’ in San Antonio on the holiday island of Ibiza.
The rest is her story.
At the time her chip was stolen Lori McElroy, a latter day femme fatale from East Kilbride, was 28 and enjoying a holiday abroad with her student boyfriend.
Westminster County Court heard that an argument ensued and that Nicholas reputedly slapped and punched the girl fracturing her jaw.
Judge McDonnel presiding dismissed the attack as ‘an arrogant and cowardly assault’ and scolded Nicholas by saying, ‘I am old fashioned enough to think it is particularly nasty for a man to strike a woman, especially an athletic man.’
To this day the incident is shrouded in mystery.
Nicholas still denies the exchange was anything like as bad as the court supposed and although he paid £1,300 damages to the victim , h e remains adamant that an injustice was done.
According to his solicitor at the time Nicholas was ‘bitterly disappointed with the verdict because he is not a violent man.’
Unfortunately the newspapers printed a different version of the truth.
According to press reports at the time, Lori McElroy and her boyfriend claimed Nicholas and his friends had been a problem throughout the holiday.
‘During the holiday we saw Nicholas more than once,’ she told the Daily Mail .
‘He was always acting flash, wearing white leather suits and drinking champagne.
He seemed to think he should have a lot of attention.’
The big trouble flared when the chip was stolen.
Lori McElroy apparently shouted, ‘Listen Charlie we're not impressed so go off and pester someone else,’ and, the court heard, Nicholas turned violent.
‘At that Mr Nicholas slapped my face hard then gave me a solid punch to the jaw.’
she told the court adding, ‘As I turned away, I felt a kick and I saw Nicholas being restrained by his friends, his legs flailing towards me.’
The evidence swung in an unexpected direction when Nicholas called a witness in his defence, a friend Christopher Brown, who was also on holiday in Ibiza.
Brown claimed it was himself and not Nicholas who was guilty of the assault adding somewhat implausibly that Charlie was ‘pure as the driven snow’.
An audible ripple of laughter went round the court room as Brown denied vehemently that he had been ‘set up to take the rap for the footballer’.
It was Charlie's worst nightmare, he had to go through the public humiliation of denying he had a drink problem and retreated from the court saying, ‘I've been found guilty so there's nothing anyone can do.
But in my heart I still know I'm innocent’.
A CHIP ON HER SHOULDER.
MISS LORI MCELROY (28), A DESIGN ENGINEER FROM EAST KILBRIDE WAS AWARDED £1,300 IN DAMAGES IN THE FAMOUS BAG OF CHIPS CASE
home is where the heart is
The following month the legal process smiled more kindly on Charlie Nicholas when a three year drink driving ban was shortened by a year allowing him to buy a new £11,000 Porsche.
But in the world of football, the word was out, yet another Scottish player had been tarnished with an uncontrollable image.
Despite the fact that Nicholas does more charity work than most young players and in spite of his regular visits to see sick children at Great Ormond Street Hospital, the image died hard.
In October 1987, when his days at Arsenal were well and truly numbered, Nicholas flew to the French Riviera with Arsenal's chief executive Ken Friar.
to enter into transfer  negotiations with the enterprising French club FC Toulon.
A £600,000 transfer was almost in place when the French club made an unprecedented contractual demand, a morality clause in Nicholas's contract which would guarantee the players good behaviour.
According to representatives of the French club they wanted to cash-flow the transfer fee in stages and put Nicholas on an eight month probation to see if he would behave.
‘We couldn't take the risk of blowing so much money on someone we are unsure of,’ said Toulon's manager Roland Courbiss, ‘I wanted Charlie in the team but we had to be sure because of his reputation.’
The transfer fell through and Charlie returned to the Scottish Premier League to play for Aberdeen.
Charlie Nicholas had left his mark on English football as one of the great imponderables, a player of exquisite skill, an under-achiever, a player literally troubled by the burden of being brilliant.
Jimmy Greaves, a goal scorer who could never match Charlie's quixotic skills, paid a fond farewell to the departing Scot.
‘Stringfellows’ will miss him,’joked the reformed alcoholic.
One of the most sobering institutions in Hampden Babylon is marriage.
For Charlie Nicholas his betrothal to his wife Claire and the more cosy prospect of a future as a father was apparently a watershed in his development.
Despite a piddling little incident in Aberdeen in 1989 when he was reported to the Procurator Fiscal for what the law delicately describes as ‘a public nuisance offence’, Nicholas began to re-build his reputation at Aberdeen, a city whose heritage was built on fish and has the highest concentration of chip shops in Scotland.
It came as no surprise in 1990 when Charlie Nicholas's name was once again associated with a Celtic team who had just experienced their worst season for years.
Could Nicholas weave magic again?
In what became the biggest spending spree the club with the Scrooge image has ever embarked on, Nicholas returned home to Parkhead along with his former Arsenal teammate Martin Hayes and another old Celtic Boys' Club stalwart, the ex-Hibernian midfield player John Collins.
When Nicholas returned to Parkhead to play his home debut in a showpiece friendly against Everton he was greeted with rapturous applause.
The prodigal son had returned to Parkhead.
Ironically, in his biography, written soon after his move to Arsenal, Charlie Nicholas had vowed he would never darken Celtic's door again.
‘Since I left, there has been talk about my going back to Celtic, but that will never happen.’
Inevitably it did and Glasgow's cafe bars gave an audible sigh of relief: champagne and chips was back on the menu.
‘CHAMPAGNE’ CHARLIE STRIDES PURPOSEFULLY OUT OF THE WESTMINSTER COUNTY COURT STILL PROFESSING HIS INNOCENCE
frank's wild years
I PLAYED WI' MUCH BIGGER TITS AT ST MIRREN.’
MCAVENNIE OUT ON THE TOWN WITH MODEL JENNY BLYTHE
If the management of Stringfellows Nightclub in London's West End were to take their snobbish door-policy to its ultimate conclusion and investigate the social backgrounds of their glittering clientele, at least one regular would be out on his ear.
Frances McAvennie, a former council roadsweeper from Glasgow's Milton housing scheme, is not the kind of character you immediately associate with brasserie lifestyle.
But football can bestow incredible social status on those with skill.
In his wildest years Frank McAvennie, a sweeper turned striker, managed to overcome his humble origins, dye his hair blond and become one of London's disco glitterati.
Like a reject from Duran Duran, Frankie Mac moved from one night-spot to another in search of notoriety and another naughty dame.
McAvennie's peroxide reign has made him one of the most recognisable anti-heroes in Scottish football.
After a successful infancy with the junior side Johnstone Burgh, McAvennie was spotted by manager Jim Clunie and signed to St Mirren, the perpetually enterprising Paisley side whose ability to discover great footballing talent is matched only by their pressure to sell them to bigger clubs.
After an inauspicious start to his career, in which he fractured his skull in a clash with Dundee United's David Narey, Frank became a firm favourite at Love Street.
His footballing skills were obviously allied to a questionable temperament, and in January 1985 Frank McAvennie lived up to his immense promise, becoming the first Scottish footballer to be sent off in a Premier league match for giving a ‘V’ sign to the opposing fans.
The Heart of Midlothian supporters, no strangers to rudeness themselves, immediately christened him ‘Frank The Wank’ and McAvennie's controversial future was secured.
In June 1985, when he was already established as one of Scottish football's most persistent   goalscorers, McAvennie left St Mirren for £340,000 and joined West Ham.
Unlike many expensive Scottish signings who had proceeded him, McAvennie took to English football like a gin to tonic.
In his first season at Upton Park, he became the uncrowned King of the East End, scoring 28 goals in his first season and setting up an unrivalled scoring partnership with Tony Cottee.
His 28 goals were free tickets to every night-club in London and despite a quiet off-field life when he first moved to London, McAvennie finally succumbed to temptation and took his rightful place in the twilight zone.
At a footballer's dinner in Glasgow, the Irish international Liam Brady once joked that McAvennie's team-mates nicknamed him ‘Ginger-Pubes’, adding with glee, ‘I can assure you Frank's blonde hair isn't natural.’
But it managed to fool the damsels of the night.
Never in the history of human seduction has one man given so much attention to the cause of international womanhood as the former roadsweeper from Milton.
Whilst the rest of Scotland's footballing anti-heroes stumbled from one seedy den to another, drinking anything in their way, Frank McAvennie has devoted his life to human affection.
In the words of one over-excited Fleet Street commentator ‘His tipple is nipple’.
McAvennie's penchant for the pectoral glands began in earnest when he joined West Ham.
His brief relationship with a page three girl Julie Desmond hit the skids when the press revealed that the bold Frank was two-timing her for another model, Anita Blue.
In a frivolous but fascinating series of articles in the English tabloids, the scorned woman described him as ‘Ratavennie’, saying he behaved like a ‘rat’ and his ‘tactics were firmly offside’.
Over a period of nearly two years, when he was involved with the two models, McAvennie had his sights on Jenny Blyth, one of the Daily Star's highest paid models and an undisputed star in the premier league of page three girls.
When their paths crossed at parties or in night-clubs, McAvennie used all his charm to convince her that ex-roadsweepers from Glasgow were unquestionably the best lovers.
Already involved with her longstanding boyfriend Neil Turley, Jenny declined his advances, but undaunted, fearless Frank phoned her on a regular basis and left messages with her unsuspecting boyfriend, a West Ham fan who was flattered that the team's top scorer was training so late at night.
In October 1987, on one of the biggest days of transfer activities in Scottish football, McAvennie returned to Scotland.
He signed for Celtic, the team he had supported as a youth, for £725,000.
On the same day Richard Gough was transferred from Spurs to Rangers for £1.5 million.
By the time McAvennie arrived in Scotland his brief engagement to Anita Blue had ended and his pursuit of Jenny Blyth was paying dividends.
Their relationship was pure tabloid.
One of Scotland's richest footballers and one of Britain's most marketable models were an item and according to a highly quotable ‘close friend’, who in true tabloid style was never named, Frank was supposedly ‘Besotted’ by the blonde lovely.
east end boys and west end girls
The couple advanced their relationship when McAvennie flew to London as a member of the Scotland squad who lost to England at Wembley in 1988.
As the tartan army drowned its sorrows in the bars of Soho, Frank preferred a candlelit dinner.
‘We really hit it off,’ said Jenny.
‘The more champagne I drank the better I understood his strong Scottish accent.
I'd barely finished my prawn cocktail before I realised I could fall for him.’
‘SHURELY SSHOME MISTAKE.’
FRANKIE & CHARLIE PROMOTE ALCOHOL FREE LAGER
Entranced by the aphrodisiacs in his prawn cocktail, McAvennie  began to visit his new girl every weekend, flying to the London nightlife and eventually provoking a dispute with Celtic manager Billy McNeill when he failed to show up for a Monday morning training session.
He proposed to her on Valentine's Day 1989.
It was the beginning of his life with Jenny Blyth and the end of his life-long love-affair with Glasgow Celtic.
Booed off the pitch in his last game for the club, he joined West Ham and left Glasgow chanting a familiar mantra.
‘Playing for Celtic has curtailed my freedom.
There are some places I just can't go to.’
The places Frank McAvennie had in mind opened at 10.00pm, had flashing light shows and enamel ice-buckets on legs.
McAvennie's second spell at West Ham was in marked contrast to his first.
Although he bought Jenny a £2,000 diamond engagement ring and happily re-settled in his Brentford mansion, his scoring prowess deserted him after a vicious tackle by Stoke's notorious Chris Kamara left McAvennie with a broken leg, an injury that kept him out of first team football for months.
McAvennie threatened to sue Kamara but dropped the idea when it was established that the injury would not end his career.
Kamara had no great love for Scottish strikers; in April 1988 he made legal history as the first English League player to be fined in court for an on-pitch assault.
The Swindon Town hard-man was fined £1,200 for attacking the Scottish striker Jim Melrose, breaking his cheekbone in three places.
Followers of Scottish football know only too well that a lapse in form and a broken leg are often the precursor of disasters to come.
In January 1990, the month his home city wore the prestigious crown of European Capital of Culture, Frankie Mac from deepest Milton celebrated in his own uniquely cultured way.
With Jenny Blyth nowhere to be found — vindictive press reports claiming that the marriage of the decade was on the rocks — he became embroiled in an unseemly dispute with his own club.
This time the venue was the upmarket Hilton Hotel in Hornchurch, Essex.
EAST END STORY.
FRANK MCAVENNIE STARS FOR WEST HAM
According to reports at the time, McAvennie and a couple of unnamed cohorts left the club's annual Christmas dinner and tried to gatecrash a private party being held in the hotel by West Ham's commercial manager Brian Blower.
A hotel insider told the Sun , ‘Mr Blower just wanted a quiet family party and when he told McAvennie he couldn't get in there was a lot of pushing and shoving.’
Brian Blower's account of the incident was considerably more revealing.
He alleged that a West Ham player assaulted him, in front of his wife, telling the Daily Express, ‘What happened totally ruined it, punches were thrown.’
Angered by the incident, Blower demanded a written apology and then threatened to take a writ out against McAvennie.
Fearing another embarrassing incident, in his short and fated career as West Ham manager, Lou Macari, still reeling from the Swindon financial controversies, slapped a huge fine on McAvennie.
The fine amounted to the equivalent of two weeks wages — or two years wages if you're a roadsweeper.
McAvennie disputed the fine and called on the Professional Footballer's grievance procedures to voice his dissent.
The Christmas rumpus led to unfair and short-sighted predictions that it was the swansong in Frank McAvennie's eventful career.
Still trying to regain the imposing form he had displayed in the past days at Celtic and West Ham, there was a strong suspicion that McAvennie was past his prime.
But true to form, the new season saw him in familiar mood, darting into dangerous positions and scoring with ease as relegated West Ham tried to regain their aristocratic status.
By one of the great ironic twists, the club's claims to aristocracy hinged on the moods of a working-class roadsweeper from Glasgow.
You could almost hear them scuttling for cover in the comfortable lobby of a Hornchurch hotel, as the Hilton resounded with a familiar sound.
Milton Rules Ya Bass!
brother can you spare me a dime
Modern football is built on a shaky platform of finance and fiscal mismanagement.
But when it comes to overdrafts and cash-flow problems, the hanging gardens of Hampden Babylon , are a law unto themselves.
If the bonnie banks of Scotland were to open their accounts to the world, there would be a run on the pound and some of the country's most famous clubs would collapse with embarrassment.
In an era when private enterprise is the political hosanna of the day, the balance sheets of some of Scotland's Premier League sides would shame a banana republic.
In the '80s Scottish football was confronted with the monumental task of coming to terms with a new financial era.
Despite a general rise in attendances, several clubs were on the verge of bankruptcy and limped from one financial problem to another playing in front of miniscule crowds often in grounds designed to suit manic-depressives from the dark ages.
Scottish football's financial history is a three-part drama starring boardroom bravado, bad-debts and bankruptcy.
It is a story that can never be told in full.
In the true spirit of t–e modern football agent, twenty per cent will have to do.
Scottish football is pockmarked with what the Everton and Scotland winger Pat Nevin once described as ‘the ego in the boardroom,’ that irrepressible businessman in the size 48 club blazer who can't keep his fingers out of football.
In years gone by the club chairman brought a certain local charm to the game; there was Jan Stepek of Hamilton Accies who made his fortune from renting TV sets to Motherwell's seething masses, Hal Stewart who forced Morton to play in day-glo orange, and Old Man Dayell, the west-coast food magnate whose personal fortune was amassed selling half-time mutton pies then partially squandered trying to turn Airdrie into AC Milan.
A shift in the financial management of football over the last ten years has brought a new and more aggressive generation of directors to the forefront of the game.
David  Murray's arrival at Ibrox sparked the much heralded Rangers Revolution.
The steel and property tycoon used his mercurial business imagination and millions of pounds raised from the fans to re-structure the club and re-float a creaking ship that was fast becoming the ‘Marie Celeste’ of European soccer.
But it was in Edinburgh where boardroom manoeuvring was at its most intriguing.
During the close season in 1990 the unthinkable happened.
Wallace Mercer, the effusive and outspoken chairman of Hearts, made a public and hostile bid for control of bitter rivals Hibernian, with the intention of merging the clubs to form an Edinburgh team capable of competing in a European super-league.
Mercer's bid to control Hibernian opened up a deep wound in the capital and brought unwanted attention to the embattled Hibs board.
The club had been the subject of sustained criticism since October 1988, when Hibs became the first Scottish football team to be quoted on the Stock Exchange.
Directors Jim Gray and David Duff presided over a set of financial manoeuvres that bewildered even the most money minded fans.
In a complex web of mystifying deals, Hibs were held together by a financial structure which in the space of a few years involved a local bookmaker, an English based company with extensive leisure interests in the west country and a company registered in Panama called Charcoal Holdings.
Football in the '90s has inevitably been determined by events off the pitch and the rivalry between Hibs and Hearts has echoed those tunes.
The Taylor Report on crowd safety, which came in the wake of the Hillsborough Disaster, left many clubs with archaic stadiums facing an uncertain future as they battled against time and their balance-sheets in an attempt to meet safety regulations and secure all-seater facilities.
Housed in their decaying Easter Road ground, ironically a matter of yards away from Meadowbank's Commonwealth Games stadium, Hibs greeted the '90s facing extinction.
With Wallace Mercer's Hearts pursuing a takeover, they were £6 million in debt and paying their interest payments of £20,000 a week, when a heroic campaign by their own fans swung events in Hibs’ favour.
Mercer retreated in the face of noisy opposition and within months of his takeover bid was having to justify his own club's financial record.
Out of the cup, thrashed 5–0 by Aberdeen, trailing badly in the league, Hearts, who had started their season by securing Joe Jordan as manager, faced widespread press accusations that they too were in financial disarray.
His commercial pride badly wounded, Mercer fought off the criticism, but had to endure a harsh winter watching his team struggle in the knowledge that it would be many years before he could contemplate the fire-side warmth of his own undersoil heating.
The wrangles that separate Hearts and Hibs are written in triplicate in Tayside, where Dundee, Dundee United and St Johnstone constantly squabble for supremacy.
The rivalry between these three clubs has an unusual history.
Although Dundee are traditionally a ‘protestant’ team, religion plays a much more low-key role than in Glasgow and Edinburgh; the rivalry is one of status.
KEEP THE FAITH.
BILL MCMURDO
Although they are by far the most successful of the three clubs in recent years, Dundee United are newcomers to Tayside tension.
United were late entrants into the Scottish league and played their earliest games on a sand-strewn pitch, earning them the local nickname ‘The Arabs’.
Although many of their fans are too young to realise, United have generally been seen as the town's two-bit team, little more than camels in the eyes of the Dens Park faithful.
But in the last ten years, United have thrived on the back of an ambitious youth policy and the curious managerial whims of Jim McLean, Dundee United created a tangerine dream for the '80s, building an impressive and free-flowing side around players like David Narey, Paul Hegarty and Paul Sturrock.
To the club's credit, the investment in youth and future development has continued beyond the '80s, rewarding United with one of the youngest teams in Scotland's history, a precociously gifted side built around youthful talent like Christian Dailley, Paddy Connolly, Darren Jackson and Billy McKinlay.
But United invested in a youth development policy as their near neighbours  Dundee fell deeper into a mire of penury and poor performances.
The Dundee disease has its roots in a virus called money.
In the early '60s, Dundee were Scotland's most gifted side, winning the first division championship in 1962 and gracing Europe in a way that few other Scottish clubs have done since.
With the prematurely balding Perthshire giant Alan Gilzean up-front and the craggy centre-half Ian Ure cementing their defence, Dundee annihilated the European Cup favourites, FC Cologne by 8–1 at home, then advanced to the semi-finals where they were eventually beaten by AC Milan.
Since the early 60's Dundee's story has got shabbier by the day.
At a crisis AGM in January 1990, Dundee's controversial chairman Angus Cook presided over a record deficit of £600,000.
Recently relegated to the first division, the projected loss of Premier League gate receipts meant a further deficit of £400,000.
Some claimed Dundee faced extinction, as strong and persistent rumours swept the city that the club was struggling to pay reserve team wages.
Meanwhile less than 20 miles away, St Johnstone, a team with a less prestigious history were enjoying increased attendances, a newly won Premier status, record profits and were warmly ensconced in a purpose built all-seater stadium.
Never have neighbours gloated with such a sense of bitter revenge.
St Johnstone, sponsored by a local whisky company ‘The Famous Grouse’, and dismissed by the Dundee fans as ‘grousebeaters’, looked on in delight as the big estate along the road fell on hard times.
Like all small-town rivalries in Scottish football, whether it be Airdrie and Hamilton or Ayr and Kilmarnock, the animosity between Dundee and St Johnstone is buried in decades of local disputes, some real, some imagined, and some steeped in the venom of over familiarity.
But the rivalry took on a ferocious tangibility in 1960, when Dundee visited Muirton Park needing a draw to clinch the league.
With the ground packed to capacity and the home team needing a valuable point to avoid relegation, Dundee played to win, eventually dismantling Saints and sending them into the Second Division.
Every game between the teams since has been a struggle for superiority and status with Dundee in the role of the local aristocrat and St Johnstone the perennial grousebeater.
But like so many Scottish aristocrats before them, history has exposed Dundee's status to be founded on a fading past.
With United investing in youth and St Johnstone benefiting from shrewd financial management, the Dundee of the '9Os has long since flogged the family silver and now faces an uncertain future as a dosser with a double-barrelled name.
the rise of agent orange
In the '60s Scottish football was awash with stories of ‘scouts’— the often unpaid enthusiasts who scoured the pitches of school-boy Scotland looking for the next generation of international talent.
In the mythology of modern soccer, the ‘scout’, an expert in a shabby raincoat has been replaced by the more avaricious figure of the ‘agent’, the character with the car-phone who along with the club chairman has become the financial ‘Lucifer’ of football.
The most successful agent in Scottish football is undoubtedly Bill McMurdo, the man who rocked Scotland when he master-minded Mo Johnston's transfer to Rangers.
In many respects, the financial complexity of the modern game needs figures like McMurdo.
In an era of sponsorship, personal endorsement and a volatile transfer market, it is not surprising that footballers—some of whom are incapable of managing their own toilet-bag—should turn to specialist agents.
But agents are by their nature controversial.
Many critics of the modern game measure the decline in club loyalty in direct proportion to the emergence of the speculative football agent.
Bill McMurdo was born in Edinburgh's Niddrie Mains.
A friend and neighbour of the ex-Hibernian captain Pat Stanton, both signed to the Easter Road Club as teenagers.
McMurdo never made the grade but like many Scots his early interest in the game ignited a flame of passion for football that has never been extinguished.
After an electrical apprenticeship with the Coal Board  he pursued a business career, eventually rising to the position of Sales Director with the American watch company Timex.
HARD TIMES AT HIBERNIAN.
STEVE ARCHIBALD & THE HIBS BOARD SQUABBLE OVER THE LAST CLEAN STRIP
It was in his capacity as a sales manager with Timex that McMurdo first acquired the taste for the agent's life.
He was delegated to hand over sponsorship money to the Brazilian Racing Driver Emerson Fittipaldi and was shocked by the lack of business acumen that surrounded the deal.
It was a gap he was to fill with consummate skill.
McMurdo is a self confessed Ted.
His 12 room Victorian Mansion in Uddingston, Lanarkshire is called ‘Ibrox’ and the polite Laura Ashley decor normally associated with Scottish suburbia, has been brashly replaced by a union-jack rug and unionist memorabilia.
At the height of the Anglo Irish agreement, McMurdo severed his links with the Conservative Party and set up an ill-fated Scottish Unionist Party.
It may be pure conjecture but he gives the impression that he knows the words to The Sash and could sing them backwards, and it was hardly surprising when football fans nicknamed him ‘Agent Orange’.
Ironically, McMurdo's political and religious opinions never interfere with money.
On the contrary, he deals with players and clubs irrespective of their image, religion or identity.
He represents the interests of Mo Johnston and John Brown of Rangers, John Robertson of Hearts and John Collins of Celtic.
‘I'm still a salesman,’ he admits, ‘My job is to sell my clients and maximise their earning potential.’
But over the years, his sales techniques have irritated as much as they have impressed, and he has been periodically banned from Celtic Park, Tynecastle and Fir Park.
McMurdo likes to joke about an apocryphal exchange of letters with the Celtic chairman Jack McGinn, who once wrote to McMurdo telling him he was ‘persona non grata’ at the club.
In a reply tailored to annoy the traditionally catholic and latinate institution, McMurdo insisted they use ‘the Queen's English’.
Bill McMurdo is a product of the tabloid era.
In order to generate interest in his players and their careers, he has become a press and publicity machine.
By his own admission he ‘hypes’ player to the press.
‘I make no apology for cheque-book journalism,’ he once said.
‘Why should the press barons get rich at the expense of my clients?’
When two of Scotland's emerging internationalists, Mo Johnston (Nantes) and Eric Black (Metz) were both playing in France, McMurdo was proud of the job he did on Johnson.
‘If Mo sneezes the whole of France knows about it,’ he boasted.
‘Eric Black could be playing on the moon for all the French know.’
McMurdo would like to persist with the illusion that everything he touches turns to gold, but several Scottish professionals think otherwise.
In 1989 McMurdo attempted to sue the Manchester United striker Brian McClair in an acrimonious dispute  over a £5,000 sponsorship deal with the sportswear company Puma.
In the two day court case McMurdo argued that he had set up the deal whilst McClair was his client.
But the presiding Sheriff Andrew Lothian dismissed the claim, saying ‘I cannot accept Mr McMurdo as a credible witness.
That is extremely bad for his credibility.’
Ironically the case did nothing to diminish Mcmurdo's negotiating skills and probably increased his credibility as Scotland's most persuasive agent.
no show without punch
Financial deals have a horrible habit of turning sour.
Ask Derek Johnstone!
In a series of news stories in the Scottish press in the autumn of 1989 under headlines like ‘Ex-Ranger D.J.
Is Bankrupt’ and ‘Derek's Hotel Tangle,’it was revealed that Johnstone had severe financial problems after a business venture collapsed.
Johnstone shot to fame as a 16 year old when he scored the winning goal for Rangers in the 1970 Cup Final against Celtic and was voted the Scottish Player of the Year in 1978, the year of the abortive World Cup campaign in Argentina.
In a playing career that ended the month Graeme Souness arrived at Rangers, Johnstone had excelled himself as a rumbustious centre-forward.
But like so many of his generation, he was a product of Scotland's obsession with football, the game was everything and business, budgeting and sensible investment offered little or no attraction.
BIG BUCKS.
BERTIE AULD MERGES WITH THE CROWD
In 1981, when Johnstone was still part of the furniture at Ibrox, Bill McMurdo and a local architect Bob Waugh involved him in the launch of Box Office Promotions (UK) Ltd a sports and leisure company which aimed to profit from Johnstone's popularity in the Lanarkshire area.
Soon after the company was established, the trio took over the run-down Bertram House Hotel in Harthill.
They renamed it ‘DJ's Hotel’ and embarked on an ambitious plan which would involve the ebullient and talkative Johnstone acting as mine host.
Within two years the liquidators were called in and the company was wound up in 1987.
But Derek Johnstone's problems didn't end there.
Drybrough's, the brewery involved in the venture, pursued the three men for debts of over £40,000.
McMurdo and Waugh paid their share but Johnstone prevaricated until 1989 when Sheriff Officers acting for the brewery issued arrestment orders ‘freezing’ Johnstone's wages from his work in broadcasting and sports journalism, where he eventually found his niche as a witty and streetwise commentator.
‘I love the big guy,’ McMurdo told the Daily Record, ‘but he's his own worst enemy.’
He was never at the hotel after a month or so and that's why it failed.
Let's face it there can be no show without Punch.‘
The history of Scottish football is sullied with the debris of penniless clubs, failed businesses, bankrupt players and financial mismanagement.
Despite the advances made by several clubs and in spite of the tireless education advice offered by the Scottish Professional Footballers Association, football remains an attractive place for the walking wounded.
The game continues to attract young teenagers whose education is disrupted by the tantalising prospect that they will become professional players.
Many of them are capable of organising their lives with dignity but others fall into football's in-built poverty trap.
When the legs stop working and the agent stops ringing, the local brewery is sometimes the only friend left.
hey big spender
The Derek Johnstone case and the financial problems which beset the former Scottish goalkeeper Alan Rough testify to the downside of football's financial spiral.
Normally, financial troubles and scandals around money visit players late in their lives, when their playing days are over and they are rehabilitating themselves back into the real world.
But not in the case of Robert Fleck.
The Norwich City and Scotland striker, a figure of such unmitigated misfortune that money deserted him at the height of what ought to have been a highly lucrative and rewarding career.
Robert Fleck's rise was meteoric.
As a 19 year old he dropped his pants in an old firm reserve team derby against Celtic and won the affection of the Rangers support with adventurous football and seemingly tireless pursuit of goals.
Although he relished playing for Rangers, the team he had fervently supported as a youth, Fleck fell foul of the club's increasingly strict discipline.
Both he and Ted McMinn were fined by the club after breaking a New Year curfew by sneaking out to a late-night disco the night before a crunch match against Celtic.
Fleck's unruly image was secured in November 1987 when along with four other Rangers players he was fined £1,000 by the club for his part in a notorious fracas in a bar in Airdrie.
The month after he was disciplined, Fleck left Rangers for Norwich City and immediately established himself as one of the most exciting and prolific goal scorers in the English First Division.
But beneath the gloss of success was a more tarnished and tragic private life.
In early 1990, when he was attracting the international attention of the Scotland national coach Andy Roxburgh, the Scottish tabloid press ran a sad and damaging story about the financial catastrophes he had left behind in Glasgow.
According to the press, his wife Linda and their child Jade were living in virtual poverty on £52 a week sickness benefit as Fleck squandered the £1,000 a week salary he was being paid in Norwich.
Fleck's estranged wife turned their private tragedy into a public slanging match.
‘I think the fame of being a footballer has gone to his head.
We were living on a shoestring all the time he was living it up down there.’
Fleck had become romantically involved with another woman Jayne Murray and was the father of her daughter Olivia.
According to press reports, which were lurid in the extreme, Fleck had failed to pay his wife maintenance money totalling nearly £4,000.
His wife, who was an invalid at the time, told the Sun ‘If it hadn't been for state benefit and my family, Jade and I would have starved.’
Fleck's financial crisis did not end with maintenance.
After moving into a suburban villa in Norwich he fell behind with his mortgage payments and had to turn to his new club for a £19,000 loan to prevent the building society from repossessing his home.
To bring a level of order and modesty to Fleck's life Norwich took the unprecedented step of paying him an allowance of only £29 per week and preserving the remainder of his salary to pay off the debts.
Fleck's solicitor told the Scottish press that the player's financial conduct was beyond comprehension.
‘He has got himself into the most God almighty muddle,’ he said, adding almost hopelessly, ‘he is not a worldly person.
He is not financially astute.’
Against this background Robert Fleck left East Anglia on a family holiday to Yugoslavia, resigned to fact that he had narrowly missed being selected for the Scotland World Cup squad at Italia ‘90.
But an injury to the Motherwell veteran Davie Cooper at the eleventh hour meant that Fleck was summoned to join the squad in Malta, where they were involved in preparatory training.
Confusion reigned.
Fleck failed to show up at the Scotland camp when expected.
According to the SFA he was trapped in Yugoslavia after the airline failed to process his ticket.
It was a Sunday and according to the official explanation, the airline fax and computer was not in operation.
Fleck was stranded.
Any other professional footballer caught in Fleck's situation would have reached into his pocket and proudly announced that smug one-liner, ‘American Express.
That Will Do Nicely’.
But this was the hanging gardens of Hampden Babylon , the land where agents rule, books don't balance and credit cards are cut up in front of your eyes.
In an era of corporate football with executive boxes, share-issues and hostile take-over bids, only a Scottish internationalist down on his luck could utter the immortal words, ‘Brother Can You Spare A Dime’.
ROBERT FLECK.
EASY COME EASY GO
I'VE MET SOME SHARKS IN MY TIME.’
DEREK JOHNSON ON BIG FISH AND KIPPER TIES
the model professional
‘BLONDE BOMBSHELL UNITES OLD FIRM.’
RANGERS AND CELTIC PLAYERS FORGET THEIR DIFFERENCES AND GET BEHIND ‘MISS HAMPDEN BOWL’ 1963
LEGS & THE LAW MAN.
DENIS LAW DRINKS A TOAST TO PLATFORM SHOES
‘I LIKE A MAN IN UNIFORM.’
A GROUP OF ‘70S STARS PUT ON THE STYLE
HAVE A GO JOE!
WEE JOE MILLER IS FRAMED BY TALENT
THE BARE ESSENTIALS.
ALAN ROUGH IS THE ONE WITH THE PERM
CARELESS HANDS.
A PRETTY BLOND TRAPS DAVIE COOPER IN A TORRID GLOVE AFFAIR
ALEX FERGUSON THE ST.
MIRREN MANAGER HELPS THE SAINTS