

Surnames and their meanings
The study of the surnames of people living in a place can be one of the most time-consuming, frustrating, baffling, but rewarding activities a researcher can undertake.
In much the way that field names can reveal traces of past languages and past land usage, and street names past social values, events, local features and benefactors, so can surnames — if carefully analysed — demonstrate racial and local origins, relationships, occupations, personal attributes and even ancient street cries.
However, in spite of much literature on the subject, and in spite of much scholarly attention, there are many avenues still unexplored, many names unexplained, and many experts in disagreement one with another.
As with place-names, a wide background of reading and an enduring love of language is needed for the study of surnames, possibly even more so, for in twentieth-century England the population is made up of people from many lands, many languages, social attitudes, cultures and customs, all of which — since the first coining of surnames — have enlarged the vocabulary of words from which patronymics and other additional gnomen (early name) forms are drawn.
Every one has enriched the pool of material available to the local historian.
It is only in recent centuries that surnames have achieved the status of stabilised family names and have tended to become hereditary.
They started off as bynames — nicknames, sobriquets and such — to distinguish two persons in the same locality who might be called Alfred, Edgar, Edith or Ethelhild, or to mark some outstanding characteristic.
Thus we have in high places Alfred the Great, Edmund Ironside, Edward the Confessor, William the Conqueror, Richard Coeur de Lion, John Lackland, Edward Longshanks, Edgiva the Fair and, for the common people, Thomas the Shepherd, Walter at the Gate, Maud the Widow, Hawisia le Webbe, Alicia Spryngabedde, Roger Mildeneye, and so on.
There is no known proof of true hereditary surnames in the period before the Conquest, and although a number of Domesday tenants of English origins have names additional to their first — such as Alnod of Kent, a byname given to a man with land in Oxfordshire — there is little or no evidence to show that these were other than personal to the individuals.
However, the period immediately after the Conquest saw short-lived hereditary surnames beginning to emerge.
This is especially true in the case of the families of Domesday tenants-in-chief, many of whose descendants were to play important roles in English history.
To cite but one example, William de Moyon, a senior tenant of the Conqueror, brought his name from his place of origin near St Lo in La Manche, and it stayed with the family, transformed in the spoken language to Moon, and in the written to Mohun by way of such variations as Moion, Moione, Moiun, Mooun, Moun, Moune, Mown, Moyn, Moyhun, Moyun, Mahoune, Mahon, Mohum and Mohon.
The name lasted as Mohun from c.1245 until the eighteenth century, when the family died out.
A Sir John Mohun fought in the Black Prince's wing at  Creçy and was a knight of the Garter, and the fourth Baron Mohun was killed in a duel in Hyde Park in 1712, the family having in the meantime given its name to Hammoon in Dorset, Mohuns Ottery and Tormoham in Devon, and Grange Mohun in County Kildare.
However, although at the upper levels of society locative and other bynames became surnames and survived from this early period, this was not true at the lower levels and certainly there is no uniformity in the development of surnames.
The matter is complicated by the fact that across the social spectrum some families changed their surnames as often as their surcoats, and individuals had, in the course of their lives, sometimes as many as three or four surnames, any of which could be adopted quite haphazardly by their progeny.
The rise of hereditary surnames varies from one part of the country to another, depending on settlement patterns, the community — urban or rural — and whether the family was affluent or poor, free or servile.
The lay subsidy rolls of the fourteenth century yield much information on the subject of bynames and surnames for all categories of persons, and in many cases it seems true to say that such names were not necessarily applied to whole families nor (given that they appear in different forms in successive rolls) can they be judged to have stabilized.
A man may appear as Johanne atte Asshe in one record, then a few years later as Johanne de Fraxino, but did he have a surname and if so what was it?
True, both the English and the Latin forms indicate he lived by the ash tree, but did they merely permit the taxatores to avoid confusing him with all the other Johns who lived in the same village?
In another instance a man who was recorded as Laurencio Forester in 1332, and his son as Willelmo de Fortereshaye, was himself recorded both in earlier and later documents as Laurence de Forstereshegh.
What did their neighbours call them?
These are obvious cases because the forms are linguistically or stylistically related, and in one of them it will be shown later that the name became hereditary — as Forsey — down to the twentieth century.
But what of the case where Johanna atte Temple's father was Osberto de Arencon, and her son Edmundo de Loundres?
Did any of these forms mutate into hereditary surnames?
The study is a fascinating one, the answers uncertain.
Types of surname
The foregoing paragraphs notwithstanding it is possible, and indeed useful, to categorize English surnames for their better examination.
There is as yet no generally accepted system of classification, and the method chosen should be the one most satisfactory to the individual researcher.
To some extent local factors come into the situation — the fine-tuning, for a village in what was Wessex will be different from that of a similar place in the former Danelaw or Northumbrian areas.
Also, some surnames will appear to fit with equal precision (or lack of precision) into two or even three categories, and this is particularly true with names descending from the occupation, or status, of the first user.
Given these qualifications, broad categories of value are locative — names derived from place-names or topographical features; of relationship — names of fathers or mothers, with additional syllables, pet names, font names and diminutives;occupational and social status — indications of trade, calling or office, carried down the centuries, often in mutilated or garbled form;nicknames — tags and sobriquets which were sufficiently distinctive, felicitous and pronounceable as to stand the test of time.
There are minor categories, and sub-categories within the foregoing groups, but for purposes of local history research the types listed will be adequate in most instances.
Locative names
There are two main types of locative names (that is, names taken from geographical locations), and together they form the largest group of English surnames.
Names of the first type are derived from topographical features which may be natural — woods, streams, fields, hills, brooks; or artificial — town ramparts, gates, parks, windmills.
Bynames of the topographical type were, therefore, of a very parochial nature, and, if they happen to contain unusual elements, can be of both interest and value but are seldom source material for studies of migration patterns.
They were, indeed, usually of the kind denoting residence, such as atte Mede — at the mead; in the putte — in the pit; which in time became just Mead or Pitt, the definite articles being dropped; or were toponymical, such as in the hurn (a hurn being an out-of-the-way corner), which evolved into Hurneman and Hurman.
There are many topographical names which have lasted down to the present in a perfectly straightforward fashion (the articles or toponymical qualifiers being dropped), such as Field, Bridge, Ford, Green, Lake, Lane, Orchard, Townsend, Gate and so on, but others are less obvious in their modern guises — Atwell and Attwood, Byfield and Byway are clear enough as examples in which the definite article has become assimilated, but others like Boveton = above town, and Binetheton — below town, are not so obvious at first sight, neither are  Biart — dweller near the enclosure,Stanners = dweller at the stone house, or Leese = dweller by the pasture.
Locative names such as those described above, and many others of like kind, were, as has been suggested, quite without meaning outside the limited area in which they were coined.
A thirteenth-century man who was free to leave his own tithing (or who absconded) for a nearby town would not long be called Matthew atte Middele (Matthew who lives in the middle of the village), or such, but rather Matthew Longback or Matthew of (or from) Thornbury, depending on which struck his new friends as the more appropriate, and the new identification may well have turned into a surname and passed down the generations.
The second class of locative, or local names, are, as hinted in the last sentence, based on place names — such as where a man lived, where he held land, or where he hailed from.
In the case of a limited number of Old English or Anglo-Saxon bynames these took such forms as at Dentune,on Lundye,of Wommerstone,in Mapeldre, but after the Conquest the prefix became, almost without exception, the preposition de (of or from), it mattering not whether the place was in France or England.
At the highest level of society there were the names given to the great tenants-in-chief who held their estates directly of the Conqueror, and it must be remembered that if these magnates were already powerful in their own country they may even have brought locative bynames with them, as was the case of William de Moyon already mentioned.
Some of these names moved slowly into recognisably English forms and dropped the prefix, as was the case of Wydo de Brione (fl .
1160), whose  famous namesake and descendant, bearer of Edward III's standard at  Creçy , was known as Sir Guy Brian, with later generations being called Bryan.
Also at this senior level there were formations of a different kind, typical of which is de la Haye (from Haye-du-Puits in La Manche), which became both Delahaye and Delhay.
At the ordinary level of society we find Richard de Derby in London, and Ingelram de Waleys (meaning Wales, though perhaps the town near Sheffield rather than the Principality) in Shropshire.
Both surnames entered the mainstream of English usage as Darby and Derby, Wales and Wailes.
There are thousands of examples, and in almost every community today there are families whose surnames show that centuries ago one of their ancestors moved sufficiently far from his own country, town or village, to acquire a place-name reference, and the name adhered.
To a minor, but relevant, purpose the local historian has, ready to hand, in easily available records, a wealth of material from which to establish immigration patterns in the geographical area being researched.
But there are other uses to which such information may be put, as the following example which examines what may be the evolution of a single name illustrates.
Did the local fourteenth-century name Upehull develop into the sixteenth-century Upsall and the nineteenth-century Upshall ?
And what are the meanings of these three forms?
‘Up’ may well be upp, ūp or uppe = up, higher up, upon; but hull is a less certain element.
A very likely explanation is that it is a form of hyll = hill, found in the West Midlands and the south-west as the Middle English hull , and this in combination with the first syllable forms a byname given in the fourteenth century to a person who lived ‘up the hill’.
In which case are Upehull and Upsall related, the ‘s’ having been introduced by scribal error or misreading at some stage, or is the later form a name given to a family coming originally from Uppsala in Sweden?
Perhaps this last suggestion is merely silly?
A further small study worth making is a genealogical one.
It so happens that the names Upehull, Upsall and Upshall occur in the records of one very small village — the first in a lay subsidy roll of 1327, the second in a manorial court roll of November 1550, and the third in a number of documents down to the latest twentieth-century electoral rolls.
The name also appears repeatedly in the parish registers from 1562 onwards.
Given that the eminent genealogist Sir Anthony Wagner has said in his book English Genealogy , that ‘where a distinctive surname is found over the centuries in one place in successive tax returns and the like, family continuity can be presumed even if descent cannot be proved step by step’, a useful study is possible.
Surnames of relationship
The word ‘patronymic’ is sometimes used as an easy synonym when referring to any surname, but its meaning is more limited than that, for a proper application restricts it to describing those names descending from fathers or ancestors.
Thus in the full range of surnames we find examples of patronymics, metronymics — formations based on a mother's name and sometimes called matronymics — font names, personal and pet names, and diminutives all called into service.
To the careful researcher there is evidence of the survival of Old English, Scandinavian, Norman, Breton and Celtic elements.
Some of the early names of this type have disappeared — Ibbotdoghter, Rogerdaughter, Hannebrother, Prestebruther, to instance just a few — and the compounds which survive, such as Hickmott (which includes magh = brother-in-law) are very rare.
But numerous patronymics of later formation have lasted — Johnson, Jackson, Peterson, Lawson, FitzPayne — perhaps to a total of more than a hundred and fifty, and to this day there are useful studies to be carried out on the distribution patterns of such rarities as Mattimoe = relative of Matthew.
The same goes for metronymics, where a rare form is Mattieson =? son of Matilda.
A very interesting sub-set in this category is that in which the Christian or baptismal name is followed immediately by one of like kind, as in the case of Johannes Geoffrey , where it appears that a personal name has been pressed into service as a byname.
There is no generally accepted explanation of this practice, and there are examples both from within and outside the Danelaw area.
Reaney in A Dictionary of British Surnames (London, reprinted 1987) suggests that an intermediate and usual filius = son of, has been totally suppressed in the written form.
Reaney also deals with other interesting varieties of surnames based on relationships — those formed from pet names and diminutives.
The history of pet names is a long one, there appearing to be evidence confirming their existence before the Conquest, but in those instances where pet names survive as surnames the appearance is that they are of post-Conquest foundation, and some are difficult to identify.
The name Lamb , for example, while usually a nickname (such as Rogerus le Lamb ), can also be descended from a diminutive of Lambert.
But there are some certainties from single-source beginnings such as Gibbe from Gilbert, and Pelle from Peter.
In contrast to the few pet names moving through the bynames stage to become established hereditary surnames, there are dozens of diminutives which successfully made the transition, and an example of the surnames coined from but one font-name is sufficient to make the point: from Richard (Reaney, as above) come almost thirty styles including Rich, Richie, Hitch, Hitchcock, Higgins, Hicks, Dick, Dickie and Diggen.
Surnames based on occupations
An important class of surnames is that based on the pursuit of occupations or the holding of various civil or ecclesiastical offices.
The name Smith and its offshoots — Smithe, Smyth, Smythe, Syme, Smither, Smithers, Smitherman, Smythyman, Smithie, Smithye and Smythye — plus its relational offshoots Smithson, Smythson, Smission, not to mention such forms as Whitesmith and Goldsmith and the less obvious Faber (Latin faber = smith) and Angove (Cornish an = the, and Old Cornish gof = smith), form a formidable list of names from a single occupational group.
Such names as Mercer, Shepherd, Painter, Wainwright, Fowler, Weaver, Miller, Carpenter, Slater, Cooper and Hooper are common enough, but there are many more surnames of occupation than modern spellings or general knowledge reveal.
A few of these are Arsnell — a maker of horse nails, a shoesmith;Horsler = an innkeeper (from del Hostell );Bolter = a grinder of grain (a miller);Pakeman = a packman (hawker or pedlar);Cordier = a maker of cords;Yorker = a shoemaker;Brayer = a maker or seller of pestles.
The mine is a rich one for the diligent researcher.
Much the same can be said for the group of surnames representing the former holding of offices, which includes such obvious  examples as Butler, Chamberlain, Reeve, Beadle, Granger and Steward, but some are less obvious because time has dimmed both the memory of the office concerned and distorted the spelling of the name:Grieve = a farm steward;Gayler = a gaoler;Bailey = a bailiff or sergeant;Spencer = a dispenser of provisions;Tunnard = guardian of the village (tūn) pound;Senskell = a majordomo (seneschal);Wardrop = a wardrober.
A worthwhile study is to systematically trace the linguistic structure of noteworthy names in a locality, as mentioned in poll tax, muster, protestation, tithe commutation and other returns, using as many early reference sources as possible and paying due regard to modern commentaries and analyses.
However, care should be exercised in the use of dictionaries of surnames, because none is quite infallible and some entries, in even the best of them, can be positively misleading, as the detailed example which forms the last section of this chapter demonstrates.
Nicknames
The use of nicknames to identify individuals arose in England in Anglo-Saxon times (at the latest)— there are the cases of Harold Bluetooth, Svegn Forkbeard, Eadmund Ironside, all highlighting personal characteristics of men with common names.
Nicknames assumed (and still assume) many forms — they can be logical or illogical — some describing physical peculiarities, others mental or moral qualities; they may take the form of animal names, being thus descriptive of appearance or disposition.
They can be the names of plants, birds or insects (the author had a school friend called ‘Chickweed’ for no better reason than his name was Hickwood), or styles of dress, manners or speech.
A nickname can mark just one incident in the life of the person concerned.
There is little agreement among philologists or social historians as to what brings a particular nickname into being, although in the days when people had just one name, of a given or baptismal kind, it was probably a necessity that an additional term be pressed into service to distinguish between folk of like name.
Many medieval nicknames were of a crude, coarse, scatological kind and have now disappeared, but others of a more acceptable and apposite fashioning passed into the language as, eventually, hereditary surnames.
In the area of physical characteristics there are some interesting survivors.
Today, a man in the public bar can be known disparagingly as ‘fat guts’, but the modern respectable names of Pauncefoot and even Ponsford almost certainly meant ‘arched belly’ in their original coining, from the Middle English panche = stomach.
The meanings of Redhead, Cruickshank, Barefoot, are obvious as are those of Thynne and Broad, but those of Callow = bald, and Pendrell = long ears, are not so well known.
In the course of one short chapter it is not possible, nor indeed necessary, to do more than suggest the richness of the material which, with a little study, can be interpreted to throw light on former ages.
Names like Catchpole = constable, Benbow = archer, and Waghorn = trumpeter, all have their stories to tell, and the books listed later in this chapter are of value in this regard.
Where to find surnames
The dictionaries and reference works devoted to surnames are useful to the local  historian in that they provide a framework of knowledge on which more specific researches may be built.
But the fundamental data must come from original records if a truly significant investigation is to be made.
There is, in most cases, very little to be gained from Saxon local documents for, as has already been pointed out, bynames were few and far between in pre-Conquest England.
By the early thirteenth century the material becomes more relevant: ‘Johannes de Erleia positus est loco Asciline matris sue optulit see iiij die versus Robertum de Juvenni de placito medietis tocius terre quam Robertus tenet de terra que fuit Radulfi de Insula…‘is a typical entry in a roll, and includes at least one name which is still found today — Erleigh (Erlé)— in the area to which the roll refers; the name probably means ‘eagle wood’.
True, the curia regis , de Banco and other rolls contain mainly names of notable, even famous, families, but they can also record the names of more ordinary folk: 1261, ‘Thomas Piket and his wife Cristina versus Ralph le Bret and William his son, and Richard de Langlay in a plea that they cut down trees’; 1262, ‘Akyma who was wife of William de Reyney versus William de Bekeford for ⅓ of the moiety of the advowson of the church’; 1318, ‘The sheriff to have here William de Bradewas, Matilda Bret, Henry de Knyghteton, Walter de Pyneford, John Keneman, John Weryng, Richard North, Thomas Tredy, and Henry Gledy to show by what right…‘, and so on.
Some of the foregoing have survived to the present day — Pyneford (Pineford), Langlay (Langley), North, le Bret (Bret and Brett), whose meanings are obvious, Piket (Picot, Pykett, Piggott, etc., from the Old French personal name Pic ), Bekeford (Beckford, from the Middle English bekke = brook, and ford), de Reyney (Rainey, etc., perhaps from Regny in the Loire), Keneman (Kinman, from cyna = cow, and mann , thus a herdsman).
The other names are more obscure although Weryng may have survived as Waring from the Old German Warin , which was a popular Norman personal name.
Among later records, the subsidies of the fourteenth century and the musters of the sixteenth are all of value.
Many early documents have been published, and some are mentioned in Chapter 5.
Other works of reference are discussed in the next section.
Reference works
The two most valuable books remain The Origin of English Surnames (London, reprinted 1984) and A Dictionary of British Surnames (London, reprinted 1987), both by P.H. Reaney, a noted specialist in the field.
The first appeared initially in 1967 and runs to more than 400 pages.
Its contents are classified into chapters on spelling and pronunciation, locative names (from English, French and other continental languages), surnames of relationship, those from native and other personal names, from offices held or occupations followed, compound names and nicknames of all kinds, oaths, colloquial expressions and phrases which have given rise to family names.
The book contains a bibliography of works in English, French, German, Danish and Latin, and from a number of national sources, those (in English) from Sweden being especially informative.
There is an index of the surnames included in the text.
The Dictionary , published first in 1958, was updated by R.M. Wilson in 1976.
It contains explanatory matter in the form of a long introduction which includes contributions on the development of Welsh, Scottish, Irish and Manx surnames, which are, of course, now found in England.
No dictionary can ever be complete, and every user will perhaps find omissions; and there is the occasional error, as the final section of this chapter describes, but the book remains invaluable.
The new Dictionary of Surnames by Patrick  Hanks and Flavia Hodges (Oxford 1988) has 70,000 names within its pages, but even in a work of such length there must remain hundreds of omissions.
English Genealogy by Sir Anthony Wagner (Chichester 1983) is indispensable to the researcher wishing to learn more about the social and historical background to the development of English family names.
Of special relevance is the section dealing with record sources, for this will assist those students moving from the study of surnames to genealogical research.
Finally, mention should be made of the pioneer work being done within the Department of Local History of Leicester University.
Since 1965 this department, which houses the English Surnames Survey, has published a number of volumes each on a county basis.
Studies of Norfolk and Suffolk, West Yorkshire, Lancashire and Oxfordshire have so far appeared, and books on Sussex and Devon are scheduled.
To take one of the books as an example,The Surnames of Oxfordshire by Richard McKinley (London 1977), this deals in great detail with the names of a single shire (which includes an important and ancient city and university).
It does so more thoroughly than was possible in Dr Reaney's general exposition.
In consequence the recounting of the rise of hereditary surnames is of basic worth, and the sections on the names of married women and bondsmen are seminal.
the story of a West Country name
This chapter ends with a description of a study carried out into the origin, evolution, spellings and meaning of an individual surname.
It was tempting to the author to use one part of his own surname — Kease — which, so far as current research reveals, is unique to his family.
It appeared in this spelling in 1698 in Worcestershire, although the form Keasse was used in Gloucestershire in 1660, and Keisse in the same county in 1583.
Other spellings — Kyese, Keise, Keese — are known to have been recorded in the shires of Gloucester, Worcester and Hereford during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, but today only the style Keyse is found in that area, and Kease appears nowhere except in the author's own ancestral bloodline.
Historically the word may come from one of several sources, but given its apparent near-restriction to the Welsh border counties, its origin lies perhaps in the Old Welsh Cai , the Middle Welsh Kei , and the Latin Caius , a common praenomen among the Romans.
There are several other possible explanations but they are all of an uncertain nature, so the study will not be pursued in these pages, Instead, a name from the author's conjugate family will be used, because its origin and development can be traced, quite unambiguously, from the thirteenth century to the twentieth.
In its present form it is spelt Forsey , and its use in this chapter has the additional advantage of illustrating that various dictionaries of surnames are not accurate with regard to the meaning of this particular name; they are at best only partly right, and at worst totally wrong.
A major work in the field remains A Dictionary of British Surnames by P.H. Reaney, in which the relevant entry reads, ‘Fursey, Fussey, Fuzzey, Forsey’, and goes on to instance John Forshay 1431 (Dorset) and Roger Fursey 1583 (Surrey).
It interprets the name as ‘dweller by the furze-covered enclosure’, from the Old English fyrs and (ge) haeg .
The Penguin Dictionary of Surnames says merely, ‘Forsey (see Fursey )’, and under the latter has ‘furzy enclosure — found early in Dorset just as Forsey is now.’
Research shows quite clearly that although the two names may occasionally have been confused due to scribal error, mishearing by early recorders, or poor scholarship, they are quite distinct and separate in origin and have remained separate in use by the families bearing them.
The study now reported began with the author recognising from an examination of the name ‘Forsey’ that although the second syllable had obviously developed from the Anglo-Saxon haeg (with the noun prefix ge ) and the Middle English hei/hey , meaning enclosure, it seemed unlikely that the first syllables fors and furs were descended from the same root word, and the fact that Dr Reaney had cited widely separated counties for their (rather late) emergence was a further slight pointer.
There could be no quarrel with fyrs = furze, for Fursey, but a search seemed indicated for fors .
An obvious possibility was forsc = frog, but the combination with ‘enclosure’ appeared not to be over logical.
Fortunately there is, for the county of Dorset (in which Reaney had found the name Forshay in a fifteenth-century deed), a mammoth ‘History’ by an eighteenth-century cleric, the Reverend John Hutchins.
This work went through three editions, each time augmented, the last being in the mid nineteenth century.
It contains a vast quantity of tabulated matter and, in the list of bailiffs for the town of Bridport, references to one man of the right name appear several times.
In 1405/6 it is given as Forsshey , in 1408/9 as Forshay (the same spelling as Reaney gives for John fl .
1431), and in 1413/14 as Forshey .
In each case the font-name is Andrew.
The search was then widened.
In the Bridport archives now in the custody of the Dorset County Record Office are two ancient Dome (or Doom) books containing financial accounts of the bailiffs and cofferers of the town, from 1389/90 onwards.
Also included are sundry other records, such as for the election of various officers, and for the year 1400/01 one of two chosen for a particular post was named Andrew Forteshegh .
It is quite apparent from the context that this is the same man (apart from the supporting fact that Andrew is a name hardly used at this time).
Further research revealed that in 1414/15 an Andrew Forshey had been chosen as one of two men to represent the borough in parliament, and it seemed sensible to hazard that a man of this standing would have held property in the area, for he would have been unlikely to have been elected by his fellow bailiffs, with the assent of the whole community, if he had not been of substantial material worth.
Investigation of the feet of the fines (property documents) for the period revealed that in 1392/3, 1398/9 and 1410/11 Andrew had indeed been involved in a series of transactions concerning an estate of some 200 acres, which obviously had belonged to the family for a long time.
The important points for the surname study were that his name had been spelt both as Fortereshey and Forsteresheigh , as well as Forsey and, perhaps most significantly of all, the name of the estate itself was given as Forstereshey .
The family had obviously taken its name from the land-holding and at some stage this was likely to have been written as de Forstershey, or something very similar.
And this was indeed so.
In 1332, in a lay subsidy roll, a family named de Fortereshaye was identified, and in a de Banco roll for  1310 the name appeared as de Foresteresheye ; and in an inquisition document of 1305 it was rendered as de Forstereshegh .
The estate itself was defined as early as 1240 in a Sarum charter as Forestarehege .
It was, then, transparently clear that the first linguistic component of the name was not the English fyrs = furze (or forsc =frog), but the Latin forestarius = forester, and that the name as a whole meant ‘of the forester's holding, or enclosure’.
Thus the dictionaries were quite wrong regarding the Dorset family of Forsey.
In the course of the years between 1310 and 1410 the spelling (and no doubt the pronunciation) had moved from de Foresteresheye (by way of Fortereshey .
and Forteshegh)to Forsey , the form in which it has stayed in and around the small area where the estate lay, close to Bridport, until the present time.
The progression and results of this study (which took a number of years and involved the House of Lords Record Office, the British Library, the Public Record Office and the College of Arms, as well as the Bridport manuscript books and medieval wills and testaments) have been presented not only to show that reference books can be wrong, but that the wealth of material available to the local historian can be utilized to very positive effect over an extremely narrow range as over a wide one.
The final point to be made is that the local researcher should trust his instinct, and if something ‘feels’ wrong it may well actually be wrong, and with diligence can be so proved.
‘The Danes sack Chertsey Abbey’, part of the Runnymede Pageant 1934.
Reconstructions of events such as this, organised by local groups, encourage interest in local rest in local history and may yield new information.
Local organisations
This chapter will discuss local organisations from two points of view: their value as repositories of local history, and the contribution their activities have made, and are making, to the social life of the community.
In any study being undertaken, the first thing to be done is the obvious one of finding out what organisations exist and whether they are part of a national body — such as the Women's Institute, Mothers' Union, Guides or Scouts — or purely local, such as the Film Club or the Debating Society.
The second thing is the not quite so obvious one of discovering if the present body is the first one of its kind to be set up in the locality, and were there any local organisations which once existed but no longing do so.
This last is not so easy as it may seem, but can be highly illuminating.
Repositories of local history
The list of present (and past) local bodies can be a surprisingly long one in both urban and rural areas.
The following may, perhaps, be typical: the parish or town council; the parochial church council; the Royal British Legion; the working men's club (or mechanic's institute); the friendly society (Buffaloes, Oddfellows, Lions, Round Table, etc.); the history (or preservation) group; the arts and crafts society; the youth club; the ‘senior citizens’ group; the football, cricket, badminton, squash, or other sporting club; the Townswomen's Guild (or its equivalent), the Church Recorders' section of  NADFAS (see Addresses, Appendix III), and so on.
The records of some of these bodies can go back over many years, and are frequently very rewarding.
A quite specific case may be used as an example.
In the village in which the author currently lives there is now no cricket team, but rumour had it that there once was.
A fairly long search produced the account book for the club which existed from 1886 until 1920 (with a break during the war years).
It was in a sad state — disbound, water stained, but quite readable.
In it were tucked all manner of bills, receipts and postcards bearing on the activities of the club.
The accounts for the first year indicated quite clearly the recognition of the social divisions which existed at the time.
The heading (on the receipts side of the ledger) read: ‘Subscribed by gentlemen outside the parish for a pavilion and for the outfit of the club’, and there followed a list (headed by the local member of parliament) of men described as ‘Esqre’, ‘Mr’, and in several cases no prefix at all— merely surname and initial.
On the expenditure side of the book details of equipment were given: Cobbet practice bats were 8/6d, Lillywhite special drivers 15 shillings.
The local gentry were prevailed upon to be such things as president, and vice president; membership fees for ‘farmers and tradesmen’ were 3 shillings, for ‘labourers’2 shillings, and for youths under 16 years one shilling.
Details of concerts and social events to raise money for the club were given: 'Hire of Piano' £1.5.0d, ‘Expenses of man coming with piano’ 2/6d.
The team was taken to away matches by horse-drawn transport —‘Hiring horse and wagonette to carry team to match 4/ —, for stabling horse 3d.’
The wagonette was hired from the local Jobmaster (who was also the publican)—‘Carriages, open or closed, Breaks, Landaus, Broughams, etc.
Horses let by the day, week or month.
Terms moderate.’
The team was careful with its equipment: ‘binding a bat’ 6d; ‘sewing a ball’3d.
And so the records went on —‘a cap be presented to those members who perform the hat trick’, ‘all hat trick caps to be the same colour’.
By 1893 the club was in trouble financially, but it was resolved that it be ‘restarted at once’.
It was restarted and, with the break during the First World War, flourished until 1920.
The last entry in the book is, in fact, the score sheet for the match played on the 14 August of that year.
Several of the older inhabitants of the village remember the team and filled in details — but no one was found who actually played in any of the games.
The survival of such a record cannot be a unique event — there must be hundreds of account books, minute books, and such, waiting to yield up information on past activities.
At a slightly different level the Minute Books of the Parish Council (and the Parochial Church Council) are essential research materials.
For the same village in which the cricket club flourished, the parish council records (which date from 1894, the year of the Act which established such bodies) make fascinating reading — receipts for the ‘Poor Lands Charity’ were £76.2.8½d (mainly from renting of parish land), outgoings rather less, leaving a balance in hand at year end of £1.12.5d.
It is of interest to note that the first item of non-financial business appearing in the records concerned the location of a footpath!
Things seem not to change very much.
The records contain much of interest (and in this regard they cannot be unique).
A few short examples will indicate some of the riches in the pages.
In 1896 the ‘Ratepayers and Inhabitants in Parish Meeting assembled [resolved to]hereby accord the Rev R. Burdon their grateful thanks for the very great interest he continues to show in the   Parish…and hereby express their ernest (sic)and unanimous wish that his health might very speedily be restored and his life be prolonged for many years.’
Burdon, who had been Rector from 1859 to 1887, has already been mentioned as the provider of the village school.
He had also built a reading room for the agricultural labourers and made other substantial gifts.
He was principal landowner and, until his death in 1920, ‘lord of the manor’.
The Chippenham Cycling Club, 1910.
Club records, and such photographs, often yield interesting and sometimes amusing information on many aspects of past local activities, and may well record architectural features long gone/
For 1900 there is record of measures taken to support the Transvaal War fund; for 1901 the resolution to send King Edward VII the parish's sympathy on the death of Queen Victoria — the handsome 14 x 9½ inch black-bordered acknowledgement by the Home Office is preserved.
In many parishes the parish magazine has been in being for a number of years and is a great repository of local information — which event was held by which organisation in which year, who won prizes at the horticultural show, etc., etc.
On occasion priceless material is discovered.
For example, in a parish magazine for June 1925, the author found a printed list of gravestones in the churchyard compiled in 1890.
The discovery was made in 1984, and a search of the churchyard at that time showed that the vast majority of the memorials had either disappeared of become illegible.
The information in the parish magazine was of inestimable value and, in addition, it prompted the recording of the remaining (and later) stones for posterity.
Finally in this short section, mention should be made of ‘scrapbooks’ compiled by such organisations as the Women's Institute, Mothers' Union and Townswomen's Guild.
From time to time these worthy bodies are moved to compile works recording the history of a parish in modern times — the Queen's Jubilee, the celebration of the wedding of the Prince and princess of Wales, and other notable occasions.
These records provide invaluable information compiled at the time of the event concerned, and are often illustrated with photographs, leaflets and other memorabilia.
Local researchers should seek out these records — after a while they tend to go missing.
There is nothing worse than being told ‘Yes, we had a lovely book all about the fête we held for the coronation, but I haven't seen it for some years.
There were lots of photographs, I used to have the negatives.
I think I threw them away only last year.’
The foregoing paragraphs illustrate, by means of brief examples, how the history of past organisations, and the story of past events can be uncovered.
Of equal importance (not least for the benefit of future researchers) is the recording of the existence and activities of present-day organisations such as those already listed.
For the dedicated researcher this can be done in several ways.
They are time-consuming but are worthwhile.
Obviously, the very first thing is to discover what societies or bodies actually exist, and then to find out who the leaders are.
At this point it is probably wise to seek out each leader and discuss their organisations with them.
When some idea of the framework of objectives, aspirations and activities has been obtained it may be useful to compile a questionnaire, into which answers may be inserted, either by the leader or by the researcher.
A second meeting will help to verify the answers.
It is, of course, vital to confirm that the information is as complete as possible — is there an older member who remembers how the group came into being?(assuming the present leader does not), and so on .
From the answers a narrative history can be written, and perhaps published in the local press or parish magazine, full credit (with photographs) being given to the people who provided all the information.
The second course is to write the history of the local organisation from general knowledge gleaned over the years, and to send this to the leader, or committee, for comment.
There are points for and against this approach.
If any of the information is inaccurate the researcher may be thought an idiot, but, on the other hand, the organisation may feel flattered to be written about and asked to vet the story.
A third way to gather information is to compile a check list of the kind of data, and anecdote, needed, and then to use this in a tape-recorded interview (or interviews, for cross-checking can be valuable) at which the list helps to ensure all the important topics are covered.
It is very necessary that the information is not left on tape too long before transcription and editing — it is hoped that the reasons for this are self evident!
The subject of pictorial records should also be mentioned.
In these days of the video camera and ‘instant’ processing it is possible to make memorable recordings of important local events — from rag-day parades to the church bazaar, the Remembrance Day service at the war memorial, or the opening of the new parish hall.
This can be an expensive way of producing local history studies — especially if a duplicate copy is made for the county record office — and we do not yet know how long video film can be stored before it deteriorates.
On the subject of still photographs, colour is splendid, but if economical reproduction is envisaged then black and white film is much to be recommended.
The local researcher may find this kind of work, down-to-earth and practical, a welcome contrast to the more academic kinds of study discussed elsewhere in this book.
The local ‘Foresters’ hold their annual fete in 1913.
No doubt some of them volunteered for war service a year later.
Palaeography
The word ‘palaeography’ combines the Greek elements palaious (‘ancient’) and graphia (a suffix denoting styles of writing), and hence, in the words of the Oxford English Dictionary , means ‘the study of ancient writing’.
Fortunately, the vast majority of local history projects undertaken by the amateur, part-time researcher can be brought to totally satisfactory conclusion without the need to study ancient documents at first hand, for it must be said that, quite apart from the difficulties inherent in the Anglo-Saxon, Norman French, and Latin languages, the task of reading early styles of handwriting can be formidable.
There is, of course, absolutely no doubt that even when only a facsimile of a document is available a professional historian or amateur specialist can gain a great deal from its perusal; much more so when there is the opportunity to examine the original itself.
Changes of scribal hands, the use of short forms, the actual layout of the documents, all help in piecing together fragments of knowledge.
Questions such as, ‘Has a word been inserted, removed or altered?’, and ‘Who made the alterations?
When, and for what reason?’ may be asked.
New discoveries are constantly being made through a return to original sources.
But all this is beyond the needs of the average local historian, as well as for the most part being beyond his general skills, so this chapter is devoted to giving a broad general outline of how handwriting developed, defining some of the terms used, and describing some of the early styles.
The chapter also contains a number of illustrations drawn from documents of all kinds and ages relevant to the study of local history.
Palaeography is a very inexact science, and should the researcher wish to delve a little deeper an excellent starting point is The Handwriting of English Documents by H.C.
Hector (2nd edition, Dorking 1980).
The author was an Assistant Keeper of the Public Records and his book, in addition to being lucid and well-illustrated, contains a structured bibliography under the headings: general, materials and instruments, languages, abbreviation, publications in record type, miscellaneous and transcribed facsimiles, this last illustrating the appearance of a wide range of documents.
Finally, should the local researcher be fortunate enough to find an original document which has not been transcribed, and which he cannot read, then professional help will be needed.
This may, or may not, be expensive — but the reward may well be worth the money, as the present author has found on more than one occasion.
Terminology
Many of the words used in palaeography have broad meanings in normal English usage, or may be used in more than one way.
The following are the most important:
Cursive Writing executed without raising the pen from the vellum or paper, so that the characters are rapidly formed with a running hand.
National styles evolved, hence there are, for example, English cursive and Gothic cursive hands.
Majuscule This term is used to describe letters written large; usually capitals, but not necessarily so.
Minuscule Normally a small letter, as opposed to a capital or uncial (see below).
The word may also be applied to the small cursive script developed from the uncial.
Various kinds of minuscule came into use, such as the humanistic and the Carolingian.
Uncial The term given to letters having the large rounded forms used in Greek and Latin manuscripts.
The letters were not joined together, as occurred in cursive scripts.
Later the word was applied somewhat more loosely to capital letters and others of large size, introduced in the fifth to eighth centuries.
Handwriting
All writing depends on the materials with which it is executed, so when in European countries surfaces such as vellum, and instruments like the reed pen took the place of stone and chisel, the joining of letters into cursive styles became possible.
Very great freedom was attained for the introduction of new letter forms, ornamentation, the mixing of different hands, and so on.
For the study of local history there is, except in a very few cases, little need to look before Saxon times.
Roman monuments and inscriptions may be found, but the majuscule writing employed on these may be regarded as a subject separate from the general theme now being explored.
Handwriting in documents before 1500
In the centuries just before and just after the Conquest, handwriting comprised a mixture of styles and letter shapes, depending on the language used (Latin, Anglo-Saxon, Norman French) and the importance of the book or document being written.
To an extent the penned hands were also dependent on the nationality of the scribe or where he had been trained.
In Latin works of an important nature titles, headings and the opening words of chapters were largely based on Roman script forms, the majuscule style of writing; and the body of the text written in an uncial form which, after the coming of the Normans and the spread of their influence, was gradually succeeded by a further uncial style.
The capitals (or majuscules) were of two types —‘square’ and ‘rustic’.
The first, as may be expected from the name, had letters as wide (or half as wide) as their height, and remain quite familiar to modern eyes, as being the face from which present-day upper-case ‘Roman’ type has descended.
Being based on characters which had been designed for incising in stone they were difficult and slow to write.
Rustic capitals, on the other hand, were much easier to pen and represented a version of square capitals developed for scribal use.
Uncial styles, which were distinctive book-hands, employed open, round letter   formation and could be mixed with square and rustic characters to very pleasing effects.
The Carolingian minuscules in which they typically appeared represented a hand developed in Europe.
It subsequently evolved into a lower-case ‘Roman’ face, and with the capital lettering mentioned in the preceding paragraph is still employed by printers down to the present day.
A charter of a grant of land dating from AD965.
The charter proper is in Latin; the boundaries of the grant of land are in English.
The document is further described on page 70.
This indenture made the 12th daye of June, the 20th yere of the Rayne of Kynge Harry the 8th.
Three and thirteth yere of the reigne of our Soveraigne Ladie Elizabeth.
Minister's accounts for Berkshire, 9 James I Expensa Seneschalli.
Et in expensis Seneschalli et aliorum officiariorum domini Regis, et tenentium hoc anno venientium pro curia ibidem tenenda ac pro bono regimine conservando, prout per billam de parcellis indi super hunc computum ostensam et examinatam patent, 46s.8d.
Summa 46s.8d.
This indenture made ye tenthe day of Januarie, in the seconde and thyrde yere of the reyne of our Sovereygne Lord and Lady Phyllyp and Marye.
This indenture made the [twentieth]day of September in the five and twentieth yeare of the reigne of our Soverayne Lord Charles the Second by the grace of God of England Scotland France and Ireland Kinge...
This Indenture made ye twenty fourth day of February and in ye Eleventh year of ye Reign of our Sovereign Lady Anne of England Scotland France and Ireland Queen Defender of ye Faith etc.
This, relating to the Easter offering in a parish in 1721 is in the handwriting of the rector, William Walter MA.
Walter had graduated from Oxford (Magdalen Hall).
This is an excellent example of what the local historian will be coping with at parish level.
I Christopher Wybergh, Curate of Burneston do hereby certify, that the above is a true extract of the entry so numbered, in the Baptismal Register Book of the said parish of Burneston, Diocese of Ripon.
Witness my hand this fourth day of December 1865.
For works written in English more ‘insular’, native forms of minuscule were developed.
The half-uncial which was the basis of the Saxon book-hand, had originated in Ireland where, side by side with it, there had been evolved a condensed upright minuscule, used for ‘glosses’(or short commentaries and explanations inserted between the lines).
In the centuries following the Conquest there gradually developed separate styles of penmanship for the two main purposes for which calligraphy was employed.
These have come to be called the ‘book-hand’ and the related groups of ‘charter’, ‘chancery’and ‘court’hands.
The first style was employed in the execution of literary and liturgical manuscripts, and those of the second in the preparation of official, royal, legal and business documents.
In the course of the Middle Ages writing, particularly the Carolingian minuscule, underwent transformation as generations of clerks succeeded one another.
There remained points of contact between architecture and palaeography, and scholars have detected Romanesque and Gothic periods in both.
The field is a specialised one and the study of it is still producing refinements of previous discoveries.
'But from about 1330 there is a steady decline in regularity and architectural quality: even in formal documents the writing is not only strongly cursive but wanting in discipline, and suggests an unsuccessful attempt to reconcile the claims of ceremoniousness and speed' (Hector,op cit ).
In the fifteenth century the Italian humanists introduced considerable refinement, the ‘humanistic minuscule’ was gradually adopted throughout the Christian world, and became the cursive hand which was eventually termed ‘italic’.
This style of writing began, in the early sixteenth century, to compete with Gothic cursive, and gradually the latter disappeared.
Handwriting after 1500
The invention of printing in the fifteenth century steadily did away with the need for handwritten books, and it is interesting to note that from that time onwards various styles of calligraphy developed for different purposes.
The departments of central government employed writing masters who, moving through several ‘bastard’ phases, gradually perfected distinctive styles described below.
Outside the sphere of government, in the realms of personalised correspondence, variations came with great rapidity.
Individual hands contained all kinds of more or less cursive elements, but the hands themselves cease to be worth classifying except by the dedicated palaeographer, pursuing studies or hypotheses in great detail.
Secretary hands In 1571 a work written by Jean de Beauchesne and John Baildon called A Booke containing Divers Sortes of Hands was published.
This described a form of handwriting used for everyday purposes.
Cursive in nature, secretary was a distinct hand initially, and written upright, but slopes were soon introduced (in the interests of writing at speed) and by 1637 it was already possible to speak of ‘sett’, ‘facill’ and ‘fast’hands, or, less opaquely, ‘engrossing’‘upright’and ‘sloped’.
What the styles had in common was a number of letter forms.
Humanistic hands These styles started in Italy in the fifteenth century and were based on the Carolingian minuscule.
During the period of their maturing, Roman capitals were introduced, and humanistic cursive became a popular hand used for private correspondence between people of sensitivity and learning.
In the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries this cursive italic style gained ground as an alternative to secretary, although as Hector says (op cit ), ‘By 1600 it was being written with such magnificent disregard of any calligraphical rules that it might be illegible to the writer's contemporaries and compatriots.’
Indeed, in 1604 the earl of Essex's love letters were described by a contemporary as ‘written in such a ragged Roman hand’ as to be quite unreadable.
Round hands As has been suggested in the last section, secretary and humanistic italic, both cursive hands, were being used at the same time in England for all kinds of general and vernacular purposes.
It was inevitable that they should influence each other and gradually fuse together.
What emerged from this process was the English national round hand.
Because this writing was very much the style from which our modern everyday hand has descended, it is worth looking at in slightly greater detail.
For example, it differentiated between the letters i and j , and u and v , which had previously caused confusion and even today transcriptions of ancient documents are being called into question, particularly in the matter of family names.
Loops were provided for the ascenders (upward strokes) of b, f, h, k and 1 , and the descenders (downward strokes) of f, g, j, y and z .
The addition of these features permitted increased legibility, a lessening of ambiguity and a speeding up of the writing process.
With the coming of the fine steel pen, further refinements were introduced.
The Carstairs system (after Joseph Carstairs, died 1820) involved using the whole forearm in the business of writing, instead of just the fingers.
The influence of Carstairs may still be detected in the handwriting of many Americans who, generally, apply a higher standard to calligraphy than do the English for similar purposes.
Today, the electronic typewriter with its daisy-wheel printer, and the personal computer with its ink jet dot-matrix printer, have probably put an end to developments in handwriting, although many people are now studying and practising the art of good penmanship, and the term a ‘fine Italian hand’ may yet be restored to its original meaning.
Bibliography
In addition to The Handwriting of English Documents by L.C. Hector already mentioned, the following books may be of value:English Cursive Book-hands 1200–1500 by M.B. Parkes (London 1979),Elizabethan Handwriting 1500–1650 by G.E.
Dawson and L. Kennedy-Skipton (London, reprinted 1981),Examples of English Handwriting 1150–1750 by Hilda Grieve (London, reprinted 1978).
An heraldic mystery.
This panel, dated 1715, in a parish church, is clearly identified as the achievement of George I of the House of Hanover.
The shield, however, is that of Anne, last sovereign of the House of Stuart, who died in 1714.
With their supporters, the arms date from after 1707, when the Union with Scotland occurred.
Anne's motto, however, was Semper Eadem, not Dieu et mon Droit.
Heraldry and local history
Although not a primary source to the local historian heraldry is, nevertheless, an important element which on occasion can contribute significantly to the progress of a study and, because of its artistic components, pleasantly-illuminate it.
True, the local history researcher is more likely to be pursuing investigations through source materials provided by Anglo-Saxon charters, medieval rolls, maps, land grants, muster documents and the like, but the uses of heraldry are not to be despised in the processes of rounding out historical themes.
Occasionally a charge on a shield of arms, or the interpretation of a crest can be an important clue in the determination of seignorial affiliation, in linking two families with different names, or suggesting a hitherto unsuspected landholding, quite apart from the visual attraction an achievement might have as stained glass, stone carving or hatchment in the local church.
It is no part of the function of this chapter to dilate at length upon the rules (so far as they exist) or the functions of heraldry since its rise in the second quarter of the twelfth century, but a few general remarks will not be out of place.
To begin with, heraldry (or, more properly, armory) comprised designs on shields and horse trappings adopted by the knightly class and above, to identify each other in tournaments.
There was, and perhaps still is, a school of thought which asserted that armorial devices were assumed for identification in battle, but both research and common sense say this is probably wrong, for as so many knights chose arms of similar design, the mud, blood and turmoil of battle would have rendered such symbols on shields of little value, although the same cannot, of course, be said about armorial banners or pennons bravely waving above rallying points or on the ends of lances.
As time went on it became the custom for an armiger to display his cognizance on his seal, which thus became tantamount to his signature.
Then it became a matter of convenience and practical good sense for an heir, on coming into his estate, to employ the same devices as his father, as an indication of familial continuity and lordship, so arms achieved hereditary significance and, by the end of the thirteenth century, there were both heraldic ‘rules’ and terminology.
With the development of closed and visored helms, which effectively hid a man's face, elaborate crests in the shapes of animals, birds, fantastical creatures and other adornments were employed on helmets to signal identity, and these too became associated with particular families.
The language of blazon
Rising as it did, when the nobility and knightly classes in England were of Norman stock, it follows that the language of armory was French, and so it has remained (in  remarkably garbed form with English interpolations) to the present day.
Coats of arms are described according to rules known as blazon, a term which when used as a noun is a description in words of a coat and, when as the verb ‘(to) blazon’, the act of so describing.
A shield of arms (to cite one simple example) comprising a black cross nth scalloped edges on a yellow (gold) background progressed from being described in the thirteenth century as jaune o crois noire engrelee to today's blazon or a cross engrailed sable .
At first sight both the earlier and later languages of blazon appear somewhat esoteric, but they readily yield up their secrets, being based on a comparatively small vocabulary, the words of which describe quite accurately both the colours (tinctures), layout, and principal devices used in armorial design.
There are three basic books which may be studied to good effect:A Complete Guide to Heraldry by A.C. Fox-Davies, revised in 1969 by John Brooke-Little, the present Norroy and Ulster King of Arms;Boutell's Heraldry , also revised by Brook-Little (1983); and A New Dictionary of Heraldry (1987) edited by Stephen Friar.
All three books are maintained in print.
Duplication and differencing
At all stages in the development of armory, and in all the centuries during which it has been in use, there have been two conflicting underlying factors, and it is important that the local historian be aware of them from the outset, so that if false trails are followed they are not followed for long.
The first has been to satisfy the objective which has already been stated: to display identity by assuming (and from the fourteenth century being granted) arms of individual distinction.
The second (not so relevant today) has, for reasons of sentiment or expediency, been to adopt arms similar to, but not technically identical with, a feudal protector or ally.
The means by which this last aim is achieved is called ‘differencing’.
The latest edition of Boutell's Heraldry gives a fine series of examples of feudal differencing of arms as assumed by the family of Luterell and their associated and dependent folk.
In formal terms the Luterell arms may be described as or a bend between six martlets sable — that is, a gold shield carrying a black diagonal band with, on each side of this, three birds rather like house martins.
This design, with colour variations and ornaments, was used by the de Furnival, Eccleshall, Wadsley, Wortley and Mounteney families.
It illustrates a simple and straightforward situation, for the relationship between the Luterells and their feudal tenants is well documented.
Unfortunately the local historian cannot rely on such proximation of tincture and style being always a sign of seignorial attachment.
Different families are known to have employed quite similar arms to each other with apparent impunity (especially before the foundation of the College of Arms on 2 March 1484), and there is no evidence to suggest their actions were anything other than innocent.
To take but one example from the many available, a well-known medieval armorial design comprises a shield with three spike-like shapes starting from the top edge of the shield, points downward and meeting towards the bottom.
In the language of blazon this is three piles conjoined in base (the charge being so termed, it is said, after the shape of the wooden supports early bridge-builders drove into river beds to support their structures).
This shield design was used by the Earl of Chester, John le Scot  (fl .
1225) as or three piles gules (gold with red spikes), the family of Ridel —or three piles sable (gold with black spikes), Basset (who succeeded Ridel)or three piles gules within a bordure sable (gold with red spikes all inside a black border), Bryan —or three piles azure (gold with blue spikes), and Wrottesley —or three piles vert (gold with green spikes).
Members of three of the above families were, around the same time (1348 to 1369) members of the Order of the Garter, and although a connection is known to exist between Wrottesley and Basset, neither is connected with Bryan and none with le Scot.
In circumstances such as this the local historian has perhaps two problems: to attempt to find a feudal or familial association or dependency, and, if the arms are uncoloured, to ascertain if they are those of le Scot, Ridel, Basset, Wrottesley or Bryan, or, indeed, some other line.
Differencing to denote cadency.
LEFT The arms of Andrew Forsey, member of parliament for Bridport in the reign of Henry V, and RIGHT those of Patricia, his 20th century collateral descendant.
The term ‘differencing’ is also used in a quite distinct way from that of acknowledging feudal proximity, and that is to display family connections and descent.
In the first instance, say a simple shield design (perhaps a red ground with a horizontal gold bar across the centre —gules a fess or)represents the bearings of the head of the main family, then offshoots might add to this stark layout crosses, birds or other charges above, below, or on the fess to mark the identity of their own branches, while honouring in their retention of the basic style the fundamental familial ties of blood.
This system is known as cadency and marks the relationships of the cadet branches to the principal family tree.
A second method of proclaiming cadency down the male line of the whole blood is to display single marks of difference.
The subject is dealt with in great detail in the more substantial books on heraldry as being one of great formality — a label for the eldest son, down to an octofoil for the ninth son.
The system was standardised in the early part of the sixteenth century, and some authorities went so far as to describe the cadency symbols for the ninth son of a ninth son (an octofoil on an octofoil ).
In the event, the whole subject became rather fanciful in the writings of bygone heralds, their petty ‘rules’ never fully translated into practical expression.
Even so, the local historian  may find the system of value particularly when examining rolls of arms in the county archive.
Impalement and escutcheons of pretence
Valuable clues to marital alliances are contained in two conventions for the depiction of armorial bearings of a man and his wife, known as impalement and escutcheon of pretence.
Both terms refer to styles of depicting the arms of spouses on a single shield.
The first system is used when the husband is armigerous and the wife, although of an armigerous family, is not herself an heraldic heiress.
The method of impalement in this situation has changed over the centuries.
In early times the fashion was to cut the two shields in half down the vertical axis (the ‘pale’ line) and join the dexter half of the husband's to the sinister half of the wife's, thus making in many cases a very strange ‘design’indeed — such as the front half of a lion joined to the right-hand portion of a spread eagle.
This fashion of dimidiation was abandoned by at least the late fourteenth century and replaced by the style of compressing each set of armorial bearings onto one half of the shield — the husband's being placed on the dexter and the wife's on the sinister.
The system is still in use today.
(A short word of explanation is required at this point regarding the use of the words ‘sinister’ and ‘dexter’.
In heraldry the shield is described from the aspect of its bearer , not its viewer .
Thus ‘dexter ‘refers to the left -hand side of the shield as viewed from the front , and ‘sinister’ means the right -hand side.)
The second system of marshalling armorial bearings to broadcast marital relationship is to adopt an ‘escutcheon of pretence’.
By this method, if the wife is an heraldic heiress, the husband displays her arms on a small shield in the centre of his own, the title of the practice stemming from the fact that he is ‘pretending’ to represent his spouse's family, because there is no male heir to do so.
Marshalling of arms
The word ‘marshalling’ is used in this context in its meaning of combining , hence the marshalling of arms is the ‘discipline of assembling the constituent elements of a coat of arms, and the various devices of which each is composed, in a manner which is in accordance with accepted armorial practice and convention.
In particular, the correct ordering of combinations of armorial devices in a single coat to signify marriage, inheritance or office’(Friar op cit ).
Strictly speaking, therefore, impalement and the use of an escutcheon of pretence is marshalling at its simplest.
In more general heraldic usage the word is applied to the bringing together of two or more sets of arms to form quarterings — this is to say a shield divided into a number of areas, each capable of carrying a complete coat of arms as a sign of familial bonding.
As with so many armorial terms the word ‘quarterings’ is not used in a conventional way and applied to a shield divided merely into four; indeed there can be as many ‘quarterings’as there are family affiliations — perhaps the record is held by the five-surnamed Temple-Nugent-Brydges-Chandos-Grenville family, whose full achievement of arms boasts 719 quarterings.
It is through the study of quartered coats, as   displayed in cathedrals, county archives and other reference sources that the local historian may glean much information not only on families of note (should textual information not exist or be imprecise), but how tenure and ownership of estates changed hands in days long or recently past.
A magnificent bookplate of 1899 with, on the male side (left in picture), twelve quarterings, some of which appear to go back to the 13th century.
The female side includes (second and third quarters) the royal arms of England within a bordure.
The handwritten text makes reference to an heiress marriage to a grand-daughter of King Edward III.
Augmentations of honour
From time to time persons distinguished in the fields of making war, healing, diplomacy, or mere grace in the sight of kings, have been granted augmentations to their armorial bearings; and the discovery of, and comment on, these can — where they are relevant — make a small but useful contribution to the rounding out of a local history.
Such augmentations are rare and signal honours.
They mark especial favours from the sovereign, for although ordinary grants of arms can be purchased (subject always to the Earl Marshal's pleasure and discretion), an augmentation cannot, for its bestowal is in effect a royal warrant under the hand and seal of the reigning monarch.
Today augmentations are rarely given, but in times gone they were less rare and were granted to such as Thomas Howard, the victor of Flodden, Sir Winston Churchill of the reign of Charles II, his son John, first duke of Marlborough, Sir Frederick Treves, surgeon to King Edward VII, the Boleyn family for providing Anne to King Henry VIII, Admiral Nelson, the first Duke of Wellington and the Right Honourable Vincent Massey, a Governor-General of Canada.
To be fair, it is almost impossible to recognise augmentations at first sight, for they take many and sundry forms — such as a small escutcheon similar to that of pretence, a chief, a crest, a canton, a chevron, or, in the case of Sir Francis Drake, a complete coat of arms.
Instances are known of augmentations comprising whole coats to be borne quarterly with personal arms.
A particular kind of augmentation concerns baronets.
At the outset these honours were merely purchased, but in later creations the augmentations came with the grants.
The gentlemen of this hereditary (non-peerage) rank, of the creations of England, Ireland, Great Britain and the United Kingdom, are permitted a canton (or an escutcheon) showing the ‘bloody hand of Ulster’—argent a sinister hand couped at the wrist gules .
Gentlemen who were early baronets of Scotland were authorised to charge their arms with a canton (or escutcheon) carrying the arms of the province of Nova Scotia —argent on a saltire azure an escutcheon of the Royal Amis of Scotland .
Finally there are ‘augmentations of office’, such as the escutcheon borne by the Kingsley family, sometime hereditary foresters of Delamere in Cheshire —argent a bugle stringed sable — and the ‘augmentations’ allowed to bishops and other dignitaries of dimidiating their personal arms with those of their office.
Augmentations are worth searching out, for there is many a manor, grand house, or estate which has at one time been owned by an eminent person in receipt of an augmentation of one kind or another — and there is almost certainly a good tale to tell.
Helms and supporters
The style of helm and the direction in which it faces, whether it is open or closed, are  all important pointers to the status of the person whose armorial bearings are being depicted.
The subject is dealt with cogently and succinctly in the New Dictionary of Heraldry , and in even terser form the present practice may be stated as follows: a peer's helm is shown as a stylised silver mêlée type, facing dexter (that is left to the observer) and decorated with gold bars; the helmets of baronets and knights face the front (affronty)and are of the steel ‘barrier’ variety, with visors raised; esquires, gentlemen (and corporations) display closed ‘tilting’helms of steel, facing dexter.
‘Supporters’ are figures — beasts, birds, mythical creatures and humans — depicted on either side of the shield in a coat of arms.
They are, in short, symbols of eminence and are normally granted only to peers and knights of the first class of the orders of chivalry — although some baronets also have armorial supporters.
Corporations may be granted these devices, but they are normally permitted only to counties, cities and councils of standing; and companies and institutions of an important national nature.
The significance of charges
Of considerable importance to the local historian are the representations of objects shown on shields.
It has already been pointed out that family continuity, conjugal status, and marital affiliations can be determined by an informed examination of armorial achievements.
The objects (or designs) depicted on shields — the charges — can be anything the armiger wishes and the granting kings of arms deem fit.
In the beginning, in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, charges were chosen to appear on shields used in tournaments, and hence reflected this — lions, eagles, crosses, geometrical patterns — but with the passing of the Middle Ages and the emergence of a wealthy merchant class, charges were chosen to appeal to the armiger's interests or fancy.
They could range from spurs to church bells, woolpacks, shuttles, rainbows, millrinds or staples, to sea-shells.
Shakespeare's arms were charged with a tilting spear in allusion to his name; and the author's own arms are uniquely charged with Bristol nails, commemorating family associations with that ancient city.
A specific illustration may be given to show the value of the study of heraldic charges in the field of local studies.
A Manchester family of Magnall, who also had business interests in London, had for many years borne arms without authority, and on 19 February 1765 Thomas Magnall was granted bearings blazoned argent on a mount vert a swepe (or balista) azure — a swepe/balista being a large siege catapult.
The present author was much intrigued as to why a northern merchant family should choose what seemed to be a most inappropriate device (unless as indicative of their aggressive commercial practices).
Reference to the actual grant of arms showed that it had a very strange limitations clause, for the arms were assigned to Thomas Magnall and his offspring and ‘any such of the Descendants of his Father who shall write their Names Magnall and by no Others’!
Further research revealed that the grantee's father had called himself Mangnall .
This made the limitations clause even more interesting, for the older man (and no doubt his ancestral assumer) had quite obviously used not a swepe or balista as the charge, but an almost identical engine of war known as a mangonel , in witty and canting allusion to the family name as used by them .
So here was an instance of the son of a local worthy insisting on recording his name differently  from his father, making sure the charge was not described as a mangonel, and further trying to ensure that any of his father's descendants who sought to use the arms should spell their name Magnall, a form from which it is difficult if not impossible to divine the relevance and punning nature of the heraldic charge.
This little study, when set in the appropriate context, was turned into a short piece for a local history magazine.
Locating coats of arms
Coats of arms are to be found in many places — churches, abbeys, town halls, stately homes, castles, police stations and public houses.
They are never there without reason.
In churches and places of worship they give clues to the identities of benefactors and, with a little skilled assistance, can be used to date important events.
This is particularly true in the matter of monuments, chantry chapels, hatchments, memorial boards, ledger stones, floor tiles and misericords, but on the subject of stained glass a word of warning is necessary.
Sometimes when the glass has been removed for cleaning and restoration it may have been reassembled back-to-front.
In the main such errors are easy to detect because the charges face the heraldic sinister rather than the dexter, but occasionally, if the charges are non-directional and the arms are impaled, the historian can be misled as to which was the husband and which the wife, and hence infer the wrong family name.
A final word of caution concerns hatchments.
These funerary items were nearly always painted by heraldic amateurs — signwriters, coachbuilders and so on— so although they provide useful clues they should not be regarded as authoritative, but of course the fact that they are not can also form part of the story the local historian has to tell.
On the outside of public buildings, particularly of the older sort, arms will give clues to the identity of previous owners, or if almshouses, benefactors.
Sadly, arms on some modern buildings, though splendidly crafted, are occasionally inaccurate and may be misleading.
Again this can be turned to the researcher's advantage.
Heraldic visitations
In the later Middle Ages as more and more families became armigerous, the abuse of arms by illegal assumption grew to the point where corrective action was necessary if the dignity of possessing a valid grant was not to be eroded beyond reclamation.
Thus in the sixteenth century there began, by warrant of the king, systematic heraldic visitations with the mandate ‘to put down or otherwise deface…plate, jewels, parchments, windows, gravestones and monuments…wheresoever they be set or placed’ should those things bear unlawful arms.
Moreover, the officer of arms making the visitation was directed to enquire into the lives of all those using a title of honour or dignity such as knight, esquire or gentleman, and if such a title or coat of arms had been falsely assumed or usurped, the offender was to be publicly denounced by proclamation.
Major visitations were conscientiously carried out by the heralds or their deputes — assisted.by the sheriffs and their officers — for more than a hundred and forty years.
Records of their findings now comprise the Library of Visitation Books of the College of Arms, and a number have been published by the Harleian Society.
This body was founded in 1869 for the purpose of publishing not only the manuscripts of the heraldic visitations but other ‘inedited’ documents of a related nature.
Since its foundation it has issued 91 volumes of parish registers, 54 volumes of heraldic visitations and 65 drawn from other sources.
Part of a manuscript depicting arms once in a stained-glass window in a church.
When the history of the church was being researched a footnote in an 18th century volume identified a drawing of some stained-glass panels which had long since fallen into disrepair and had been replaced by plain lights.
The drawing was located in a British Museum collection, and showed not only the shields which had formerly adorned the window but identified the families whose arms they were, and in some cases gave the tinctures of the fields and charges.
The principal family, Coker, were well-known Parliamentarians and several members were senior officers in the Cromwellian forces.
The visitation records have several values for the local historian.
The first is that being spread over a period of time which began before the Armada, included the civil war and Commonwealth, and finished only after the accession of William of Orange, they are an unrivalled source of information on the changing status of many local families.
The second is that they include not only pedigrees and arms but also, in many cases, ancillary material such as lists of persons to be summoned, correspondence, church notes and lists of disclaimers.
Where they survive, ‘tickets of summons’ are occasionally found attached to paintings of family arms.
It is apparent from studies made that not all those summoned actually attended the heralds — a number ignored the college officers because they understood themselves too grand, of ancient family and proud lineage, and thus beyond any need to have their pedigrees recorded, much less authenticated.
Not the least valuable to the local historian are the lists of names of ignoble omnes who falsely claimed arms and were publicly shamed.
Reference books
In addition to the books already mentioned, the following are among others of value:Burke's General Armory , published in 1842 and reissued in facsimile in London in 1984.
It contains tens of thousands of blazons of arms held (or recorded as held) by English families, listed alphabetically by name.
It is neither complete nor authoritative — the family of Forsey, to take just one small example, being listed separately as Forterishey, Fortersley, and Fortryshey without cross reference, attempt to verify a definitive spelling, or verification of blazon — but it is almost the only generally available starting point, and cannot be ignored.
The counterpart to Burke's General Armory is Papworth's Ordinary of British Armorials , published in 1874 and reissued in London in 1985.
The book comprises an alphabetical dictionary ‘in which the arms are systematically divided throughout…so that the names of families whose shields are found on buildings, monuments, seals, paintings, plate, etc., whether mediaeval or modern can be readily ascertained.’
And that statement, given that such a book can never be complete nor, when based as it is on Burke's volume, without error, is true.
But the user of Papworth must be able to blazon.
The Oxford Guide to Heraldry (Oxford 1988), by Thomas Woodcock and John M. Robinson, is a welcome, lavishly illustrated, new text.
Anglo-Norman Armory (Vols I & II) by Cecil Humphery-Smith (Canterbury 1978) is of value to the researcher needing assistance in identifying arms on early rolls.
The volumes are not especially easy to use, however, and more detailed and accessible information is contained in two works published in 1950 and 1967 by the Society of Antiquaries of London:A Catalogue of English Medieval Rolls of Arms by Sir Anthony Wagner, and Rolls of Arms — Henry III edited by T.D.
Tremlett and Hugh Stanford London, with additions by Wagner.
Honour and Arms by J.F. Huxford (London 1984) is a quite sumptuous book covering augmentations from early, legendary, varieties up to the present century.
Each coat of arms touched on is illustrated in full colour, and the augmentation is blazoned.
A series of publications under the title Hatchments of Britain is in the process of appearing, edited by Peter Summers.
So far the following have been released: Vol.1, 1974,Northampton, Warwickshire and Worcestershire ; Vol.II, 1976,Norfolk and Suffolk ; Vol.III, 1980,Northern Counties ; Vol.IV, 1983,Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire, Berkshire and Wiltshire ; Vol.V, 1985,Kent, Surrey and Sussex ; Vol.VI, 1987,Cambridgeshire, Essex, Hertfordshire, Huntingdonshire and Middlesex .
Seals are dealt with in the series issued by HMSO:Catalogue of Seals in the Public Record Office by R.E.
Ellis (1978–81); and brasses by A List of Monumental Brasses in the British Isles by Stephenson Mill (1926, with an appendix, London 1938).
A Guide to Stained Glass in Britain by P.A. Cowan (London 1985) is, in its field, most valuable for it contains a gazetteer.
Medieval Chantries and Chantry Chapels by G.H. Cook (London 1968) has much to commend it, as has English Misericords by M. Laird (London 1986).
Finally, the New Dictionary of Heraldry includes useful articles on churchyard monuments, tomb chests and medieval tiles.
Lincoln.
The arch of a Roman gate to the colonia.
Buildings and architecture
For the purposes of this chapter the word ‘architecture’— the art or science of building — is employed in the widest possible sense, from the construction of the circular huts of the Bronze Age peoples to the curtain-walled apartment blocks or ‘space-age’ experimental structures of the late twentieth century.
Each succeeding system or style drew on the techniques of preceding systems or styles, and all are of interest to the local historian.
Ecclesiastical buildings
No extensive treatment will be accorded to ecclesiastical buildings, be they humble parish churches, cathedrals, abbeys, monasteries, friaries, nunneries, or any other such.
Almost without exception these structures (past and present) are already well covered.
Some, like St Paul's Cathedral in London, and the Metropolitan Cathedral of Christ the King in Liverpool, have handsome four-colour booklets devoted to them, and these publications are useful starting points for the serious student.
Others, like the now all but vanished Saxon cathedral in North Elmham in Norfolk, are the  subjects of academic papers by the staff of the Ancient Monuments and Historic Buildings division of the Department of the Environment.
A third group, the humble parish churches, have their guide books.
These too are obvious starting points but should be treated with caution, because the authors, conscientious as they may be, are almost always non-professional antiquaries, historians or architects, and errors or misapprehensions frequently creep into their work.
A vast number of religious buildings have been surveyed by competent authorities, and detailed descriptions (with photographs and plans) are available from the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments (see Addresses, Appendix III).
Even where the buildings are described in the Commission's published series,An Inventory of Historical Monuments in the County of …, the researcher should write to (or, better still, visit) the Commission's London offices for more information than has appeared on the printed pages.
The photographs which are available frequently include tombs, wall monuments, brasses, cartouches, and important exterior details such as grotesques, gargoyles and sundials, for which there was no space in the books.
Before embarking on detailed research on an individual, quite ancient, building it will be prudent to refer, in addition to the Inventory noted above, to the Victoria County History , for in many cases valuable data will be found.
The Monasticon Anglicanum has already been mentioned in this book.
It should be remembered that the title of this mammoth work is, essentially,A History of the Abbies and other Monasteries, Hospitals, Frieries and Cathedral and Collegiate Churches…together with a particular account of their respective foundations ….
Being published, originally, in 1655–73 it is of the greatest importance in connection with ecclesiastical buildings up to that time.
Also of prime relevance are the old county histories.
A modern work of importance describing all the main monastic sites still surviving is Medieval Monasteries of Great Britain by L. Butler and C. Given-Wilson (London 1983).
As has been indicated for the parish church, it will be prudent to determine if a descriptive booklet is, or has ever been, available.
Such a publication will be a pertinent reference aid.
Indeed, if superbly well written, it may contain everything that is required.
Experience has, however, shown that although many such works appear prima facie comprehensive, they frequently are not.
The more ancient the building, the greater the problem.
It must be remembered that what is described is, almost without exception, the church as it existed at the time of writing.
It is of course true that in many cases it will be stated that the nave is, for example, twelfth-century, the chancel fifteenth (with nineteenth-century restorations), the north chapel twentieth, and so on , but it will not record the stained glass now gone or the wall monuments which have decayed (or, obviously, the changes wrought since the booklet was written).
In the former of these circumstances the old county histories may be searched to considerable effect, for not only may they describe the church as it then was, but give further clues as to where data may be found.
In a specific instance the author discovered a footnote in a county history (1774) describing how stained glass in a local church was falling into decay.
There was no mention of any such glass in an early twentieth-century description, and it seemed to have disappeared before a restoration of 1869.
However, by careful reading of the footnote, a manuscript was found in the Harleian Collection of the British Library which dated from 1599 and gave details of the armorial panels which at that date existed.
These were of great value not only regarding the history of  the architecture of the fabric and fitments, but also the matrimonial alliances of long-dead notables.
This aerial view of Pevensey Castle shows the Roman fort together with the medieval keep and bailey in the southeast corner.
The fort was built c.AD300, and the castle during the period AD1100-1300.
Regarding the changes made since the writing of the booklet, the researcher will gain pleasure from discovering them on site.
Castles and forts
There are dozens of castles, or sites of forts and castles, in England — from Corfe (Dorset) in the south to Ford (Northumberland) in the north, from Shrewsbury (Shropshire) in the west to Caister (Norfolk) in the east.
They range from sites of long-gone timber motte and bailey structures, through ruined stone works to well-preserved extensive buildings still lived in and enjoyed by owners or tenants.
Every castle and site of consequence has its guide book, and many of these are well written if not actually comprehensive.
The old county histories contain interesting  material, sometimes with plans and drawings not easily obtainable elsewhere.
The volumes in the Victoria County History and the Inventories of the Royal Commission on Historical Monuments are invaluable.
There are also modern books on the subject.
One which has much to commend it is Great Medieval Castles of Britain by James Forde-Johnston (London 1979), for it contains, in addition to many photographs and line drawings, a good bibliography, and provides historical perspectives — political, military and architectural.
Stately homes
Much of the generality of what has been said about important religious buildings and castles is true about stately homes.
Many have guide books, the information in which can be augmented by diplomatic approaches to the owners or custodial bodies (such as the National Trust and English Heritage)— there may be estate papers showing details of constructional features, modifications, contractors' itemized bills for work done, and so on.
Sometimes personal tours can be arranged in the company of a qualified member of staff, and these are of particular value for ‘special subject’ histories.
Industrial and special-purpose buildings
A moment's reflection will show there have, from very early times, been ‘industrial’ and other special-purpose buildings —‘henges’, fogous, shrines, kilns, mints, abattoirs, amphitheatres, salthouses and many others.
The first industrial revolution brought numerous new structures — textile mills, engine sheds, foundries, pumping stations — the second brought everything from telephone exchanges to towering office blocks, nuclear and photovoltaic power stations, vertical-axis wind turbines and multi-storey carparks.
All are built somewhere and hence within the province of the local historian.
The sources of information are countless: from the Archaeology Branch of the Ordnance Survey to the publicity departments of large civil engineering contractors and multi-national corporations, the Departments of the Environment and Energy, county halls, and museums.
Each researcher must make a personal choice, in the multiplicity of circumstances which now exist.
Domestic buildings and architecture
It is fairly obvious to say there are two classes of buildings to be studied — those which still stand, and those which have been destroyed, fallen down, or otherwise disappeared.
The disappearances may range in cause from the Roman invasion to the obliteration of a village for an aircraft runway, from sheer neglect to site redevelopment.
To the local historian, all the architectural features on buildings past and present are of interest.
The search for details of buildings now gone is as fascinating as that of the discovery of features of those that remain.
There are three (perhaps four) sources of information — archaeological, documentary, and new observation through personal research; the dubious fourth being the stories by third-parties who ‘remember’ things about buildings now gone, or changed.
19th century weavers cottages in Heptonstall.
The wide windows provided light for the looms inside.
Archaeological sources
Hardly a week goes by without a report in the press of some find of archaeological importance.
Excavation in a town centre or new rural development unearths traces of Bronze Age habitations, Roman foundations, sections of medieval walls, etc.
It is, therefore, sometimes a little difficult to keep up-to-date, for although what is found may not be in the area being researched by the local historian concerned, it may, nonetheless, have a bearing, for the style of housing suggested for one place may be typical of that formerly existing in another, ten or even a hundred miles away.
The first places of research are, therefore, the local authority archaeological officer, the central reference library and the county or city museum.
There will be found a wealth of information in all kinds of forms — from details of sites which have been excavated and studied, to actual examples of materials used, given that they have been sufficiently durable as to survive.
Even when no substantial physical remains have been found, archaeologists, using bodies of knowledge gained over many years, may have been able to infer what kinds of buildings may have stood on particular spots which show foundation-traces, and have rendered ‘artists impressions’ of what the structures probably looked like.
These may range from circular huts set in a farmyard, with small closes dating from the Ornamental Horizon of the Middle Bronze Age, through the hill-fort ‘village’ of the Iron Age, first-century Roman villa with outbuildings, to much later structures up to, and sometimes including, the twentieth century.
Documentary sources
Documentary sources vary widely over time and in quality.
They may range from a brief mention of a thirteenth-century tithe barn near the manor house, to a fully  detailed true-to-scale plan of a building as it existed in earlier times, but which is now changed.
Or they may be of a different kind.
The farmhouse in which the author now lives was thought, locally, to be about 250 years old — its general style and construction seeming to indicate this.
It was not, however, shown on the tithe map of 1838, and recent modifications to the structure revealed a stone set above the front doorway (and previously hidden by an Edwardian porch) which was ‘documented’ with the date 1880.
The house was indeed of that later time, but in the style and materials which at first glance indicated a greater age.
An engraving from the 18th century of the magnificent guild hall in Hereford.
The timber-framed building dating from the late 16th century was demolished in the 19th century.
It is unusual to find documentary evidence earlier than the fifteenth century, and extremely fortunate to find actual details of buildings.
For example, the author discovered an early fifteenth-century ‘survey’ of a village (describing the sizes of fields and the uses to which they were put) which mentioned a grange close to the manor house.
This led to a field study which at least seemed to locate not only the site but the probable outlines of the building.
In another case, the name Cruckerne (‘the house where the pottery was made’) permitted the identification of a valuable site and foundation traces.
Manorial court records sometimes give useful clues as to when a particular building existed (even when it was built), but seldom are there clues to the sizes or layout.
Glebe terriers, cathedral records, borough records and tax returns can also be of value.
So too can wills and probate inventories.
Descriptions of houses and their environs can sometimes be reconstructed from such items as ‘goods in the hall , in the middle chamber , in the hall-chamber , in the kitchen , in the milkhouse , in the barn and another barn.’
With a little knowledge, ingenuity, and the help of local authority staff, these definitions (all taken from one inventory of 1717/18), and others of like kind, can be translated into probable floor plans.
One of the most useful sources of documentary evidence is that afforded by maps and plans, particularly if they are of large estates and augmented by written records.
Some early maps of this type show, albeit crudely, the kinds of houses existing at the time of drafting, and it is possible to appreciate the difference between the houses of, say, the more well-to-do freeholder and the lowlier tenant.
It may also be possible to compare these early drawings with a still existing building on the same site, to determine if it is the same structure, and, if so, if any general exterior modifications have been made.
There is an important official source of relevant information — the publications of the Royal Commission on the Historical Monuments of England.
These fall into several categories.
The first is the Inventories , mentioned several times already in this book, detailing architectural (and archaeological) treasures in many counties.
The second category (called Occasional Publications)ranges over a wide area of subjects from Peterborough New Town (1964),Industry and the Camera (1985), to English Vernacular Houses (reprinted in paperback 1980).
This last-named is a quite essential source of both information and ideas for the local researcher.
A third category, termed Supplementary Series , deals mainly with working-class houses —West Yorkshire — 1400–1830 and 1750–1920 are typical examples (1986).
The National Monuments Record Photographic Archive is the fourth category, and Buildings for the Age: New Building Types 1900–1939 (1982) and Farms in England: Prehistoric to Present (1983) are representative titles.
The final category,The Survey of London , is made up of volumes describing the buildings in parishes, and books devoted to individual London structures such as Cromwell House, Highgate, and Trinity Hospital, Mile End.
The Royal Commission publishes an Annual Review of its work (with maps and photographs) and this is a worthwhile document to seek out, for it gives not only the background to the work undertaken but keeps the publications record up-to-date.
A useful paper, 'The Royal Commission on Historical Monuments’, was published in Antiquity Vol.LV (1981) pp.106–14, and points to the way some present, and future, publications will be made.
Important as the foregoing publications are, the crucial thing for local historians to be aware of is the richness of the records maintained by the Commission, which have not been, and perhaps never will be, published.
These are maintained in three sections: architectural records, air photography, and archaeology, and they contain millions of individual entries.
For the time being enquiries should be made to the Commission (see Addresses, Appendix III).
A guide to the records is currently being written by the Commission's staff.
A further official record is the List of Buildings of Special Architectural Interest compiled by the Department of the Environment (see Addresses, Appendix III).
This series, with accompanying maps, was started in 1950 (and has been in revision since 1970).
It is prepared within the authority of the Town and Country Planning Acts, and appropriate sections are available for inspection at county and district council offices.
Town and city guidebooks are further sources of information.
These publications frequently contain pictures and other details of notable domestic buildings.
More particularly, careful scrutiny of the ‘Acknowledgements’ sections will occasionally lead to other avenues to be explored — private collections of photographs being a notable instance.
Of more academic, secondary reference, works two in particular may be of special  value.
The first is The English Medieval House by Margaret Wood (London, reprint 1985) which, although dealing mainly with larger houses, is well organised into a series of chapters dealing with features , such as porches, fireplaces, staircases, windows, and so on.
It is very well illustrated with innumerable photographs, line drawings and ground plans.
The second book is How Old is Your House ? by Pamela Cunnington (London, revised 1988), and is even more valuable.
It quite belies its title for it deals with a very wide spectrum of architectural and building topics, has many pictures and plans, useful addresses and a pertinent bibliography.
It deals with all historical periods from the medieval to Victorian, and is an essential aid to the study of vernacular buildings.
Reference should also be made to the section entitled Housing in Chapter 31 of this present volume.
There is a surprising number of medieval houses still standing, sometimes quite unexpectedly awaiting discovery.
For example, Miss Cunnington cites a small house at Pamphill, Dorset, which may have once been a fourteenth-century hunting lodge.
When first surveyed, a few years ago, it had rendered outer walls and unprepossessing windows.
On closer examination it proved to be a medieval first-floor hall house, with solar, garderobe, seventeenth-century overflooring, and to have spent part of its time as a farmhouse.
It has now been handsomely restored.
The book cites a number of further case histories and examples from later centuries, and others similar to those quoted may, of course, be repeated many times over, in all parts of the country.
Conclusion
There are, then, many avenues open to the local investigator wishing to research the history of the buildings in any geographical area.
Perhaps more than in any other specialist area of study the means to do so are readily available.
When the sources of the local authority archaeological office, reference library, county or city museum, Royal Commission publications and collections,Victoria County History volumes and the secondary texts quoted earlier have been exhausted, then the historic buildings officer may be consulted, together with the county or district planning departments.
For very modern buildings of all classes it will also be possible to contact the developers and architects concerned.
In the case of ecclesiastical property this may be done through the church authorities; in the case of other buildings it will be possible to consult with the agents who handled the commercial matters concerned; these can be identified by consultation with the local authority.
An excellent example of the rewards of careful research.
This small house in Pamphill, Dorset, presented until recently a very drab and rundown appearance.
When all the rendering was removed and interior studies made, it proved to be a late medieval first-floor hall house, and its appearance is now as in the lower picture.
Chronology and some problems of dating
At some point or other the student of local history will encounter dates expressed in a variety of different ways with which he will have to become familiar.
Each has its own terminology, logical basis and history, several are complex and worth exploring in some detail.
Regnal years
Most local historians are familiar with the term ‘regnal year’ and are used to seeing dates in printed texts and commentaries expressed in forms such as 11 Edward III, or 63 Victoria, meaning a time between 25 January 1337 and 24 January 1338, or between 20 June 1899 and 19 June 1900 respectively.
It is quite usual to seek translation in tables of regnal years such as those printed in the more common reference books without, perhaps, recognising the historical significance of the system or the traps which lie within it for the unwary.
Indeed, two of the most popular reference books contain errors in their tables of regnal years, their compilers having made the grievous mistake of assuming the method is a straightforward one, when in fact it is not.
It has been a common practice since ancient times to date official documents by the year of the rulers issuing them, or from within whose jurisdiction they emanated.
In Roman times the law required that certain types of document carry the names of the consuls, and in AD537 the Emperor Justinian decreed that the year of the emperor's reign should be added.
The system of dating by the regnal year was afterwards adopted by a variety of authorities including bishops, popes and kings, and it found its way into literary narratives as well as official documents.
In a number of cases it ousted earlier conventions, such as the indiction or year of grace (see later).
The system is known to have been used in England in the first part of the eighth century, and continued to be employed by Anglo-Saxon kings until the tenth, when it fell into almost total disuse.
From the beginning of the reign of King Richard I in 1189 the method was revived and, from that time onwards, has been the accepted way of expressing the year date in civil government and other documents; the form being, for example, that names of signatories are subscribed or the seal affixed ‘this first day of July in the Thirtyseventh year of the Reign of Our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth the Second…and in the year of Our Lord One thousand and nine hundred and eighty eight.’
A reliable table of regnal years for English monarchs starts (popular reference books to the contrary) with the accession of King Henry II on 19 December 1154.
There is no positive evidence as to how the regnal year was reckoned in periods before that time.
Edward the Confessor, for example, came to the throne sometime in June 1042, and was crowned on 3 April 1043, but did he become king as soon as Harthacnut died on 8 June 1042, or was he adjudged king only after his anointing?
Problems of a somewhat similar kind occur up to the death of Stephen on 25 October 1154, and even after that date there are various kinds of complication; the first to be noted is that the reign of a monarch did not automatically start, or be deemed to start, on the day his or her predecessor died, or vacated the throne, as has been the custom since the death of William III on 8 March 1722.
It is true that Edward V's one and only regnal year began on the day the previous sovereign expired, as did those of Henry VII and Henry VIII, Edward VI, Queens Jane, Mary I and Elizabeth I, James I, Charles I and James II.
But Henry II died on 6 July 1189 and Richard I succeeded nearly two months later on 3 September.
John followed Richard after a lapse of some six weeks, to be succeeded in turn by Henry III after a vacancy of a week, and Edward I succeeded him after a four-day interval.
A number of kings assumed sovereignty the day after the demise of their predecessors — Edward II, Richard II, Henry IV, Henry V, Henry VI and Richard III.
In other cases, circumstances of national moment prevailed.
In the case of Henry VI, he was deposed on 4 March 1461 (thus ending his 39th regnal year), to be succeeded on the same day by Edward IV.
The new king fled the country on 29 September 1470 and Henry VI was restored very shortly afterwards, but deposed again on 11 April 1471.
The duration of his restoration was deemed his 49th regnal year — in other words, the reign of Edward was ignored.
But when Edward recaptured the throne he went on dating his regnal years as though the restoration of Henry had never happened.
Queen Jane (the former Lady Jane Grey) lost the throne on 19 July 1553 — having been sovereign for twelve days — to be succeeded by Mary whose first regnal year was dated from that day, but her second regnal year began on 6 July 1554, thus ignoring the ‘reign’ of Jane.
When Mary I married Philip of Spain she decreed they ruled England jointly, and for the next few years until Elizabeth came to the throne the following strange convention was adopted for recording their regnal years: On 17 March 1649 the monarchy was abolished and during the period until parliamentary government was overtaken by the Restoration, English official documents were dated by the year of grace.
Charles II was proclaimed king in May 1660 and, because parliament declared he had been de jure king since his father's death, his first year of actual kingship was designated his twelfth and a starting date of 29 May was adopted.
Two minor points need to be noted — firstly that Charles himself was, in April 1660, already dating documents ‘in the twelfth year of our reign’, and secondly that although his father's sovereignty terminated on 30 January (1649), his own did not begin as though immediately following.
After the flight of King James II on 11 December 1688 the legal fiction was adopted that this day was the last of his reign (thus 4 James II is 6 February 1688 to 11 December 1688), and there followed an interregnum until William III and Mary II were made king and queen for their joint and several lives on 13 February 1689.
Their last regnal year (6 William and Mary) ended with the queen's death on 27 December 1694.
The period from 28 December 1694 until 12 February 1695, is known as 6 William III, and from then on the normal conventions applied.
In the reign of George II, in 1752, eleven dates were omitted in September when the New Style  calendar was adopted (see below).
Thus 25 George II ran from 11 June 1751 to 10 June 1752, 26 George II from 11 June 1752 to 21 June 1753, and 27 George II from 22 June 1753 to 21 June 1754, thus ensuring that the 26th regnal year contained 365 days.
There are two final peculiarities to be noted.
The first concerns the reign of King John, whose monarchy dates from his coronation on Ascension Day 1199.
Now Ascension Day is a movable feast in the Church calendar, and hence John's regnal years vary in length so that, for example , his eighth year contains both 12 May 1206 and 12 May 1207.
The second is tantamount to the same thing in reverse.
Easter is also a movable feast, and because of this there is no Easter in 10 or 37 Henry VIII, or in 3 or 14 Charles I. On the other hand, there are two such Pascal days in 11 Henry VIII and 13 Charles I.
The year of grace
The dating of years from the Incarnation of Jesus Christ — AD1 — started in England in the eighth century quite informally, and then spread throughout the countries of Western Europe with the exception of the Iberian peninsula, where a quite different system against a base of 1 January 38BC prevailed for a number of centuries.
But this latter convention has no place in a volume about English local history, or at least none the author has ever discovered.
The practice of using the passage of years since the birth of Christ as a numbering system had its genesis in some work carried out by a monk, Dionysius Exiguus, in AD525.
Dionysius, who lived in Rome, compiled a table for calculating the date of Easter, and in committing this to writing used as his datum not the regnal year of the pagan Emperor Diocletian, but the more appropriate Incarnation of Our Lord.
In AD664 the Dionysian Easter Table (with its list of years) was accepted by the synod of Whitby for use in England.
The eighth-century chronicler Bede adopted the year-numbering system in his historical works and its use spread, for in a Christian country  it had much to commend it.
The year of grace is found in Saxon documents of both a royal and civil nature at this time, in the term ab incarnatione , sometimes supplementing and sometimes replacing dating by indiction — of which more later.
The royal chancery adopted the year of grace and by the Middle Ages it was in general use, and providing the chronological framework for English histories of all kinds.
The problem is that for many centuries there were a number of variant systems in which the year of grace began at different times — 1 January, Christmas Day, the Annunciation, Easter Day, and 1, 24 and 29 September.
The local historian should be aware of the systems and the difficulties they create.
These range from determining exactly where in Europe the lord of an English medieval manor was at a certain date (for the more senior magnates were often crusaders, pilgrims, legates and diplomatists) to ascertaining precisely when an eighteenth-century trading agreement with a French merchant was concluded.
The problem might even be confined to England itself, for it is not unusual, particularly in the twelfth century, to find two systems of reckoning in use at the same time for different classes of computation.
The historical writer Gervase (a monk of Canterbury and contemporary of Becket), although sometimes using the Annunciation discipline which at that time was in more general use, preferred for the bulk of his work,Chronica ,Gesta Regum , etc., the Christmas system — much to the irritation of later writers.
The historical year
The historical year, now in general use in England for all everyday purposes and many official and ecclesiastical, begins on 1 January, and thus coincides with the Roman civil year which was widely used until at least the seventh century.
1 January was also used as the octave of the Nativity (Christmas) in the first centuries of the Christian era, and later as marking the Feast of the Circumcision.
However, during the Middle Ages 1 January lost favour against a start date of the feast of the Annunciation (25 March), the main reason no doubt being the Church's wish to underline its pre-eminence by using one of its own major festivals to mark the inauguration of each year.
Even so, some medieval documents treat 1 January as the first day of the year of grace.
In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries continental Europe gradually changed to a 1 January system, but it was not adopted in England until 1751/2 when the day after 31 December 1751 became 1 January 1752, rather than remaining 1 January 1751.
It should be noted in passing that in Scotland the change had been made in 1599/60.
It is a little difficult to explain why the 1 January method superseded 25 March as the start of the historical year, although it can be shown that it was in ordinary use early in the eighteenth century, as witness such as‘A True and Perfect Inventory of the Goods and Chattells of John Green Deceased the eight day of January 1713/14’.
A number of partial explanations have been put forward — the persistence of the calculations of calendars based on a solar year starting 1 January, and the popular association of the date with ‘New Year’.
Samuel Pepys, the noted diarist who died in 1703, dated his journals on the basis of the Annunciation, but invariably noted 1 January as ‘New Year’.
The Nativity
The convention of marking the beginning of years of grace by the Nativity (or Christmas Day) has a long history.
It was used in the Roman Empire until early in the thirteenth century, and in most of Western Europe until the twelfth.
The Anglo-Saxon and Norman kings employed the system, but during Plantagenet times it fell into desuetude.
It was, however, retained by Benedictine writers, and local historians will do well to note this, for some confusion can be caused to the unwary or uninformed researcher.
For example, Matthew Paris, the medieval author of Historia Anglorum and who used the Nativity reckoning, wrote in consequence that certain eminent people were born, or died, on certain dates which were at a variance of a full year with the Historical.
It should also be noted that, in much the way that the period 25 December to 1 January is nowadays increasingly a ‘holiday’ but without religious content, so in medieval times the octave was an important festival and sometimes Christmas and Historical reckoning became uncertain in the dating of documents.
The Annunciation
The term ‘annunciation ‘(announcement) is that given to the message presented by the angel Gabriel to the Blessed Virgin Mary that she would in due time be delivered of the Son of God, and the festival commemorating this — Lady Day — has the date 25 March.
This date was adopted by various countries as marking the beginning of the year.
Here again two conflicting conventions grew up and were in use at one and the same time in the medieval England of the eleventh and twelfth centuries.
The first system used 25 March preceding the Nativity as the start date, and the second system employed 25 March following the Nativity as its beginning.
Thus there were two year dates running absolutely parallel with one another.
The first method, which started on the continent in the ninth century, was used in the papal chancery from 1088 until 1145, and although little used in English documents nonetheless has a bearing on local ecclesiastical history for that period.
The second method, the use of which became much more widespread, also began in Europe — in the eleventh century.
It gained gradual acceptance in England, as witness certain entries in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle , and had general application in the twelfth century, remaining in use until 1752 when the Historical year gained official approval.
From the middle of the sixteenth century there had, however, been some confusion in England, mainly because most continental countries had adopted 1 January as the beginning of their year, and had also assumed the same year number.
Thus for official purposes the old reckoning of 25 March was used, but its employment for unofficial and private purposes was waning to the extent that many documents carried a double indicator for the period 1 January to 24 March, as was illustrated by the inventory quoted in the Historical Year section, above.
If no double indicator is used the local historian may usually assume that seventeenth-century and eighteenth-century documents dated up to 1752 use the Annunciation method.
Because of the now universal use in England of the Historical year system, it is normal for reference books to mark events of all kinds which happened between 1 January and 24 March in any one year  with a double indicator — thus King Henry V may be judged to have come to the throne on 21 March 1412/13, that is 1412 by Annunciation reckoning, but 1413 by Historical (now conventional) reckoning.
The Easter Day system
This system has little impact on English local history, except in those cases where Anglo-Norman magnates retained interests in France which bore a relation to their holdings in England.
It was a method which reckoned the year from the movable feast of Easter, and was introduced by the French king Philip Augustus (1180–1223).
It did not last long because of its complexity in application.
September dating
There are several styles of year-dating which start with a day in the month of September.
The oddest is that used in the fourteenth century by the English historian Adam of Murimuth.
This writer, for no reason which is apparent, began his year on Michaelmas Day, 29 September, in advance of the Historical year.
In Saxon times two other conventions were adopted, both based on Indiction (see next section).
A September method was employed by Bede in his ecclesiastical history written in AD731, and he used either 1 September or 24 September as his year-start dates (the Greek and the Caesarian systems).
The September method is also used in the late ninth century Anglo-Saxon Chronicles , before the Christmas style was re-introduced in the tenth century.
The local historian should beware of placing too much credence on year-dates given in older volumes of Anglo-Saxon history, for these can be in error by twelve months; but it is unlikely that any modern scholar of repute has been led astray.
Indiction
The term ‘indiction’ has been used earlier in this chapter, and although the system is unlikely to be encountered in isolation by a local historian it is worth recording, if only for the sake of completeness.
It was a method of year-dating of civil, as distinct from religious, application first adopted by Imperial Rome and then continued in both the papal and royal chanceries of Europe during the early Middle Ages.
However, it gradually fell into disuse and was finally abandoned by its last users, the public notaries, in the sixteenth century.
The indiction was a cycle of fifteen years computed always from AD312, and in practice there were three ways to calculate the opening date.
These were the Greek or Constantinopolitan which began on 1 September, the Caesarian or Imperial beginning on 24 September, and the Roman or Pontifical which commenced either on 25 December or 1 January.
It is unlikely that the local history researcher will require the dating formula to compute an indictio primo, secunda , and so on, so the matter is not dealt with here.
A full description appears in A Handbook of Dates by C.R. Cheney (London, corrected edition 1978).
Divisions of the year
The calendar in use today is known as the Gregorian or New Style, to distinguish it from the Julian or Old Style, and was introduced by Pope Gregory XIII in 1582.
Its functioning, including leap years, is so familiar that it sometimes comes as a revelation to researchers into early English local history to learn that there were several calendars in use in the past, each somewhat different from the other, with quite distinct ways of referring to months and days, and with days whose hours varied in length according to the season of the year.
The Roman calendar
The Roman ‘Julian’ calendar was introduced in 45BC by Julius Caesar, and hence carries his name.
It was in use until the sixteenth century, when small inaccuracies it contained had compounded to the point that minor revision was necessary.
The Julian calendar established a year of 365 days with an extra one (24 February was repeated) every fourth year to rectify the difference between calendar and solar years, which contained 365¼ days.
There were initial problems, and Augustus made certain small adjustments which need not be recounted here.
The Romans divided the year into twelve months, and each month into groups of days called respectively Kalends, Nones and Ides, with the days after Ides reckoned in relation to the Kalends of the next month following.
The local historian unfamiliar with Roman practice may, therefore, have slight initial difficulty on finding, for example, Lady Day (25 March) expressed as VIII Kal April; or that although III Non June is indeed 3 June , IV Non June is 2 June , or equally that whilst XVI Kal July is 16 June XVI Kal August is 17 July .
It is best, therefore, to use a conversion calendar rather than attempt to cast from Roman to Gregorian.
Even here a word of caution is necessary, for although medieval writers employed the Roman calendar they sometimes reckoned the Kalend, None and Ide elements in reverse order; so that, for example , 14 January might appear not as XIX Kal Feb but as Pridi Kal Feb (prima die kalendarum Feb ).
Too much need not be made of this, and the Roman calendar will suffice for all but the quite rarest occasions.
In addition to dividing the months into days as just described, another Roman system was in use until the Middle Ages.
This was the custom of Bologna and was employed in England by public notaries.
In this, the month was divided into two parts, the first (of fifteen or sixteen days) being counted forwards, the second being reckoned backwards.
It has little impact on local history studies, for gradually the system of numbering the days of the month as a continuous series was, with one outstanding exception, accepted.
The exception was embodied in the ecclesiastical calendar.
The ecclesiastical calendar
From about AD500 the Christian Church introduced a practice of dating according to the nearest religious festival.
To begin with the system was used by chroniclers, then for specifying the dates on which fairs were held or rent payments due, and finally, in the thirteenth century, it came into use for dating letters and other documents.
Because the list of festivals included saints' days (of which there are a large number) the system became complex.
Sunday was the first and chief day of the week, and  saints' days always fell on the same date, as did some of the major festivals such as Christmas, which was celebrated on VIII Kal Jan (25 December).
Easter, however, was not only a movable feast but its incidence was calculated on different dating systems by the Celtic and Roman churches.
In due time the Latin Church decreed that Easter should be ‘celebrated on the Sunday following the first full moon on or after 21 March’, and although this simplified matters slightly Easter Day might still fall on any one of thirty-five days, starting with 22 March and ending with 25 April, and the whole of the calendar was controlled by this wide spectrum.
Hence a series of tables is required by the researcher to determine the date of Easter in any given year, and then another set of tables is needed to establish the dates of the other major festivals.
Such tables are provided in the book already mentioned,A Handbook of Dates by C.R. Cheney.
The subject of saints' days poses different questions altogether.
In the first place there were many local and idiosyncratic variations: the uses of the bishopric of Sarum were different from those of Canterbury, the allegiance of certain chroniclers to some saints above others, and the preferences of certain abbeys for certain saints.
Then there is the problem of two saints with the same name, such as Thomas (the Apostle, and à Becket), whose feasts, octaves and translations occur on different dates.
Faced with these considerations the researcher may be lucky, for if a secondary source is being used the editor may well have provided an interpretation (which should as far as possible be checked, for even the most eminent historians have been known to err).
If a primary source is being accessed then the student must look to other indicators for confirmation — such as the regnal year, the indiction and the day of the month in Roman fashion, already covered, but also the golden number, the epact, the dominical letter and the concurrents.
The golden number This is a symbol assigned to each year in the series of one to nineteen, calculated from 1 January in the year 1BC.
The figure nineteen is derived from the close approximation of lunar and solar cycles after a lapse of this number of solar years.
The approximation was (and is) used as a basis for calculating the date of the paschal moon and hence determining when Easter occurs.
The golden number was used as an auxiliary indication of dates in the Middle Ages (see Cheney op cit ).
Epact and dominical letters These devices also appear as additional symbols and supporters of dates on documents penned in the Middle Ages; they are auxiliaries dependent on the computation of Easter dates and, if there is any doubt created by the main convention used, can be of value.
Sources for the determination of the epact and dominical letter are given in the section Reference books at the end of this chapter.
Concurrents Concurrents is the term given to a number in the series 1 to 7 assigned to each year, and has close correspondence with the dominical letter.
(It too is mentioned in Cheney — see Reference books below.)
Fractions of the day
In pre-Conquest and later medieval times the day was divided into two periods of  twelve hours, one running from sunrise to sunset and one from sunset to sunrise.
It followed that the periods varied in length from season to season and hence the duration of the hours fluctuated.
The times appointed for church services (the canonical hours) of Matins, Prime, Terce, Sext, None, Vespers and Compline also varied.
With the gradual introduction of mechanical clocks around the fourteenth century, hours of standard length became general.
These new measurements were counted in two series of twelve with their poles at noon and midnight, and to differentiate between them the terms ante meridiem and post meridiem (‘am’ and ‘pm’) were coined.
Lately there has been a move towards counting the twenty-four hours in a single progression from 00.00, representing midnight, to 23.59, the figures on the left of the punctuating point being the hours and those to the right the minutes.
Students of local history may very occasionally need to take into account the difference between Greenwich Mean Time and Summer Time, but those who are researching the histories of maritime ports from which merchant or royal naval vessels sailed will almost certainly have to pay regard to the system of reckoning found in ships' log-books, particularly between the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries.
During this period mariners employed a day (of twenty-four hours) starting and ending at noon, with the date twelve hours in advance of the land calendar.
just to make matters more difficult, sailors used the normal calendar day in their journals.
The Gregorian calendar
The use of the New Style calendar (to distinguish it from the Old Style, or Julian, calendar) was ordered by Pope Gregory XIII on 24 February 1582.
Its purpose was to rectify an accumulated error between the solar and calendar years since the modifications introduced by Augustus.
The immediate difference was to cut ten dates out of the October of 1582, 4 October being followed by 15 October, and making a slight change to the incidence of leap years at the ends of centuries.
For various reasons of a nationalistic and religious nature the New Style calendar did not gain immediate acceptance except in those countries honouring the will of Rome.
In England the change was not effected until the Earl of Chesterfield's Act of 24 George II which stipulated, in March 1751, that the first day of the January immediately following should be the start of 1752, and that 2 September 1752 should be followed by 14 September.
Many local historians will encounter the problem of the varying practices regarding the adoption of the Gregorian calendar — the dating of letters concerning a town's rope trade with Spain or the wool trade with Russia, to name but two.
Spain, for instance, being under obedience to Rome paid prompt heed to the bull of Gregory III; but Russia, under the rule of the Orthodox Church, did not adopt the New Style until the early twentieth century.
Frequently correspondents give two dates to their letters: ‘12/22 December 1635’ or ‘16/29 August 1907’, or indicate the convention being used by the addition of the letters ‘OS’or ‘NS’to the date.
But sometimes there are no such identifiers and the student must make a personal judgement depending on the document being analysed.
Other considerations
There are a number of fairly minor conventions and devices used, especially in the legal profession — the ‘limit of legal memory ‘, for example, being 3 September 1189, the start of the reign of King Richard I — and the reader is referred to the list of printed works in the next section.
Reference books
The most valuable book is the one already mentioned, the full title of which is Handbook of Dates for Students of English History edited by C.R. Cheney.
published by the Royal Historical Society, London, in 1945, it has been frequently reprinted with minor corrections.
In addition to the subjects discussed in this chapter it contains a list of rulers from the English settlement to 1154, a table of regnal years; exchequer years; a list of popes from Gregory I to Paul VI, and a tabulation of saints’ days and other festivals.
A large section deals with legal chronology — law terms, exchequer of pleas, chancery and star chamber, parliament and statutes, county court days, the Court of Arches, and other ecclesiastical and civilian courts.
It includes the following calendars: Roman; all possible dates for Easter; for England in the year AD1752 (in which eleven dates were dropped); and a chronological table for Easter Days AD500-2000.
The Handbook of British Chronology edited by E.B. Fryde et al (London, 3rd edition 1986) is also published by the Royal Historical Society.
It is a long book giving the dates and details of rulers, officers of state, archbishops and bishops, dukes and marquesses, parliaments and assemblies, and councils of the Church of England.
There are minor infelicities and inconsistencies in typography which are irritating, and although purporting to be revised and updated there are imbalances and inaccuracies in the styles accorded to various officers of state.
That said, the book is one which all local historians should own or to which they should have easy access.
The Oxford Dictionary of the English Church (Oxford, reprint 1985) is a valuable aid, especially regarding details of church dignitaries and holders of high religious office.
The Penguin Dictionary of Saints (London, reprint 1985) is also useful.
Finally, the annual volumes of Whitaker's Almanac can be of great value regarding fractions of the day and other matters.
Vocabulary and orthography
The subjects of vocabularies (ranges of words used in languages) and orthography (correct or conventional spelling) are very much linked in the field of local history research.
Dealing first with vocabularies, there are, it is suggested, three general kinds.
The first is that of the language itself: English, French and Latin.
The second is the language related to the time in question: for example, Old English, Norman French and Medieval Latin.
The third is possible changes in meaning which have occurred in certain words since the time when the writing was executed and the present day.
In addition to the general vocabularies there are the special terms used in such things as parish records, manorial rolls, legal documents, and so on.
In the case of orthography it is only in comparatively recent times that spelling has been standardised into ‘correct’ forms, it being, in former centuries, very much at the whim of the writer as to how a word was spelt, and it was not unusual for several styles —‘king’, ‘kyng’, ‘kynge’are examples — to be used in the same document, or even sentence.
A related point concerns calligraphy (in its everyday sense, handwriting)— in early manuscripts ‘u’, ‘v’ and ‘n’are easily confused, for instance, and until the development of ascenders for letters such as ‘b’, ‘d’and ‘h’, and descenders for ‘p’, ‘q’, ‘y’and ‘z’, other kinds of misreading are possible.
General vocabularies
In the next chapter is a section devoted to dictionaries — Anglo-Saxon, Middle English, Old French and so on, and these will not be detailed here.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide several basic wordlists, to point to where more detailed lists (other than in dictionaries) may be found, and to comment on certain aspects of orthography.
The comments will be confined to works of the type which have been transcribed and printed, not to holograph manuscripts, for in this instance all the uncertainties mentioned compound to produce results which will be beyond the skills of the vast majority of local historians to interpret.
Latin
The Latin used in medieval documents likely to be of interest to readers of this present volume was not the classical language of antiquity, nor were its standards universally high, and it varied from century to century as time advanced.
Additionally, as needs changed, new words were coined for new situations and were ‘Latinised’ to fit more  easily into the documents being called for.
There are literally thousands of Latin words occurring in texts of interest to the local historian — and these may date from the sixth or seventh centuries down to the seventeenth.
Indeed, in the author's own village the parish register was being kept in Latin as late as 1657.
Perhaps the most difficult problem to be coped with (apart from grammar and syntax which are quite outside the scope of this book) is that of semantic shift — the new meanings which Classical words acquired in medieval times, sometimes making them unintelligible to readers who remember only fragments of the language from their schooldays.
Just a few examples may be cited to highlight this problem.
Miles which in Classical times denoted an ordinary soldier had, by the eleventh century, come to mean ‘knight’ and led to such forms as Miles Parliamentalis = knight of the shire, and miles agrarius = holder of a knight's fee.
The word villa = a mansion, came to mean both ‘town’ and ‘village’.
Pacare , originally meaning ‘to appease’, took on the interpretation ‘to pay (a debt)’.
As long ago as May 1954 R.E.
Latham (who went on to prepare the Revised Medieval Latin Word List for the British Academy) wrote in the Amateur Historian Vol.1, No.11, p.332: ‘The student who strays from the beaten track in the realm of Medieval Latin may expect the trials and joys of the pioneer.
He may easily find himself drawn into uncharted regions of medieval law and administration, agriculture and technology, ecclesiology and theology…
Printed texts, if he can find them, may be wildly inaccurate, and notes and glossaries either hesitant or misleading.’
Although much work has been done in the decades since those words were written, it is still true to say that many texts in printed form do not reflect the contents of the original manuscripts with complete accuracy, although more recent printed transcriptions tend to be reliable, not least because they have usually been scanned by a number of scholars before publication.
Any wordlist, short of a full-blown dictionary, must be highly selective and although the following must needs be short, it contains terms which over the years the author has found particularly useful.
Latin Christian names
At a somewhat different level from the terms listed in the previous section, the spelling of Christian names in Latin can sometimes pose a problem of interpretation to modem eyes.
Bartholomaeus is obviously Bartholomew, but Aluredus is less apparently Alfred, and Matilda not self-evidently Maud.
The following list contains names whose  later English forms are not readily apparent.
It must be appreciated that the spelling of Latin names varied in much the way that today Catharine, Catherine, Katharine, Katherine, Kathryn and Catrina are, for example, versions of a single form, hence in the list only the more obscure renderings are given.
Old English (Anglo-Saxon) and Middle English
This is not the place to discuss the linguistic differences between Old English and Middle English.
It is sufficient to say that in broad definition the former term applies to the language used up to the twelfth century, and the latter that given to the language between the twelfth and the fifteenth, when Modern English started to emerge.
There cannot be a sharp dividing line, as there can be between one year and the next; the evolution of language is a gradual one, as witness the modern divergences between American, Australian and United Kingdom English, and the differences between the everyday languages of Cornwall and Northumberland.
In his book Anglo-Saxon England (Cambridge 1970) Peter Hunter Blair wrote (p.370): ‘The novice should take his first steps…with the aid of the Anglo-Saxon Primer by H. Sweet (9th edition, revised 1953)…[then with]An Introduction to Old English by G.L. Brook (Manchester 1955)…and for a dictionary A Concise Anglo-Saxon Dictionary by J.R.C. Hall.’
He could have added ‘the 4th edition, with supplement, 1960.’
For most local history purposes a simple wordlist will suffice for both Old and Middle English — the dictionary for the latter being Stratmann's Middle English Dictionary (Oxford  1891)— and what now follows are words the author has found most useful in pursuing his studies.
The letter d is called ‘thorn’, and is pronounced ‘th’.
Old French, Anglo-Norman
Of the more ancient languages the local historian will encounter in the course of his studies, Old French (Anglo-Norman) will be the least important.
It is true that the Anglo-Norman aristocracy spoke French among themselves and wrote to each other in that language, long after they came to regard themselves as Englishmen.
As but one example, records of the famous case of Scrope versus Grosvenor before the Court of Chivalry 1385–1390 show testimony was given in French, and even today French phrases linger in the language of heraldry.
A selection of words from the Old French language will be of value:
Specialised vocabularies
In addition to the general vocabularies described and demonstrated in the previous section, there are many subjects associated with local history research which have their own special terms.
These include architecture, church history, archaeology, legal documentation, and so on.
Chapter 31, Personal Reference Libraries, identifies some of the many dictionaries now available to aid the researcher, and those listed are recommended as desirable if not downright essential.
Space considerations dictate that detailed vocabularies are not possible in these present pages, but the following volumes contain wordlists which may be of value:Anglo-Saxon England by Sir Frank.
Stenton (Oxford, 3rd edition 1971) has, on pp.731–4, a ‘Key to Anglo-Saxon Place Names’;Historical Interpretation: I by J.J. Bagley (Penguin Books 1965) has, on pp.265–73, a ‘Glossary of Archaic and Technical Words’, and this is useful for compound terms.
In addition,The Amateur Historian published, in its early volumes, useful glossaries.
These included ‘Manorial Terms’ by R.H. Hilton (Vol.I, No.3, January 1953), ‘Terms from Parochial Records’by P.V.
Harris (Vol.1, No.4, February/March 1953), ‘Glossary of an Old Church’ by Lawrence Maidbury (Vol.II, No.1, August/September 1954), ‘Archaeological Terms’by P.W.
Gathercale (Vol.II, No.5, April/May 1955), ‘Legal Terms and Phrases’ by G.D.
Johnston (Vol.III, No.6, Winter 1957/58).
The most valuable of all the modern publications at the more general level of a local historian's vocabulary is A Dictionary of British History by a variety of editors.
This was first published in hardback in 1981 and was reissued in 1982 by Pan Books; the editorial consultant being J.P.
Kenyon.
It covers everything from ‘abjuration of the realm’ to the ‘Young England Movement’, and has a lengthy chronology.
Orthography
In his book The Parish Chest (3rd edition, reprinted 1983) W.E.
Tate says, on p.309, ‘The orthography of 17th and 18th century parish officers is often eccentric in the extreme and the inquirer must be prepared to translate [such terms]as arter david into ‘affidavit’[and]carvaers into ‘surveyors’…
‘. There follows in Mr Tate's book an interesting list of examples.
They can, however, be matched by almost any local  historian:plenty cut = Pentecost, poyentyng = pointing (of tiles), hollyear = whole year, sarples and seaplece = surplice,sparrs = sparrows, comen = common, comenen = communion,cute = cut, and so on.
Occasionally there may be bafflement.
The author was, for example, frustrated for some time by a field name written in 1736 as Abboxry Land , and could come to no sensible conclusion as to what was meant.
Fortunately, in 1749, it was recorded in the form Abotsbery Land and was shown subsequently to belong to the poor lands charity of Abbotsbury , a few miles from Weymouth in Dorset.
The foregoing examples are taken from documents written by uneducated men who committed to paper, as best they could, what they thought they had heard, or spellings they believed appropriate.
Such difficulties of interpretation as the modern local historian may encounter are not, however, confined to this class of writing alone, as a single example taken from the sixteenth century will illustrate.
The document, dated 1549, comprised the letters patent of privileges granted by ‘Edwarde the Sixt’ to his Officers of Arms.
It was, presumably, drafted and engrossed by persons of reasonable educational standard, and the eccentricities (to modern eyes) in the orthography cannot be put down to illiteracy.
In the course of a few hundred words the following occur:catalles = chattels, Chrystean = Christian,peax = peace, freyle = freely,delyved = delivered,auctorytye = authority,mad = made,borow = borough,rome = room,jarretier = garter, and playnle = plainly.
Little general guidance (or comfort) can be given in respect of the interpretation of words spelt in unfamiliar ways or the basis of phonetics.
It will, without doubt, be useful to say a word aloud in a variety of stresses and vowel sound combinations, and if this does not work then to ask a native of the place being researched to say it — this is frequently a useful device if the document originated locally.
A talent for crossword puzzles and acrostics will sometimes help!
Turning to the subject of handwriting, this has been touched on at the beginning of this chapter.
No complete certainty is ever possible in the matter of ‘u’, ‘n’, ‘v’, ‘i’ and so on, particularly where names are concerned — Julian o could easily be Julian a , Pothe could be Poche, Tonn might be Toun.
All the foregoing are drawn from documents employed by the author in various studies, and there are many more examples which could be quoted.
In one fourteenth-century case a surname could have been Penerine, Penerive or even Penerme, and an interesting study on bynames and family names was thwarted.
But success can be achieved.
In a nineteenth-century printed version of a fourteenth-century document a family was called de Farbereshaye, a form which seemed reasonable and could conceivably have been a version of Fabro = Smith and (ge) haeg = enclosure.
Further study, however, together with research of a parallel nature and an examination of the original membrane indicated that o had been read as a , and t as b , and that the name was de Fortereshaye — of/from the forester's enclosure (or holding).
This later, correct reading enabled a complex study to be successfully continued, completed, and finally published in a journal of academic standing.
Personal reference libraries
It is fairly obvious that the size of any local historian's personal reference library will be controlled by two main things and several less important ones.
The principal considerations are the interests being pursued and the depth of the personal pocket; the subsidiary ones are the ease with which a good public reference library can be accessed, the speed with which further volumes can be obtained via the public lending service, and the lengths of the permitted retention periods.
If the interests are restricted to the history of one particular place, or confined to one special area of study, then a private library of books and offprints is quite readily assembled.
If, however, the studies are pursued more widely and the research becomes deeper, the need for ready-to-hand volumes and essays will increase geometrically.
In considering the topics of the works to be collected it may be useful to visualize the whole subject in the form of a large sheet of paper divided into columns and rows.
The columns (and there may be twenty or more) represent chronological periods — pre-historic, pre- and post-Conquest, and up to the present day — and the numerous rows represent identified fields of study.
Thus Bond Men Made Free by Rodney Hilton (London 1973), which deals with the peasants' revolt of 1381, would be classified in the column of the fourteenth century, and the row of, say, ‘Social Structure’; and The Hungry Mills by Norman Longmate (London 1978) which describes the Lancashire cotton famine of 1861–65, would appear in the column for the nineteenth century and a row possibly designated ‘Trade and Industry ‘.
The bulk of this chapter is, therefore, written with the possibility in mind that the reader might use such a system to help identify gaps in any present personal library, or to lay the structure for a proposed collection of books.
The headings used, by way of illustration, are:general reference publications applicable to a wide variety of subjects and periods,social structure, local government, agriculture, trade and industry, personal prosperity, housing, religion , and education .
General reference books
Language dictionaries and word lists
The complete text of the Oxford English Dictionary is available in micrographically reduced form at a price which is more readily in the reach of the local historian than that of the multi-volume set.
It is bound in three volumes in the form of ‘four-pages-to-view’, and may be read with the aid of a low-powered magnifying glass.
A wealthy researcher may, of course, wish to invest in the conventionally produced OED , the price of which runs into hundreds of pounds.
Apart from his native language, the British (or American) student of English local history will need a nodding acquaintance with, or at least dictionaries of, three other languages.
These are the related sources of Modern English — Anglo-Saxon/Middle English, Medieval Latin, and Old French.
A Concise Anglo-Saxon Dictionary by J.R.
Clark Hall (4th edition, with a supplement by H.D. Meritt, Cambridge 1975), and Stratmann's Middle English Dictionary (rearranged by Henry Bradley, Oxford 1940), are two reference works of value for the first language group.
With respect to Latin, the essential text is the Revised Medieval Latin Word List by R.E.
Latham (London 1983).
This volume includes, in principle, all words found in British document sources insofar as they are non-Classical either in form or meaning.
The local historian must judge quite separately any need for the large (and expensive)Latin Dictionary by Charton Lewis (Oxford 1879/1980).
So far as Old French, or Norman French, is concerned there is an admirable Short Old French Dictionary for Students by Kenneth Urwin (Oxford paperback 1985).
In addition to the foregoing there are numerous dialect dictionaries, each devoted to the colloquial (or traditional) speech of a particular region.
Typical of these is A Glossary of the Dorset Dialect by William Barnes, first published in 1886 and later reprinted, in Guernsey, in 1980.
Valuable support to the dictionaries of these early languages or dialects are three books in lexicon form, published by Cambridge University Press for the English Place Names Society.
The first two, by A.H.
Smith, comprise English Place Name Elements which appeared in 1970, and Cornish Place Name Elements by O.J. Padel in the same series, published in 1985.
Biographical reference books and dictionaries
An important work relevant to many fields of study is The Dictionary of National Biography .
This, like the OED , is also available in a compact form produced in two volumes by micrography at twelve-pages-to-view (Oxford 1975).
It contains short biographies of many thousands of distinguished British and English people from the earliest of recorded times down to 1960.
Although not specifically termed ‘dictionaries,, two related works of a similar kind are The Complete Peerage and The Complete Baronetage .
Both are photo reduced at four-pages-to-view, and can be read without the aid of a magnifying glass.
The former is now available in paperback, and is of special value to local historians for it is, in effect, a genealogical dictionary of every person who has held a ‘peerage’ from the period of the very first post-Conquest earldoms.
Equally importantly, its many appendices are of great interest and benefit to the historical researcher.
Vol.II, Appendix B, for example, is devoted to ‘The Great Offices of State’ and covers 45 pages; Vol.1V, Appendix H, names peers whose late nineteenth-century estates were in excess of 100,000 acres each; Vol.XII, Appendix B, describes portraits appearing in the Town and Country Magazine .
Special subject dictionaries
Every year the number of special subject dictionaries increases, and today they range from popular interests such as Christian names to works with more limited appeal, such as A Dictionary of Fairies by Katharine Briggs (London 1976).
The following works are among the more important to the local historian:Archaeology by Warwick Bray and  David Trump (Penguin Books 1970);Architecture by John Fleming and others (penguin Books 1966);Field Names by John Field (London 1972);British Folk Customs by Christina Hale (London 1978)— a related book,British Folk Tales and Legends by Katharine Briggs, London 1977, is not in dictionary format but is valuable;Genealogy by Terrick FitzHugh (Sherborne, new edition 1988);Heraldry by Stephen Friar (Sherborne 1987),;Burke's General Armory (London, reprint 1984);Historical Slang (London 1972);Nursery Rhymes by Iona and Peter Opie (Oxford, revised 1977);English Place Names by Eilert Ekwall (Oxford, 4th edition 1960);English Plant Names by Geoffrey Grigson (London 1974);Religions by J.R.
Hinnells (Penguin Books 1984);The Christian Church by F.L. Cross and E.A. Livingstone (Oxford, corrected edition 1983);Ecclesiastical Terms by J.S. Purvis (1962);Saints by Donald Attwater (Penguin Books, revised 1983);British Surnames by P.H. Reaney (London, revised 1977);English Weights and Measures by R.E.
Zupko (1968).
A most useful dictionary (although not called such) for the country historian, a copy of which has an honoured place in the author's library, is Old Country and Farming Words by James Britten (The English Dialect Society, London 1880).
This book contains words collected from many sources, ranging from the Dictionarium Rusticum (1681) to the Cyclopaedia of Agriculture (1863), and runs to some 220 pages.
A number of local societies publish booklets which may be classified as mini-dictionaries.
Typical of these is A Glossary of Household, Farming and Trade Terms from Probate Inventories by Rosemary Milward (Chesterfield 1982).
Finally,The Local Historian's Encyclopaedia by John Richardson (New Barnet, 2nd edition 1986) is a worthwhile volume, containing many hundreds of definitions of words and terms of value to the researcher, and the Dictionary of British History (Pan Books 1982) is essential.
Other works of a general nature
One of the best guides to works currently in print, and which deals with publications on local history and the associated fields of genealogy and the material heritage, is the annual catalogue issued by the well known specialist booksellers and publishers, Phillimore.
These catalogues, which are now issued in sections, provide a quick ready-reference to the hundreds of volumes available.
A second useful source of information is the periodic booklist issued by another specialist company,Heraldry Today , and includes sections on family history, history and biography, genealogy and topography, as well as the expected subjects of heraldry and the peerage.
That said, the following books are of quite fundamental value and should be possessed by every student of local matters:Local History in England by W.G. Hoskins (London, 2nd edition 1972), which remains possibly the best overall introduction to the subject;The Parish Chest by W.E.
Tate (Chichester, 3rd edition 1983), which, for all its apparently limiting title is, in fact, ‘a study of the records of parochial administration in England’;Town Records (Chichester 1983) and Village Records (Chichester 1982), both by John West, are further important works of a basic kind, as is How to Write a Parish History by R.B. Pugh (1954).
County and local histories
Reference has been made elsewhere to the early county histories written in the  seventeenth, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, sometimes by gentlemen in the priesthood.
If the researcher's interest is sufficiently wide and his pocket sufficiently deep it is advisable to obtain a copy of the appropriate work even if a catalogue does describe the volumes on offer as ‘disbound’, ‘shaken’, with ‘weak hinges’ or some other euphemism for falling apart.
Precisely the same comments may be made about the pertinent books in the Victoria County History series.
The point may be stressed, for experience has shown how important it is to have these volumes always on hand for cross-referencing with later works, or providing new ideas for lines of investigation.
In the decade of the 1950s a new series of county histories was initiated under the heading The Darwen Series , after its founder Lord Darwen.
The books are quite short (about 40,000 words, less than a quarter of the text of this present volume), but each has about 150 drawings and pictures.
As concise synopses of the history of each county they represent good value.
In the case of Kent, for example, the Darwen History may be acquired in conjunction with The Kingdom of Kent by K.P.
Witney (1982),Domesday Book: Kent (1986),Medieval Kentish Society by F.R.H. du Bouley (1964), the Victoria County History and Edward Hasted's History of Kent (1797/1801) to form a powerful basic collection.
A further series of ‘county’ books is that devoted to ‘The Making of the English Landscape’, of which more than a dozen have appeared under the Hodder & Stoughton imprint.
On the subject of local histories — especially town histories — it is very possible that the ground will have already been explored by a previous researcher and the results of the study published.
It is always sound to add any such volumes to personal collections, for however well or badly done, they will always be a source of inspiration — if only on how to approach certain topics.
Atlases and maps
The latest Ordnance Survey maps are of great value and, when related to those of earlier editions, tithe apportionment, commutation and estate maps of past centuries assist in the unravelling of the development of tenurial holdings, field boundaries, land usage, road layouts, the development of town and city centres, the linking of suburbs and all manner of things covered, in later years, by the umbrella term ‘town and country planning’.
It is of benefit to compare all the very early maps one with another, as each will show something different, and there may be anomalies which lead to interesting studies and, quite possibly, new discoveries.
The Ordnance Survey maps of the Iron Age, Roman and other historical periods, are necessary references, and the specialist atlases — Anglo-Saxon England, Historical Atlas of Britain, etc., mentioned elsewhere in this book — may be considered essential.
For the dedicated, long-term researcher An Agricultural Atlas of England and Wales by J.T. Coppock (London, reprint 1982) is useful, and a further basic work is the Phillimore Atlas and Index of Parish Registers by Cecil Humphery-Smith (Chichester 1984), composed mainly of ‘genealogical maps ‘of the pre-1832 parishes on a county-by-county basis, topographical maps from Bell's Gazetteer of 1834, and a 283-page index of deposited registers at county and public record offices, plus copies noted in Boyd's marriage, Pallot's marriage, and other lists.
There is also a useful booklet Maps and Plans in the Public Record Office (PRO 1967).
Social structure
A good general introduction to the subject is A Social History of England by Asa Briggs (Pelican Books 1987), which also contains an excellent forty-page bibliography.
The Common People by J.F.C. Harrison (London 1984) is also relevant.
It covers the period from the Norman Conquest to the present day, and has a long section on suggestions for further reading.
Also useful in this area is An Introduction to English Demography , edited by E.W. Wrigley (1966).
As has been shown earlier, the records of social structure (and population) may conveniently be divided into three.
Those before 1538 (the point when Thomas Cromwell legislated for parish registers), those after 1801 (when official censuses began), and those between the two dates mentioned.
For the first period, local historical societies or historians with local interests are increasingly publishing lay subsidy and other early records, which permit a (sometimes incomplete) picture to be built up of local populations and the relative prosperity of individual heads of family.
The information contained in the Domesday folios is, when used cautiously, also of value to the pre-plague period.
The following volumes are relevant:Rural England 1066–1348 by R.E.
Hallam (London 1981),Lay Subsidies and Poll Taxes by M.W. Beresford (1963),Parliamentary Taxes on Personal Property 1290–1344 by J.F. Willard (1934).
A valuable work, covering many aspects of social structure and population distribution, is that edited by R.E.
Glasscock,The Lay Subsidy of 1334 (1975).
Two articles of interest are ‘The Pre-Plague Population of England ‘by J.C.
Russell, which appeared in the Journal of British Studies vi(2) 1966, and ‘The Population of an English Village -1086–1801’ by W.G. Hoskins, which was printed in his volume Provincial England (1963).
For the second of the historical periods mentioned (1538–1801) the following books (all available in paperback) are most useful background texts:Sixteenth Century England by Joyce Youings (London 1984),English Society in the Seventeenth Century by Margaret Spufford (1985), and English Society in the Eighteenth Century by Roy Porter (London 1982).
These are works in the Pelican Social History series, other volumes of which will be mentioned later.
Two valuable books on the seventeenth century (apart from the Oxford History mentioned in an earlier chapter) are those published as Open University set texts,Seventeenth-Century England — A Changing Culture (London 1980).
The first volume is edited by Ann Hughes and devoted to primary sources, and the second is edited by W.R. Owens and comprises a series of modern studies.
The Family, Sex and Marriage in England 1500–1800 by Lawrence Stone (Penguin Books, reprinted 1984) is a well illustrated book, particularly useful on matters of the changing relationships between family members.
Life and Labour in England 1700–1780 by R.W. Malcolmson (London 1981) and The Rural World 1780–1850 by Pamela Horn (London 1980) are two volumes in Hutchinson's Social History of England series, containing, in addition to the principal text, a number or pages of academic commentary and reference.
In recent years local societies have been active in publishing transcripts of, and commentaries on, a number of primary sources.
These include Tudor lay subsidies, muster rolls, protestation returns, and so on.
They are useful documents, not only for insights into such things as parish organisations, but also (when used cautiously) population movements, family prosperity and Christian and surname patterns.
Copies  of these publications are well worth obtaining as permanent additions to personal libraries, and may be supported by such articles as: ‘The Population of Elizabethan England’ by E.E.
Rich, published in Economic History Review 2nd series ii (1950); ‘English Country Towns in the 1520s’ by J.C.K. Cornwall, which appeared in the same publication, 2nd series xv (1962); ‘English Provincial Towns in the Sixteenth Century’by W.G. Hoskins, which appeared as a chapter in his book Provincial England (1963); and ‘The Village Population in the Tudor Lay Subsidy Rolls ‘by S.A. Payton, in English Historical Review xxx (1915).
For the third period of history (1801 onwards) a useful volume is British Population Growth 1700–1850 by M.W. Flinn (London 1970).
Although this book covers just the first half-century of the period, it is a valuable contribution to the subject, as are the further volumes in the Pelican Social History series:Britain 1800–1870 by V.A.C.
Gatrell (London 1985);Britain 1870–1914 by José Harris (London 1985);Britain 1914–1945 by John Stevenson (London 1983); and British Society Since 1945 by Arthur Marwick (London 1984).
As for previous periods, searches should be made of the contents of the proceedings of local historical societies,Notes and Queries , the Victoria County History volumes, and the Amateur (later Local) Historian.
Sources for English Local History by W.B. Stephens pp.45–71 is valuable as an indicator of local publications of wider significance.
Local government
Today, the administration of local government is variously in the hands of the county, the borough, the district and the parish.
But these bodies are of comparatively recent origin.
County councils were established in 1888 and replaced the organisation of the lieutenants and the Justices of the Peace, which had operated since Tudor times.
Parish councils were set up in 1894 and superseded parish vestries, which had in turn supplanted manor courts.
District councils came into being as a result of the 1974 legislation which,inter alia , abolished rural district councils.
It is best to staff at the beginning.
For the centuries up to the Tudor times the main instrument of local government outside the boroughs was the manor court, and the best introduction to the whole subject remains Life on the English Manor by H.S. Bennett.
First published in 1937, the book is still in print.
A good overall view also appears in English Local Administration in the Middle Ages by H.M.
Jewell (1972), but for the researcher who intends to carry out sustained and long-term work in the field the ten-volume English Local Government by S. & B. Webb (reprinted 1963) may be necessary.
It comprises:(i) The Parish and County;(ii) and (iii) The Manor and The Borough;(iv) Statutory Authorities for Special Purposes;(v) The Story of the King's Highway;(vi) English Prisons under Local Government;(vii)(viii) and (ix) English Poor Law History;(x) English Poor Law Policy.
Other works of general interest are Archives and Local History by F.G.
Emmison,Local Records by L.J.
Redstone and F.W. Steer (1953), and, of course, books by R.B. Pugh and John West mentioned earlier.
The Early History of English Poor Law Relief by E.M.
Leonard (1900) is worth seeking, as are the following:The Manor and Manorial Records by N.J. Hone (3rd edition, 1925),A History of the Boroughs and Municipal Corporations by  H.A.
Merewether and A.J. Stephens (originally published in 1835, but reprinted in 1972),British Borough Charters 1042–1216 by A. Ballard (1913),1216–1307 by A. Ballard and J. Tait (1923), and 1307–1660 by M. Weinbaum (1943),A History of English Assizes from 1558–1714 by J.S. Cockburn (1972).
Sources for English Local History by W.B. Stephens has many further references to published volumes.
Agriculture
Some slight insight into early local agricultural practices may be obtained from such things as Anglo-Saxon charters, details of which have been published (from 1961 onwards) in a series of volumes called The Early Charters of …, and commentaries on land usage such as in The Domesday Geography of …, each volume of which deals with a particular region.
Reference may also be made to the relevant Domesday texts and the published volumes of the curia regis and other rolls, some of which make useful contributions to local knowledge.
The appropriate publication in the Victoria County History series will also be of value.
To a substantial degree agricultural history and social history are inextricably bound up with one another— demesne and common land practices, copyhold and other tenures, enclosures — and many of the books already mentioned include sections and passages which will enlighten.
A recent series of volumes under the general title of The Agrarian History of England and Wales , each edited by a distinguished scholar, is basic to the study of the subject.
There are dozens of specialist works on the subject of agricultural history, and many more dealing with purely local matters.
The following are merely typical examples of books worthy of collection:English Field Systems by H.L. Gray (republished London 1969),History of the Farmstead by J. Weller (London 1982, with over 200 illustrations, a glossary and a bibliography),Old Farm Implements by Philip Wright (Gloucester 1983),The Agricultural Revolution in South Lincolnshire by David Grigg (Cambridge 1966), and Bound to the Soil.: A Social History of Dorset 1750–1918 by B. Kerr (London 1968).
The Village Labourer by J.L. & B. Hammond was originally published in 1911 and has since been republished in paperback (London 1978).
It has been edited by G.E.
Mingay and now contains important bibliographic notes on open fields, the process of enclosure, the economic consequences of enclosure, the social consequences, the poor law, and agrarian unrest.
Trade and industry
There are few ‘basic’ books on the subject of trade or industry which the local historian will regard as essential to his personal library.
The ‘natural’ industries of metal and mineral mining, forestry and fisheries have always been localised, for obvious reasons, as have the associated processes of conversion such as the smelting of ore, the dressing of stone and the manufacture of coke and charcoal.
The holding of markets and fairs for the trading of livestock, agricultural produce and the output of craft industries has been widely spread, but the institutions themselves have been diverse.
With the growth of towns, the coming of the Industrial Revolution, and the improvements in surface transportation, the pattern in all but the staple industries  changed and the whole industrial and commercial structure grew (and grows) increasingly more diverse and complex, to the extent that it moves ever more out of the realms of the local researcher into those of the economic or social historian working at national, or even international, level.
For each locality the records of first resort remain the early county histories, the relevant volumes in the Victoria County History series, and the proceedings of the county, or similar, historical or record society; and no doubt local historians will wish to obtain some of these or, subject to the laws of copyright, obtain photocopies of selected sections.
There is a valuable chapter, ‘Industry, Trade and Communications’, in Stephens' Sources for English Local History which points, particularly, to references in the public records.
Beyond this, the local studies collection in the public reference library will be a source of essential information.
There are, however, a number of books, now mostly out of print, which are worth seeking:Fairs Past and Present by C. Walford (1883), and The English Craft Guilds by S. Kramer (1927) both deal with early institutions of wide application.
The Phillimore annual catalogue will also serve to identify books of individual interest.
For the local researcher concerned with studies of bygone industries the following are useful:Industrial Archaeology by M. Rix (1967),The Techniques of Industrial Archaeology by J.P.M. Pannell (1974), and Fieldwork in Industrial Archaeology by J.K. Major (1975).
Personal prosperity
The subject of the prosperity of individuals and families is very closely connected with social structure, agriculture, and trade and industry.
To some degree aspects of local distribution of the eighteenth century, poor relief of the nineteenth, or welfare benefits of the twentieth.
A great deal of information is contained in the numerous books already cited in this chapter as worthy of forming part of a personal library, and the local researcher should not lose sight of the early comparative data obtainable from the published Domesday folios, and the later in such things as the hearth tax assessments, all of which volumes are well worth places on private shelves.
The author is not aware of any book dealing with the totality of this field, indeed it is so wide that generalisations can be misleading.
However, a search in town and country reference libraries (and local studies collections) will reveal titles of books which are worth acquiring, especially on the subjects of the impact of indigenous trade, industry, and agriculture on the well-being of local populations.
The chapter ‘Poor relief, charities, prices and wages’ in Sources for English Local History (Stephens) contains numerous references of local and sometimes more general value.
Housing
A key reference book is Sources for the History of Houses by John Harvey (London 1974), and to this may be added The Illustrated Handbook of Vernacular Architecture by R.W. Brunskill (London, 3rd edition 1986), and Traditional Buildings of Britain by the  same author (London 1985).
The Timber-Framed House in England by Trudy West (London 1971) and English Stone Buildings by Alec Clifton Taylor and A.S.
Ireson (London 1983) may be useful for the periods and styles they cover.
Further works which may be deemed desirable acquisitions are:The English House by James Chambers (London 1985),English Vernacular Houses by E. Mercer, and The English Medieval House by Margaret Wood (London, reprint 1985).
Reference to British Books in Print and the trade catalogues of specialist publishers will show many titles of works dealing not only with houses, but also with the broadly related field of what has been called ‘national prosperity’.
These may be referred to, and selected works obtained, from public lending libraries, before any decision to purchase is taken.
Religion
The history of religion in England has been a complex one — Monasticism, the Dissolution, the Reformation, Nonconformity, and other events and disciplines have also played their part.
The study of religion in the context of local history will be influenced by such things as ‘Was the area dominated by a religious institution in medieval times?’
‘Did the Tudor period have a recorded local impact?’
‘Were the philosophies of Commonwealth times — Puritanism, the Levellers — of dominant concern?’
‘When did Methodism, Unitarianism, the Baptist Church (or whatever) come first to the area?’
The answers to these questions will determine which books the local researcher will purchase and retain.
A useful starting point is the reference sections appearing at the end of each major entry in The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church already mentioned.
Under ‘Baptists’, for example, there are dozens of works, starting with A History of the Baptists …to the year 1886 by T. Armitage (London 1888).
Under the heading ‘Methodist Churches’ there are many works regarding all branches of this faith.
Similar extensive bibliographies appear for the Church of England, all the monastic orders, Roman Catholicism, Spiritual Healing, Judaism, Islam and all other religious denominations and orders of, or relating to, Christianity.
Education
The field of education is as wide as that of religion, and it would be futile to attempt to particularise over such a vast subject.
The starting point must again be British Books in Print , and the card index of the nearest large public reference or lending library.
A further useful beginning to identifying needs is the long article on the History of Education in the Encyclopaedia Britannica ; whilst much of this is not relevant directly to the study of local history, it is good background to the history of the English national systems of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
Many useful references are given, but it must be recognised; hat both juvenile and adult education has changed very considerably indeed in the last decade — and more changes are due.
This makes the identification of basic texts very important — and the enlistment of expert help from the town or county hall most desirable 
Specialist archives and collections
The importance of the great national repositories of original documents was stressed in Chapter 5, and subsequent chapters have indicated many ways in which their resources may be used by local researchers.
Attention has also been paid to the importance of collections maintained in museums, reference libraries, universities, and by corporations.
These collections, in addition to having work of a distinctly ‘local’, that is to say geographical, concentration have, in many cases, manuscripts and printed works of much wider significance in the fields of social development, religious beliefs, technological innovation, the functioning of particular industries, and so on.
The purpose of this chapter is to identify the places where specialist collections of more than local importance may be found, as well as indicating the kind of local material that is so freely accessible.
The locations of the various collections will be found in Appendix III, Addresses.
Local authority record offices
These provincial centres, set up at different periods in the past, vary in the sizes of the archives they maintain.
In general terms they house the expected local authority records, but also frequently hold large numbers of estate, manorial, business and family papers, enclosure and tithe awards.
Often they have custody of borough archives, Quarter Session records, and the registers of baptisms, marriages and burials deposited by ancient parishes, some of whose records go back to Elizabethan times.
Other material of wide interest dates from as early as the Saxon period.
What now follows is a listing of important, more general, archives in the keeping of these local depositories, some of which have been considerably reorganised subsequent to the county boundary changes of 1974.
Cambridge Papers of a number of women's rights organisations from 1885 onwards.
The Huntingdon office has manuscripts from the muniments of the earls and dukes of Manchester.
Chester Archives of city gilds are held.
These are of general value, as well as illuminating the history of the local organisations.
Cumbria (Carlisle) Records relating to the suffragist and pacifist movements, from 1880 onwards.
Derbyshire (Matlock) Three groups of records of general interest are held: papers on the Titus Oates plot, papers relating to the Civil War, and the pre-vesting date archives of the National Coal Board.
Devon Papers, dating from the nineteenth century, of the geologist William Buckland and the naturalist Frank Buckland.
Durham Records relating to coal mining and coal interests have been deposited.
These include not only National Coal Board records but also pre-nationalisation documents.
East Sussex (Lewes) The collections include papers of J. Baker-Holroyd, first earl of
Sheffield (1735–1821), an authority on agricultural topics.
Leeds An important group is the papers of Samuel Smiles (1812–1904), the political reformer, biographer of Josiah Wedgwood and others, and the author of Self-Help (1859),Character, Thrift and Duty .
London The Corporation of London office holds the official archives from the eleventh century to the present, and many documents are of wide interest, for they deal with jurisdiction and property interests in many countries, including the estates granted in 1628 for sale by the Crown to settle national debts.
The Greater London Record office has the papers of a number of hospitals and medical institutions, the most important of which are: St Thomas' (1556–1948), including the Nightingale School (1860 onwards); Guy's (1860–1948), and the personal records of Thomas Guy.
Also held are the records of the Westminster Hospital Group (1715 onwards), and the Foundling Hospital (1793 onwards).
Manchester The city archive has the two following collections likely to be of wide interest: the first deals with women's suffrage in the north, and the second comprises the documents and papers of William Farmer, an editor of the Victoria County History: Lancashire .
The Greater Manchester Record Office has many canal records, including those of the Manchester Ship Canal and the Rochdale canal enterprises.
Merseyside There is considerable material on docks and shipping, plus correspondence regarding the American Civil War, the slave trade, and other commercial ventures.
An archive of special social interest is that of the Society for the Relief of Sick and Distressed Needlewomen (1864–1927).
Surrey The Guildford office holds records of the Office of the Ring's Tents (1542–58), and the Lieutenancy of the Tower of London (1615–17).
The Surrey office at Kingston-on-Thames has the records for the Royal Philanthropic Society's School for the reform of juveniles, from 1788 onwards.
West Yorkshire The collections include the records of the British Waterways Board from the year 1652 and thereafter.
University and college archives
Several universities and institutions of higher education have departments of local history in which the subject may be studied to the end of achieving a recognised qualification, and hence have well-stocked reference libraries.
Others, being anciently established, also have manuscript materials going back to the days of their foundation in the Middle Ages or the Tudor period.
A third group has, in addition, deliberately created specialist collections of both manuscript and printed works.
It is probably true to say that, with the exception of the more recently founded universities and colleges, all higher educational establishments have archival  collections of varying sizes which they have generated, been given, or have purchased.
The larger collections are usually estate papers or the personal libraries of people with direct connections, as witness, say, the Thomas Arnold manuscripts at Rugby School, the Montefiore collection of Jews' College, or the Conan Doyle correspondence in the University of London Library.
Some of the archives, however, are not only of substantial national or international repute, but are of paramount relevance to local history research.
Among the more notable are, by classification:
Agricultural history The Sheffield University Library contains several specialist collections, one of the more important being the Hartlib MSS, a seventeenth-century group devoted to describing methods of agricultural improvement.
Cultural activity The Library of Contemporary Culture Records was founded in 1970 and is now in the custody of the University of East Anglia.
It holds a vast collection of manuscripts dating from 1965 onwards.
The items are drawn from all parts of the country, and cover such things as local festivals, art associations, poetry circles, and so on.
Cultural tradition The Centre for English Cultural Tradition and Language of the University of Sheffield houses the Russell Wortly collection of folk dance and song.
There is an extensive index.
The centre also has a wide-ranging collection of artifacts relating to folklore and craft industries.
Ecclesiastical history The Borthwick Institute (University of York) was established in 1953 and specialises in the study of ecclesiastical history — particularly the administrative and legal history of ecclesiastical institutions.
These include the Community of the Resurrection and the Society of Friends.
The Gurney Library of some 15,000 books concerns, mainly, ecclesiastical history.
Genealogical studies The John Rylands Library of Manchester University has many collections.
In the Charter Rooms are deeds, genealogical and family papers for the twelfth to twentieth centuries, from the counties of Cheshire, Derbyshire, Warwickshire and Yorkshire.
Gypsy lore The Sydney Jones Library of the University of Liverpool houses the records of the Gypsy Lore Society (1895–1974) and the Scott Macfie collection of gypsy and Romany material.
Labour history Within the University of Hull is the Brynmor Jones library, which specialises in labour and socialist history.
The collections are extensive.
Local history Large collections of local history books, pamphlets, manuscripts and the proceedings of interested bodies are held in the Department of Local History of the University of Leicester and the Bodleian Library, Oxford.
This latter institution also has a vast assemblage of deeds, rolls, family papers and ecclesiastical records of importance to local history research.
Palatinate of Durham Within the Department of Palaeography of the University of Durham, established in 1948 for the promotion of the study of manuscript material mainly from the northern counties, there are major collections dating from the eleventh to the nineteenth centuries.
Power generation The University of Bath is a technological institution, and has custody of the Watkins Collection of photographs and written material on the evolution of steam power generation and the part it played in Britain in the years 1850–1914.
Rural life There are two important resources in the University of Reading.
The first, within the Institute of Agricultural History and the Museum of Rural Life, has over 250,000 photographs, and many major collections of documents illustrating farming methods over the centuries, as well as thousands of tools, items of equipment and implements.
The second resource is in the Department of Archives and Manuscripts, and consists of thousands of farm records, from every English county from the sixteenth century to the present.
Social studies The Tom Harrisson Mass-Observation Archive is housed in the University of Sussex.
The records are those of a unique social science research organisation set up in 1937 to record the anthropology of everyday life in a wide variety of places.
Volunteers kept diaries, answered regular questionnaires, and generally responded to points put to them by the directors of the study, Tom Harrisson and Charles Madge.
The work continued into the 1950s and the Mass-Observation Archive is complete.
Topography The Department of Geography of the University of Keele has a collection of air photographs, which are the property of the Public Record Office.
There are more than 5,000,000 vertical air-photographs (not all of places in Britain), which may be accessed subject only to the provisions of the Official Secrets, and public Record Acts.
Town planning Liverpool University archives contain two bodies of documents of interest to researchers in local history: the first is Lord Holford's papers on town planning, and the second is Sir Charles Reilly's documents on architecture.
Local studies collections in public libraries
There is hardly a public library in the country which does not have, under one heading or another, a ‘local studies’ section, and these are vital sources to the student of local history.
The contents of the sections vary a great deal in both quality and quantity — depending very much on the space available, the interests of past librarians and local historians, the cash resources of the competent authority, and any transient idiosyncrasies of fashion.
The paragraphs which now follow single out some of the more important, more specialised, local collections, and particularly those which are likely to be of value to researchers working over a fairly wide geographical area, or concentrating on a single subject.
Avon County Reference Library (Bristol) A collection relates to slavery and the slave trade, and there is, in the Emanuel Green Library, a host of publications on the history of Somerset.
Birmingham Reference Library Among the many collections housed (including the famous Shakespeare Library) are business archives — the Boulton and Watt archive is a major source of reference for the history of the Industrial Revolution; the Assay Office Collection relates to the Mint and the Midlands toy and silver trades — and the more general local studies department has a fine collection of maps and seals.
Derbyshire Library (Chesterfield) Contents of general value are the Wyatt Collection concerning lead mining in the nineteenth century; records of the Derby Canal Company; and the Duesbury Collection on china and porcelain manufacture.
Devon Library Services (Exeter) The library has a large number of books dealing with the south-west of England.
There are more than 2,500 volumes of pre-1800 imprint, and an extensive assemblage of maps, illustrations and ephemera.
Doncaster Central Library A substantial archive is devoted to the history of horse racing, and another to railways.
Dudley Local History Department Included in these archives are the muniments of the lords Dudley, fifteenth to twentieth centuries.
It will be recalled that the Dudley (or Sutton) family was prominent in the history of England especially in late Tudor times, and held many estates and titles including, for a short time, the dukedom of Northumberland.
Gateshead Library The local history collection includes estate papers from the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, of particular relevance to the early history of coal mining in the Palatinate of Durham.
Kidderminster Library Useful papers of eighteenth-century Ironmasters are stored.
Liverpool City Library The local studies group has manorial and estate papers of the widely spread holdings of the earldom (later, marquessate) of Salisbury.
Westminster City Library This archive contains the important Grosvenor estate papers.
The Grosvenor family (now holders of the dukedom of Westminster) is of ancient lineage (the Scrope versus Grosvenor controversy of the late fourteenth century is a pertinent study), and, over the ages, members have held estates in a number of counties and participated in governmental matters in many localities.
Specialist archives
There are hundreds of specialist archives around the country.
Some, like the British Telecom Museum, deal with technology; others, like the Library of Political and Economic Science, with ideology; a third group, such as the Bethlem Hospital (Bedlam), with an institution; a fourth, as represented by the Hatfield House Collection, with a great family; another, as witness the Huguenot Library, with a cultural and religious group.
The list is not exhaustive, but what this present section sets out to do is give a very substantial selection illustrating the range of material which can be drawn on by the researcher.
Army Ogilby Trust (Aldershot) Established in 1954 with the purpose of collecting papers, books, journals and lists dealing with British regiments and their uniforms.
Baptist Union Library (London) Includes the Baptist Historical Library, and many histories of Baptist churches from the seventeenth century onwards.
Much of the material is unpublished.
Bethlem Royal Hospital (Beckenham, Kent) Bedlam, as it was called, was founded in 1247 as the Priory of St Mary of Bethlehem.
By 1400 it was a hospital for the insane.
As an archive it is recognised by the Public Records Act 1958.
It has the collected papers of a number of hospitals, some medieval records, and a library devoted to the history of insane, asylums and hospitals.
It has hundreds of drawings, engravings and photographs.
British Architectural Library (London) has more than 400 metres of shelving of manuscript works from the seventeenth century onwards, on all manner of  architectural topics; there are more than 250,000 drawings and 50,000 photographs on architecture and topography.
British Library of Political and Economic Science (London) The library specialises in modern British political, economic and social history, social anthropology, and has a vast collection of books.
The Charles Booth Survey of London (1885–1905) fills 426 volumes.
The term ‘modern’ is interpreted widely, for some works date from as early as the sixteenth century.
British Steel Record Services (London) The Corporation maintains a central archive, and also regional collections.
Given the nature of the corporation — it was formed in 1967 — its major collections are devoted to the history of the many companies from all the great steel-producing centres, which constitute the corporate body.
Its regional archives are in Wellingborough, Middlesbrough and Deeside (plus, for Wales and Scotland, Cardiff and Glasgow).
British Telecom Museum (London) This museum contains, in addition to the important displays of equipment from the earliest electro-mechanical to the latest digital fibre-optic, the Historical Telephone Directory Library containing London directories 1800 onwards, and provincial directories 1900 onwards.
Charity Commission (London and Liverpool) The Commission was established in 1853 under the Charitable Trust Act.
Its principal archival collection comprises records relating to some 140,000 charities.
The London office covers national charities and those in England south of the River Severn to the Wash, and the Liverpool office has responsibility for those north of that line.
Chetham's Library (Manchester) The policy of this library is to collect works of all kinds dealing with the local histories and topography of places in north-west England.
Christ's Hospital (Abingdon) Records of the Fraternity of the Holy Cross and the Guild of Our Lady, 1165–1547, the records of benefactors and charities administered by the Governors, and the records of the hospital 1533–1918 are the principal collections.
College of Arms (London) The college was granted its charter by King Richard III in 1484, but some of its papers date from before that time, to the very earliest days of heraldry in the thirteenth century.
The official records include heralds' visitations, grants of arms, and pedigrees.
Semi-official and unofficial collections include rolls of arms, armorials, ordinaries, work books and papers relating to orders of chivalry.
There are some 50 private archives created by past heralds, miscellaneous family papers, as well as seals and bookplate collections.
Duchy of Cornwall Office (London) All records of the duchy are maintained.
They include parchment and paper rolls prepared by receivers, manorial court officials and other functionaries.
Council for the Care of Churches (London) Established in 1921, the principal collection is the National Survey of Churches, including photographs and guide books on almost all the 17,000 parish churches and associated chapels of the Church of England.
There are extensive records on nineteenth-century stained glass.
Customs and Excise (London) HM Customs & Excise library dates from 1671, the time at which the Board of Customs was founded.
An important collection concerns taxation on goods and smuggling, and there are eighteenth-century maps and charts of British coastal areas.
Dean and Chapter Library (Durham) The library has developed from the one founded by the Benedictine house of the tenth century.
It comprises an extensive accumulation of medieval manuscripts, and a number of antiquarian collections.
Devonshire Collection (Derbyshire) The archive is that of the Cavendish family, earls and dukes of Devonshire.
It includes estate papers (from 1618 to the present) and numerous books of household accounts.
Exeter Cathedral Library The library was founded in the eleventh century, and the Exon Domesday and several other documents survive in situ from that date.
There are many important collections of charters, leases and other capitular works, maps, cartularies, deeds, manorial records and so on, of pre-Reformation properties.
There is an archive of Vicars Choral thirteenth-twentieth centuries.
Fawcett Library (London) Originally the library of the London Society for Women's Suffrage (1867), it is now named after Millicent Garrett Fawcett, its founder.
The collections include suffrage, equal status, the feminist controversy of 1863–86, and the records of the Association for Moral and Social Hygiene.
Folklore Society (London) Founded in 1878, the society has more than 50 major collections, but at the time of writing these have not been catalogued.
Gloucester Collection (Gloucester) In addition to numerous estate records, the collection includes the Dancey Gift of works relating to the county (225 volumes, more than 300 pamphlets, almost the same number of prints and paintings).
There are some fine manuscripts illustrating the histories of the county's Saxon churches.
Guildhall Library (London) The library holds thousands of records of the trading history of the City of London and it is, in effect, the county record office for the City.
It also houses the records of most of the city livery companies.
Harrow School (Middlesex) In addition to school and estate records, the collections include Harrow manor court rolls.
Hatfield House (Hertfordshire) Papers include those of Lord Burghley (1520–98), Secretary of State to Queen Elizabeth I, and other distinguished members of the Cecil family down to those of the 3rd marquess (1830–1903), Prime Minister of Great Britain.
Hereford Cathedral Manuscripts survive from the eighth century, and the earliest deed is dated c.840.
There is a chained library of 1500 books and many works of more than local interest.
Huguenot Library (London) Further to the papers of philanthropic institutions founded or supported by the Huguenots, there is a fine collection of pedigrees and other genealogical works.
Institute of Geological Studies (London) The collection of some 30,000 items is, in effect, a national geological archive, and includes the Geological Survey and the Palaeontographical Society records (1847–1950).
Institute of Heraldic and Genealogical Studies (Canterbury) Many thousands of unpublished manuscripts relating to family histories; manorial papers thirteenth-twentieth centuries, records of armorial bearings in all Sussex churches, Canterbury Cathedral and elsewhere; an extensive index of British arms; transcripts of rolls of arms and heraldic treatises; heralds' original note books; and hundreds of genealogical documents are held at the Institute.
Lambeth Palace Library (London) The library holds registers of the archbishops of  Canterbury from the thirteenth century onwards, and the archives of many societies connected with the Church of England, together with those of bishops and statesmen.
There are more than 150,000 printed books, many being of historical importance within the Church.
Leeds Diocesan Library (Leeds) The archive includes papers of the Roman Catholic Church in the north of England after the year 1688.
Methodist Archives and Research Centre (Manchester) The collections are housed in the John Rylands Library and comprise documents and books devoted to the religious history of the denomination.
In addition there are thousands of letters ‘diaries and journals which were the property of prominent Methodists.
Middlesex Polytechnic (London) The Silver Studio Collection is maintained by this institution.
The Silver family were wallpaper manufacturers and textile designers in London, and the collection includes many thousands of photographs, designs, samples and related ephemera.
Modern Records Centre (Coventry) The centre is maintained within the University of Warwick, and has the objects of collecting and preserving written and printed material of special interest to labour history, industrial relations and kindred subjects.
The papers of many trade unions are housed at the Centre.
National Meteorological Archive (Bracknell) Climatological data covering the British Isles have been gathered, some as early as 1900.
National Monuments Record (London) There are records of The Royal Commission on Historical Monuments, 1908 to the present, 400,000 Ordnance Survey record cards of sites of archaeological importance; 2 million photographs, drawings and reports on historical buildings and archaeological sites; and numerous reference books.
Duke of Norfolk's Archive (Arundel) This extensive collection is valuable for many reasons.
Firstly, it is a family archive covering the period since the thirteenth century; secondly, the dukes of Norfolk have been Earls Marshal and Hereditary Marshals of England for many centuries; and finally, as the family has adhered to the old religion, many documents have an important bearing on English (Roman) Catholic history.
Duke of Northumberland's Archive (Alnwick and Middlesex) The Percy family and its successors have been prominent in English history since the thirteenth century, firstly as earls, and later as dukes, of Northumberland.
Members have always owned vast estates and, through important heiress alliances, acquired (and sometimes disposed of) property in many counties as far south as Dorset and Kent.
Their archives reflect this.
Office of Population Censuses and Surveys (The General Register Office in St Catherine's House, London) A central register of births, deaths and the solemnization and registration of marriages, was begun on 1 July 1837 and was called The General Register Office.
In 1970 it was amalgamated with the Government Social Survey to form the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys.
The collections are an essential reference source ‘especially for the Victorian period.
The decennial census data which have so far been published in accordance with the 100-year closure rule provide unique information on social patterns and mores.
Order of St John Library (London) The Sovereign and Military Order of St John of Jerusalem was founded c.1100, and the collection includes a number of manuscripts  dating from the early centuries.
The (English) priory of the medieval order was dissolved in 1540 and the archive consists mainly of records of post-1831 date, when the Venerable Order of St John was founded.
There are fine collections of books, pamphlets and coins.
Port of London Authority Records of London Dock and Thames Navigation authorities and companies dating from 1770 onwards.
Post Office Archives (London) Although the collections mainly concern the work of the General post Office, there are significant holdings of records from the late seventeenth century which are of importance to local historians researching the evolution of communication methods.
The National Postal Museum is also of potential value in this field.
Queen Mary College (London) This college of the University of London, developed from the people's Palace in the East End (1884), by way of the East End Technical College.
The archive of The People's Palace (1884–1920) is voluminous.
Royal Geographical Society (London) The Society was founded in 1830 with the object of sponsoring geographical research and exploration.
It has a large accumulation of books, manuscripts, maps and pictures.
St George's Chapel (Windsor Castle) The College of St George was founded in 1348, the probable date of the creation of the Order of the Garter.
There are many manuscripts dating from that time, and a few from the earlier period, starting 1140.
There are many property deeds and papers referring to the knights of the order, some of whom were powerful land-holding magnates, close to the throne.
Society of Antiquaries (London) The Society (founded in 1701) has nearly a thousand manuscripts dating from 1100 onwards, representing every branch of antiquarian studies.
It has some 20,000 prints and drawings of a topographical nature, and about 3000 broadsheets, some as old as 600 years.
There is a large collection of material about the civil war, and 10,000 casts of seals.
Society of Friends Library (London) The archive, founded in 1673, has large resources, with indexes and search lists, of documents of importance to the Quaker movement.
Many family papers are stored and there is an extensive picture library.
Society of Jesus Archive (London) The Jesuit mission to England began in 1580 and some of the archive material dates from that time.
The main sources of acquisition are the Jesuit houses, and there are quantities of letters from the central and provincial curia.
Spalding Gentlemen's Society This body was founded in 1710.
It has a fine collection of manorial and local government records, and its archive of fens drainage papers is unique.
Thames Water Authority (London) The Authority's territory covers 5000 square miles.
It has records of the older companies and boards, plus plans and letter books dating from the eighteenth century and onwards.
There is a valuable library of works concerning the River Thames.
United Reform Church History Society (London) The main sections of the archive house the papers of the Presbyterian Historical Society, the Congregational Churches of Christ and the United Reform Church.
There is a library of seventeenth-century pamphlets and tracts.
Westminster Diocesan Archive (London) The collections date from after the Elizabethan Reformation settlement of 1559.
Records of Catholics in the Home Counties in the sixteenth-nineteenth centuries are held, and there are leaflets, scrap-books and correspondence.
Dr Williams's Library (London) Daniel Williams was a Presbyterian Minister who died in 1716, and his personal library is the foundation of the present collection, which specialises in English Nonconformity of the Protestant type.
There are nearly 140,000 printed books now held.
Wiltshire Library and Museum Service (Trowbridge) The importance of this establishment is its use of a computer data base for recording archaeological sites and historic monuments.
Work is also being carried out (on a wider than county basis) on transferring information regarding charities onto computer-based storage media.
Winchester College Archives The College was founded in 1382 and there are extensive records of its estates in, mainly, Hampshire, Wiltshire and Dorset.
These papers include maps, plans and architectural drawings.
York Minster Archives There is much material from the Middle Ages to the present (1150 onwards).
The archive contains documents of a non-ecclesiastical nature, not only relative to the city itself, but also the county and, indeed, the properties of the Minster elsewhere in England.
Museum archives and collections
Every local historian will be familiar with his own county, town or privately-run district museum, and of its importance in the field of historical studies.
Many such institutions also have substantial libraries, not only about local places, people and conditions, but works by local authors, all of which can be of value in building a picture of a place, its people, and their social preoccupations.
The closest attention should also be given to the contents of such national museums as the British, Ashmolean, Science, Victoria & Albert, London, and the Fitzwilliam, all of which have incomparable collections of artifacts, documents, books, and all manner of relevant material.
What now follows is a list of museums (many with archives) which specialise in material of general as well as narrowly local moment.
Costume and Fashion Centre (Bath) The centre was opened in 1974 and the collections deal with fashionable dress for men, women and children of the sixteenth to twentieth centuries.
Ironbridge Gorge Museum Trust (Telford) Established in 1968, the Museum Trust conserves the unique industrial remains of the area, which comprise coke-smelting furnaces, the world's first iron bridge, china factories and much more.
The work of the Trust is of wide significance — it includes, for instance, the Berkeley and Gloucester Canal archives, and the Elton Collection of material relating to the Industrial Revolution.
National Maritime Museum (London) Public records including Admiralty, Navy Board and dockyard muniments for seventeenth-nineteenth centuries are maintained.
The personal papers of a number of distinguished sailors are held, and there are thousands of historic photographs.
National Museum of Labour History (London) The extensive collections of exhibits, records and papers cover radical movements from the Industrial Revolution onwards: Labour Party, Independent Labour Party, and the archives of many trade unions.
There is also a well stocked reference library of books, newspapers, posters and ephemera.
There is a collection of photographs (and projector slides).
National Railway Museum (York) Set up in 1975, as a part of the Science Museum, London, the Yorkshire body houses the contents of the old British Museum of Transport.
There are several collections, including many records of minor railways in the West Midlands and the Welsh Borders, and the Lancashire and Yorkshire Railway.
There are official glass negative collections of a number of major companies, 1880–1950.
North Western Museum of Science and Industry (Manchester) Opened in 1969, the displays cover the industries representative of the north-west of England.
Of special interest are books on papermaking, photography and heavy electrical engineering.
Guides and reference books
Without exception the bodies, institutions and archives mentioned in this chapter have catalogues, guides, indexes or lists to help the researcher determine what is relevant and where to find it.
Copies of the more important volumes are held in the larger reference libraries, or may be borrowed from the lending division of the British Library.
In support of these publications there are several general reference books of value.
British Archives by Janet Foster and Julia Sheppard (London 1982) is a work of more than 500 pages and is described as ‘guide to the archive resources in the United Kingdom’.
Its particular merit is the brief descriptions of the contents of many of the archives.
Record Repositories in Great Britain (HMSO 1982) is a useful handlist, as is Materials for Theses in Local Record Offices and Libraries by F.G.
Emmison and W.J. Smith (London 1973).
This latter publication lists, by county, important archives (and suggests ways in which they may be used).
Record Offices (how to find them) by J. Gibson and P. Peskett (Birmingham 1981) complements the last-named booklet by providing maps showing where most public record offices are located.
Turning now to commentaries, the following are relevant:Archives and Local History by F.G.
Emmison (London 1978), and Enjoying Archives by David Iredale (London 1985).
Finally,Sources for English Local History by W.B. Stephens (Cambridge 1981) is a quite indispensable guide, for not only does it refer to archives and collections, but suggests ways in which they may be used, and does so by major subject categories: population and social structure; local government and politics; poor relief; charities, prices and wages; industry, trade and communications; agriculture; education; religion; and houses, housing and health.
The story of Combsburgh — an imaginary place
Writing a good parish history is not a task to be undertaken lightly.
If the work is to be comprehensive, thoroughly researched and well constructed it will take many years.
The present author, working almost full-time, spent just over five years on a single village; the result was a book of A4 format (11½ × 8 inches) containing 436 pages of printed text and 62 pages of illustrations — photographs, maps and diagrams.
The village itself was in Dorset, but visits were needed to Alnwick in Northumberland, Seal in Kent, Syon in Middlesex, Southampton in Hampshire, Slapton in Devon and Salisbury in Wiltshire to examine original manuscripts and take photographs.
At least a dozen visits were necessary to the Public Record Office, the British Library, the National Monuments Record and the Institute of Historical Research in London.
Many letters were exchanged with people in America, France and the Antipodes, as well as in Britain.
Thus material about the specific parish and its people was gathered.
But no parish is a closed community — it is bounded by other communities (and sometimes by the sea) and all these have helped to shape its boundaries, layout, population and activities.
National events and policies have played their part, from the arrival of a new overlord in 1066, through the effects of the civil wars of the seventeenth century, to the present-day activities of the Department of the Environment.
All these things must be considered.
To end this book a chapter will, therefore, be devoted to the history of a fictitious place called Combsburgh, with the objects of demonstrating ways in which data obtained by careful research may subsequently be incorporated into a narrative.
The story opens with a brief scene-setting introduction, followed by a much fuller treatment of the social history of Combsburgh during the years 1820–60.
Combsburgh — setting the scene
Combsburgh is the name of an ecclesiastical parish of great antiquity and a civil parish whose latest status was established by the local government legislation of 1972/4.
The parish contains a small market town (also called Combsburgh) and several outlying hamlets and farms.
It covers about 3630 acres, traversed by the River Holbeck and drained by several small tributaries, mainly Fitlock Brook.
The land undulates between 200 and 250 feet above sea level, except in the south-east where the altitude nears 300 feet.
A broad band of Corallian Limestone and Sand crosses the central part — northeast to south-west — and this is bounded on each side by Oxford Clay.
The small market town area (see map) is to the east of the parish, and this, together with the  high ground south of the river and the tiny hamlets of Steeple and Dogbury Valent, all appear to have been the sites of pre-Conquest settlement.
Combsburgh has evolved into a pleasant shire parish containing the little market town mentioned, to which local farmers, traders and visitors come with pleasure and occasional profit.
It was the site of a Roman estate in the first-third centuries, the Saxons established farm clusters, two of its settlements were mentioned in Domesday, and King John used it as a hunting base (and purchased his wines there).
By late Tudor times it had become a prosperous wool-producing centre, and had a thriving tannery, but after the civil wars, during which it housed a small Parliamentary garrison, it gradually declined inactivity and status.
After the First World War the town thrived briefly, but in later decades achieved a near-dormitory state, having been discovered by couples wishing to retire from the frenetic life in the larger urban conurbations.
Then, in the late 1970s, a new motorway thrust through the county and a junction was constructed just six miles to the west.
The land speculators and property developers moved in, and the parish has been given a priority status within the County Structure Plan.
Today the social life of Combsburgh has many facets.
The parish is fortunate in having a spacious and well-appointed parish hall (erected and administered by the Combsburgh Recreational and General Trust, with a generous gift from the Carradine-Haye family), and a fairly well-stocked branch library.
Organisations range from Brownies, Cub-Scouts, Scouts and Guides to the Silver Lining Club for the ‘Senile Citizens’, as they tend to be called locally.
There is a Women's Institute branch (the W.I. — known, inevitably, as the Witches International by the habitués of the Smoke Room of the Red Lion), a Choral Group, and an Amateur Dramatic Society.
The Combsburgh High School stages a Christmas pantomime in which every young Jack and Jill (or Wayne and Tracy as they are all called today) has at least a walk-on part.
Football and cricket clubs flourish.
A well-written, well-produced parish magazine appears monthly (with the exception of July); edited by the rector, the Reverend  Leonard Gaines, this publication includes a calendar of forthcoming events — those of general interest as well as those connected with the churches.
The River Holbeck has much to offer.
It follows a winding course through low-lying water meadows, between the piers which supported the old railway arch (unused in the wake of Dr Beeching), down through attractive wooded slopes to Steeple Mill.
The banks of the river are accessible to walkers, and are much appreciated by anglers anxious for coarse fishing — chub, perch, roach, tench and pike are plentiful.
In the summer, the parish children and others delight in the hens, ducks, geese and cattle living the traditional rural life.
The mill-house, with its white-painted cast iron footbridge over the river below the weir, forms a seductive spot for photographers, painters, picnickers and what used to be called courting couples, but are now gender-opposite persons endeavouring to establish meaningful relationships by pair-bonding and role-playing.
Friday is market day and it must be admitted that even in these times of high-speed travel, mini-breaks, and the lure of the larger towns, Combsburgh comes alive.
It is the day when gossip is exchanged, slander is perpetuated, goods are bought and sold, refrigerators, deep freezes and wine cellars are replenished, bubblegum stuck to the more inviting parts of old ladies' dresses, and money transferred from the coffers of the DHSS to the tills of the Red Lion in joyous cacophony.
Combsburgh is, then, a typical English rural parish.
A social history of Combsburgh 1820–1860
In the early nineteenth century Combsburgh, in common with the areas surrounding it, was in straitened circumstances.
In 1820 Sir Frederick Adam published his Survey of the State of the Poor , in which he showed that throughout the shires rates of pay for labourers of all types were low, and that many families lived on small quantities of wheaten or barley bread, skimmed milk, cheese, potatoes and legumes, meat hardly ever figuring in their diet.
On as little as 8/6d (42 new pence) a week a working-class family might have to pay 3 shillings (15p) for bread, 1 penny (3p) for cheese, 2 pence for tea, 4 pence for milk, 1½ pence for salt.
In addition, their tenancy had to be paid for, fuel, clothes and thread provided.
Cakes baked on the gridiron were regarded as a luxury, and sometimes a substitute for tea was made by pouring boiling water over burnt crusts of bread.
Sanitation was primitive and the poorhouses in regular use.
As a twentieth-century writer has said, ‘Parish destitution had passed beyond any solution: repressions, palliatives, exhortations and sermons were of no avail.
‘The workers began to organise.
The lush farmlands of Combsburgh and the main trade of the little town had come into the hands of just a few landlords.
An attempt had been made to offset recent enclosures by letting out a few five-acre plots, rent and tithe free, to deserving poor, but the newer legislation continued to make things difficult.
The Game Law of 1816 was especially overbearing by rendering a man suspected, much less convicted, of poaching liable to transportation.
Attempts to snare even rabbits became dangerous forays.
There had, in 1814, been six convictions at the Quarter Sessions for these and other offences, such as deer stalking and assaults on keepers.
By 1821 the number had  risen to 43, four men being from Combsburgh.
In 1822 there came to the parish as rector, the great Walter Henry, a graduate of King's College, Cambridge, and a Fellow of the Royal Society.
He did everything within his power to assist his parishioners, including letting out twenty acres of glebe land at £2 an acre rather than the £8 normally charged for potato ground.
But unrest continued, not only in Combsburgh but in the rest of the county, and sporadic riots occurred.
The accession of the new king, William IV, in June 1830 brought some slight relief, mainly because it was widely believed that His Majesty favoured the destruction of machinery and the payment of 2 shillings a day to men of the labouring classes.
But discontent rose again; the fine autumn, plentiful harvest and good potato crop did not lessen the murmurings of the poor.
As winter drew near, the folk of Combsburgh and the surrounding parishes became more restive.
Talk in the Red Lion became increasingly spirited as the season wore on, and the rumours passed from farm cottage to town hovel.
There remained talk that the new king would pay for the destruction of the threshing machines which the agricultural workers believed lay at the root of their misery, and there were stories that the new police — the ‘peelers’— had been armed with 6000 cutlasses from the Tower.
On 26 November 1830, hungry, cold, sickly and tied to their parish by the restrictions of the Poor Removals Act, the destitute of Combsburgh rose in an outbreak of physical violence.
From the tranquility of the first decade of the twentieth century, the Victoria County History recorded: ‘Farmers and petty employers [in Combsburgh]would not engage the best labour, but preferred the inferior hands at low wages…it was, therefore, scarcely surprising there were riots…‘.
Walter Henry, as might be expected of a man of his background, calling and intellect, was much concerned with the well-being of his people and campaigned actively on their behalf.
A remarkable and long letter from this gentleman has survived.
It was addressed to Mr G.E.
Bateman, the acting magistrate for the county who was conducting inquiries into the operation of the Poor Laws.
A Mr Ashton had given evidence to the Inquiry and quoted a third party, who appeared to criticise its works.
From the bench Bateman had said: ‘I here beg leave, not merely in my own name but in the name of the whole bench, to require from Mr Ashton the name of the individual on whose statements he has thus presumed to impugn our magisterial conduct.’
Henry replied, in an open letter, ‘It is I’, and over the course of no fewer than 63 pages drew a factual, logical and haunting picture of the plight of his beloved Combsburgh, as he perceived it in the winter of 1830/31.
He pointed out to the magistrates that the people of the parish had previously been law-abiding, that riotous demonstrations and the destruction of property were rare, and even now were believed by many of the farmers and traders (and the poor themselves) to have been the work of gypsies.
Henry continued, ‘The riots here followed those in neighbouring counties, of which our people had heard rumours, as if those rioters had been able to overpower the gentry and as if large masses of men were moving on from London, to aid them in forcing their masters to give higher wages.
The population of this district had not been previously deeply dissatisfied; but it was natural that they should wish well to people of their own class, supposed to be fighting for higher wages; and they presently heard with truth that several employers hereabouts had begun to promise higher payments under the dread of seeing the population armed against them.’
Henry went on to point out the evils of sweated labour and the pay make-up system, how it fostered a disinclination to work and how it encouraged landless men to marry just so that their income would be augmented ‘in proportion to the number of their children’, and how it led to degradation of the character: ‘The weak, the indolent, and worthless worker is now secure of the maximum payment settled by the standards you have determined from parish funds, and the industrious, skilful and honest workman can expect no more…the pernicious and demoralising practice of paying wages out of rates…ought to be suppressed and prohibited.’
He went on: ‘I feel that, as a minister of a parish having no other resident gentleman, I ought to act as a guardian of my own poor; and if 00 should neglect any opportunity, which the Lord may place within my reach…
I shall be deserting a plain duty.’
The Rector implored the inquiry to consider the case for living wages to be paid, as was the case in more enlightened parts of the county.
In contradistinction to the indolent paupers who sponged off the Poor Rate and exploited pay make-up, and the hard-working landless town dweller who also suffered, he further cited the most respectable portion of the peasantry who were prevented from rising above the nominal low price of hire, so that the wage level ‘must soon fall too low to allow the most abstemious worker to maintain himself.
The cottager is, therefore, first entangled with debts for food and clothing, and then constrained to raise money by mortgaging his loved little tenement
This was heady and powerful stuff, written by a passionate, articulate, sincere and devout man.
The result was little enough, and the days of the Combsburgh riots passed.
As the Victoria County History puts it, somewhat laconically, ‘The chief result appears to have been an order given to the overseers to relieve ten more able-bodied families.’
There were other personal repercussions, as the calendar and register of prisoners in the county gaol shows.
Combsburgh got off fairly lightly — Aaron Howes aged 22 and John Foot aged 34 were transported, and William Dole aged 23 was sentenced to one year of hard labour — but adjoining parishes were not so lucky.
The rioters had done but small things.
Under the apparent leadership of John Foot, ‘as honest and quiet a man as any in the kingdom’, to quote the court records, they had smashed a threshing machine and burned a hayrick.
They had been vociferous to the effect that the ‘tithes should come down’ and the men should ‘have higher wages’.
There were other incidents of a minor nature, but in their wake the county was roused.
Special constables were enrolled, the 9th Lancers were called in, and the 3rd Dragoons.
The rioters took refuge in Highbrow Woods, but on 4 December moved into open country and were quietly taken.
The Crown and Nisi Prius courts sat, the men were tried and sentenced.
All petitions for leniency failed and the transportees were loaded onto the prison hulk York on 4 February 1831.
In Van  Dieman's Land, to which the men from Combsburgh were sent, some of their fellow rioters died of despair and others were permanently ‘stupefied with care and grief.’
Things did not improve in the county for a long time to come.
The wandering poor got short shrift — a burial is recorded in the Combsburgh register of an unknown man the neighbouring overseers had refused to receive when dying of cold.
The number of paupers continued to increase from 18,600 in the county in 1840 to 22,700 in 1845.
Over the many years preceding the period now being described the ownership of properties and land in Combsburgh had changed hands many times.
On occasion, distinguished local people such as Lord Brooks were landlords, at other times the owners were quite remote and took little interest in their holdings.
As a national newspaper reported in June 1851: ‘Some of the cottages in the parish, from continual neglect and the total absence of repair, are rendered insecure to that degree, that the inmates must be in a continual state of ‘fear and trembling'’.
One of these tenements, the property of the lord of the manor and situated in the little town, deserves particular attention.
A labourer and his family — in all eight persons — are the occupiers of this hovel, in which there is but one bedroom for their accommodation.
There is a small opening, about a foot square, in this apartment, which is unglazed and serves the purpose of a window.
The numerous cracks and fissures in the walls, which on every side present themselves, denote that at no very distant period this disgrace to the parish in which it stands will effectively remove itself.
The furniture in the lower room, which in every respect corresponds to the upper one, consists of one chair, of most antique and unsafe appearance; two tables, which may be referred to an equally remote period; and a rude wooden bench, about four feet long.
The rents of most of the houses in Combsburgh vary from 1/ — to 1/6d per week.’
It is now, perhaps, fitting to turn away from stories of poverty and squalor, for although sickness and misery abounded and early death a commonplace of everyday existence, there were, in fact, social developments of a positive nature in the parish.
One of the most significant was in the increase in formal schooling, particularly of the young.
If we examine the parish registers from 1763 onwards (from which date the principals and witnesses were required to ‘sign ‘their names) it will be apparent that up to 1830 more than half the bridegrooms could not write and nearly three-quarters of the brides were devoid of the skill.
Much the same went for the witnesses.
In 1832 Walter Henry built a Sunday School near the church, and in 1839 founded a day-school for boys while his wife began to teach young girls in the rectory.
Notes by the Rector about his establishments survive and we learn that in the first year of the new Sunday School there were 45 male and 32 female attendees.
The master was paid 2 pence per week and he had four unpaid helpers.
The day-school at its inception catered for 19 males and 13 females.
The figures were low enough, for other records (baptisms and deaths) suggest there were nearly 90 boys of school age in the parish and more than 100 girls.
As may be expected, most of the children attending school were the offspring of the more well-to-do traders and farmers, although exceptionally one or two daughters and sons of the labouring poor attended.
The remainder of these unfortunates were already contributing to family incomes as labourers, shop boys, glovers, house-servants, rag collectors and so on.
The notes kept by Walter Henry recorded in 1842 that, ‘Each child pays a penny a week [when attending school]to which the Rector adds a penny.
The Rector also pays the rates.
All the children learn to read, 22 to write, 23 arithmetic, 12 geography.
Four boys learn to knit, 13 girls learn to sew or make buttons.’
The Rector, his wife and their helpers were not the only folk in Combsburgh ministering to the spiritual and educational needs of the population, for Methodism was, by 1848, beginning to be a force in the parish.
Indeed, there is in the fabric of the present chapel a stone perpetuating the memory of Myles Emsworth, a local haberdasher, who in that year qualified as a lay preacher.
To begin with, the local followers of the Methodist creed met in each others homes, then, in the ‘hungry forties’ when their members numbered about a score, they undertook the building of a chapel to seat 120.
This lean-to structure lasted until about 1858, when the construction of the present chapel was put in hand, to be opened on Good Friday 1860.
The Methodist Sabbath School had been founded ten years before, and just one year after that date the ‘collections were liberal’.
A record shows, 'The inhabitants of the place said we never saw it in this fashion before; we were left to wander and none cared for our souls; but now a brighter day has dawned for us.’
This is a pleasantly worded and, no doubt, sincere statement, but must be balanced by the fact that Walter Henry was recording attendances in excess of 250 each Sunday in the parish church.
The Methodists were nonetheless going from strength to strength, and noting that they listened to ‘hearty, racy, cutting and unctuous speeches which surely would never be forgotten.’
By 1861 there were 13 Sabbath school teachers and they taught 51 children.
In previous chapters we have seen how the ancient manor of Combsburgh had been partially enclosed as early as the fourteenth century, especially in the areas close to the market town, and how the bulk of the field structure had been established by the late sixteenth century.
However, there remained in the 1850s several hundred acres of open land, particularly in the north of the parish near Dogbury Valent.
A number of Acts permitting enclosure were passed by parliament in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, and the Combsburgh Enclosure Award (the granting of fields to be enclosed by people who, up to that time, had common grazing rights) was, in 1858, based on an Act of 1836.
This legislation provided for the enclosure of certain types of open fields without private legislation, provided two-thirds of the interested parties agreed.
The Combsburgh award was recorded in a document of 16 April 1858, engrossed on parchment and now in the keeping of the county archivist.
All the folk having grazing rights according to the poor rate assessment of 1833 received their apportioned share of the fields, ‘due consideration being given to the public carriage roads, drift ways and public halter paths or bridle ways through and over the [land]divided and enclosed.’
So it thus came about that the fields, meadows, pastures and arable acres of Combsburgh were finally taken in from the waste which had existed for millenia.
The parish geographical and morphological infrastructure was complete.
The changes which have since occurred have at worst been cosmetic, and at best commercial.
The year 1860 was, in effect, the end of a difficult time for Combsburgh.
The years covered by this present chapter were broadly sad ones, so it is, for this author, a pleasure to be able to end on something of a light-hearted note.
A recently discovered ‘memoir’ of an old bedridden resident has, for December 1860, the following: ‘In an old house that was next to Mr Wagoner's shop near the Red Lion there lived a man by the name of C…, who had been a gentleman's servant, but had lost his character and situation and was very lazy.
One day he stole a sheep from a stall in the market.
The constable traced the sheep to his house and found it hung up and dressed in his stable.
He got five or seven years in gaol.
Also one T…
R…stole a cow and drove it to a distant market for sale.
From this, Combsburgh men of that generation got a bad name for sheep stealing and cattle lifting and men from the next parish retaliated on them by nicknaming them Baa-Lambs.’
The next parish was, in fact, Higher Piddle, and we may wonder what their men were called.