

Youth Organizations: Organizing Boys and ‘Making Men’
The purpose of this chapter is not to provide a detailed account of youth organizations, as their histories are easily available elsewhere.
Instead the intention is to describe a few of the salient features of the more relevant groups in order to show something of the motivations and workings of the voluntary youth movement prior to the introduction of collectivist measures after 1900, and to suggest why the ‘boy labour’ reformers were eager to incorporate several aspects of the movement's practice and ideology within those policies.
It is important to stress that the differences between, on the one side, the personnel of the brigades, Scouts, and clubs and, on the other, the reformers, should not be exaggerated, if only because many of the latter were also active in one or more of the organizations.
Nevertheless, the fact that the youth problem was being redefined in the early 1900s, led to the advocacy of new remedies which meant that the voluntary sector found itself regarded as only one part of the solution, rather than the whole solution.
For about twenty-five years or more prior to the Poor Law Commission designating ‘boy labour’ a social problem, several attempts had been made to deal with the youth question by enrolling older children and young adolescents in a socially conservative youth movement, whose main features were discipline, religion, and organized leisure.
The movement was enormously diversified, but there were three broad groupings which dominated this particular phase and area of the age and class relationship: the uniformed brigades, representing different religious denominations; the clubs, which had varied origins; and the Scouts.
The youth work practice which began to emerge in the 1870s and 1880s built upon a long tradition of mainly religious charitable activity among young people, usually in connection with Sunday schools, temperance societies and the Band of Hope.
One of the most influential mid-century organizations was the Young Men's Christian Association (YMCA), 1844, whose members tended to be respectable workers in their late teens and twenties, employed in the retail and clerical professions.
From about the mid-1870s the YMCA made a conscious effort to recruit more adolescent and working-class members, and extended its interests to include additional recreational and sporting facilities.
In this respect the Association was an important influence on later youth workers who saw that a combination of religion, recreation and welfare could capture the allegiance of members, and thus provide numerous opportunities for their social education.
It is certainly not without significance that the Association always maintained a link with the new youth movement by aligning itself with the Boys' Brigade and playing an active role in the formation of the Scouts.
There is little doubt that the principal influence on those who  worked among children and adolescents (and little distinction was made between the two) was organized religion, and, therefore, they were primarily concerned with temperance propaganda, opposition to secularism, the protection of girls and women away from home and, directly and indirectly, with sustaining the Christian family.
The new youth movement of the 1880s shared many of these concerns in varying degrees, but it was motivated by several other ambitions which included keeping boys ‘off the streets’, actively teaching the value of discipline, spreading the public school esprit de corps , and generally advocating the intangible virtues of ‘character’.
In each of the new groups, religious belief and church attendance continued to be encouraged, but this was no longer the principal aim of the movement as a whole.
THE UNIFORMED YOUTH MOVEMENT
The new youth movement found its most dramatic expression in the religious brigades, the first of which was the Boys' Brigade (BB), founded by William Smith in Glasgow in 1883, followed by the Church Lads' Brigade (CLB) in 1891, and the Boys' Life Brigade (BLB) in 1899.
Throughout the 1880s the Cadet Corps developed among working-class boys (having started in public schools), and in 1908–9 the non-denominational Scouts first appeared in substantial numbers.
The religious and philanthropic development of Smith is well known, in particular his background as a missionary in the city and his membership of the YMCA and the Volunteer Force.
But it was his experience as a Sunday-school teacher which left him wondering how discipline could be maintained with older boys and how they could be kept in touch with the Church once they became wage-earners and left the Sunday school.
One solution was to provide an organization for the 13–17 age-group, such as the Working Boys' Brigades formed in the 1860s, and the Glasgow Foundry Boys' Religious Society.
Undoubtedly the loss of so many young workers from the  Church was the most significant factor in the immediate origins of the Brigade.
As one of the first members recalled, ‘When we reached thirteen most of us felt we were too big for the Sunday School, and there was a gap of a few years until we were able to join the YMCA at seventeen…
During that gap period, many working-class boys ran wild, became hooligans and street-corner loafers.’
The BB was formed, wrote Smith, because of the need ‘to improve the discipline of the Sunday School; to hold and interest the older boys, and to reach them and influence them, not only on Sunday, but all through the week’.
Smith looked to the discipline which he encountered in the Volunteer Force to be put to good use, while the programme of uniform, bands, drill, camps, recreation rooms, and religious instruction was intended to attract young adolescents so that their leisure time might be ‘organized’.
The declared aim of the BB was ‘The advancement of Christ's Kingdom among Boys and the promotion of habits of Obedience, Reverence, Discipline, Self-respect, and all that tends towards a true Christian manliness’.
Smith, who summed up the philosophy as one of ‘Discipline and Religion’, hoped that by emphasizing masculinity and the becoming of ‘Christian men’, the boys would come to see the ‘manliness of Christianity’ and that this would counter their tendency to regard it as ‘effeminate and weak’, an idea which seemed to be too popular.
The concept of  ‘manliness, of course was derived from public-school culture, which also inspired Smith to bind ‘the boys together and create an esprit de corps that would make them proud of their company, jealous of its honour, ashamed to do anything to disgrace it, and prepared to make any sacrifice rather than be dismissed from it’.
The ambition was to surround the youth with ‘continued influence for good’ at a critical time of his life: ‘We try to make him feel that there is no part of his life that is beyond the range of God's love, and that everything should be done in God's sight.’
In the attempt to provide good influences, officers were advised to cultivate personal contacts: to become friends with the boys, to invite them home for tea and to visit their homes; they were to encourage their charges to have confidence in them and never to break faith; above all, they were told, never ‘miss an opportunity of strengthening your hold over them’.
If discipline and religion were central to the BB philosophy, so too was friendship — it was the Trojan horse in which ‘influence’ hid, awaiting its opportunity.
One reason why officers were instructed to be friendly disciplinarians is that Smith, once again echoing public-school sentiments, consciously strove to prolong boyhood for as long as possible.
‘Boys’, he said, ‘ought to be boys’ and nothing else.
‘We don't attempt to put old heads on young shoulders.’
This was a rejection of Arnold's view that the change from ‘childhood to manhood…ought to be hastened’ in favour of that expressed by Warden Sewell of Radley College: ‘How I dread  mannikizing a boy…
No, keep boys boys — children children — young men young men.’
The Brigade was probably the first youth group to emphasize the specific nature of ‘boyhood’ and to develop a programme and a philosophy designed for this stage of life.
The BB had many imitators of which the most numerically significant was the CLB and the non-military BLB.
The CLB, founded by W. M. Gee, an ex-Volunteer officer and secretary of the Junior Branch of the Church of England Temperance Society, saw itself as an Anglican institution for the ‘care and training of lads in Religion, Morals and Physique’ during the important years prior to manhood.
In its publications, it claimed to be ‘one of England's Great Public Schools’; it was ‘the ‘public school’ of the sons of the poor, where, for a short time, they are trained in those qualities which make Public School boys so healthy,esprit de corps , obedience, humility, a sense of responsibility, honour and truthfulness’.
Although the commitment to religion was stressed from time to time, often in response to the charge of militarism, the CLB always seemed to emphasize matters of social discipline and conformity.
If the BB was intent upon creating Christian men and displaying the manliness of Christianity, its Anglican counterpart wished to create conservative and patriotic Christian men.
The political ambitions of the CLB can be deduced from its interpretation of the Edwardian crisis: ‘At so critical a period in British history as the present, when there is so great and unfortunate a tendency to slackness, ease, and carelessness as to religion, morals, and work, when there is so great a craving for pleasure's sake, when so serious a social problem as the great army of the unfit and unemployed has become a national scandal and a public danger’, it was necessary to provide men of the future with ‘that spirit of self-denial, self-control and definiteness of righteous purpose’ which had put Britain in the lead among nations.
The Brigade claimed that it could offer both the spirit and the purpose because it ‘disciplines and controls our lads…tames flippancy, quells impertinence, promotes chivalry, encourages reverence, teaches ready obedience to all properly constituted authority, and insists upon pure and clean English and temperance in all things’.
Of all the uniformed organizations, the Boys' Life Brigade  founded in Nottingham by the Revd John Brown Paton, was the most distinctive in so far as it appeared to be non-military, committed as it was to the principles of life-saving, even though it had a BB-style uniform and a military command structure.
Paton shared Smith's belief that young people should be kept under the influence of the Church and that they required discipline and order.
However, he was much more explicit in his references to the nature of ‘adolescence’, referring to it as the age of ‘terrible peril’ which had to be responded to; the ‘wayward forces’had to be ‘rightly directed’, so that the ‘new instincts and impulses, the new faculties and powers…shall be rightly exercised and trained, and that protection shall be given as far as possible against the temptations to which it is exposed’.
Adolescence was to receive a suitable…[and]…spiritual education from the application of Christianity to ‘common life’.
In practice this included compulsory attendance at either company Bible class or Sunday school, but the unique feature of the BLB was its adherence to life-saving drills (fire, water, and stretcher), with an emphasis on gymnastics, swimming, first-aid and hygiene, in order to ‘prepare for helpful service to others’, while simultaneously training the body in ‘healthful vigour’ and ‘moral discipline’.
The most militaristic of all the uniformed groups was the Cadet Corps.
The Corps originated in 1859 when the Volunteer Movement was formed as a result of the panic over the threat of a French invasion.
By the 1870s several public schools had their own cadet or rifle corps, though within the schools it was not until the Boer War that they achieved real popularity.
In the 1880s, however, working-class boys began to  be recruited, largely through clubs associated with University Settlement Houses and Public School Missions.
In common with the CLB the cadets portrayed themselves as offering a substitute public-school environment in which the boy would ‘learn the duty and dignity of obedience…get a sense of corporate life and civic duty [and]learn to honour the power of endurance and effort’.
These virtues were contrasted by Octavia Hill, the housing reformer and champion of the cadet principle, with the ‘ill educated, dirty, quarrelsome, drunken, improvident, unrefined, possibly dishonest, possibly vicious’ environment from which the cadets were to be recruited.
Once the problem of ‘boy labour’ found its way into middle-class consciousness, recreation and religion were deemed to be insufficient for coping with this new and alarming aspect of the youth question.
At the same time as reformers, investigators, and social administrators were beginning to appreciate its complexity, a new uniformed group appeared which sought to mobilize boys aged between 11 and 18 with a programme of outdoor activities and a strong sense of patriotism and moral purpose.
The story of the Scouts is too familiar to require further repetition, except in so far as some acknowledgement of the movement is worthwhile in order to complete this description of the range of voluntary youth provision in the period.
Whereas the late nineteenth-century organizations had seen themselves as  combating indiscipline, irreligion, immorality, and social neglect of their members, the Scout movement looked to encourage certain positive values necessary for national and imperial security.
It is not quite time to say that by 1914, ‘Ideologies of national purpose, often couched in  Social Darwinist terms of racial survival, had supplanted earlier religious and moral justifications, though the latter were still very much a part of public rhetoric.’
If Scouting was about imperialism and militarism, it was also about ‘citizenship’— that repository of a variety of moral precepts.
In this respect, as the discussion on continuation schools and citizenship will show, the ideological stance of the movement reflected the larger external debate among educationalists, philosophers, social scientists, and politicians.
The basic text was Scouting for Boys , although the clue to its meaning was in the subtitle:A Handbook for Instruction in Good Citizenship .
In choosing the full title, Baden-Powell was responding to the already well-established interest in civics manifested in classroom instruction, the influence of philosophical idealism in educational circles, the propaganda of the Moral Instruction League and to his association with R. B. Haldane, the War Minister, who was also a professional philosopher and a leading educational theorist.
In his search for the most effective approach to the training of boys, Baden-Powell made an extensive study of past and present methods.
What emerged was a scheme that sought the development of ‘character’, partly through the expectation of certain standards of behaviour (a kind of esprit de corps ), and partly through doing (activities).
The importance of the latter was conveyed in the opening chapters dealing with ‘camping, camp life, tracking, woodcraft, or, knowledge of animals and nature, saving life, or how to deal with accidents’, which were followed by chapters with advice and exhortation: ‘Endurance  for Scouts, or how to be strong’, ‘Chivalry of the Knights’ and finally, ‘Patriotism, or our Duties as Citizens’.
The boys were to be given a certain amount of trust in their activities so that they might have the opportunity to make themselves moral, which in turn could help them become good and valuable members of the community.
The Scout Law was, after all, ‘a statement of a moral condition’.
Consequently, the emphasis on ‘doing’ fitted in with the Idealist view that proper citizenship required purposeful, moral actions.
It is this sentiment, as much as any exaggerated nationalism, which explains Baden-Powell's famous objection to the passivity of the working-class football crowd, when he compared football to Roman circuses.
The Scout movement was obviously a conservative organization, conformist and profoundly respectful of properly designated authority.
This is manifestly evident in the often quoted passage from a ‘Scout's duty as a Citizen’ which warned:
A house divided against itself cannot stand…
Remember, whether rich or poor…you are all Britons in the first place…
If you are divided among yourselves you are doing harm to your country.
You must sink your differences…,
We have got, each one of us, to take our place as we find it in this world and make the best of it, and pull together with the others around us…
Don't think of yourself, but think of your country and your employers.
Self-sacrifice pays all round.
Despite the crudity of this message, it was extremely popular as a rallying cry because, in calling for shared community values, it so neatly combined Liberal and Conservative fears about the threat from urban democracy.
Loyalty, service, and duty were exactly the values which the ‘boy labour’ reformers sought to impress upon young workers, and as many of the reformers were also active, or had been active in one or more of  the youth groups, they were sympathetic to the objectives of the Scout movement.
This is not to say that they thought the movement could solve the boy labour problem, or the youth problem in general, but its ideas and its personnel would be useful in sustaining scientific collectivism.
There is surely a certain irony in the fact that such a conservative movement should have been enlisted in the service of an essentially liberal aspiration.
THE CLUB MOVEMENT
The Origins
The official history of the movement sees it as the outgrowth of ‘homes and refuges for the destitute and institutes opened in the evenings with a mainly educational purpose in view’.
The institutes which began to open in London in the late 1850s appear to have recruited from among the lower-middle class, though Waldo McGillicuddy Eagar, a young Edwardian club worker (later to be a leading figure in the National Association of Boys' Clubs) claimed that ‘as anxiety about the working classes was intensified, some Youths’ Institutes reached down from the middle classes to the poor, and increasingly diluted their formal educational programmes with recreational activities.
This was partly due to the unattractiveness of education classes and partly to the pervasive influence of the public-school obsession with games.
Whatever the cause, many institutes began to drop the word from their title, and turned themselves into clubs.
The distinction between the recreational and the educational establishments was apparent when the Revd Daniel Elsdale opened what has been called the first proper boys' club in the poorer area of his Kennington parish in 1872, and the following year a ‘Youth's Institute’ in the more middle-class district.
If the origins of clubs are entangled in the intricate web of mid-Victorian religious philanthropy, the lines of development near the end of the century are much easier to discern.
The  main sources for the movement as it developed between 1880 and the early 1900s, were University Settlement Houses, Public School Missions, the ‘Independents’, and the motley collection of local parish clubs and others, many of which were affiliated to larger parent organizations, such as the Girls' Friendly Society, BB, YMCA, the Wesley Guild of Youth, and the Army Cadets.
While the religious influence continued to be a factor, the new movement was not simply an extension of the evangelical impulse; it involved that impulse, but more besides.
The clubs were interested in what was termed ‘wholesome recreation’ and in keeping boys and girls ‘off the streets’, and they expressed their concern through a social rather than a religious ethos, placing far less emphasis on Church and Bible, preferring instead to emphasize the ‘making of men’(albeit Christian men).
The question arises, however, as to why clubs rapidly expanded nationally throughout the 1880s and 1890s.
The immediate answer requires us to remind ourselves of the principles governing the Settlement Movement, since the club spirit was essentially that of the settlement.
It is well known that the movement was part of a complex colonizing process which began in the early 1880s in the East End of London, whereby members of the upper classes lived among the poor, providing them with a variety of educational, recreational, and welfare services.
The intention of the ‘residents’ was to familiarize themselves with sections of the working class, to develop a sense of contact, both physical and spiritual, between rich and poor.
The movement owed its existence in part to an amalgam of anxieties specific to the London crisis of the 1860s, in particular to what Gareth Stedman Jones has called ‘The Deformation of the Gift’, that is, the emergence of a gulf between the classes which had not only destroyed the ‘gift relationship’ involving elements of ‘prestige, subordination and obligation’, but was also fundamentally responsible  for the ‘demoralization’of the poor.
In 1883 Canon Barnett, Warden of Toynbee Hall, the first settlement house, expressed the movement's philosophy:
Inquiries into social conditions lead generally to one conclusion.
They show that little can be done for, which is not done with the people.
It is the poverty of their own life which makes the poor content to inhabit ‘unthinkable’ houses…which makes so many careless of cleanliness, listless about the unhealthy condition of their workshops, and heedless of anything beyond the enjoyment of a moment's excitement…
Such poverty of life can best be removed by contact with those who possess the means of higher life.
Friendship is the channel by which the knowledge — the joys — the faith — the hope which belong to one class may pass to all classes.
Contact between the classes was vital if political and social harmony were to prevail; as Barnett continued:
It is distance that makes friendship between classes almost impossible, and therefore, residence among the poor is suggested as a simple way in which Oxford men may serve their generation.
By sharing their fuller lives and riper thoughts with the poor they will destroy the worst evil of poverty.
They will also learn the thought of the majority — the opinion of the English nation — and they will do something to weld Classes into Society.
Here Barnett is opening up a whole store of perceptions, aims, and criticisms which marked out important features of the class relationship in the period (and which were also relevant to age relations), such as the alleged pauperization of self-respect among the poor; their grasping of excitement; and the superiority of middle-class culture which made contact between the classes so crucial.
The same kind of critique has already been described in relation to the adolescent ‘personality’ and to the role played by habits and principles in working-class life.
Similarly, the significance of friendship as a means of exercising influence was appreciated by youth workers, as it would be after 1910 in the working out of the  juvenile labour exchange, vocational guidance and after-care schemes.
If the crisis of the 1860s provided the original impetus for the settlements, the events of the 1880s made colonization even more necessary.
As the first report of Oxford House, run by Keble Anglicans, declared in thought similar to that of Barnett:
Colonisation by the well-to-do seems indeed the true solution…for the problem is, how to make the masses realise their spiritual and social solidarity with the rest of the capital and of the kingdom: how to revive their sense of citizenship, with its privileges which they have lost, and its responsibilities which they have forgotten.
Among these privileges should be education, rational amusement and social intercourse; and these can best be supplied by local Clubs, with their various guilds, classes and societies.
Among the duties…which require to be revived, thrift and prudence are pre-eminent; and thrift and prudence can only be taught by men who will associate with the people and thus induce them to face the elementary laws of economy.
The clubs could attempt the task, and indeed their origins include the desire on the part of settlement workers to preach the virtues of citizenship, just as Scouting did more than twenty years later.
In many respects the Public School Missions, widely regarded as ‘civilizing’ and ‘Christianizing’the community, paralleled the settlements, with an ostentatious display of social conscience and religious conviction.
Eton, Harrow, Winchester, Marlborough, Rugby, Clifton, Haileybury, Shrewsbury, Wellington, and Charterhouse established clubs as part of their mission work in London, Swindon, Birmingham, Liverpool, Bristol, and Portsmouth.
School Mission had first been conceived by Edward Thring, headmaster of Uppingham, but it was Eton which opened the first club in 1880, followed by Harrow in 1883.
The early mood of the schools' social commitment was best expressed by Montague Butler, headmaster of Harrow, when, holding a copy of the revelatory The Bitter Cry of Outcast London in his hand while delivering a sermon in Oxford, he called out:
God grant that it may not startle only to be read and pondered by thoughtful brains as well as by feeling hearts…
God grant that here in this great home of eager thought and enlightened action and generous friendship the bitter cry of outcast London may never be intrusive or uninteresting but that year by year her choicest sons may be arrested by it.
By the 1890s, however, it seems that the wave of public-school interest in clubs had passed, and there developed ‘an intensification of the snobbery which had always been latent in them, and of the mere athleticism which caricatured the mens sana in corpore sano tag’.
Nevertheless, among the middle class, there were few institutions so revered as the schools, and their influence in clubs was held to be of great consequence as reformers regularly called for public-school men to come forward to work in the clubs.
In 1908 Russell wrote of how the club movement sought to emulate the schools, ‘the special pride of the country’.
The significance of this, he said,
may be appreciated when we reflect that if our rulers in the nineteenth century were educated at Eton, our rulers of the twentieth century are being educated in the elementary schools.
If it is largely the public-school spirit which has made England great in the past, any means by which a similar spirit may be fostered in the boys who leave the elementary schools at the very age when the sons of the  monied classes are entering on the most valuable years of their school career, is of incalculable importance.
Aims
In his classic manual,Working Lads' Clubs , Russell argued that the principal aim of clubs was ‘to provide youths of the poorer classes with an opportunity of becoming happier, healthier, and better citizens than they are likely to become if they spend their leisure in loafing about the streets’.
If working-class youths were to achieve their ‘fullest possible development’, then attendance at the club was essential.
But there were differences as to how best the opportunity could be given to the young people.
Some clubs pursued their aim by focusing on recreation, physical exercise, and outdoor games; some were more concerned with general academic education; others with religious instruction; while many tried to offer varied programmes.
Whatever the differences between them, however, those who were not attached to religious organizations saw sport and recreation as the ‘first reasons’ for their existence.
These reasons secured agreement among club workers because they offered an immediate, convenient, and popular response to what was universally seen as the major problem: how to keep adolescents, especially the young ones, ‘off the streets’.
We have seen how ‘the street’ and ‘the city’played important roles in middle-class demonology, so it is easy to understand why youth workers sought to provide counter-attractions to them, believing as they did that ‘there is nothing worth doing to be done there’.
But it would be a superficial reading of club ideology to view the movement simply in terms of its ‘rescue’ work, for though this may have been so in the early days, it was never the sole aim which would imply a passivity hardly reconcilable with the ambitions of the  founders of clubs, or with that of the missions and settlement houses.
While rescue was the initial objective, it was soon surpassed by the desire to reclaim and re-educate.
After all, club life was intended to serve as a practical course in citizenship.
Clubs, Russell wrote, had three main interests: recreation, education, and religion.
Boys, he said, needed ‘excitement’, and if they could not get it by legitimate ways then they would ‘seek it in mischief and vice’.
The answer to this problem lay in healthy recreation, which meant games, swimming, gymnastics, boxing, indoor games, and, in certain clubs, cycling and country walks.
The notion of education was to be interpreted in the widest sense of the word to include physical, moral, and mental training.
Religion was also to be given a broad interpretation.
Some of the older clubs were narrowly evangelical, but Russell wanted to see religion used ‘to comprehend all the impalpable influences which give a club a grip on its boys and tend to awaken their higher nature or further their spiritual development’.
‘Real religion’, he said, was concerned with ‘the quest of the Highest, the practical doing of good, the helping of the weaker, and the unselfish work done for others’.
Whatever the rhetoric behind these sentiments, they reflected precepts of duty and service, and were antipathetic to notions of merely keeping boys off the streets.
Another aim, often hinted at, but rarely stated explicitly, was to counter the threat of early sexual and marital relationships — to help the young people ‘when they are having a very hard time, physically and often morally’.
It was generally agreed that ‘One great good of the lads’ club is to fill their lives with interests and excitements, so as to prevent premature  love-making, the connections, and even the marriages'.
Girls were alleged to have tendencies towards ‘flirtation’, and were usually seen as a threat to the healthy development of the boy.
At best they were regarded as a distraction, if not a danger; the assumption being that as they did not smoke or play outdoor games, ‘they devote themselves…to inducing lads to leave humming-tops and marbles, and cleave only to them’.
Maude Stanley, for example, a founder of girls' clubs, voiced the wider social anxiety about the role of girls in the alleged deterioration of the race and the threat of over-population among the working class.
Furthermore social surveys had shown that early marriage, by unskilled workers could lead to poverty and destitution.
Reformers believed that one way of preventing these marriages was to provide clubs with attractive and organized recreational facilities in the hope that ‘the girl who has her clubs will not need the idle companionship of lads’.
Unsurprisingly, as girls were always portrayed as sweethearts, and as future wives and mothers, Russell could write:
it is largely a waste of work and energy to train the boys — if the girls are left uncared for and untaught.
Far more than is suspected are inefficient wives responsible for the misery of many back-street homes, and it is perhaps more than a coincidence that some of the Lancashire towns with the worst repute for their high rate of infant mortality have no girls' club within their areas.
The extent to which contemporaries really believed that clubs affected the infant mortality rate is difficult to gauge, though in club circles such a proposition may well have been tenable.
However, it was certainly the case that girls (like their mothers) were seen as ‘helpers’ and ‘guides’to men and to families, and the significance of the club was that it could show them how to overcome their ‘understandable selfishness’and reveal ‘the beauty of unselfish devotion to others’.
All this helps to explain why founders and managers were usually opposed to a mixed membership.
Generally speaking, the movement strove to develop discipline, obedience, self-control, and self-respect, which were the essentials of ‘character’.
Most founders and managers felt that discipline was the first step on the road to all kinds of mental, moral, and physical improvement.
Thus it was looked on as ‘the all important matter’.
Maude Stanley was only expressing a truism, as far as respectable society was concerned, when she advised that in starting a club ‘discipline and order are the first requisites’.
Members were required to realize that ‘rules have to be obeyed and that obedience is a necessary virtue’.
Russell devoted a whole chapter to the topic, where he argued in favour of both the narrow, imposed variety and the more important ‘constructive self-discipline’.
This emphasis on discipline, has to be seen in the context of the specific nature of the social critique of youth, and of working-class life in general, which focused on notions of chaos, irrationality, spontaneity, and so on .
Discipline was important, indeed essential, because in the widest sense of the word, it could open up a more ordered world.
There had to be some ‘element of order or discipline to contrast…with the undisciplined nature of the streets’.
But it was not just a question of the physical environment; discipline was also  integral to the control of the mental environment of individuals; it was part and parcel of self-respect, self-control and perseverance, as well as the ability to shape the nature of one's own existence.
And yet the process whereby the dutiful, rational, moral citizen could be developed was complex.
He or she could not be expected to emerge simply as the result of exposure to the properly approved values, though such exposure was crucial, hence the importance of suitable club workers, in particular those with a public-school background.
Of equal, if not greater, importance, however, was the personal contact bonded by friendship which all youth groups advocated between members and personnel.
As William Smith had understood, contact,— friendship,— influence,— were the means by which not only could the youth be rescued and disciplined, but also civilized.
In the words of the Head Missioner of the Birmingham Street Children's Union: ‘personal influence, the reaction of character on character, is the only effective force in social or religious reformation’.
Similarly, T. H. Pelham, the evangelical pioneer of youth work, and author of the very first club manual, urged on his readers the value of friendship, stressing that ‘Personal influence is one of the first conditions of success’.
But it was E.J. Urwick who most aptly summarized the approach to youth work:
The right man can produce almost as much impression on a boy in a month as he could on a man in a year, but he must first understand him…
He must know…not only the influences to which he may be made to respond, but those to which his nature is now day by day responding — the complex environment which…is the unconscious education of his body and mind and will.
‘Making men’, then, was an active process, the emphasis was on ‘the making’, the success of which depended on establishing a relationship that could bring about, through influence and example, a change in the boys' character.
Eagar claimed that the friendship was ‘uncalculating’, but, given the social and  political environment of the youth organizations, this is most unlikely.
YOUTH GROUPS AND THE PROBLEM OF BOY LABOUR
The organized youth movement can easily be identified as emerging from out of the economic and social crises commonly associated with the late Victorian period.
On the one hand these groups, which in some respects mark the bridge between the old and the new philanthropy, were the first to focus their attention directly on urban working-class (and in some instances lower-middle-class) youth, rather than on children and adolescents, or women and girls.
In this respect they are the forerunners of the juvenile labour exchanges with their affiliated services of vocational guidance and after-care.
On the other hand, unlike their predecessors, they were not advocates of single causes, such as temperance or even religious instruction, but instead sought to attract members with a varied programme which consciously mixed recreation with education, welfare, and sometimes church attendance, for a variety of reasons all of which rested on the specificity of youth in relation to age and to class.
Boy labour reformers disapproved neither of the youth movement in general, nor of its goal, which was the building of Christian character, driven by civic responsibility in search of class harmony.
By the early 1900s, however, the youth question was being redefined.
Many of those involved had reached the conclusion that the philanthropic provision of youth services was inadequate by itself for the task of tackling the economic, social, and what were coming to be regarded as educational problems concerning working-class adolescents.
Several factors had brought about this new attitude.
First, the settlement house policy of ‘neighbourliness’ was trenchantly criticized by young radicals such as George Lansbury and C. F. G. Masterman who saw such movements either as laboratories for ambitious young men or as having lost their initial enthusiasm.
Barnett's hope of ‘humanizing’ the working man  through friendship and influence alone, though still not completely redundant, looked somewhat antiquated by 1900.
Even so, that wave of philanthropically inspired work among boys and girls which began in the 1880s had exhausted itself a decade or more later, and despite the opening of new clubs and the formation of the Scouts, youth work no longer inspired the same missionary zeal.
Secondly, it is well known that the impact of the rediscovery of poverty in the 1880s helped to bring about a much more complex analysis of poverty and its causes, which in turn looked toward the State to begin to solve the problem.
Once youth was seen to figure in that problem, it became illogical to suppose that it could be kept separate from the collectivist response.
Thirdly, and more precisely, social scientists and youth workers themselves were increasingly aware of and worried by the ‘boy labour’ topic.
The range of essentially economic issues revealed by the ensuing debate was such that it was almost impossible to conceive of the solution being affected by either brigade or club.
Given this to be so, under the influence of the new analyses (of poverty and of the youth labour-market), it was appreciated that the critical features of the youth question were not only those relating to church attendance, unorganized leisure, absence of esprit de corps and, at the extreme end of the spectrum of anxiety, juvenile delinquency.
No one denied the importance of these factors, but it was now felt that others would have to be included.
Where the late Victorian perception of youth emphasized their social identity — religion, leisure, discipline, character — the Edwardian perception, while accepting the significance of the social (and elaborating upon it), in addition gave working-class youth an economic identity which was important in itself, and as a conditioning factor in the development of the citizen.
The change in attitude was perhaps most clearly evident in Studies of Boy Life in Our Cities , where Urwick and his collaborators saw the boy neither ‘as an amusing playmate nor as a vagrant from the ecclesiastical fold, but as the product of a still imperfect educational system and the embryo of the citizen who would decide the destiny of a still  inchoate democracy’.
In his concluding essay, Urwick wrote: The club  can catch him, but cannot discipline him, the Boys' Brigade can discipline him to a small extent, but cannot catch or keep him when he most needs it; the voluntary evening school can do neither.
Nothing short of a compulsory system in which both physical and mental training are combined, can hope to do both successfully.’
This criticism was in part a reflection of the call made by the Report of the Committee on Physical Deterioration for greater physical and mental education for adolescents, but it also pointed to the three main criticisms of clubs which were reiterated years later by Freeman: that they could only really provide amusement; that their positive educational value was small; and that they failed to reach the mass of boys.
None the less, it should be stressed that in the changed climate of the early twentieth century, there was no question of abandoning the youth organizations: that would have meant jettisoning the principle of voluntary action.
Moreover, several of the leading reformers, who were to become important administrators in local and national government agencies, were also prominent in the youth movement and had no wish to weaken it: Jackson, Russell, Paterson, and Norman Chamberlain.
(And Baden-Powell had been asked to become the first chairman of the Juvenile Organizations Committee, established by the Home Secretary, Herbert Samuel in 1916.)
There was, then, no intention of repudiating all the work of the clubs, brigades, and the Scouts.
It was true that in the 1880s youth work had meant philanthropy and religion, whereas in  the 1900s it was felt to be the responsibility of local education authorities, juvenile employment committees, after-care committees and part-time day continuation classes in liberal and vocational studies.
However, not only were these statutory bodies to work with the voluntary sector, but much of the day-to-day running of the new ‘services’ would continue to rely on volunteers from the youth groups, for their time and expertise were essential if the new schemes were to be viable.
In the area of youth policy, as in many other areas of welfare, the philanthropic tradition was incorporated into the social service state which was emerging from the Liberal reform programme.
Rites of Passage: Origin of the Youth Employment Service
The means by which school-leavers made the transition from school to full-time wage-earning have been described, as have the criticisms of reformers who dubbed it ‘haphazard’.
i Once it became obvious that youth organizations could not solve the ‘boy labour problem’, either socially or economically, the question arose as to what needed to be done.
The idea of a youth employment service, however, did not figure prominently as a solution to the problem, probably because social scientists did not begin to examine the possibilities of labour exchanges until after 1905.
The fact that very little concerted thought had been given to organizing the juvenile labour-market does not mean that no action had been taken at the local level by schools, skilled employment committees, and several or more local education authorities.
In many respects, between them these bodies, especially the Apprenticeship and Skilled Employment Association (ASEA), pioneered the basic elements of the service as it was to develop, namely, vocational guidance, registration and placement, and after-care.
Furthermore, in forging a connection between juvenile employment and education, they helped to portray the transition as essentially an educational rather than a trade process.
This had two important consequences.
First, it kept the school-leaver within the realms of dependence, emphasizing the need for guidance and employment advice; and, secondly, it led to the eruption of a lively dispute between the Board of Education and the Board of Trade over which department should have final authority for adolescent workers in the administration of the Labour Exchanges Act 1909.
However, before describing the dispute and the practices of the two main schemes to emerge  out of the compromise, it will be useful to look more closely at the work of the ASEA which, in its legacy to the service, was the most influential of all the voluntary agencies.
THE APPRENTICESHIP AND SKILLED EMPLOYMENT ASSOCIATION
Apprenticeship and skilled employment committees of one sort or another had existed in London since the 1860s and 1870s when the Jewish Board of Guardians decided to organize apprenticeship schemes for their own young workers.
Several years later this example led to the establishment of an Association for Befriending Boys, followed in 1906 by the Lads' Employment Committee, though neither was exclusively concerned with formal apprenticeships.
There is some confusion as to the exact origins of the first Apprenticeship and Skilled Employment Committee, but it probably derived from the activities of the Charity Organization Society (COS) in assisting women and girls to find skilled occupations.
A number of COS district branches soon began to form themselves into separate committees for this purpose, and in 1902 a Central Industrial Bureau was opened which, under pressure from increased applications from boys as well as girls, addressed itself to both sexes.
Within a few years it had evolved into the ASEA, and by 1909 there were seventeen affiliated committees in London and ten in the provinces.
The main objectives of the ASEA were to prevent elementary school-leavers from ‘drifting into unskilled occupations, and later on into unemployment’; and to promote industrial training through ‘apprenticeships and other methods’, usually trade schools and technical education classes.
In addition, and just as important, it sought to co-ordinate and supplement information from local committees concerning industrial intelligence and vacancies through meetings, conferences, and literature.
The critical work, however, was performed by the local committees with their voluntary membership, whose aims included recruiting applications from juveniles for assistance in obtaining apprenticed positions, compiling a register of suitable vacancies and employers, keeping themselves informed about the condition of local trades, and supervising the observation of indenture regulations by both apprentices and employers.
But by far the most important duties were to offer vocational guidance to prospective apprentices, to negotiate with employers on their behalf, and to encourage ‘thrift among the parents’ so that they could save towards the cost of the premiums.
From their earliest days the local groups relied upon the cooperation of schools and education authorities, and to a lesser extent club workers, to supply them with the necessary information concerning pupils who were about to leave school.
The London County Council (LCC), for example, drew the attention of head teachers to the existence of the ASEA, and by 1909 the Council was trying to establish a formal liaison between local branches and its own reconstituted Children's Care Committees.
The usual procedure was for sympathetic teachers to provide branches in their areas with lists of school-leavers each of whom was then interviewed at home with his or her parents by a ‘visitor’ who discussed the general employment situation with them, urging the importance of continued education and inviting the parents to make a formal application to the committee for assistance.
If the visitor was  unsuccessful, influences were brought to bear from other quarters, such as the clergy, the district visitor, or some other agency with knowledge of the family.
It seemed, however, that an increasing number of juveniles, with the permission of their parents, were being referred directly to the ASEA committees by teachers, club managers, clergymen, and welfare workers.
Many were also referred by elder brothers and sisters or friends who had already been placed.
When parents applied for assistance they were asked to provide general information about the family, including occupations, earnings, rent, and size of accommodation.
At the same time, teachers were asked to make out a special report card on the child, itemizing health, academic standard, character, ability, and what they considered would be a suitable employment.
The next step was to enter all the details on a single form to which were attached any other relevant papers.
These were then filed and added to with frequent reports, letters, and documents.
The final phase in the procedure involved giving parents advice about prospective job opportunities for their children, and this was considered to be the most difficult part of the work as it meant balancing all the different factors in an attempt to situate the best applicant in the best position.
Once parental approval had been obtained, the committee entered into negotiations with employer and parents and on reaching a satisfactory agreement, the young person might be taken on a month's trial.
While the ASEA emphasized vocational guidance and suitable placement, it was equally concerned with after-care  supervision, usually until the youth was aged 17 or 18.
Each committee appointed a member who acted as a ‘guardian’ whose main responsibilities were to supervise the working of the indentures, to make monthly visits to the home, and to be ‘on friendly terms’with parents and child.
After-care was considered necessary in order to ease the employer-employee relationship and because it added ‘the personal touch which is the breadth of life to this and every form of charitable effort’.
When the committee system of the ASEA is considered as a whole, it is apparent that members were consciously operating an employment policy based upon casework, the practice most conspicuously associated with the COS, which, given the origins of the Association, is by no means unexpected.
The renowned original intention of the COS was to organize charity, but it soon found itself investigating individual cases, and as a result developed a casework methodology, the fundamentals of which were home-visiting, comprehensive and in-depth interviewing, written records, committee discussions, emphasis on ‘character’ as well as circumstances, preservation of family respectability, and, generally applicable, a ‘carefully specified procedure’.
Personal contact and visits to the homes of the poor and the sick were part of a long-established visiting tradition, but the COS fused this with casework to produce a quite distinctive practice.
And after the 1880s the renewed emphasis throughout philanthropic work on the ‘personal’ relationship between the classes gave these contacts a special significance in terms of influencing the ‘character’of parents and their adolescent children.
In theory, the committees were to provide opportunities for skilled and apprenticed employment, though members  admitted that formal apprenticeship, at least, was not always possible, partly because it appeared to many observers that machines had eradicated a number of handicrafts, turning the worker into a ‘machine-tending artisan’, and partly because ‘skill’ was a relative concept, demanding different degrees of training.
Consequently, the ‘visitors’ and ‘guardians’usually settled for any occupation that required ‘some training which offered a prospect of continuous employment, and which fulfils the other desirable conditions’.
Even so, the machine factor remained an important consideration, in particular what was seen as the growing practice of instructing boys in a single process.
Thus while the committees hoped their work would act as an antidote to the apparent tendency ‘to reduce workpeople to the mental condition of animated machines’, they also sought to encourage an all-round improvement in efficiency and a training designed to develop ‘the habit of regular industry…a healthy growth in mind and body’, the inculcation of thrift, and the ever popular ‘discipline’.
Clearly, more than simple apprenticeship is at issue here.
The clue to the ambitions of the ASEA is to be found in the plea that the training of youths was to be ‘a continuance of their education’, and an aspect of the committees' work that ‘should ever be borne in mind’.
This reiterated the belief, common among all those concerned with the youth question, that ‘adolescence’ should be regarded as a period of education, supervision, control, and guidance.
It was also an attempt, in certain respects a successful attempt (at least in terms of creating a social image), to project the early years of full-time wage-earning as an ‘apprenticeship’ to an approved form of adulthood.
However, these reformers found, just as others would find within the framework of the national labour exchange system after 1910, that the economic reality of the free market in labour was always the more influential factor.
Although widely admired, the ASEA was by no means without its critics, and considerable doubt was expressed as to whether it offered a practical answer to the problem of boy labour.
The small scale of its activities was always mentioned: it was estimated that of the 30,000 boys who annually left London elementary schools, not more than 2% came under its influence and that of similar organizations.
Other major weaknesses were said to be the emphasis on skilled employment, of either the apprenticed or respectable kind, and the individualist approach to the problem.
The committees could find ‘a nice place for a nice boy’, wrote Bray, but the problem remained untouched, in part because apprenticeship alone was no solution.
And Dearle claimed that in addition to the small scale of their work and the inexperience of their members, the committees also suffered from a difficulty in gaining the support of employers, especially in persuading them to grant the young worker time off for further education.
Too much attention, he added, was given to obtaining indentures and too little to the quality of the training.
The most trenchant criticisms came from Urwick, who argued that the ASEA simply did not understand the workings of the labour-market.
The fact was, he said, the market wanted boy labour for occupations ‘for which there is a relatively low demand for adult labour’.
So boys flocked to take up these jobs which were harmful to their long-term interests and, therefore, philanthropists felt moved to interfere by ‘choking off’ the juvenile supply and by turning juvenile labourers into skilled workers.
In Urwick's view, those who sought to turn every boy into an apprentice wished to construct an ‘ideal market’ where the demand was for skilled labour.
This ignored, or misunderstood, the regular complaint of employers about the lack of good workmen, which did not mean they required  ‘skilled’ workers, who were always available; what they required were efficient workers.
The real need was for ‘efficient labourers and factory workers by the million and for ‘efficient’ skilled workers by the thousand'.
In the present situation, the ASEA could never be a remedy for the ‘general wastefulness of industry ‘; instead, its proper role was in helping employers to get the right kind of boy, and boys to find the right kind of employer and to ensure that training was effective, both in terms of the workshop and of continued education.
The fundamental answer to the ‘boy labour problem’, however, lay in state action to prohibit employers from exploiting juvenile labour, just as the State had acted in the past in ‘the case of children and women’.
Urwick maintained that the hopes for a sound economy rested on state interference, more than on ‘the exaggerated hopes’ of the various skilled employment committees.
Notwithstanding these criticisms there are five reasons which explain why the ASEA was important in the origins of the juvenile labour exchange system.
First, it developed the concept of integrated and comprehensive provision; secondly, in making a connection between school and wage-earning ‘it successfully rendered the transition as a social and educational process; thirdly, it made vocational guidance and after-care appear to be essential features of any youth employment scheme; fourthly, it showed that the service could offer significant opportunities for exercising a personal influence over the adolescent and his family.
Finally, and of some significance, not only did many of the personnel continue to serve in the state system on a voluntary basis after 1909, no doubt bringing their ideas with them, but also the casework procedures became the basic methodological practice of the service.
THE LABOUR EXCHANGE LEGISLATION
The Labour Exchanges Act 1909 was part of the response by the Liberal Government to the problem of unemployment and  underemployment.
But the state labour exchanges established by the new legislation were by no means the first attempt to assist workers in finding jobs, though most of the previous efforts had been confined to specific trades or occupations.
In 1885 a new type of exchange had opened in Egham, Surrey, known as the Egham Free Registry, which was designed to make contact between employers and workers.
A similar exchange opened in 1880 in Ipswich, and in 1891 the Borough of Chelsea launched the first municipal exchange.
By the end of 1892 there were seventeen private registries and thirty-one under the control of local authorities in England and Wales.
In 1905 the Unemployed Workman Act gave statutory force to a scheme inaugurated the previous year by Walter Lang, the President of the Local Government Board, under which a Central Executive Committee founded a Central Employment Exchange.
The Committee soon became the Central (Unemployed) Body (CUB), with one of its functions being to ‘establish, take over, and assist Labour Exchanges or Employment Registers and collect information’.
By 1907, the CUB, acting on a plan initiated by W. H. Beveridge, was busy opening exchanges in every London borough, each of which made special provision for women and juveniles, and provided vocational guidance for school-leavers through working in co-operation with the ASEA and the Education Department of the LCC.
This shows that from the earliest days of government interest in organizing the labour-market, Beveridge at least saw juvenile labour as a separate category which would require the formulation of a joint approach by the exchanges and local education authorities.
In 1908, Beveridge, who by now was an acknowledged expert on unemployment and its remedies, joined the Board of Trade as an unestablished civil servant and prepared his first brief for the president, Winston Churchill.
In his paper, Beveridge repeated what he had been saying for some time, namely, that  there was no general breakdown of the labour-market, instead there was an overstocking of individual trades which was due to‘inadequate labour information and local hindrances to labour mobility’.
He believed there was not one problem of unemployment, but several, some of which were simply part of modern industry, while others could be cured by state intervention.
Beveridge also held the view that throughout ‘modern industry’ there was a lack of mobility, a lack of communication, and ‘wasteful duplication of the labour force’.
In his opinion the system of production had not developed an equally modern system of labour organization, and the result was widespread unemployment.
He identified the several causes of unemployment as poor organization of industry, seasonal and cyclical fluctuations in the demand for labour, structural decline of certain industries or trades, personal deficiencies and, to a certain extent, ‘blind-alley’ situations.
Though Beveridge was rather ambivalent about the role of the ‘blind alley’, his recognition of the imaginary nature of many of the faults attributed to the juvenile labour-market has been established.
He nevertheless shared with other critics a concern about the untrained, unregulated, and unsupervised adolescent work-force, and found it impossible to separate completely the behaviour of these young workers from the larger problem of unemployment.
The use of labour exchanges to encourage vocational guidance and industrial training would, he argued, have three consequences: it would reduce risks of individual ‘maladjustment’, which often meant waste of abilities and even unemployment; it would adjust the flow of labour between trades; and it would discourage ‘blind-alley’ occupations, which he saw as not only demoralizing, but also as likely to lead to ‘a fresh point of stress in industry — the transition to a new occupation at manhood’.
While denying  the importance of industrial training as the ‘principal’ remedy for unemployment, he looked to technical education to raise the general level of skill ‘from which men start’, as well as to divert juvenile labour (which he described as ‘adaptable’) into new and growing trades.
If each of these requirements were to be implemented, it was, he said, necessary to have at least an organized labour-market, though much more would be needed.
Churchill gave his approval to the idea of labour exchanges and, in a cabinet paper drafted by Beveridge, he circulated the details of the proposed system in January 1909.
In the section entitled ‘Juvenile Employment’, Beveridge pressed the view that the exchange should be more than a place of registration and placement: it should be ‘both a market-place and a centre of guidance and supervision in the choice of ‘careers’.
Accordingly, he suggested separate facilities at each exchange for dealing with juveniles; notices with information about the exchanges were to be displayed in schools; lists of prospective school-leavers to be sent to the local exchange with details of their ‘ability, tastes and desires’; and each school-leaver to be told to call at the exchange for an interview.
‘In this way boys and girls would get ample opportunity of guidance as to their choice of careers, and those who were going to be apprenticed or learn skilled trades might have all their arrangements made while still at school.’
Beveridge also recommended the establishment of ‘special juvenile advisory committees’ at the exchanges with representatives from education authorities; or, alternatively, the exchanges could co-operate with the ASEA and similar agencies.
Whenever special committees were formed, they were to be ‘in connection with the schools’ and their duties were to include supervising conditions of labour, making recommendations as to continuation and technical education classes, forming ‘a public opinion’against ‘blind-alley’occupations, organizing apprenticeships, and caring for juveniles with special disabilities.
These details make it clear that Beveridge regarded young  workers as constituting a separate source of labour supply which required specialized provision and that he agreed with the ASEA and the ‘boy labour’ reformers in wishing to see the transition from school to work treated as an educational matter (though not necessarily one controlled by the Board of Education).
The thinking of Beveridge on the subject was governed by one principal consideration: how to make the labour-market more efficient.
He (among others) perceived adolescent labour as an obstacle to efficiency not only because it lacked knowledge of employment opportunities and the ability to distinguish between the merits of different occupations, but also because its inherent ‘adaptability’ was ‘wasted’(always a key notion in National Efficiency circles) by the ‘haphazard’nature of the transition which left too many youths in dead-end jobs and failed to enrol them in any form of further education.
The Labour Exchanges Bill passed its second reading without a division on 16 June 1909, and the new exchanges opened their doors in February 1910.
But the Act made no specific reference to special provision for young workers.
However, it was well known that Beveridge, together with Churchill and other important officials such as Llewellyn Smith and George Askwith, were intent on setting up a scheme for juveniles.
The question had been raised in the Commons during the debates on the Bill, when Churchill indicated that the Board of Trade hoped for co-operation between labour exchanges and local education authorities (LEAs) in the sharing of information, and that in certain instances Juvenile Advisory Committees (JACs) could be established.
Where this did not happen it would be possible for part of the membership of the Exchange Advisory Committees (provided for in section 2, subsection v  of the Act) to be co-opted to assist with the local education employment bureaux which were being started in Scotland and in parts of England.
Churchill was emphatic in saying that ‘boy labour’ would be dealt with in conjunction with education authorities ‘because we have no intention of allowing the commercial side to override the educational side in regard to young people’.
Whether this meant that market forces were not going to be allowed unrestrained activity is unclear; there was definitely no legal mechanism to inhibit them.
The more immediate problem, however, was which of the two Boards (trade or education) should have overall authority for the juvenile side of the exchanges and Churchill may well have sensed that a controversy was brewing.
THE DISPUTE BETWEEN THE BOARD OF EDUCATION AND THE BOARD OF TRADE
The rival claims of the two departments never became a contentious matter among the ‘boy labour’ group of reformers, though the majority appear to have favoured the Board of Trade.
The general view was that the exchanges, through their JACs should work in co-operation with LEAs, schools, and voluntary agencies such as the ASEA.
The important issue for reformers was the creation of a national, comprehensive system offering guidance, placement, and after-care.
No doubt many of them agreed with Beveridge in regarding the local authorities as unsuited by themselves to cope with the administration of the service.
However, despite the repeated calls for co-operation between the different interests, nothing could be done to allay the criticisms of certain members of the  Board of Education, sections of the educational press, notably the School Government Chronicle (organ of the LEAs), and several local Directors of Education.
José Harris has gone as far as to describe the dispute as ‘a major conflict of principle’ between the two boards.
Certainly Sir Robert Morant, the powerful Permanent Secretary at the Board of Education, argued strongly that organizing a juvenile employment service was part of the education process and as such should be in the hands of his department.
Similarly, E. K. Chambers, who was an official at the board, was determined to secure for education committees the sole right of both advising and placing juveniles.
Morant, Chambers and others were aware that for ten years or more several LEAs including Sheffield, Nottingham, Wigan, Liverpool, Carlisle, Finchley, Bolton, Cambridge, and Edinburgh had been experimenting with their own employment schemes.
It was no doubt with this in mind that an editorial in the Chronicle explained how the provision of vocational guidance had grown gradually and represented the interaction of official and voluntary organizations, the intricacies of which were not appreciated by the Board of Trade.
One of the most vociferous voices in the dispute was that of Mrs Ogilvie Gordon, chairwoman of the Education Committee of the National Union of Women Workers, and an old campaigner on behalf of vocational guidance for young people.
In 1904, at a meeting in Glasgow, she had proposed the establishment of a national system of ‘Educational Information and Employment Bureaux’ to be run by the local  authorities.
Although she made little initial impact in England, her scheme gained influential support in Scotland where it was adopted by the Scottish Education Department which agreed to give School Boards ‘choice of employment’ powers under the Education (Scotland) Act 1908.
Mrs Gordon's particular interest in the educational aspects of vocational guidance is evident from her remark in a letter to Morant that the bureau was to help to ‘humanise the roughest elements among our young population’.
This was by no means an uncommon aim among reformers and administrators, and she was no doubt aware that Morant was one of those who were most anxious to find a way of humanizing, not simply young people, but the entire labour-force.
Likewise Churchill, who would have agreed with her sentiment when she told him that without the Board of Education, the Board of Trade was ‘powerless’ to make ‘a better worker, a better man, or a better citizen of the young worker.’
Obviously vocational guidance, registration, and placement of school-leavers involved more than just the organization of the labour-market; they were seen as essential to the incorporation of working-class adolescents into what influential social theorists were calling ‘the community’.
The draft regulations which Beveridge had written in December 1909, were published in February 1910, to coincide with the opening of the exchanges.
The rules began by clarifying the ‘special advisory committees’ for juveniles and  spelt out in some detail the procedures for registering them at the exchanges.
Secondly, the Board of Trade was allowed to form JACs in co-operation with LEAs in such areas as it thought ‘expedient’.
The membership was to include appropriate volunteers who had knowledge of ‘education and of other conditions affecting young persons’, and who were in a position to advise the exchanges.
Thirdly, the committees were allowed to take steps ‘either by themselves or in cooperation with any other bodies or persons, to give information, advice, and assistance to boys and girls and their parents with respect to the choice of employment and other matters bearing thereon.’
In other words, the Board of Trade could more or less control the Service, co-operating with other agencies when and where it thought necessary, although those LEAs which had or might have in the future statutory powers for dealing with juveniles were permitted to submit schemes for the exercise of these powers, provided they could obtain the permission of both Boards.
The Board of Education was far from happy with the rules and throughout the spring and summer the dispute rumbled on.
In August 1910 the Board finally introduced its own legislation in the form of the Education (Choice of Employment) Bill, which empowered LEAs to create and finance their own juvenile employment services.
Immediately prior to the passing of the Act, Beveridge and Llewellyn Smith attended several conferences with Education Board officials which resulted in the publication of a joint memorandum intended to clarify the position in a spirit of co-operation.
The memorandum specified that the employment of young people should be primarily considered ‘from the point of view of their  educational interests and permanent careers rather than from that of their immediate earning capacities’, and consequently LEAs were urged to undertake their new responsibilities and to exercise them ‘in the fullest co-operation with the national system of Labour exchanges’.
Those areas where the Board of Trade already operated JACs, or were about to do so, were to be excluded from the LEA schemes.
If, however, local authorities had not exercised their powers by the end of 1911, then further JACs could be established.
The responsibilities of the two departments were to be as follows: the education authorities who operated a service under the 1910 Act had to confine themselves to ‘interviewing, advising, registering and selecting juvenile applicants’, while the labour exchanges would ‘register vacancies, place juveniles with employers and oversee their progress during the early years of employment’.
In practice this distinction was almost impossible to maintain, especially as the exchanges and the education employment committees often failed to provide each other with the necessary information.
The ‘uneasy partnership’ continued with some modifications throughout the 1920s and 1930s, and by 1945, 104 out of 315 LEAs were still running their own schemes.
THE ADMINISTRATION OF THE ACTS
The fact that responsibility for the juvenile labour exchange system was divided forced LEAs to choose between either  administering their own scheme (with Board of Education approval), or accepting the Board of Trade JAC.
The largest authority, the LCC, opted for the JAC structure, while the second largest authority, Birmingham, decided to create its own individual scheme.
There is no way of knowing how representative these specific approaches were of the national system as it developed, but an examination of their administrative organization will show that whatever the theoretical differences between them, there was little to choose in terms of their objectives and procedures.
In August 1910, the LCC decided to establish the Board of Trade JAC, to be worked in co-operation with its education department.
The JAC was the central body for a number of local juvenile advisory committees and its chief function was to organize them in connection with each labour exchange in the area.
The JAC membership comprised six members of the education committee, two employers, two trade unionists, two representatives from the ASEA, two persons otherwise interested in juvenile welfare, and a chairman.
In general its powers included giving information, advice, and assistance to adolescents and their parents on choice of employment and related matters; filtering available young workers into openings on the basis of a detailed knowledge of each applicant and each vacancy; acting as a centre for enquiries from other youth agencies, such as clubs, Scouts and apprenticeship committees; and organizing propaganda for the creation of ‘responsible’ opinion among parents, juveniles, employers, and the public as to the ‘evil’effects of the disorganized methods of recruitment into the youth labour-market.
In order to implement its duties, the JAC relied upon local committees, each of which had a much larger membership than the parent body: ten nominees from the LCC education department, two headteachers, four employers, four workers, and ten persons nominated by the central JAC for their interest in adolescent welfare.
The main function of these committees was to carry out JAC policy, but this involved detailed work in organizing both the industrial and the welfare aspects of the developing service, and dovetailing much of the administration with that of education authorities.
The comprehensive nature of the local groups is evident from a list of their duties, which were to focus the efforts of different agencies dealing with juvenile employment; to organize methods of collecting information about the character, education, and home life of school-leavers, usually with the assistance of teachers and school care committees (SCCs)(which were under the control of the education offices); to form subcommittees or rotas to attend the labour exchange for the purpose of interviewing applicants and parents; and to organize a system of ‘after-care’ in co-operation with SCCs, clubs, and other similar organizations.
The London committees concentrated their attention on school-leavers (rather than all those in the 14–17 age-group), which meant involving voluntary agencies, emphasizing home visits, and consolidating the structure of the SCCs.
Consequently, from its earliest days the service had a strong welfare orientation.
Before looking at the day-to-day working of the system in London and Birmingham, it is worth pausing to describe the role of the school care committees, for in both cities they were the vital link in the attempt to make the transition an educational rather than an industrial process.
Moreover, as will be argued below, they provided the continuity between the older philanthropic tradition and the labour exchange system as an example of collectivist social policy.
The London SCCs originated in part from the Relief Committees established in 1899 by the School Board, and continued by the LCC until they were renamed in 1907 when the Council put into effect section (1a) of the Education (Provision of Meals) Act 1906, which called for the establishment of Canteen Committees.
However, they soon came to  deal with a whole range of children's welfare in addition to health and feeding, which included helping school-leavers, in conjunction with the ASEA, to find suitable employment.
In 1909 the LCC completely reorganized its school welfare programme and formed a central co-ordinating body with a number of Children's Care (School) Committees on the basis of one for every elementary school.
Besides their duties relating to general welfare, these committees (SCCs) were specifically instructed ‘to advise and help parents in connection with the after-employment of children, referring suitable cases to the local apprenticeship committees, and generally to befriend with useful advice and guidance’.
This not only involved the SCCs in vocational guidance and after-care in a formal sense prior to the creation of juvenile labour exchanges, but also it provided an influential role for the ASEA, certainly for its practice.
For instance, as SCCs were formed, so each would appoint a number of ‘Friendly Visitors’ to interview the school-leavers and their parents at home and to collect all relevant information from teachers as to academic ability and character.
The completed report cards were then passed on to the SCC for discussion, after which the details would be forwarded to either the association of SCCs (covering a wider area than a single school), the ASEA, or to some other agency, such as the Girls' Friendly Society, the Metropolitan Society for Befriending Young Servants or the Recreational Evening Schools Association.
A vacancy might already have been found if the visitor or the committee had made direct contact with an employer.
If the youth was left to find his or her own employment, the visitor was to persuade the parents to forgo the relatively high initial earnings of blind-alley jobs in favour of one with a more permanent future.
Once the London JAC was established, the SCCs were instructed by the LCC to co-operate with the local  committees, having as their principal duty the reporting of the economic, social, and educational condition of the school-leavers, while the local JACs were to supervise the conditions of employment, ensuring that they were as favourable as possible for the young people, and that ‘round’ children were put into ‘round holes’.
Without the existence of the SCCs the JAC would have been forced to create its own committee system at the level of the school; as it was, the SCCs brought with them a network of contacts, an established structure, and a large number of volunteers, amounting to some 5,000 by 1914.
The bringing together of school-leavers and vacancies began with the adolescent being interviewed at school, after which a form was completed by the headteacher and a member of the SCC, just as the ‘Friendly Visitors’ had done prior to 1910.
But now the details relating to academic, social, personal, and occupational aptitude were forwarded to the juvenile section of the local labour exchange where vacancies had been notified by employers.
On receipt of the form, and with parental consent, the exchange registered the boy or girl.
After parents agreed to use the exchange (and not all of them did agree), they were summoned with their child to an interview by a selection of the members of the local JAC, which had a list of vacancies, and the young person was sent to one of these.
Once the school-leaver was placed, the after-care supervision was entirely in the hands of the SCCs, and other associated bodies, who made periodic reports to the local JAC, and as with the earlier form of care committee, a ‘visitor’ was named who had the duty of keeping in touch with the young workers until they were 17 or 18.
Although the day-to-day arrangements in Birmingham were similar to those in London, a brief account of the details is useful because Birmingham was the first and the largest  provincial area to operate a scheme independently of the Board of Trade.
Moreover, it was very much a conscious decision inspired by the welfare work of Norman Chamberlain, its leading social reformer, and his co-worker Edward Birchall.
Chamberlain was the chairman of the JAC, established by the Board of Trade, but he made it clear that he wanted to see ‘a separate department of the city's government, in which the education authority and the Ministry of Labour would cooperate in order to cover all sides of juvenile welfare’.
With the passing of the 1910 Choice of Employment Act, the education committee decided to exercise its powers and petition for the closing of the JAC (which had not yet begun its work) so that it could open what was termed a Juvenile Employment Bureau and Care Committee System.
In July, 1911, a Central Care Committee (CCC) was appointed, with members drawn from the Women's Settlement, the Sunday School Union, the Children's Service Union, Church of England Sunday Schools, the CLB, the BB, the Boy Scouts, the Street Children's Union, the Church of England Men's Society, and the Trades Council.
The duties of the CCC, which was to work ‘in close touch’ with the Central Juvenile Employment Exchange, were to arrange for the vocational guidance of prospective school-leavers and to liaise with exchange officials in registering juveniles and in selecting applicants for interviews.
The second foundational feature of the Birmingham scheme was the creation of a Juvenile Employment Exchange and Bureau under the direction of the Board of Trade, but housed on education premises (an important fact for those who wished to preserve the ‘educational’ nature of the transition), together with ‘the continuous co-operation and interchange of views’, which was to be the basis of a real partnership between exchange officials and the LEA.
It was intended that the bureau should receive applications from both juveniles and employers, but no applicant could be put in touch with an employer without the exchange first contacting the CCC.
The education authorities, probably under the influence of Chamberlain, obviously recognized that the gathering of information concerning industrial conditions needed to be linked to the exchanges, as did the mechanism of registration.
At the local level there were to be branch juvenile exchanges and wherever possible branch care committees, and the duties of both corresponded to those of their London counterparts.
This is evident from detailed instructions given to the SCC members which show how the educational aspects of the scheme were regarded as crucial.
Members were to influence the ‘industrial history and character’ of the young people by taking account ‘of the needs of individual cases’and of the general conditions of industry, and by encouraging ‘the wider use of educational institutions’during the adolescent years.
Members were also to influence parents because their cooperation and support was seen as ‘absolutely essential’ in the long run.
Similarly, in their daily practice, as in London, each SCC nominated a ‘responsible helper’ who first met the headteacher to discuss those juveniles who were about to leave school, and then interviewed the young people themselves and their parents.
Once the Juvenile Employment Bureau had registered and placed the adolescent, the ‘helper’ resumed responsibility by attempting to keep ‘in effective touch’with either him or her and with the home.
On the basis of the school reports, each youth was graded A, B or C, depending on how  much after-care was thought necessary.
There was no attempt to supervise all juveniles (aged between 14 and 17) who numbered about 36,000 in 1910; instead, the intention was to make contact with the school-leavers, of whom there were approximately 9,000, with each ‘helper’ responsible for ten or less.
By 1914 this target had been achieved, with over 2,000 helpers attending to 8,472 cases through 91 care committees.
HOW SUCCESSFUL WAS THE SERVICE?
By 1914, there were over 400 Board of Trade exchanges in the United Kingdom dealing with juveniles; in 44 districts the Board had also authorized JACs, and in 58 districts the LEAs were running their own schemes.
The number of placements and registrations rose so that in 1913, 74,535 boys and 54,206 girls aged between 14 and 17 filled labour exchange vacancies and the number registering was 137,668 and 115,171 respectively.
As the total number of filled vacancies for all ages was 652,306, this means that juveniles accounted for about 20% of all those finding employment through the exchanges.
When only school-leavers are considered the percentage naturally falls: of the filled vacancies, 24% of boys and 30.4% of girls, numbering together 42,000, were in this category.
Given that approximately 500,000 children left school each year, the figure of 42,000 represents about 8% of all school-leavers who found their first full-time job through the juvenile exchange system, though a far greater number registered.
But not  much more than a vague impression of the early impact of the service is provided by these figures, for without an extensive number of regional studies, it is difficult to estimate either the local variations in the success rate or the extent to which different areas established SCC systems alongside the employment bureaux.
Leaving aside the question of how many juveniles used the exchanges, how far was the service successful in channelling school-leavers away from so-called ‘blind-alley’ occupations?
The education lobby, in arguing for control of the service often alleged that the Board of Trade exchanges sent young people to any kind of job in order to show a high ratio of filled vacancies.
In Birmingham, the largest number of placements for juveniles during the first eighteen months of the scheme were as messengers and porters, workers in drilling, milling, engineering, and brass foundries, business clerks, and labourers in warehouses.
In Oxford, out of 312 boys, 119 became errand lads, while 110 girls out of 223 became domestic servants.
The JAC in Leeds admitted that it had not been able to counter the numbers going into dead-end jobs, and a similar admission was made by the Plymouth authorities.
These local impressions are confirmed by the national returns which show that between 1911 and 1914, the major occupational group to which boys were sent was conveyance of goods, men, and messages, followed by metals and commercial employment;(for girls, the major employers were dress, outdoor domestic work, and food, tobacco, drink, and  lodging).
Few of these occupations offered any opportunity for either ‘skilled’ or (where boys were concerned) respectable employment as understood by the ASEA and other reformers.
The fact that family circumstances gave the school-leaver little option but to take the first available work, and the highest paid, was appreciated by exchange officials.
But even had they sought to do otherwise, they felt obliged to fill the ‘blind-alley’ vacancies if only because employers would always manage to find workers for this type of employment however much the exchanges tried to frustrate them.
It therefore seemed better that the JACs and SCCs co-operate in order that they would at least be in a position to provide after-care supervision.
In this way, it was hoped that the ‘care’ features of the service could counter the allegedly demoralizing effects of the employment.
To some extent there was a contradiction between the declared aim of the service, which was to organize the transition from school to full-time wage-earning in a thoughtful and informed manner so that the adolescents went into respectable occupations with long-term prospects, and the policy actually pursued.
Whether Churchill and Beveridge really believed that the exchanges could successfully redirect young people away from‘uneducative’ labour is doubtful.
It is much more likely that they shared the wish of Arthur Greenwood who looked to the after-care workers to:
bring into active play all the possible forces, schools and clubs, etc., to neutralise and overcome the pernicious influences of ‘blind alley’ employment, to insure that, however uneducative and useless a juvenile's job may be from the point of view of the future, he shall not on that account emerge from it unfitted for any other kind of labour.
At one moment Beveridge can be found looking to the exchanges for the ‘discouragement’ of ‘blind-alley’work, but he also warned against starting out with ‘the idea of rigidly prescribing all but the best employments…
So long as‘blind-alley’ openings…are not absolutely illegal…the choice of them can only be discouraged generally by bringing them [boys]into direct competition with better openings at a general exchange.’
He concluded, rather lamely, that the youth who becomes a van-boy via the service ‘would at least learn that other occupations existed’.
This was Beveridge expressing the ‘expert’ view that working-class parents and school-leavers were ignorant about the range of job opportunities.
But while young people were being sent to ‘blind-alley’ and other unskilled vacancies, the exchanges could do little to alter the condition of the juvenile labour-market since ‘wider knowledge of possibilities and prospects’could not offset demand.
If the success of the service is measured against an economic criterion, it appears to have been partial, at least in its early years.
If, however, the service is seen as a social institution, with aims which were, to a large extent, independent of market organization, then it is possible to see it as much more successful and of far greater significance.
CONTINUITY AND CHANGE
In her authoritative study, José Harris tells us that where unemployment was concerned, Liberal policy dealt with ‘only an ice-berg tip’ of the problem as it had been defined by Booth, Llewellyn Smith, Beveridge, and the Webbs.
Very little was done about juvenile labour, she says, with no attempt being made to raise the school-leaving age or to make further technical education compulsory until the age of 17.
It is time that technical education remained not much more than a debating topic, although the Education Act 1918, did make 14 the universal minimum leaving age and, far more controversial, it began to introduce compulsory part-time day continuation classes.
Both of these measures had been under discussion for a number of years, and but for the war there is every reason to believe they would have been enacted earlier.
All the same, the failure of the labour exchange legislation to affect the  reorganization of the juvenile labour-market, at least in the short term, can hardly be denied.
And any attempt to make it more effective would have been virtually impossible in political terms.
The problem for Liberal politicians was a fundamental one: how to combat the economic and social consequences of juvenile labour without interfering with, and effectively undermining, one of the principles of political economy, namely, the free market in labour.
It would be a mistake, however, to dismiss this aspect of the Liberal reform programme as being of no legislative or historical significance, at least in so far as the preceding details have revealed that the different schemes were the result of much thought and argument on the part of a number of interest groups, each of which cared about the transition process, believing it to be critical for the economic and moral welfare of working-class youth.
To this extent, in establishing the service, certain governmental and educational authorities were signalling with all the pomp and circumstance of legislation that youth did constitute a separate and, in important respects, an immature source of labour which required special treatment.
Before describing some of the ways in which the service changed age relations, the continuity of the older methodological practices (mainly through elaboration) needs to be emphasized.
Contemporaries noted the continuation of the voluntary tradition within the developing framework of Edwardian collectivism, and probably nowhere was this more obvious than in the realm of child and adolescent welfare.
The emergence of the SCCs and the ASEA, for example, has been shown to have arisen from the work of the COS, and to have copied its basic committee structure, together with its use of a few paid organizers supervising a large number of volunteers.
JACs and juvenile employment committees also made use of COS methodology and volunteers, who brought with them experience of working with young people.
But COS influence was at its most profound in passing on to the service the principle of casework, for this embodied a number of middle-class assumptions about individualism, character, and  family responsibilities.
Despite a new relationship between philanthropy and the state being forged, and with it a new role for the voluntary social worker, there remained the old focus on family, home, and character.
Indeed, voluntary helpers were seen by many observers to be indispensable intermediaries between the state and the home precisely because as ‘friendly visitors’ they were able to respond to individuals.
All this meant that the tradition of ‘visiting’ remained inherent in the new welfare provision for young people.
As one settlement worker remarked, while the after-care committees provided ‘many more opportunities for direct personal service than there had been in the past’, the exchange system brought the home visitors and the club managers into the ‘industrial side’ and, therefore, united the social and industrial welfare of adolescents.
But it should be kept in mind that the home visit, for reasons of either vocational guidance or after-care, was intended to do more than simply attend to the school-leaver, who was urged to ‘put your shoulder to the wheel’ in order‘to reduce to a minimum the number of inefficient citizens’.
The procedure was also designed to exert an influence on the parents.
In ‘Suggestions for Helpers’, Birmingham care workers were advised to make parents feel that their visit was the result of a desire to be ‘really helpful and friendly’.
Elsewhere, it was stressed that no one wished to interfere with the ‘responsible and competent parent’, but where they were not so, ‘action is needed either to reinforce the consciousness or replace the incompetency’.
Voluntary efforts, by themselves, did ‘not cover nearly the whole ground’.
In other words, legislation offered the opportunity to begin a new programme of education for the working-class family.
The incorporation of visiting and casework into the administration of the juvenile exchange system not only reflected the continuation of both the practices and the perspectives of the  reforming middle class, but also, and ultimately this was of greater importance, it altered the nature of the age relationship, certainly in the degree to which volunteers were in contact with young workers.
This is partly evident in the innovatory character of the legislation.
It was, after all, the first comprehensive Welfare Act directly intended for adolescents (14–17), although previous legislation had specified hours and conditions of labour for children and young persons, and young adolescents were included in several of the clauses in the Children Act 1908.
Broadly speaking the interest of the State in vocational guidance, registration and placement, and after-care, marks the beginning of its concern with wage-earning youth, which was to develop over the next twenty years with the formation of the Juvenile Organizations Committee in 1916, the various measures to ameliorate juvenile unemployment between the wars, and the inauguration in 1939 of The ‘Youth Service’, each of which was a response to economic and social pressures, and all of which refined and extended the image of youth.
Furthermore, it was the role of the adolescent as worker which first introduced the State into this area of collectivism, proof of the importance with which the juvenile labour-market was regarded in relation to the social problem.
But in what ways did the creation of the exchange system, and those elements of continuity and change, actually affect the image of youth?
In the most obvious sense the establishment of special facilities for young workers emphasized their distinctiveness and their separateness; it also suggested that by virtue of their ignorance and incompetence they needed to rely upon ‘professionals’ for assistance in choosing and finding an occupation.
In effect, the service portrayed the adolescent as essentially a dependent person.
The capacity of the young worker for rational, thoughtful, and informed actions was brought into question by the new identity that was bestowed upon the transition process.
The legislation turned the transition into a public activity, performed to certain rules, clothed in the rhetoric of advice, guidance, and protection which, it was claimed, could only be given by ‘experts’ and selected voluntary ‘helpers’.
The procedures of the system made it seem overwhelmingly complex: the visits, the record cards of teachers and helpers, the correspondence with  employers, the labour exchange forms, the committee structure, and their numerous meetings.
This input of detail, with the emphasis on the need for guidance and care made the transition appear to be a period of effort, anxiety, and danger; and such a representation was convenient at a time when social scientists, and others, were ‘discovering’ adolescence as a stage of life characterized by ‘storm and stress’.
The purpose of the labour exchanges, as Churchill said, was to curtail the ‘haphazard and unorganized state of our industrial life’.
The principal aim of the Juvenile ‘Rules’ was to continue ‘the supervision of the boy or girl, when placed, with a view to his or her further education, both technical and humanistic’and to bring to bear on the life of the adolescents ‘all the influences making for industrial efficiency, for enlightened citizenship and self-realisation’.
It is beyond doubt that the service was meant to be a social institution with aims in addition to those of an economic nature.
As Dearle wrote in summarizing what he called ‘The Needs of the Future’: the ‘supreme necessity’ was not merely to ‘establish certain regulations and forms of control’, but to ‘encourage and develop good industrial and social habits’.
Reformers continually blurred the occupational role of wage-earning youth by fusing economics with ‘character’, and in presenting youth as ‘raw material’ for the future.
Perhaps the prevailing attitude towards adolescents was most plainly and simply described by the objectives of the Birmingham CCC: ‘To bridge the gulf between the disciplined life of the school and the comparative freedom of the industrial world; to ensure that care of the young shall not cease with the end of school life; and to provide the means for the guidance of young persons through the difficulties and perils of adolescence.’
All in all, the juvenile labour exchange legislation served to institutionalize the transition from school to full-time employment, and in so doing provided it with priests and  rituals; the transition became a rite de passage and, therefore, brought this aspect of the adolescent's life into a formal arena where it was subject to critical scrutiny.
Prior to the legislation, the transition was obviously in the hands of the young people themselves, and of their parents, relations, and friends.
The significance of the service lies in the attempt to take the process away from them and place it under the control of national and local welfare élites.
Of course, it might be objected that while the description given here is theoretically accurate, in practice the exchange officers and ‘helpers’ were never able effectively to guide, supervise, influence, and control the school-leavers (and their parents) who continued to deviate from an ‘ideal’behaviour pattern.
The strength of a social institutional ideal, however, is not that it always attains its stated objectives, but that it establishes itself as the desirable norm.
Day Continuation Schools: Creating the Adaptable and Efficient Citizen
Part of the impetus behind the establishment of the Youth Employment Service was the perceived failure of the home, philanthropy, and the workshop to train, supervise, and guide adolescent workers through their ‘critical years’.
In the minds of reformers, however, the service was only one of two policies designed to bring working-class youth under the purview of state agencies and their officials.
More deeply felt, more tendentiously extolled, and more verbose were the arguments in favour of what was really to be a new form of further education: the compulsory part-time day continuation school.
While there was a continuing interest in ‘technical’ instruction (though the term itself was both confused and confusing), it was the concept of a very generalized ‘continued’education for adolescents which held the centre stage of the education debate during the Edwardian period and, together with the raising of the school-leaving age, throughout the First World War.
Despite its popularity in certain quarters, however, the idea of compulsory part-time day classes met with strenuous opposition from politicians, employers, and from sections of  the labour movement.
Undaunted, the 1918 Education Act made provision for local authorities to begin to open such schools for all 14–16 year-olds not otherwise engaged in full-time secondary education.
But within a few years, before the majority of LEAs could submit their schemes for departmental approval, a combination of factors forced the closure of the half-dozen or so schools which had opened.
So, it might be asked, why is it important to examine in detail what, after all, merits little more than a few paragraphs in conventional histories of education?
There are three reasons.
It was the first time that there had been a debate on the viability and the desirability of having an element of compulsory further education, which in theory was to enrol all adolescents, though in practice it applied mainly to those from the working class.
Furthermore, while the nature of the curriculum was shrouded in generalizations, it was clearly intended to offer more than a narrow technical expertise.
Rather the intention was to offer a mixture of liberal and vocational courses designed to produce the ‘humane’ but ‘efficient’citizen.
The proposal, then, was momentous in its implications for the juvenile labour-market and for industrial training.
Secondly, the discussion on why the schools were needed and what they could achieve reveals significant features of both the age and the class relationships.
By examining the arguments of the reformers, in looking at their aspirations and ambitions, it is possible to see something of these relationships as they were evolving.
Thirdly, and following on, the debate helped to formulate a new image of young workers and to project it, not only well beyond the immediate confines of the reformers and their circles, but also well beyond the realms of education into the public domain.
NARRATIVE OF EVENTS
The term ‘continuation school’ was derived from the wording of the Education Code of 1862 which defined the Evening School as one providing ‘not secondary, but continued elementary instruction’.
This limitation was removed by the Education Act of 1890, but the description remained unchanged until the 1918 Act.
The passing of the 1902 Education Act placed all types of public education, elementary, secondary, and technical, under one control, the Board of Education.
At the local level control was taken away from the School Boards and put into the hands of local councils who were to serve as LEAs in their own areas.
This reorganization gave an overview of the education system which had not previously been possible.
It specifically made visible the gap in post-elementary provision, one to which the subsequent enquiries addressed themselves.
Many of the reformers were keenly aware that their proposal would entail an extension of state activity and the curtailment of the voluntary principle.
Such a development required a strong defence, and the point to which they referred time and time again was that ‘modern conditions’ made it imperative that education be structured into a coherent national system, with special attention being paid to working-class youth, not merely to trade classes for apprentices, but to the mass of young workers.
Nowhere was the call for a new attitude more clear than in the inquiry conducted at Manchester University by Michael Sadler and his associates and published in 1907.
Sadler began by reminding readers that throughout the nineteenth century the ‘authority of the state’ had gradually made itself felt in relation to education, resulting in the 1870 Act.
Now, he wrote, seeing that during the ‘critical years of adolescence’ not more than one out of every three elementary  school-leavers received any kind of educational care, there ‘is reason for thinking that once more the national minimum should be raised’.
Adolescence was seen as ‘critical’ because it was during this stage of life ‘when stimulating instruction, technical training and well-directed guidance in matters of conduct and personal hygiene are often most needed and, if wisely given, most helpful towards healthy living and self-control’.
Those who worked among young people were said to lament ‘the spoiling of promise and the waste of power which they see caused by lack of tendance and of invigorating discipline.’
Moreover, economic factors, such as the ‘blind alley’, seemed to be making matters worse.
But, as Sadler shrewdly and significantly observed, it was not merely economic change that gave rise to social and political anxieties, for there were ‘psychological causes of unrest’ which were ‘more subtle and not less powerful’.
Sadler was sensitive to what he called ‘the great stir of thought’ which had disturbed ‘the traditional ways of looking at things’, and had affected all classes.
Society was being moved by ‘the tremendous force of the intellectual and economic movements which are carrying us forward not solely to new dangers but also to new opportunities of good’.
There was a new desire for ‘reality’ and for ‘self-expression’, and while they held within them dangers, they also held the possibility of ‘veracity and strenuous life’.
He felt able to offer comfort: ‘It is no unreasoning or ill-judged confidence which relies upon the force of the truth and wisdom of the old order to hold their own and indeed to extend and deepen their influence under conditions which, after all, will for the most part be only superficially new’.
Although he may have underestimated the depth of the changes, his confidence reflected a widespread  fundamental optimism among social scientists with respect to the reform of working-class youth.
Sadler was no doubt thinking of the climate of opinion in which his inquiry was conducted, in particular the movement for ‘National Efficiency’ which questioned not only the principle of voluntaryism, but also the apparently redundant individualism of late nineteenth-century Liberalism.
While the continuation school proposal was never a major feature in the programme of those who sought to reconstruct British society, as an issue education was considered to be of vital importance.
The various critics accused Britain of neglecting its ‘brains’, wasting the results of its elementary schools, and of failing to offer facilities for proper training (technical, vocational and liberal) to appropriate students.
The key themes of the movement were: racial fitness; the elimination of all kinds of waste, in particular resources of human ability; experts and ‘knowledge’, especially scientific knowledge; and a form of collectivism, or state-directed public policy, in preference to what one journalist called ‘the idea of personal liberty’.
In effect, those who argued in terms of national efficiency (and they cut across party boundaries) were pressing for a ‘National Minimum’ in social, economic, and educational affairs.
And Sadler knew that he would strike a responsive note with his claim that the voluntary evening classes were ‘wasteful of human material which might  by timely care be made more serviceable to the State’.
The question which had to be decided was ‘whether we in England gain more through stimulating and rewarding the energy of the vigorous few by our voluntary system…than is lost through our failure to raise the general average of trained and disciplined efficiency by means of compulsory attendance for all’.
Then, donning his philosophical idealist heritage, Sadler quoted Aristotle to remind his readers that the purpose of the State was to enhance life for its citizens: ‘the State was formed to make life possible, and exists to make life good’.
Sadler's inquiry joined many other calls for a comprehensive extension of day-time continued education: government committees, teachers' organizations, the Workers' Educational Association (WEA), the Labour Party, and the Liberal-inspired Education Reform Council all asserted their approval, Nor was the issue ignored by the House of Commons where between 1908 and 1914 a number of Bills were presented without success.
However, despite all the interest at official level and among reformers and commentators, on the eve of the First World War many were pessimistic about the chances of a compulsory system ever reaching the statute book.
Two of the best-known figures, Sir Philip Magnus, the Conservative MP and propagandist for technical education, and R. B. Haldane, the Liberal politician and educational philosopher, lamented the lack of public interest and despaired for the future.
The 1914–18 War radicalized informed opinion on educational matters.
The pre-war debate was motivated by concern over the ‘boy labour problem’ in its social and economic contexts.
The onset of war, however, not only brought forward other anxieties relating to working-class youth, in particular the rising rate of juvenile crime, but also, and not unrelated, exaggerated fears about the consequences of high wages and precocious independence.
Of even greater consequence, the participation of adolescents in society was of special interest in the latter part of the War when ‘reconstruction’ promised both efficiency and a liberal, social democracy in which everyone had a part to play.
This helps to account for the publication of different schemes by Labour, Liberal, and professional organizations.
In 1916, H. A. L. Fisher, the Vice-Chancellor of Sheffield University, was appointed President of the Board of Education, with the promise that ‘money would be found for ambitious educational measures’.
The brief given to Fisher was not simply to prepare the way for a measure of egalitarian reform, but to introduce some order into the whole area of adolescent education which, given the increase in juvenile delinquency, and mounting industrial unrest, was felt to be a social issue of some significance.
Fisher no doubt knew in advance the recommendations of the Lewis Report : a uniform school-leaving age of 14, the abolition of exemptions, and day continuation classes for all those aged between 14 and 18, all of which measures were embodied in his Bill.
The intention behind the reforms was made clear in the famous words: ‘[the conception of the juvenile]as primarily a little wage-earner, was to give way to the conception of him ‘as primarily the workman and citizen in training’.
During its passage through  the House of Commons, however, an amendment was introduced by spokesmen for groups of employers, and reluctantly accepted by Fisher, which postponed for seven years the continuation class clauses for those aged between 16 and 18.
Even so, by the end of the War, the part-rime day continuation school looked set to become a permanent feature of the British educational system.
Within four years of the passing of the Education Act, the few schools which had been established closed their doors, with the single exception of Rugby.
What, then, had gone wrong?
The reasons for the failure of the experiment have been discussed in detail elsewhere and so need be only briefly described here.
The principal obstacles to its success were: the economic climate in which the Geddes Report emphasized the low priority of education when financial restraint was inevitable; the less than enthusiastic response from numerous LEAs in submitting their schemes (they were allowed to proceed at their own pace without a universal appointed day); the beginning of opposition from the National Union of Teachers and the labour movement in favour of‘Secondary Education for All’ and a school-leaving age of 15; and, perhaps most significantly, the opposition of large sections of industry, including the Federation of British Industries.
THE CURRICULUM
The greater part of the debate on part-time day continuation schools centred around what it was claimed they could achieve.
There were, it seemed, endless opportunities for physical education, the building of ‘character’, the production of efficient and ‘adaptable’ workers and, as was most consistently argued, for the creation of ‘citizens’.
At the same time, the curriculum through which all this was to be achieved remained remarkably unexplored and neglected; and in many respects this in itself was a comment on the nature of the reformers' aims and aspirations.
However, it is possible to identify a few fairly distinct elements upon which there was general agreement.
No one doubted that some form of physical education should be part of the programme; nor was there any dissent from the view that girls were to be taught domestic economy and similar subjects in addition to trade and academic courses; and, thirdly, the terms ‘vocational’ and ‘liberal’should be generously interpreted, rather than be seen as mutually exclusive.
The most difficult aspect of the discussion on the curriculum, such as it was, revolved around the problem of deciding the relationship between vocational and liberal subjects.
An influential voice in the debate was that of Georg Kerschensteiner, Director of Education in Munich, ‘the Mecca of all school reformers’, who was famous for his opposition to ‘general’ continued courses, preferring instead the ‘vocational’but in an integrated curriculum designed to train young workers as citizens.
Modern society, he said, no longer required either the nineteenth-century intellectual or the ‘perfect individual’ of German classicism, but rather the citizen who was a member of a community, and whose education had turned him into a ‘social being’.
By 1914 Kerschensteiner was probably one of the most quoted of educationalists.
He had written several very influential books, of which Education for Citizenship, The Idea of the Industrial School , and The Schools and the Nation were translated into English, and had lectured in Scotland and Chicago.
In an account of the continuation school movement, written in the 1920s, he was credited, together with Sadler and Stanley Hall, as being the man who made ‘the issue clear: either organize the adolescent life of the nation on liberal lines or reap the consequences in a citizen body less stable, less progressive, less sound in mind and body than it might be’.
The widespread influence of Kerschensteiner ensured that reformers referred to him for guidance on the matter.
The basis of his educational philosophy lay in the belief that ‘practical instruction’ should be central to any curriculum for only then could ‘mental and moral training’occur which, together with a sense of esprit de corps created within each school, would help to cultivate the spirit of ‘civic responsibility’.
By ‘practical’, Kerschensteiner had in mind drawing, modelling, knowledge of materials and tools, and so on, as required by particular trades, which was to be accompanied by practical civic training, such as a degree of self-government in the school and  organizing social activities, together with theoretical instruction in civics and hygiene.
In Munich, as one observer reported, each apprentice was made ‘industrially efficient’; and ‘with this end in view’ it was ‘not sufficient’to receive instructions merely in the technical side of the trade, for the young worker to become ‘a worthy citizen’, he should know something ‘of his duties and responsibilities to the State’.
It is significant that Kerschensteiner insisted on the practical and the theoretical being part of the same syllabus, with the former leading on to an appreciation of the latter: it meant that ‘civic virtues’ had to be practised in order for them to become meaningful.
In his opinion, the theory of civics, in whatever form it was taught, was useless without a real social context, which for him meant the practice of ‘work’, in all its senses.
This explains why he considered the argument over the merits of vocational versus liberal education as an ‘unnecessary dispute’ because ‘on the way to the ideal man stands the useful man, he who realises his own task and the task of his country…[and, therefore,]Vocational education is the door to the education of the man’.
Popular opinion among those British ‘boy labour’ reformers who considered the curriculum seems to have favoured basing the organization of the classes on the Munich model in which trades either had their own schools, or groups of trades had their own curriculum.
There was, however, meant to be a distinction between the subjects taken by senior students, aged between 16 and 18, and those taken by juniors aged between 14 and 16, just as there was between those employed in skilled trades and those who were in unskilled occupations.
One recommendation was for the older pupils to be divided into four occupational groups: engineering; commerce; domestic  work; and industries for which no vocational instruction was necessary.
Tawney, Sadler, Bray, Gibb, Best and Ogden, and Dyer, among others, all argued for trade-based courses with an emphasis on practical instruction.
A boy attending a woodwork trade school, for example, would continue his ordinary education, as well as being taught drawing, mensuration, and science, ‘all specially adapted to the requirements of the trade’, and lastly, ‘in the school workshop he will acquire skill in the general use of woodwork tools’.
With boys in unskilled employment, the intention was not so much to impart skills, ‘as to retain [them]at an impressionable age and to mould and discipline their character’, and in such cases specialization or technical training would be out of place.
In principle at least, no one disagreed with Kerschensteiner when he said that the education given should not be ‘a mere trade or industrial training in the narrower sense of these words’, but should involve ‘everything which leads to a wider outlook and a broader life’.
Such schools, claimed Bray, rather hopefully, would then be in a position to train ‘the man in the interests of the community and in the interests of the trade.’
Despite these intentions there is some evidence, however, drawn from proposed schemes submitted by LEAs (but never implemented), which suggests that in practice the allegedly integrated curriculum emphasized ‘liberal’ studies for the 14- to 16-year-olds who were to be the first age-group to attend under compulsion.
Even in those schemes which included vocational courses, the instruction consisted of historical, economic, and sociological aspects, rather than a particular form of vocation.
Furthermore, there was sustained  opposition to vocational courses from labour interests, teachers' unions, local authority directors of education, and from the WEA.
No wonder Selby-Brigge, successor to Morant at the Board of Education, remarked in 1917 that the controversy over the curriculum was an ‘endless one’.
Introducing his Bill, Fisher voiced the opinion of liberal educationalists when he told the House that the schools would ‘continue the general education’ of the elementary level, and would give ‘in addition vocational bias, the force of which will be graduated according to the age and occupation of the pupil’.
But this could not disguise the fact that however much influential educationalists, notably those associated with the Education Reform Council, might refer to combining vocational and general subjects (in whatever mix for whatever age of pupil), and might intellectually appreciate the relevance of vocational training they lacked an effective political policy for reconciling both types of syllabus.
More significantly, they lacked the personal conviction necessary to argue for the ‘balanced’ curriculum for the younger pupils.
Instead, they were left with their deeply-rooted faith in ‘humanism’ which was to be derived from citizenship, and this encouraged them to think in terms of the whole person, rather than training for specific trades.
The idea of ‘humanism’ had been raised in the report of the Consultative Committee when it warned: ‘That the schools should humanise their pupils is an indispensable condition to their being able to impart true economic efficiency.’
It was, however, J. Dover Wilson, at the time an HMI, who wrote in detail of the need for a type of education which was ‘adapted to the needs of citizens in an industrial democracy’ and this, he maintained, required not technical classes but ‘informed humanism’.
The origins of this view probably came from within the Board of Education under Morant who, together with his assistants, desired to bridge the gap between education and industry so as to create a ‘balanced culture for the masses’ with the schools providing pupils with ‘meaning for the work they did with their hands’.
Echoing this anxiety over the future of democracy at the end of the First World War, another government inspector wrote of the need to keep working-class youth ‘in touch with‘the forces of civilisation’, for it was necessary always to keep in mind that ‘we are training a whole social class’.
And what, thought reformers, could be more effective in pursuit of this goal than to inculcate in young workers the values of citizenship — a popular doctrine which drew support from all political perspectives?
There was, then, unanimous agreement that the overriding function of the continuation schools was to prepare their pupils for ‘the efficient discharge of the duties of citizenship’, but it was also understood that in order to make this viable, young people had to be taught to ‘increase their adaptability and skill in bread-winning occupations’.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ‘ADAPTABLE’ WORKER
The notion of ‘adaptability’ was always attractive to various groups of reformers because it appeared to promise so much.
The transitive verb meant ‘to make suitable’ and when translated into human terms this indicated a solution to a number of perceived difficulties in the juvenile labour-market: at the very least it offered a safeguard against redundancy through technological change; it provided a necessary companion for ‘intelligence’, one of the qualities demanded by ‘modern’industrial conditions; and it seemed to imply a degree of social contentment, integration, and stability, which were important, if only in so far as they could serve as protection against the ravages of unemployment and, in extreme cases, unemployability.
But what did contemporaries mean when they used the word?
Although precise definitions are hard to come by, it is clear that they looked to some kind of ideal worker, that is, someone who was trustworthy, interested, intelligent, literate and numerate, full of initiative, and capable of mental and physical agility.
E. J. Urwick, in a pioneering essay, told his readers that ‘in the present conditions of industry’, the ‘supreme essentials’ for both skilled and unskilled labour were ‘intelligence and adaptability’.
This was not to deny the importance of technical education for the prospective tradesman, but he would be ‘unsafe’ unless this was supplemented by a training which allowed him ‘to adapt himself to new conditions’.
And for the unskilled, the urgent requirement was a general education which would develop ‘intelligence, quickness of brain, and power of adaptation’.
Urwick quoted an employer: ‘I want ordinary men who have learned to use their brains.’
This, said Urwick, leading his readers, reflected the essence of modern labour, namely, that it was ‘mental’.
While machines could do the work of muscle, ‘the labourer is needed to guide the machines, and to take his place as an intelligent factor in the complex system of modern industry’.
The aim of the schools, said Sidney Webb, was not to turn every man into a skilled worker at an apprenticed trade, but into 
a man of trained hand, eye, and brain; disciplined and good mannered; of sound muscle and fully developed lungs; with a general knowledge of common tools and simple machines; able to read a plan and make a drawing to scale; ready to undertake any kind of unspecialised work,; and competent, even if he does unskilled work, to do it ‘with his head’.
Similarly, Freeman argued, in relation to unskilled labour, that ‘uneducative’ employment was unavoidable and, therefore, it was necessary that ‘the intelligence and character of the adolescent be trained outside the workshop’: ‘We cannot train for a trade, but we can enable the worker to do his duties as thoroughly as possible’; such training would give a ‘familiarity’with ‘ordinary tools’and ‘simple machines’, a grounding in ‘mechanics’and ‘competent draughtsmanship’.
He then added: ‘What is required of the low-skilled worker is that he shall be energetic, intelligent, careful, resourceful, trustworthy and adaptable.’
Intelligence was also a critical factor for Bray who interpreted adaptability as ‘a trained intelligence’.
Where skilled labour was concerned, he said, employers wanted this quality as well as‘trustworthiness’ and ‘a highly specialised manual dexterity’.
The skilled man was one who had acquired ‘a general use of the tools employed in his trade’(even though this was not necessarily of use to his employer) which would give him ‘adaptability’.
In the case of unskilled labour, Bray criticized the assumption that it required no training and made no demand on ‘skill’: this was ‘a grave mistake’.
Such labour also required intelligence, together with ‘manual training and practice’.
At present, he argued, the unskilled were engaged with machinery and they were ‘almost always inadequate and unsatisfactory’.
But all kinds of labour ‘had to be capable of readily adapting themselves to new conditions, and not become petrified in a rigid and inflexible mould’.
Young workers needed to develop the ‘ability to grapple with unfamiliar conditions, and the habit of applying one's mind and one's knowledge to what one has to do’.
So, adaptability had two meanings.
First, it referred to the ability of a worker to move about within a workshop — hopefully from process to process — a mobility bestowed by ‘knowledge’ of different processes which in turn involved familiarity with the tools of the trade and the necessary skill to use them.
In many respects reformers viewed the term simply as the obverse of specialization.
Secondly, it referred to mental qualities: dexterity, attitudes, intelligence, flexibility, initiative, and so on.
This was a crucial consideration, especially for the unskilled, because it was seen to be their only asset.
But it was by no means to be confined to labourers since the emphasis on being adaptable was an implicit recognition of the importance of the mental factor inherent in all forms of labour, and one which was deemed to be of increasing relevance under ‘modern conditions’.
If this is what was meant by adaptability, why was it such a popular idea among those who discussed industrial training within the framework of compulsory part-time day continuation schools?
The answer, as far as ‘boy labour’ reformers were concerned, lay in their perceptions of the condition of the juvenile labour-market, which meant ‘the apprenticeship question’, the influence of machinery, and the relation of ‘boy labour’to the problem of unemployment.
This is an enormous area to consider briefly because it touches on the central issue of what is sometimes called ‘the second industrial revolution’ and, more precisely, on the relationship between labour and technological change.
Some consideration, however, is essential in order to clarify the aspirations of reformers.
It has been shown that one of the basic criticisms of ‘boy labour’ was the ‘decay’or ‘decline’of ‘old-style’apprenticeship under the impact of excessive specialization of process which resulted in a ‘dilution’of apprenticeship proper.
There is some difficulty, however, in establishing the reality of apprenticeship during the Edwardian period because historians disagree about the meaning and extent of ‘de-skilling’.
Some reformers have been accused of either exaggerating or misunderstanding contemporary developments.
Although it is conceded that a ‘decline’ occurred in a few trades, reformers are said to  have been confused by terminology and to have failed to distinguish between ‘deskilling of individual jobs and industrial changes which led to the number of jobs in certain industries or occupations declining either relatively or absolutely, but not to the nature of the job themselves changing’.
Other writers have concluded differently, especially with reference to engineering, building, shipbuilding, and printing.
Whatever the disagreements, it seems reasonable to say that the period circa 1890–1914 witnessed ‘an unprecedented advance of machine technique and of mechanisation generally and automatism in particular’.
There occurred a ‘new era of accuracy and precision in engineering…the spread of the interchangeable system…increasing subdivision of productive processes and specialization of both plant and labour’.
Machine technique entered the boot and shoe trade, certain processes connected with the erection of the hull of a ship and type-setting.
An entirely new development was the spread of the automatic machine, for example, the turret-lathe and the Norththrop automatic loom.
In general, the division of labour principle was ‘making some revolutionary progress in certain pursuits’, especially in engineering where the craft of the turner was completely changing and in the production of boots.
In addition to changes in existing trades, such as engineering and boot and shoe manufacture, new trades were developing from the 1880s: sewing-machines, cycles, and motor and electrical manufacture.
The chief characteristics of this second phase of industrialization have been described as
the introduction of new semi-automatic machines…the increasing use of unskilled and semi-skilled labour in trades hitherto the exclusive preserve of the skilled man…the adaptation of a rudimentary system of standardised and interchangeable parts…the  predominance of factory over the workshop as the unit of production…the introduction of aspects of Taylorism, particularly the premium-bonus system’.
The undeniable fact was that these changes had ‘a widely varied impact on skilled workers’.
Every day, wrote one social investigator, the ‘old methods which require manual skill and long practice are being superseded by the progress of mechanical invention.
‘Skill’ in the old sense, is no longer what is wanted.’
Several observers even suggested (wrongly) that ‘skilled’ and ‘unskilled’no longer had a definite meaning and, therefore, the important distinction was between ‘good’and ‘bad’occupations.
However extreme this view, there was some truth in the assertion that ‘the changes in methods of production are rapid’, and this posed a threat to the employment prospects of both skilled and unskilled labour.
Moreover, the greater use of semi-skilled labour, either in new processes or in those previously monopolized by apprenticed tradesmen, not only threatened to undermine job security but also helped to create a new and indeterminate category of ‘skill’.
Traditional terms denoting job status, such as‘labourer’, ‘apprentice’, ‘tradesman’, and ‘mate’, were no longer amenable to straightforward definitions.
The ‘unprecedented advance of machine technique’(in common with other developments in production) seemed to be altering the nature of ‘work’ itself as it made more complex and numerous demands on labour.
With this in mind, in advocating the ‘New Apprenticeship’, Bray warned of the dangers of ‘monotony’ in the workshop which, he said, was hostile to industrial wisdom:
Unless there is a well-trained intelligence to begin with, the continual performance of a single task will reduce the man to the level of a machine…the employer does not want a mere machine…
He wants a machine with intelligence; he must therefore have a man.
But  the intelligence must rest on a broad basis of education or the machine element will prove too much for it.
And Sadler made a similar observation:
In many of its new developments…modern machine-industry does not…necessarily degrade the operative into a machine.
On the contrary, one of its chief characteristics is to sieve out the workers into grades according to the degree in which they possess the required kinds of ability and alertness.
An automatic machine does not want mere automata to look after it.
It sifts the workers according to their capacity of skilfully watchful service.
There is a greater demand than ever for men possessing good judgment, trustworthiness of character and the power of dealing intelligently and thoughtfully with new conditions.
‘One of our most pressing problems’, he concluded, ‘is how to deal with the human waste which has come through the discarding of the services of workers unable to adjust to the new requirements’.
Sadler was expressing the widely-shared belief among reformers that, given the prevalence of machinery, the labour demand of the present, and even more so of the future, was for ‘skilled and versatile minds ’.
The importance of such ‘educated’ minds lay, of course, in their presumed ability to cope with a variety of industrial processes, including the total environment of modern production.
In contributing towards the creation of the properly trained worker, adaptability was also thought to be an indispensable element in the struggle to reduce unemployment,(what Sadler called ‘human waste’), though its direct impact was the subject of some discussion.
On the one hand, there were those who argued for a simple causal relationship between education and security in the labour-market.
The author of a social study of Norwich reasoned that as ‘Unemployment is partly a problem of education’, so ‘a half-trained or untrained man cannot adapt  himself easily and rapidly to the endless changes of production under modern conditions.’
J. H. Whitehouse, the Liberal MP, proclaimed that ‘in view of the relation of unemployment to adolescent and child labour’, an improved system of education was ‘a matter of urgent necessity’.
Bray also thought that with the onset of adaptability, the problem of unemployment ‘would be comparatively easy of solution’.
Sadler, however, was more cautious.
Education, in itself, he said, was ‘no panacea’, but it could help the young person to avoid unskilled labour.
Sidney Webb and Beveridge were equally careful in expressing their views.
Webb denied the value of adaptability alone in preventing unemployment, for there was no straightforward correlation between education and an individual's ability to find regular work.
In the analysis provided by Beveridge, education could keep the intelligence ‘alive and growing’, but it could not affect either the causes of industrial fluctuation or prevent casual labour.
However, adolescents were by definition ‘adaptable’ and this asset, he said, needed to be developed.
Young people could be ‘moulded to the demand’ from employers and this was crucial because in the long term, the ‘character of the demand…is ultimately governed by the possibilities of supply.’
In other words, as the supply changed its character, so the demand would also change and unemployment could be reduced, in particular that caused by ‘lack of mobility and adaptability under circumstances making these qualities essential’.
But there was another very significant aspect of adaptability which indicates the continual blurring, by almost everyone concerned, of economic and social (moral) issues.
In the minds of reformers, being ‘adaptable’ suggested both individual fulfilment and a sense of community loyalty and, therefore, social and occupational cohesion.
In effect, the concept implied a commitment on the part of the employee to work as a moral good in  its own right, irrespective of wages, conditions, or personal (selfish) satisfaction.
Instead, the satisfaction was to be derived from being prepared for labour and in the performance of tasks, conscious of their relation to a greater whole.
The adaptable worker would partner machines without being alienated, while simultaneously displaying interest, application, and initiative, in addition to possessing an all-round competence.
Adolescents were to be taught that they had a duty to serve the community and these ideas were to be bound together within the framework of ‘citizenship’.
In a lecture given before the British Association, C. T. Millis, the educationalist and principal of the Borough Polytechnic Institute, said ‘We need good citizens, but good citizens must be good workers.’
There was no necessary connection between these two categories; their relationship was entirely founded on ethical and political considerations.
THE SEARCH FOR THE ‘CITIZEN’
One of the most popular demands of ‘boy labour’ and other sympathetic reformers, or perhaps it should be described as an aspiration, for that is what it was, referred to the creation of ‘a satisfactory race of citizens’.
The idea of citizenship itself had a special status during the late Victorian and Edwardian periods as politicians, philosophers, educationalists, and social scientists were continually calling for a revival of the concept, by which they had in mind a form of social organization stressing harmony, duty, service, self-realization, rationality, and morally good behaviour.
Throughout the latter part of the nineteenth century ‘citizenship’ had been part of the civilizing process; so it was not without reason that T. H. S. Escott, writing in 1897, described ‘Social Citizenship’as ‘a Moral growth of Victorian England’, probably best exemplified by the Settlement Movement, beginning in the 1880s, with its emphasis on ‘civic idealism’.
But, as a concept determining the  political and educational programme, it remained rather vague, standing as it did for all manner of virtues before a spectrum of interests.
In the context of the debate on continuation schools it can best be understood through an examination of two of its principal features, namely, political stability, which of necessity included social harmony, and what has been called the ‘civic ideal’, which meant service to the community.
First, the philosophical source from which citizenship emerged needs to be recognized, as does the relationship which existed between the philosophy and New Liberalism.
It is well known that the belief in citizenship was derived from the writings of T. H. Green, the Oxford Idealist philosopher, who more than any other figure made the connection between philosophy and educational theory and practice.
The substance of the meaning of citizenship was that the extension of the suffrage in 1867 should be accompanied by ‘a spiritual advance imposing new duties as well as new rights’.
This became an even more important matter with the extension of the franchise in 1884–5, and when the votes for women campaign intensified after 1905.
Accordingly, for many public figures writing in the 1890s and early 1900s, the character of citizenship and the common understanding and experience of it, all of which was bound up with the imperatives of progress, became urgent political and social issues.
The roots of British Philosophical Idealism were to be found in the philosophy of Hegel, as well as in that of Kant, Fichte, Plato and Aristotle.
This body of thought, sometimes called Neo-Hegelism, which had been introduced into Britain by Benjamin Jowett, Green's tutor at Balliol, rejected the dominant philosophical view, derived from the Enlightenment, which was ‘empiricist, individualistic, utilitarian’, and chose instead to see reality as ‘an organic interconnected whole, no part of which was independent of the rest’.
To the Idealists, man was essentially ‘a social creature’ and one very much bound up with the State.
Consequently, and this was of critical significance for all those who were concerned about the various aspects of the youth question, ‘His education, which is the means whereby he becomes a citizen, is thus one of the State's foremost concerns.’
The process of ‘becoming’ involved the development of the ‘character’of pupils, since only in this way could they be properly prepared for their ‘shared social and political’life.
If citizenship embraced the reconciliation of rights and duties within a democracy, in general terms, as Vincent and Plant suggest, the concept also ‘implied a noble purpose’, orientated as it was toward ‘community life’; it represented ‘the consciousness of the ends of life and their origin and unity in the community as a whole’.
The specific values of citizenship voiced the social significance of ‘the common good, ‘service’, ‘character’, ‘rationality’, ‘self-realisation’, and ‘morality’.
These were the terms that gave substance to the concept, and in so doing represented ‘a co-ordination and subordination of individual actions towards some common good’.
But what was it about the concept of citizenship that made it so popular in political discussion and why were ‘boy labour’ reformers so eager to introduce working-class adolescents to its supposed virtues?
The espousal of citizenship in particular, and philosophical Idealism in general , coincided with the growth of New Liberalism, a radical political creed which was  virtually synonymous with economic and social reform and, therefore, it is not easy to separate the theory and practice of the former from that of the latter.
It is especially difficult given that several of the most important Idealists were also actively contributing to the reinterpretation of Liberal principles.
But whether Idealism helped Liberalism and the ‘New’ Liberals to speak and act on the basis of a more dynamic and conceptually successful social theory, or whether, to quote Michael Freeden, ‘Rather than Idealism giving birth to a new version of liberalism, it was liberalism that was able to assimilate certain aspects of Idealism to its mainstream and thus bestow new meaning upon Idealist tenets’, is not a problem of immediate relevance here.
We should, however, appreciate the close relationship that existed between the philosophical beliefs and the political doctrine, which not only manifested itself in the convergence of interests with respect to social problems and class politics, but also provided the proposed reform in education (and other attempts to ‘educate’ young workers, such as the club movement) with a certain authority.
On the other hand, the nature of the relationship was always contested, and ultimately it failed to produce a lasting system of part-time day continuation schools.
Secondly, and this was most important in terms of associating adolescents with the community, many of the ideas and precepts embodied in citizenship, such as duty, service, neighbourliness, social stability, self-realization, and contentment with one's societal position, were politically convenient to reformers who stressed the significance of providing instruction for the moral development of young people.
The provision of instruction was crucial for the improvement of the environment, which in turn was a necessary precondition for the emergence of ‘character’.
Philosophical Idealism, then, was well suited to be called upon as testimony in support of what, after all the huffing and puffing was basically a political  programme.
The rhetoric of Idealism, as proclaimed by, for example, Sadler, Urwick, and Haldane, gave intellectual credence to their views on the importance of educating for the new democratic age, as they perceived it, especially after 1918.
With its ethical imperatives, Idealism was perfectly suited to debate the ‘boy labour’ problem which was usually seen, in one way or another, as a problem of ‘character’and, therefore, notions of duty, service, subordination, and so on, were eagerly and easily incorporated as desirable features in the making of the new image of youth.
Of course, individual reformers did not need to be committed Philosophical Idealists in order to adhere to the new image; old-fashioned ageism reached the same conclusion and had more or less the same remedies for the ‘problem’.
But once again, Idealism provided the theoretical justification for a (political) critique based upon combined ageist and class prejudices.
Of the two principal features of citizenship, political stability, including social harmony, was by far the most comprehensive and provided the fundamental raison d'être .
In the final analysis, all questions concerning harmonious relations in society were derived from issues relating to social class.
T. H. Green had hoped to see a dialogue between opposing interests in a society where self-sacrifice would overcome self-interest, and where citizenship rather than class consciousness would determine priorities.
In fact he
tried to inaugurate a new concept of citizenship which would link men of different social classes, The concept was based upon the notion that there was a good common to members of all classes, a goal the existence of which could be established from German Idealist metaphysics and which could be made visible in actual measures of educational reform and social welfare.
The ‘antagonism of interest’, which Green knew existed, could ‘only be met by moral ideas appropriate…to the citizen stage…the reconciliation must come through a higher gospel of rights — the gospel of duty’.
By the end of the nineteenth century it was fairly obvious that the dialogue was not  materializing, as the social and political events of the 1880s had made clear, and the employers' counter-attack on trade unions in the 1890s gave little hope for any kind of reconciliation.
By the early 1900s, the birth of the Labour Party, despite being closely involved with Liberalism, signalled a new phase in class politics, and between 1910 and 1918 the continued growth of the party together with a rapid increase in trade-union membership, syndicalism, deteriorating industrial relations, social unrest, and the influence of the Russian Revolution, were all factors pointing in an ominous direction.
The nervous mood was captured by the Conservative Morning Post which reminded its readers that the modern franchise was concentrating more power into the hands of the working class.
‘Can we afford’, it asked, ‘to leave our National and Imperial interests to the control of an ignorant and illiterate and unprogressive democracy?’
It seemed to many reformers that certain ‘interests’ were threatening the survival and growth of the ‘common good’.
This feeling was unambiguously expressed by J. H. Muirhead, a Professor of Idealist Philosophy and secretary of the Ethical Society, who, while acknowledging the long history of ‘class differences’, nevertheless warned that ‘Class conflicts waged in the name of fundamentally different and irreconcilable social and ethical standards are a new thing.’
Consequently, although reformers saw ‘adaptability’ as a sine qua non of citizenship, many were equally insistent on the more overtly  political aspects of what was usually paraded as a moral concept, even though the intensification of class politics from the 1880s onwards more or less completely subordinated the purely moral principles.
Sadler had articulated the political sentiment in his Manchester inquiry when he remarked on how education was but one aspect of ‘a many sided problem’, and as such it necessitated both the development of individuality and personal conviction and ‘a sense of national duty and obligation towards the State’, which could only come through ‘better and more systematic training for the duties of citizenship and for home-making and family claims’.
The critical factor in the ‘many sided problem’ was felt to be the question of ‘Rights and Duties within the State’, and their relation to the wider issues arising out of an increasingly democratic society, notably that of the ‘sectional interest’of the labour movement, which was always of profound concern to the New Liberals who regarded it as undermining political stability and social harmony.
The task of education was to reinvigorate citizenship in order that pupils might act morally and embrace ‘duty’.
Many of those who talked and wrote about the concept pined for the ideal situation which had existed in ancient Greece where
the meaning of citizenship was plain.
Nothing stood between you and your fellows in the community.
Citizenship was obviously and visually a life, your whole life, with common dangers, common responsibilities, common enjoyments, and common ambitions…
In modern life it is very much harder to see our way…[it]has almost ceased to he a controlling conception for us.
Education no longer meant, ‘as it should, the victory over the idols of class’; instead everything was judged ‘by the standard of a class or clique’.
Urwick shared this view, arguing that too narrow an interpretation of citizenship prevailed: ‘the sense of duty is not realised, and the all-pervading duties of  citizenship are lost sight of in the wilderness of interests of both individuals and groups’.
Similarly, James Bryce, chairman of the Royal Commission on Secondary Education, also looked on sectional interests as a danger to the common good because ‘civilized societies’, he said, were progressing towards popular government and, given this direction, ‘each member of a free community must be capable of citizenship’ which involved ‘Intelligence, Self-Control, Conscience’.
The true citizen must be ‘able to understand the interests of the community, must be able to subordinate his own will to the general will, must feel his responsibility to the community and be prepared to serve it by voting, working, or (if need be) fighting’.
The most difficult requisite to produce was ‘Conscience’ for the struggles for political liberty had always been in the name of ‘Rights’, and in this conflict, ‘the other side of the civic relation naturally fell out of sight’.
By this Bryce meant that ‘Duty’ had been forgotten, whereas it was actually ‘the correlative of Right’.
Since the late eighteenth century, there had developed the ‘perfectionist doctrine’ which claimed that ‘government of the people by the people’was most appropriate, but according to Bryce, this had now been shown to be wrong.
It had become ‘painfully evident’ that the majority of people did not possess the merits of ‘Capable Citizens…
In no European country is the average citizen what the citizen in a democracy ought to be.’
Ordinary people, he said, fell far short of the ‘proper standard of duty’ because they suffered from ‘indolence…self-interest…[and]party spirit’.
The solution was for the ‘wild stock’ of the average man to be amended by the grafting on of ‘the better conscience’.
And how could this best be achieved?
‘The most obvious way to begin is through the education of those who are to be citizens’.
The view that duties were being swamped by particular interests, each wallowing in an orgy of rights, was common  among the Idealists, as it was among the New Liberals.
In place of rights, the intention was to emphasize the notion of ‘service’ on behalf of all interests in the community.
John MacCunn, Professor of Philosophy at Liverpool University and author of several standard texts on citizenship and character, was keen to impress upon his readers that rights alone did not make the citizen; what mattered was the way in which they were used: democracy itself was only a beginning, not an end.
The importance of citizenship lay in the individual ‘giving’ to his city, rather than taking from it.
The same exhortation came from Henry Jones, another Professor of Idealist Philosophy, active in Welsh education matters, friend of Lloyd George and author of The Principles of Citizenship .
Jones wrote in terms of‘Social Responsibilities’ between ‘Man and Society’, arguing that it was ‘Mutual Service and Mutual Obligations of State and Citizen’which kept the community alive and well; only ‘the continued well-doing of its citizens’could sustain the State.
When he asked rhetorically, what ‘services, can we render? the real answer, he said, lies ‘in your own circumstances, your vocation and your character’; adding, significantly: ‘Duty only binds those who discover it and impose it upon them selves’.
Jones is expressing three central and fundamentally related features of Idealist ethics: the idea of service; the acceptance of one's position in society and a willingness to perform allotted tasks to the best of one's ability; and the belief that morality cannot be imposed by external forces, but that it must come from within the individual personality.
The unspoken assumption which sustains these features is that they are easily defined and non-controversial, since all disputes were subject to Green's gospel of duty, with its moral and being the classless  ‘common good’.
And though the notion of the ‘common good’ went through several transformations at the hands of the New Liberals, it continued, in Hobhouse's words, to require ‘a readiness to forgo personal advantage for the general gain, a recognition of mutual dependence’.
But, of course, this was a conscious attempt by liberal theorists to settle political issues by reference to what T. H. Marshall has called ‘social citizenship’, thereby evading those more difficult questions of economic inequality which so concerned late Victorian and Edwardian commentators.
The promotion of ‘service’, mediated via citizenship, was a constant theme throughout the debate on part-time day continuation schools because more than any other single aspect it emphasized the moral value of working conscientiously in a given occupation in order to contribute to the welfare of the community; hence the importance of creating the ‘adaptable’ worker.
All those who were familiar with the works of Kerschensteiner knew that the task of the schools was to educate their pupils to serve their fellow citizens; they were to be taught the value of joy in work as service.
The end of all education, he said, was not merely the technically efficient workman, but one who ‘not only seeks to advance his own welfare through his work, but also consciously places his work in the service of the community.
The Report of the Consultative Committee on Continuation Schools (no doubt under the influence of Sadler) quoted him approvingly when he wrote that apprentices should learn ‘the truth of the maxim that the meaning of life is not to rule but to render service to one's neighbour, service to one's calling, service to one's native country, service to truth and to justice’.
Such an exhortation  was meant to encourage adolescents to accept what was in effect an ideological belief, namely, that ‘any service for which payment is accepted, however humble it may be, is to be regarded as a service to the community and to be conscientiously performed.’
Writing in 1918, but with a little more subtlety, J. Dover Wilson advised that the War had transformed work from being ‘a meaningless drudgery’ into something meaningful, because it brought about ‘a common purpose’, which needed to be continued by encouraging workers to regard ‘production’not as ‘forced labour’, but as ‘a social service’.
Education was necessary in cultivating this belief, for though it could not abolish the monotony of labour, ‘it can add value, meaning and even pride to the vocation of the worker if it helps him to understand his relations with his fellows, the importance of his contribution to the national task’.
This understanding of ‘service’ was crucial to the political practicality of citizenship which always depended upon being able to offer a reconciliation between ‘personal rights’and, despite the vacillating liberal reinterpretations, ‘the community’.
‘Service, if consciously and freely given, seemed to be the most appropriate way of achieving this end.
But the immediate significance of imbuing adolescents with such a ‘civic idealism’ lay, as Dover Wilson said, in transcending the ordinariness of labour, in its transformation through ethical principles into a moral act.
If labouring was to be perceived as a ‘moral’ activity, then young workers had to be persuaded to see ‘meaning’in wage-earning.
Of course, this was both a political and a disciplinary measure.
Reformers were seeking to integrate working-class adolescents into the ‘common good’ by means of an educational programme which it was hoped would lead them to internalize the community perspective and, therefore, use it as the criterion for evaluating their own wishes and responses.
Labour, and its consequences, was not the only factor involved but it was crucial in relation to the  social problem, economic efficiency, industrial relations, and to sectional interests.
Moreover, in the simplest of terms, it was correctly felt that occupational satisfaction, which a sense of ‘service’ could create, was a prerequisite of a stable political culture.
The call for education to buttress democracy by inculcating into young people the principles of citizenship became increasingly exaggerated and, in some senses, melodramatic.
Henry Dyer, the Scottish educationalist, warned of the ‘vast forces’ which needed to be ‘guided by an intelligent democracy’which itself could only be ensured by ‘an adequate system of education’, otherwise, everything ‘will end in chaos and despotism’.
One of the most urgent pleas came from Haldane, who regarded the education of the working class as ‘the new problem of the twentieth century’.
In his introduction to the English edition of Kerschensteiner's The Schools and the Nation , he wrote
Democracy is becoming a reality, the possessors of new and increasing political power are finding their feet, not less abroad than in this country.
As their education and knowledge increase they are pressing more and more each year for better social conditions and for a larger share in the fruits of industry.
The movement is one to be welcomed if it proceeds along the right lines, the lines along which it may develop and not hamper national life.
But no compulsion can secure that it will proceed along those lines…it can only be supplied with the knowledge and training which may guide it to seek its own solution in the better state with higher ideals.
For Fisher, speaking on his Education Bill in 1917, the ‘governing conception’ of the proposals was to ensure ‘the production of good citizens’, which was now a matter of some urgency since the extension of the franchise had put ‘a greater demand than ever before upon the civic spirit’.
He was more  explicit in his meeting with a deputation from the Federation of British Industries at which he said that the ‘secret’ of controlling young workers was to ‘fill their minds with something like humane letters, or elements of science’, then ‘you get a humane outlook throughout the country and you get industrial relations more intelligently discussed’.
In general, Fisher was keen to stress the ‘healing’ qualities of education, telling a Newcastle audience how it ‘dispels the hideous clouds of class suspicion and softens the asperities of faction’.
A. L. Smith, chairman of the Adult Education Committee at the Ministry of Reconstruction, also warned: ‘If industrial moral and social side must be taken up in a way that had hardly been experimented upon as yet…
Unless we educated our democracy there would be the greatest social and political trouble as the outcome of the war’.
The message was bluntly stated by the Times Educational Supplement : ‘In these columns we have repeatedly declared that the new franchise and the new education are supplementary things.
Without education, Bolshevism, or Syndicalism run mad, indicates the unconscious goal’.
The compulsory part-time day continuation school for boys was meant to provide physical, vocational and ‘humanistic’ education with the intention of producing individuals who were disciplined, moral, contented, and possessed of a civic conscience.
At one end of the spectrum of aims and aspirations stood the need to turn out adaptable workers, suitable for a developing labour-market; while at the other end there was the desire to educate young people for their role as adults in the evolving mass democracy.
And in between were ranged a number of additional hopes and objectives all of which were intended to contribute toward the creation of the ideal citizen.
In his diary for August, 1915, Sadler wrote ‘Better education is vital in England’; it was necessary for trade competition, efficient use of resources, and for class co-operation.
Years earlier, in 1903, he had told a British Academy audience that ‘Implicit in educational theory…is a theory of social order.’
The ‘fundamental difficulty at the present time’, he continued, ‘seems to be the impossibility of forecasting with confidence the future lines of social organization.’
Lodged in between these two dates were a number of factors which gave the issue a pressing urgency.
First, ‘boy labour’ came to be defined as a problem which, together with the ‘discovery’of adolescence, meant that working-class youth attained a hitherto unknown pre-eminence among social theorists and reformers.
Second, the trade-union movement continued to grow while the Labour Party established itself (if only as an adjunct of Liberalism), and as both institutions were significant expressions of sectional interests, they created apprehension among the political authorities.
Third, there was the severe deterioration of industrial relations in the few years prior to 1914 which brought with it violent strikes and syndicalism.
Thus by the outbreak of war a number of questions and problems had forced themselves onto the agendas of middle-class society, and by the end of the war all these factors were resolved into one major consideration: the nature and control of ‘industrial democracy’.
The proposed continuation schools were seen as a means whereby the newly-discovered young workers would be given a ‘liberal’ education, involving a version of civic ethics which emphasized both occupational adaptability and community service.
The intentions were to give the adolescents a ‘character training’; to produce more efficient workers; and to educate youth in the duties of citizenship.
If, however, the schools offered the prospect of serving such obvious needs why, then, did the experiment collapse?
Given that occupational ‘adaptability’, for instance, was such a prominent objective, why did the Federation of British Industries and employers in general oppose compulsory part-time day (though not evening) continuation classes?
In  some respects, reformers found themselves isolated: working-class ‘clients’ on one side, uninterested middle-class businessmen on the other.
The answer lies in part in the social position of the reformers who belonged to the professional rather than the employing middle class: they were social workers, teachers, social scientists, philosophers, clerics, doctors, and psychologists, the majority of whom were distanced from the realities of the labour-market.
Moreover, the distance was exaggerated by the educational character of their proposal, which employers recognized would restrict their freedom to use juvenile labour at their own discretion; and, given employers' traditional suspicion of further education, they regarded the whole idea as unnecessary, potentially expensive and disruptive of production schedules.
Nor were the moral and ethical themes of the reformers helpful in making the schools appear relevant: discipline, character, conscience, service, and so on.
None of these had much significance for the hard-pressed businessman, struggling against his competitors at home and abroad, fighting off trade-union influence and coping with a growing volume of government-inspired social and industrial legislation.
True, the reformers promised an ‘adaptable’ worker, but adaptability lay in the eyes of the beholder and, anyway, in the short term it was more relevant to the supply of, than the demand for, labour and, therefore, of little immediate interest to employers.
However, the single most important factor militating against employers' cooperation was that they never regarded the ‘problems’ highlighted by reformers — indiscipline, excessive occupational mobility, absence of vocational guidance, lack of systematic  industrial training, and inadequate preparation for family responsibilities and exercise of the franchise — as problems for which they felt responsible; they had little interest in the search for solutions.
While they might find ‘delinquent’ behaviour, in its many manifestations, irritating, as the role of juvenile labour in the production process was always either peripheral or  auxiliary , the ‘delinquency’was more than compensated for by the advantages of using young workers who were cheap, malleable, non-unionized, easy to recruit and just as easy to dismiss.
Once again the spectre of the adolescent as worker and wage-earner returned to obstruct the aspirations of reformers who came into direct conflict with the priorities of market forces, including the evolving relationship between labour and technology, the urgency of the small firm for immediate profits, and the overwhelming influence of supply and demand.
Such a reality had little sympathy for the training of character and the creation of citizens.
Conclusion
The shaping of adolescence by social and cultural forces does not mean that there are no inherent biological and hormonal changes during puberty.
For adolescent behaviour is determined by the interaction between cultural and biological forces in a particular society at a particular moment in history.
Adolescence, like infancy, childhood, and old age, is real.
What matters is what is thought of it, how it is seen, what is done to it, and what is expected from it.
This study has been about mainly the Edwardian moment.
In the broadest terms, it has been concerned with one aspect of youth history: how and why, and with what consequences for age relations, middle-class reformers put together a number of images of working-class adolescents.
These pages have described and examined some of the ways in which groups of adults perceived young workers, and how and why they sought to train, supervise, and control them.
However, they did not seek to achieve these ends merely for reasons of age prejudice, though this was always an important consideration; indeed, many of the other reasons grew out of this prejudice.
But of greater significance, ultimately, was the attempt by youth workers, social scientists, educationalists, and politicians to solve a number of social problems whose effects stretched well beyond young people themselves, involving as they did the economy, labour, racial hygiene, and political stability.
In pursuit of their ends, reformers and others were compelled to alter their perceptions of (and attitudes toward) young people and, therefore, the images which they used to order and define them.
As the images were changed so, too, were age relations, since the former not only are always expressions of the latter, but also clearly help to sustain them.
But it can hardly be overemphasized that the new images were not constructed in any artificial, mechanistic sense, separate, as it were, from  attitudes and real social relationships on the one hand and, on the other, the economic and political structures of society.
As the clarity of the perception of youth as a problem sharpened, so new images emerged.
In some respects the period witnessed the birth of three principal sets of perceptions, involving changes in attitude, and associated in turn with ‘boy labour’, the psychology of ‘adolescence’, and the social critique of the young workers' personality.
Each of these overlapped with the other; each depended on the other for either illustration, evidence, or knowledge, and each reinforced the other, providing both an individual and a collective logic and coherence.
The ‘boy labour problem’ was a feature of the larger social and political issues which dominated the Edwardian era, and obviously one that came to be taken seriously by contemporaries, in terms of the efficient functioning of the labour-market in general, and of specific problems deriving from the market, such as un- and underemployment, industrial training, casual and unskilled labour and, in the wider sphere, poverty and family morale.
Once this had happened, attitudes toward, and images of, youth were profoundly altered (though, of course, the alteration was a process over time, not a dramatic moment) and a new pattern of age relations began to develop.
But there was another and ultimately more significant image under construction, especially during the Edwardian years, which involved the transformation of ‘youth’ into ‘adolescence’as a ‘stage of life’.
The process meant that adolescence ceased to be what an American scholar has called an ‘idea’ and became, in his words, a ‘social fact’.
This study has illustrated the ways in which the social sciences created ‘new knowledges’ as they revolutionized themselves, and none more so than psychology which obtained its influential position by applying itself to a number of ‘practices’involving problems of the ‘abnormal functioning’of either individuals or institutions.
As a result of adolescence becoming a ‘social fact’, a specificity was bestowed on boy labour which gave the whole subject of juvenile employment an enhanced status in part derived from its scientific description, and in part from its social relevance.
Of even greater importance, however, the concept united and ordered so many different facets in observable behaviour of the young and claimed to provide such insight and understanding of their physiology and psychology, in particular the significance of ‘instincts’, ‘emotions’, and ‘habits’, that everything about them, including their wage-earning capacity, could be made knowable and manageable.
This explains why reformers were fundamentally optimistic about their ability to make youth more dependent and subservient and, therefore, less threatening.
The prominence of instincts and emotions in the social identification of boy workers as adolescents was emphasized not only by the nature of Edwardian social observation, but also by the social psychology of the crowd.
In many respects the urban working class appeared to share some of the characteristics of young people: they were indisciplined, disordered, volatile, emotional, and liable to be subverted through undesirable influences, not least of which was their own collective personality.
It seemed that while both the crowd and adolescents had within them potential for good, they also had a destructive or anarchic potential; in each there was a conflict, what Urwick had likened to Jekyll and Hyde.
This theme is one which forcefully impressed itself upon Edwardian social politics, and thereafter.
It explains how ‘adolescence’ as a concept could almost appear as a metaphor for human nature: dangerous if left untutored and ‘natural’, but capable of ennobling the race if the ‘natural’was educated by, to quote Urwick again, ‘the skilled hand’.
As an age-group, a stage of life, adolescents stood, clearly visible, defined and itemized, the embodiment of so many of the tensions and contradictions peculiar to the period, without which they would never have been ‘discovered’.
We have also seen the complex procedures whereby under the influence of their stage of life, the economics of boy labour was thought to affect adolescents' social behaviour, which was usually defined in terms of their personality.
This meant that  an older social critique, whose pedigree went back hundreds of years, was expanded to take account of juvenile employment in such a manner as to make the critique more subtle, at least in the sense that some reformers began to suggest that the combination of juvenile psychology, conditions of labour and industrial training was influential far beyond the workplace and on a scale previously unrecognized.
After all, one of the most important lessons of the sociological inquiries was to teach that demoralization was organic; it could not be confined and, therefore, all groups within the working class were at risk.
Hitherto, youth, unlike children, had been largely ignored but the events and trends that so characterized the decades circa 1880 and 1920 brought young workers firmly within the investigative framework of the social sciences as report after report vividly illustrated their significance in most areas of society.
In effect, the new images, emanating from sociology, economics, eugenics and psychology, projected adolescents as active participants in the social order, with a political identity, and capable of consequential behaviour.
Given the close relationship between the occupational behaviour of working-class adolescents and their ‘personality’, reformers faced certain difficulties: how to imbue them with approved ethical principles; how to turn them into efficient workers; how effectively to reorganize the labour-market for social and economic ends.
One means was actually to take control of the youth's entry into full-time wage-earning, in order to control the transition from school to work and, by offering vocational guidance and encouraging attendance at continuation schools together with an after-care system, to set initial standards with regard to attitudes and behaviour.
Leaving aside the question as to whether the State and reformers were successful in affecting young people, the process itself was instrumental in creating a new image for youth, one which in common with so many of its other images, emphasized incapacity while seeking to deepen its dependence on the appropriate agencies.
A great deal of its significance in influencing ‘attitudinal changes’ derives from the power of the State to legitimize and enshrine new perceptions of young people.
Something of the sort had been attempted by the late Victorian youth organizations, but these  had been unable to reach the mass teen-age population; and had also failed to agree on a coherent programme attractive to the different reforming interests.
Even so their contribution to the mechanisms whereby the new images were translated from theory to practice needs to be recognized.
We know that they and other voluntary bodies, such as the ASEA, provided much of the procedural methodology, including the focus on individualism, and the personnel to staff the new committee structures.
Young workers, then, had come to be regarded as integral to the efficient functioning of the social and economic system and, moreover, to the development of ‘character’ throughout the working class.
In particular, Edwardian reformers believed that labour conditions for adolescents were influential on their social behaviour in both the short and the long run, or, put another way, and taking into account the wider implications of ‘personality’, that labour conditions influenced the form of their social being.
What happened, with reference to adolescents, was that the notion of ‘character’ underwent a kind of transformation and emerged in the company of, perhaps as, citizenship.
If character was the watchword of moral philanthropy as personified by, for example, the COS, so citizenship was the criterion by which it could be judged.
But the COS had refused to acknowledge the role of economic forces with respect to character, justifying J. A. Hobson's jibe that their philosophy could be summed up in the phrase ‘character is the condition of conditions’.
The debate on boy labour provided further evidence to undermine this view as economic life, argued reformers, could not be divorced from conditions.
The concept of citizenship allowed for this wider interpretation; it was sufficiently flexible (or vague) to be able to accommodate a variety of desirable qualities, which in recognizing the importance of labouring (in whatever capacity) as a service to the community, connected the economic to the social.
Citizenship as a subject of discussion was not peculiar to the early twentieth century, but it occupied a special place in the strategy of the boy labour group, and other reformers, in solving the problems posed by working-class adolescence.
It is worth bearing in mind that reformers chose compulsory part-time day continuation schools as the principal means through which to preach the effectiveness of the doctrine.
In terms of the practical implications for employers, this was a controversial proposal from the earliest days and it is clear that its implementation met with strenuous and effective opposition from different interests.
This indicates a profound division of opinion between different sections of the middle class over methods and objectives.
It should also serve as a warning against using the concept of social class in a crude explanatory manner.
Either way, it tends to confirm the view that collectivist reforms were doomed unless industry and commerce gave their consent.
The failure of the continuation school movement shows that the class position of the prospective pupils, rather than any age relationship, determined that the significance of their labour power was more important than their further education, however that may have been defined.
But were the images of youth, as Gillis suggests, wedged between ‘Conformity and Delinquency’?
Surely not.
The argument herein has been to point to a range of images, which focused not so much on sociological types (conformist and delinquent behaviour), but on those pertaining to occupations, education, and the psychological state of ‘personality’.
Gillis gives the impression that reformers and other observers had only two perceptions of youth, whereas in reality there were several.
Conformity was required only in the most general of senses.
(It hardly fitted in with the Idealist conception of the  active citizen).
We have shown that the objectives of the youth movement, the juvenile labour exchanges and the proposed continuation schools were not so much the creation of conformist youth as of the adaptable, efficient citizen, motivated by service, mediated by humanism, and morally conscious.
The alternative was not delinquent youth, but the ordinary boy whose vices and virtues resembled those of his parents: on the one hand, cheerful, plucky, generous; on the other, unstable, careless, superficial, noisy, thriftless, and so on.
Thus we return to the inseparability of age and class.
The realities which provided the raw material for the new images were not confined to youth, but were issues of social class, race, poverty, work, democracy, and political harmony.
And each of these continued to be important throughout at least the inter-war period.
The images of youth arose from a society in which the middle class was reviving its claim to political and cultural leadership at the very time when it was being challenged by the new class politics.
The problems, however, were not insoluble.
There was little doubt among those concerned that through education youth could be made to exhibit the appropriate values.
This optimism was borne out of a confidence in the ability of the social sciences to provide the basis for social policies; in the State to administer those policies; in the superiority of middle-class culture; and in psycho-medicine to understand and explain individual behaviour.
The psychology of adolescence was crucial to the enterprise because it offered the possibility, indeed, the likelihood of change; it was grist to the mill of those whom Peter Clarke has termed ‘moral’ as opposed to‘mechanist’reformers.
The former believed that it was possible to regenerate people (this applied emphatically to the young) and, therefore, progress could be assumed.
The image of youth associated with regeneration (to be accomplished by Urwick's ‘skilled hand’) did much to categorize adolescents as ‘pupils’, and was used to compel those who refused to accept their new status.
The success of the image of youth as an age-group corralled by ‘storm and stress’ was noted long ago by Frank Musgrove in his pioneering study of adolescents.
‘The position of youth in contemporary society’, he wrote, ‘is only intelligible in terms of the rise since the eighteenth century of a psychology of adolescence which has helped to create what it describes.’
And the disabling function of this image has remained visible throughout wide range of current psychological and sociological literature.
However, as John Springhall has recently argued, there is little evidence that teenagers suffer anything like an ‘identity crisis’ during their adolescent years.
None the less, Springhall is unwilling to conclude that young people were repressed by adults.
He asks rhetorically if there has been ‘a deliberate conspiracy…to keep adolescents…in an inferior social and economic position’.
In answering he correctly reminds us that young people are often of necessity in a subservient position as a result of their dependence on parents for food, clothing, and shelter; teachers for schooling; employers for employment; skilled workers for instruction in apprenticed trades; and on youth workers for leisure activities.
On this basis he maintains that these adults should not be seen ‘as agents of social control repressing the young — as reductionist social history might suggest — but as agents of socialization preparing them for their future roles as citizens in a society to which most adolescents gave unthinking and willing allegiance’.
No one disputes that agents of socialization were hard at work on working-class adolescents.
The important questions, and those which suggest exploitation and repression, are those which ask, who gave these agents their authority?
What was meant by socialization?
For what ends?
And by what means?
All socializing processes are political, just as they involve struggle between competing interests.
Did the pursuit of citizenship, obedience, and rational recreation, to take but  three examples, have nothing to do with class power, with stabilizing industrial relations, with inculcating notions of thrift and respectability, and with an implicit acceptance of one's place in society?
And were not all of these contested values and beliefs?
Were not adolescents being courted, persuaded and, where possible, forced to adopt modes of behaviour acceptable to established political and cultural authorities (which were often in conflict with those of their parents)?
When Springhall writes that adolescents gave their allegiance to ‘society’, this is at best a half-truth.
The question is, whose society?
That of youth workers, Philosophical Idealists, imperialists, eugenists,et al ?
Or that of their families, their communities, and their friends?
If young people posed no threat in terms of allegiance, there would have been little need of so many reform programmes.
Moreover, the complacent acceptance of socialization as a justification for adult authority denies adolescents the right to mount their own critiques, just as reformers never allowed the possibility of a reasoned and intelligent adolescent point of view.
Psychology had sanctified the charge that youthful rebellion was evidence of the ‘natural’ condition of adolescence.
We do not have to subscribe to a version of history which sees it simply in terms of a struggle between virtue and vice, nor do we have to believe that all adolescents were intelligent and admirable, in order to argue for the repression of young people, if only in terms of debilitating images.
To conclude, the claim made in the introduction merits reiteration: ‘Age relations (including youth) are part of economic relations and the political and ideological structures in which they take place.
It is not the relations between ages which explain change or stability in societies, but change in societies which explains relations between different ages.’
It  has been a fundamental aim of this study to argue that the images of working-class youth, and their means of construction were inextricably bound up with the political, economic, social, and cultural issues of the time.
What happened during the years between circa 1880 and 1920, was the beginning of a process whereby young workers were admitted to the public domain: their newly-defined significance meant that they required a new role, but one which had to be carefully circumscribed.
The intention was to consolidate their powerlessness.
From the perspective of reformers and administrati, if collectivism was to participate in the restructuring of society by making provision for its efficient management, then working-class boys could no longer be ignored.
These adolescents began to be designated as apprentices to a certain kind of maturity, suitable for an industrial and democratic age; and, with metaphorical binding written indentures, they were to be kept confined, while time-serving in the ante-room of respectable adulthood.