

Inner-Urban Policy: the Context
The Urban Context
Chapter 1 outlines some key historical developments in the evolution of urban policy.
However, since 1977 various other forces have been at work in the cities and, consequently, have affected the efficacy and relevance of inner-urban policy.
Indeed, it could be argued that the collective influence of the processes discussed in this chapter  have made a greater impact on the cities and those living within them than has inner-city policy.
These forces can be grouped into four major categories: political considerations, socio-demographic factors, economic change and financial constraint.
Each is discussed below.
The Political Environment
The fundamental issue in this context is the breakdown in the mid-1970s of the post-war political settlement, the subject of considerable analysis (see, for example, George and Wilding, 1984; Raban, 1986).
In brief, programmes advocated by Beveridge and Keynes were accepted and implemented by national governments from 1945 until the mid-1970s.
These programmes were founded on a comprehensive Welfare State system complemented by the demand management of an expanding mixed economy.
This ‘middle-ground’ approach received bi-partisan support until the mid-1970s, when sharply-divided views began to emerge.
Collectivist principles were still seen (by at least some on the left) to provide a coherent and viable strategy that would both sustain economic growth and support the Welfare State.
This approach was very much at the heart of Labour's 1983 election manifesto.
Alternatively, from the mid-1970s, a new libertarian strand of thinking came to dominate the Conservative party.
State intervention, collectivism and political consensus, which had characterized politics after 1945, were seen as significant causes of economic decline and social dependency.
A new ideology based on individualism, a diminution in public activity and intervention, free enterprise and selective welfarism prevailed within  a Conservative party that was about to gain electoral success in 1979 and throughout the 1980s.
This apparent breakdown in the post-war consensus has been attributed to a number of inter-related processes.
Some have argued that international economic slumps, notably that after the oil-price rise in the early 1970s, imposed unacceptable constraints on the ability of weaker national economies — such as Britain's — to support a comprehensive Welfare State (Mishra, 1984).
Other commentators, such as Barnett (1986), place a greater emphasis on the interweaving influence of economic decline and political ineptitude that, even in the 1930s, prevented governments from facing up to the constraints imposed by the vested interests of major corporations and trade unions.
Other observers place the collapse of the post-war settlement in a narrower ideological framework, arguing that a separate ideology of the Welfare State can be identified independently of capitalism and socialism (Pinker, 1979).
Whatever the ultimate causes of this breakdown, it is clear that — for many of those able to perceive a substantial division in post-1945 British political attitudes — important changes occurred in the 1970s.
The first change occurred in 1976 when the International Monetary Fund imposed reductions on public expenditure, and the second with the election of the first Thatcher government in 1979.
Inevitably, this brief summary of a major debate surrounding change and continuity in British politics ignores a whole range of issues.
There is no universal agreement, for example, that the mid-1970s represented a fundamental break in political attitudes — aspects of the ‘new’ capitalism coming from the Conservative party in the mid-1970s can be traced back to Churchill's administration in the early 1950s (Raban, 1986).
However, these and similar discussions are beyond the scope of this book.
It seems reasonable to assume that there was a change in the dominant ideology within the Conservative party in the mid-1970s.
Clear differences in approach can be identified between the last two years of Heath's 1970–4 administration — with its strong dirigiste tendencies — and policies effected by Conservative governments elected since 1979.
These later governments have advocated (if not always implemented) programmes designed to reduce collectivism, public-sector activity and expenditure, and apparent social dependency, whilst liberating enterprise and encouraging individualism.
The ideological changes within the dominant political party since 1979 have undoubtedly affected in various ways the cities and those living in them.
A national economic policy designed to reduce public expenditure, to liberate enterprise and to eradicate inflation, combined with a determination to limit local-government spending and intervention, was extremely damaging for the cities and their economies in the early 1980s.
In addition, other policies had an adverse effect on the major conurbations.
This may not have been the explicit aim of the programmes outlined below, but the consequences for the inner cities were real enough.
One way in which changing State ideology has been felt in the cities since 1979  is the determination of central governments to reduce and even eradicate public-sector policies and organizations.
The Housing Act 1988 is likely to reduce the stock of public-sector dwellings substantially.
This is likely to prove particularly significant in those cities with the most council accommodation.
There may be a case for greater flexibility in the housing market, but a reduced public sector and probable higher housing costs will do little to reduce the national homelessness figures of over 100,000.
It is also apparent that the cities have suffered as a result of the abolition in 1986 of the metropolitan counties and the Greater London Council.
The government argued (HMSO, 1983) that these conurbation-wide bodies were unnecessary and irrelevant.
Some were perhaps not unhappy at the abolition of the counties, for certain powers returned to the lower tiers of government.
However, any rational analysis of urban administration must conclude that the lack of any elected conurbation-wide bodies — particularly for London, the West Midlands and Greater Manchester — is shortsighted.
Metropolitan counties are needed to guide the strategic planning of the city regions, to organize intra-urban transport and to frame economic and demographic mobility within and between conurbations.
Their abolition increases costs, encourages an over-proliferation of uneconomic developments, stifles the mobility of the poorest and generally inhibits rational urban planning.
The problems of encouraging orderly development in the older conurbations have been heightened not only by an inappropriate metropolitan administrative structure, but also by an inadequate and diminishing regional influence.
The social and economic performance of a city inevitably reflects — although it is not exclusively determined by — the fortunes of the larger region in which it is located.
Regional performance is influenced, if only at the margins, by regional policy.
Since the 1930s, regional policy has attempted to direct, on the whole, manufacturing companies to the more depressed regions of the north and west of Britain.
Between 1960 and 1976 regional policy possibly created nearly 300,000 jobs in the Assisted Areas (Moore, Rhodes and Tyler, 1977; Fothergill and Gudgin, 1982).
The bulk of these jobs were not located in the inner cities — many went to green-field locations and new towns.
Real costs were incurred in redirecting jobs away from more prosperous areas, and not all of the jobs that were relocated survived periods of economic slump.
Nevertheless, in at least some areas regional policy undoubtedly moderated unemployment.
However, after 1979 this success failed to keep regional policy intact, when it reflected all too clearly the hand of State intervention.
Early indications of Conservative attitudes to regional policy were given in 1983 (DTI, 1983).
Regional policy was still seen as a significant factor in remedying imbalances in unemployment.
In part, this could be achieved by widening regional policy to encompass aspects of service employment (not a traditional focus for regional support) and by linking approved projects with job creation.
These changes, implemented in 1984, might in themselves have been seen as distinctly advantageous.
However, total regional support was downgraded  as both levels of support and areas granted regional status were reduced.
Despite the government's determination to modify regional expenditure in the mid-1980s, total regional aid — both selective assistance and the more important automatic development grant — amounted to almost £700 million in 1986–7.
Perhaps partly as a result of this and perhaps partly as a result of the government's view that regional aid should be more immediately directed towards assisting business skills and enterprise within smaller companies, a further major review of regional policy was published in 1988 (DTI, 1988).
Among the other revisions it proposed, the Department of Trade and Industry argued that the automatic grant for buildings and machinery that was available through regional development grant was to disappear.
Selective assistance, where companies demonstrate that assistance is necessary for the implementation of specific projects, was to remain.
The government argued that this was correct since many projects would have gone ahead irrespective of automatic grant.
Not everyone was convinced.
Labour MPs and some key Conservative figures, such as Michael Heseltine and Leon Brittan, argued that a removal of the automatic grant would worsen regional imbalances (Duffy, 1988).
Obviously, companies prefer automatic grant, but that is not a justification from the government's point of view (Begg and McDowell, 1987).
This loss of automatic grant might prove particularly important when regions attempt to attract major international inward investments.
The Nissan car plant near Sunderland is a notable example of this.
In 1988 the production of a second model from the plant was supported by a £25 million grant, which helped to provide another 1,400 jobs.
Selective assistance may not be able to attract as many developments.
Many inward investments can be criticized for lacking research and development facilities, for having limited local independence, and so on.
However, many projects — from America and Japan in particular— are destined for the European market.
If UK incentives prove unattractive, these mobile projects will locate themselves elsewhere within the Community.
This brief discussion of regional policy may seem somewhat divorced from inner-urban problems, but it is, in fact, very relevant.
It demonstrates how Conservative administrations in the 1980s have been determined to reduce public expenditure and to ensure that support is ultimately dependent on central-government approval — a constant theme in inner-urban policy, which later chapters explore.
Debates relating to regional policy also highlight the way in which the economic problems of the older industrialized regions, which include most inner-cities, have not figured prominently in government thinking since 1979.
Regional policy may not be a major strand of governmental intervention and in the short to medium term it is destined to decline in importance.
But its evolution, combined with trends in housing and urban administration referred to earlier, gives an indication of the political constraints acting upon the cities in the 1980s.
Another factor to be felt in the cities is the increasing political marginalization of the older industrial regions of the UK.
Elections in 1979, 1983 and especially  1987, showed starkly the political polarization in Britain.
While southern England and  suburban Britain voted Conservative, by 1987 the major cities (except Birmingham and London) returned Labour MPs almost unanimously.
This is not surprising — Labour offered far more to those in the cities than did the Conservatives.
Investment in housing, transport, education and social services would have risen with a Labour victory.
However, despite an effective campaign, Labour secured just 32 per cent of the vote, leaving the Conservative government with an  overall majority of 102.
There are a number of possible reasons for Labour's election failure (Curtice, 1987; Kellner, 1987).
Conservative policies, such as the sale of council houses, proved popular with many working-class voters.
In the South of England, where political power increasingly resides, the anti-Conservative vote was split between Labour and the Alliance.
Perhaps Labour was also unable to appeal to many voters in an increasingly better-off, more obviously middle-class Britain.
Whatever the reasons for Labour's weak performance in the 1987 election, few working within urban government can regard this as anything but unfortunate.
Labour's reformist programme to moderate poverty and to re-invigorate the older industrialized regions — whatever its ultimate success — at least offered more to the urban disadvantaged and to the cities generally.
Towards the end of the 1980s, it is increasingly apparent that cities are likely to find themselves very much in the firing line, as a series of radical measures are implemented concerning education, social security and local taxation.
These measures seem certain to remove local government from aspects of educational provision, to reduce massively social security payments to those in the inner-cities — for example, by more than 80 per cent in Liverpool and Glasgow (Brindle, 1988)— and to create financial and social hardship through the imposition of the poll tax.
A further Conservative victory in the early 1990s might be avoided either by an electoral pact between Labour and the Democrats, or by increased support for Labour, particularly in southern England.
Neither of these developments seems likely.
Perhaps the most realistic possibility for a more reformist and supportive programme of urban support lies in a re-orientation of attitudes and policies within the Conservative Party.
However, the radicalization of the party suggests this will not be forthcoming.
The continued political marginalization of the cities and their inhabitants raises the question of urban disturbances.
The 1980s saw urban riots on a scale unprecedented in peacetime twentieth-century Britain.
Major civil disturbances occurred in 1980 in Bristol, in 1981 throughout the UK and in 1985 at Broadwater Farm in Tottenham and again in Birmingham.
In 1981 more than 4,000 people were arrested in serious incidents of public disorder (Home Office, 1982).
Inevitably there has been considerable speculation on the causes and implications of urban disturbances.
In the context of the apparent marginalization of the cities, there is a central reformist tradition (developed in both Britain and the USA) that suggests that riots need to be seen as political statements of dissatisfaction.
This sentiment is particularly evident in the Kerner Commission's report that  explored riots in American cities during the 1960s (Kerner et al .,
1968) and to some extent in the Scarman report that focused on the Brixton disorders in April 1981 (Scarman, 1981).
These analyses examined both the immediate and the more fundamental causes for urban disturbances.
In the Kerner report, police tactics and the role of the media were seen as especially significant.
But the causes for the disturbances lay elsewhere.
These and other commentators basically concluded that riots reflected a disturbing degree of political alienation by a substantial minority of inner-urban inhabitants, particularly young, single men.
Very often these are not the most deprived in society.
In the UK, about half of those arrested in 1981 were employed.
Most, despite popular belief, were white.
Some urban riots in the 1980s had racial connotations — whites fought blacks and blacks have fought the police — but in general must disturbances involved urban youths, both black and white, in confrontation with the Police.
To Kerner and Scarman the one factor explaining this confrontation is the economic, physical and social environment in the older urban cores: housing and educational standards are deficient; jobs are often hard to come by and badly paid; orthodox political parties appear irrelevant; and public and private-sector services seem inadequate.
Alienation and even violence become understandable, almost predictable responses.
Scarman's position in 1981 was well received by many political commentators.
The report concluded that a reform of existing institutions and policies would alleviate substantially the poor conditions under which many were living in Brixton and, by implication, in other inner-urban localities.
Hence, a predisposition towards violence would be moderated.
Reform could take many guises, but there would have to be large investment in housing renewal, educational provision and job creation, while steps would need to be taken to reduce the real but, Scarman argued, not institutionalized, racism apparent within the Metropolitan Police.
Reform would need to be deep rooted, but existing structures could be modified.
Radical change was, therefore, not on the agenda — no doubt a conclusion very much to the satisfaction of the government.
However, there must be some reservations about Scarman's reformist programme.
On one level it would be difficult to argue that the kinds of interventionist policies supported by the report were ever carried out in Brixton: such inner-city areas as this suffered from declining public-sector resources in the mid-1980s.
At a deeper level, it is apparent that not all observers share Scarman's analysis of the problem or its associated policy response, and it is possible to identify stances both to the right and left of this central reformist tradition.
Many within the Conservative Party and a large segment of the popular Press considered that the urban disturbances were related to, if not caused by, immigration.
Young black people were seen as engendering an anti-British culture that, because of its criminal overtones, inevitably lead to conflict with the forces of law and order.
Criticisms of this approach have been documented by, for example, Lea and Young (1982); most of the rioters were not black; some riots  occurred in areas where there were very few black people; most black people are British; a ‘British’ culture seems elusively difficult to define; and so on .
Other explanations for urban disturbances are based in class as well as race.
In the case of class, commentators such as Friend and Metcalf (1981) locate the riots within broader economic processes.
In the long post-war boom, labour shortages throughout Europe and North America necessitated the introduction of new groups into the job market, particularly women and immigrants.
In Britain's case, the position of immigrants was different from that of most European countries as Commonwealth immigrants had certain civil rights.
Even though immigration was controlled from the early 1960s, those immigrants and their families in the UK were entitled to remain.
This was unlike the position of, say, the Turks in Germany.
Immigrants to the UK fulfilled in many ways the same functions as white working-class people.
A reserve army of labour was created that included many Afro-Caribbean people and people from the Indian sub-continent.
These and their white peers were taken on in times of expansion.
After 1976, however, the long contraction in economic performance, combined with processes such as technological change, led to a steadily-larger reserve army of unemployed labour.
It was this process of economic polarization that fuelled the urban disturbances of the 1980s.
This review of the urban disturbances is important as it places the cities and the urban labour forces in broader economic trends.
Much of this thinking has emanated from neo-Marxist debate, a paradigm that is reiterated in Chapter 10.
However, this interpretation of the urban disturbances should be treated with some caution.
Evidence from both the UK and America suggests that the most deprived tend to be less involved in riots than those slightly higher up the economic ladder.
This type of observation suggests, perhaps, that the most accurate commentaries on the urban disturbances have emerged from those adopting positions somewhere between neo-Marxist interpretations and the central reformist tradition (Rex, 1982).
There is clearly an economic impetus to riots: urban employment and the lowering of individual and community wealth and income increase the probability of urban riots.
But other forces need to be considered.
Racial intolerance and racism are probably greater than Scarman assumed.
There is evidence that institutionalized racism is apparent within the police (Policy Studies Institute, 1985; Broadwater Farm Inquiry, 1986).
In addition, a whole range of aspects of consumption, housing, education, shopping, transport, training, and so on , remain insufficient for many people living in the cities.
These deficiencies give rise to dissatisfaction in those who can see increasing inequalities in a society where suburbanites and those in the smaller towns and cities of the south of England have experienced large material gains through house-price increases and tax changes.
These inequalities inevitably give rise to resentment.
The types of minimal reforms advocated by the Scarman report will not suffice in moderating this scale of resentment.
To bring the argument full circle, one frequently-neglected aspect of the urban problem is the political dimension.
The urban disadvantaged have little  in the way of an effective political outlet.
Power resides elsewhere, in other places and in parties that do not need urban parliamentary seats.
It is not surprising that political activity by working-class city dwellers has declined sharply in recent decades.
Any serious attempt to resolve the urban problem cannot ignore questions of political participation within the cities and the urban political debate's impact on the national stage.
The Cities and Socio-Demographic Change
The major demographic change occurring in recent decades within the cities has been a decline in absolute population levels (Redfern, 1982; Champion, Coombes and Openshaw, 1983).
There are inevitable statistical complexities in defining what ‘urban’ means in this context.
However, there was certainly a considerable population loss from the cores of the larger, older provincial cities from 1971 to 1981.
Some inner-London boroughs, such as Kensington and Chelsea, lost in a decade more than one-quarter of their 1971 population total.
Glasgow, Manchester and Liverpool all lost more than 15 per cent and even free-standing cities such as Nottingham and Hull were losing around 5 per cent.
To a certain extent, the declining population totals reflected falling birth-rates in cities, but the main factor here is population decentralization.
The scale of this process and its considerable effect on the cities raises a number of pertinent issues.
Why have so many left the older urban cores?
What implications does this have for the cities?
And what future trends might be anticipated?
Why have People Left the Cities?
A distinction can be made between planned and unplanned decentralization.
Most households left the cities through unplanned decentralization, but some were moved as a result of specific planning policies.
For example, some were moved to the edges of the older urban cores as a result of the construction of peripheral public-housing schemes in the 1960s and early 1970s.
Cantril Farm in Knowsley, 8 miles from Liverpool, is one particularly notorious example.
These developments often failed because of the limited scale of the local social and economic infrastructure.
However, most who moved out of cities as a result of planned decentralization did so through the new-town programme.
The construction of 28 new towns after 1946, housing more than 1.1 million people by 1987 (Potter, 1987), must be seen as the major positive achievement of town and country planning in the UK.
The debates concerning their development are well documented (for example, Aldridge, 1979) but in this exploration of the inner-urban problem three issues should be raised.
First, although it was always assumed that many from the older urban cores would be rehoused in the new towns, early evidence (Heraud, 1966) shows that it tended to be the better-housed suburbanites who moved, few from the inner cities even knowing of the programme.
Second, new towns offered at least some public housing for the   urbanites who were unable to buy their way out of the cities.
Thus, the abolition of the new-town development corporations in England in the late 1980s has strong implications for the mobility of the poorest in the cities: they will not find a great deal— if any — of non-owner-occupied housing beyond the conurbations.
Third, only a small proportion of those leaving the cities moved to new towns, perhaps only 10 per cent.
Hardly any left cities such as Leeds and Sheffield, around which no formal new towns were commissioned.
Most of those leaving the cities have done so through the  commercial market and they have moved for a variety of reasons (Kennett and Hall, 1981): more freely-available, cheaper, owner-occupied housing might be found beyond the cities in environmentally-attractive locations; households are more mobile — car-ownership rates doubled between 1961 and 1981 and the electrification of some InterCity lines has encouraged a marked decentralization of people away from London to areas such as Peterborough, Stamford (Lincs.) and even Newark (Notts.); many move out of cities on retirement; and for the economically active in the south of England, movement out of London becomes ever more attractive as many commercial activities leave the capital.
This process of corporate restructuring is discussed further later, but the overall effect in terms of demographic patterning is that many of those previously employed in London can now find equivalent work in the free-standing towns of the south.
Since 1961, the expansion of towns and cities within a hundred or more miles of London has been enormous.
In the 1970s, for example, places such as Newmarket (Suffolk) and Huntingdon (Cambs.) grew by almost 20 per cent .
In the following decade, communities to the west and south of London, such as Basingstoke (Hants), Reading, Guildford and Slough, were to expand even faster.
Demographic decentralization may well have preceded the movement of jobs out of the cities but, by the mid-1970s, a self-sustaining centrifugal force was clearly draining the cities of both people and jobs.
What are the Implications of Urban Decentralization?
The scale of urban decentralization after 1961 has important implications.
For regions such as East Anglia, which grew in population by more than 10 per cent in the 1970s, there are problems associated with growth.
An increasing population, particularly one scattered in an unplanned fashion throughout a region, increases substantially the cost of service provision.
Infrastructural, educational, health and retailing costs rise.
Some costs fall on the private sector, but most fall on overstretched public-sector organizations.
However, the implications of urban decentralization for the cities are of greater concern.
In some respects it could be argued that diminishing populations need not necessarily be unwelcome in the cities: renewal can take place at lower densities and much needed environmental improvements can take place.
On the other hand, if city-based populations continue to decline problems will ultimately occur because of under-utilized services and diminishing taxation bases.
That  stage, however, has perhaps not yet been reached.
The real problem is not so much the scale of decentralization but the selective nature of demographic decentralization.
A large proportion of dwellings constructed beyond the cities since 1960 have been in the owner-occupied sector.
Most of those leaving the cities have had to buy their way out if they wanted to live in environmentally more-attractive areas that, particularly in the south of England and — to some extent — increasingly elsewhere, were proving to be the most economically active.
Public-sector housing provision, which might have allowed for greater mobility, declined in the 1970s and 1980s.
In 1979, 32 per cent of dwellings in Great Britain were in the public sector.
By 1984 that figure stood at 27 per cent(CSO, 1981; 1987).
This decline was due to both the sale of council dwellings and to fewer starts, which — at perhaps 20,000 or so in the mid-1980s — represents about one-fifth the early 1970s total.
Much of what was started was implemented not by suburban, predominantly Conservative councils, but by urban Labour ones.
However, the public sector offers little possibility of enhanced mobility for the urban poor; the same is true of private rented accommodation that, by 1984, represented only 12 per cent of dwellings in England and Wales.
An overwhelming proportion of private rented accommodation is to be found in the major cities, notably London and Liverpool.
Many of those living in the cities are trapped: they cannot afford to buy their way out, particularly not to the more prosperous areas of the south and rented accommodation — which is in any case largely urban based — is declining nationally.
Not surprisingly, areas to the west of London were encountering severe shortages of skilled and even unskilled labour by the mid-1980s, a time of real and substantial unemployment in the older industrialized regions.
job availability in the south is of little value when inter-regional mobility is difficult.
A lack of mobility on the part of many within the cities has inevitably meant that an increasing number of those remaining are in some way disadvantaged (Redfern, 1982; Office of Population Censuses and Surveys, 1984).
The older conurbations, cores tend to accommodate larger proportions of the unemployed.
They contain fewer households with cars, more mentally and physically disabled and more of those with limited educational qualifications.
Additionally, the cities often contain much larger numbers of the elderly than national figures would suggest, and far fewer from the higher socio-economic categories.
Liverpool in 1981, for example, had 13 per cent of households in SEGs I and II compared with a national figure of 23 per cent .
Some cities housed larger proportions of households whose head was born in the New Commonwealth than national statistics would indicate.
In 1981 approximately 4 per cent of the British population could be so classified, whereas in more than fifty largely-urban parliamentary constituencies, the comparable figure was 15 per cent or more.
This population concentration may reflect a number of factors, for example, cultural considerations.
However, job opportunities and the availability of rented accommodation may also encourage households originating in the New Commonwealth to locate themselves  within the older conurbations.
For those from Afro-Caribbean backgrounds, prevailing material circumstances are possibly worse, on average, than for those pertaining to white working-class  urbanites .
This concentration of the more disadvantaged within the cities has fuelled debates about the combined issues of the extent of multiple deprivation in the cities and the relative severity of that deprivation within the various cities.
It is not simply that a large number of multiply-deprived people live in the urban cores (Hall and Laurence, 1981); there are individuals and households where this applies, but highest unemployment rates are frequently encountered in areas of new public housing that would not be identified as inadequate in census surveys.
Equally, it seems that multiple deprivation is more apparent in some inner-urban cores than in others (Hausner and Robson, 1985)— inner Birmingham, Liverpool, Glasgow and Manchester seemingly substantially worse than most others.
The scale of deprivation and the constraints on mobility within these cores should not, however, be exaggerated.
Most heads of households within the cities do, on the whole, find employment, and job opportunities for women may be better than elsewhere.
Wealth continues to be generated in the conurbations.
A great deal of inadequate and over-crowded housing has been removed, not always to be replaced by high-rise developments.
There is still some scope for the more deprived to move.
A national mobility scheme operates within the public sector, and some social housing is constructed beyond the cities by housing associations.
However, the central problem remains — cities may have lost segments of their populations, but they have been left with ever-more dependent communities.
Demographic Trends and the Cities
In some respects, socio-demographic trends appear to indicate further problems for the cities.
For example, the proportion of elderly People living in the cities seems destined to rise, and many of these will be single-person households.
This will increase pressures on social services and public-sector housing.
Other groups, such as single-parent families, the poor and the disabled, will gravitate to or remain in the cities, partially as a result of the relatively greater availability of rented accommodation.
The issue of rented accommodation seems likely to become much more problematic in the 1990s.
The indications suggest that the Conservative government elected in 1987 is committed to reducing swiftly the scale of public-sector housing.
It will be interesting to see the effect this has on homelessness.
It will almost certainly place additional costs on local government generally, and urban authorities in particular.
Although the overall picture of socio-demographic change in the cities remains gloomy, it is, at the same time, important to stress the dynamic aspects of its nature.
The most significant change in this respect is the slowing down in the 1980s of the decline in urban populations compared with the previous decade (Champion, 1987).
For example, between 1971 and 1981 the eight principal cities of the UK were, on average, losing population at a rate of over 1 per cent per annum .
From 1981 to 1985 the figure had fallen to about 0.33 per cent per annum, and London actually gained population in 1984, thus reversing a long period of decline.
There may be a number of reasons why urban population loss has moderated.
Higher birth-rates among ethnic-minority groups, urban house-building projects, the running down of the new-towns programme and perhaps an improvement in environmental conditions in the cities may all have contributed to this.
It is not, however, obvious that this will continue, and it is not clear whether it will benefit urban government.
It may if more better-off households remain in the urban cores, but to what extent does this trend mean that even more disadvantaged groups will be trapped in the inner cities?
Urban Economic Change
There can be little doubt that one of the main reasons for the urban problem is a reduction in both economic activity and employment opportunities in the older conurbations.
From 1977 to 1987, the scale of plant closure and/or contraction in many cities was extremely dramatic.
In the late 1970s and early 1980s, most were losing well in excess of 1,000 manufacturing jobs per month.
By 1987, the travel-to-work areas encompassing the seven major conurbations held more than 850,000 registered unemployed and, with the exception of Greater London, average unemployment rates were over 15 per cent(DE, 1987).
In smaller pockets within the cities, and often in peripheral public-sector housing schemes, unemployment figures were much higher, with particularly disturbing youth unemployment totals.
Increasing unemployment in the cities has had all kinds of unfortunate consequences: it reduces demand for such services as retailing, while at the same time increasing pressures on public-sector provision; and social services, housing training and education encounter increased demands for certain activities.
Rising unemployment also has implications for health provision and policing.
It can lead to serious motivational problems, especially for the long-term unemployed.
In short, unemployment must be considered as the primary agent causing and maintaining urban deprivation.
The causes of economic and employment decline in the cities have been the subjects of the most extensive studies — no other area of urban research has received so much attention.
Here, where our main focus is on policy, some debates can receive only limited analysis.
Nevertheless, we must consider some central issues, if only because associated policy has to be assessed in the light of the scale and intensity of the decline.
Five major themes can be explored.
They do not all explain the decline in total, nor are they mutually exclusive, but collectively they raise many of the prime considerations.
These themes are the impact of national and regional economic performance on the cities; labour-market considerations; urban economic structure; spatial explanations; and the role of capital.
National and Regional Economic Performance
Cities inevitably reflect broader national and regional trends.
In the case of national trends, fiscal and monetary Policies adopted by the Labour government between 1976 and 1979 and particularly by the Conservative government between 1979 and 1982 had a marked effect on many urban manufacturing companies.
Throughout this period, an increasing emphasis was placed on tight monetary policy in an attempt to eradicate inflation.
Interest rates rose, Sterling increased sharply in value against most international currencies, public-sector capital investment was curtailed and VAT was substantially enhanced.
The overall effect was extremely damaging for many companies in the cities and elsewhere: domestic demand was reduced; the costs of borrowing rose; public-sector contracts diminished; exports became much more expensive.
Inevitably, industrial production declined.
An index of 100 for industrial production in 1975 rose to 112 by 1979, but fell back to 100 by 1980 (British Business, 1981) and stood at only 109 by 1986 (British Business, 1988).
Industrial investment was even more badly affected: in 1980 prices, UK industrial investment was about £8,200 million in 1979 but by 1987 was only £7,586 million (British Business, 1987).
National economic policy does not explain the whole of urban decline, but the attitudes and policies of the Treasury have a greater influence on the cities than probably all urban projects combined.
The over-simple assumptions widespread in the early 1980s that controlling the supply of money would in some way affect inflation (the removal of which would introduce a period of substantial growth) must be considered as being unsound.
Regional performance also influences the urban economies.
Too often regional issues are neglected in an attempt to understand and to moderate urban decline.
Recent research (Wolman, 1987) has confirmed that there is a strong relationship between regional and urban economic performance, not just in Britain but other countries as well.
In the UK, the bulk of those cities and towns that performed well between 1971 and 1981, when assessed by such indicators as employment growth and unemployment, were located in the growth regions of the south of England.
Almost all the poor performers were to be found in the economically-disadvantaged regions.
Cities are not independent entities — they reflect national and regional considerations.
Urban Labour markets
One reason for high unemployment in the inner cities is the concentration within them of groups of people who are prone to unemployment (Thrift, 1979).
Among the most obvious categories here are the unskilled, the young, black people and those made redundant from manufacturing.
These groups tend to locate in the older urban cores as a result of factors examined earlier.
Many are trapped in the inner cores because of the unavailability of rented housing beyond the cities.
These segments of society have been regarded as constituting one side of a dual  labour-market (Lever, 1982).
This argument proposes that some workers operate within an environment dominated by low wages, high unemployment and turnover rates, with limited opportunities for mobility.
Their labour histories consist of periods of work interspersed with times of unemployment, underemployment or black-economy jobs.
Their position can be contrasted with that of people in professional occupations, where unemployment is rare, mobility is relatively easy, jobs are advertised nationally and retraining is usual.
An increasing proportion of the latter occupations seek to live beyond the cities and to commute back to them.
Net inward commuting into the inner cities expressed as a percentage of total employment almost doubled between 1951 and 1981, from 21 per cent to 39 per cent(Begg, Moore and Rhodes, 1986).
Frequently, urban employment rates fail to distinguish between those living and working in the cities and those commuting in.
By 1981, two in every five urban jobs were occupied by commuters.
Hence, an increasing proportion of the declining urban jobs (urban jobs almost halved between 1951 and 1981) went to commuters.
By 1981, unemployment for those living in the cities was 50 per cent higher than the national average.
The quality of the labour supply in the cities might also be another important factor for high unemployment.
There is evidence (Wolman, 1987) that urban economies with larger proportions of those skilled in complex manufacturing techniques and knowledge-based services tend to outperform those urban economies with large proportions of people with lower skills in manufacturing.
There may be a number of reasons for this.
Skilled and professional employees may, perhaps, spend more on labour-creating services.
They earn more.
Evidence suggests a direct correlation between higher educational and technical qualifications and the creation of new companies (Storey, 1981).
The quality of the labour market may, therefore, affect economic development and unemployment in contrasting ways: an over-supply of lower-skilled labour will heighten unemployment, while a higher concentration of the more skilled and better educated may well encourage greater employment, even if only marginally.
Urban Employment Structures
It could be argued that one reason why the cities have lost so many jobs and contain so many unemployed is that they are over-represented by sectors of the economy that have declined nationally — the cities merely reflecting national trends.
Somewhat surprisingly, there is little evidence to suggest that a city's industrial structure in itself accounts for poor urban performance (Fothergill and Gudgin, 1982).
Between 1952 and 1976, more than two million urban jobs were lost that cannot be accounted for in terms of national trends influencing unfavourable urban structures (Danson, Lever and Malcolm, 1980).
An important issue when examining urban employment structures is that of the varying performances of different sectors of employment.
It is necessary, for example, to distinguish between manufacturing employment and service  employment, both in the private and public sectors.
Wolman (1987) establishes that a strong relationship existed in the 1970s between poorly-performing urban areas and areas with a large percentage of their workforce engaged in manufacturing.
This may seem inevitable as the percentage of people working in the UK in service employment rose from 49 per cent in 1963 to almost 64 per cent in 1983.
The more successful cities might be judged as those able to attract and retain expanding service-sector employment, and that did not have an initially high proportion of manufacturing jobs.
In practice, however, the situation is not so simple.
In the cities, public-sector service jobs declined by 7 per cent in the 1970s, and private-sector services fell by 22 per cent in the 20 years after 1961 (Begg, Moore and Rhodes, 1986).
Equivalent national statistics show that public-sector jobs increased by 7 per cent between 1971 and 1981, and that private-sector services increased by 18 per cent between 1961 and 1981.
Wolman (1987) concludes that there is little difference in service-sector growth between good and poor urban performers but that there are very marked differences in the degree to which cities lost manufacturing jobs.
Some lost far more manufacturing jobs in the 1970s than others.
According to Wolman, of the 15 per cent difference in employment performance between good and poor urban economies, three-quarters can be explained by contrasting experiences in manufacturing.
Not all analyses agree entirely with this conclusion.
Hall (1987), for example— possibly because he uses different definitions and sample size — presents a somewhat contrasting picture.
He assesses the degree to which manufacturing losses between 1971 and 1981 in eight major cities were balanced by changes in service-sector employment.
All eight cities lost manufacturing jobs in the decade.
By 1981, London, Liverpool and Birmingham had lost about 45 per cent of their 1971 totals.
However, not all lost service-sector jobs.
London, Liverpool and Glasgow lost some, but other cities including Edinburgh, Bristol and Cardiff increased their service-sector jobs by approximately 10 per cent and their information service jobs by 20–30 per cent.
It was this balance or imbalance between losing manufacturing jobs, on the one hand, and service-sector performance on the other, that accounted for urban economic performance and variation in the 1970s.
Cities do not simply reflect their employment structures: they tend to perform worse than their economic constitutions would suggest.
The amount of manufacturing employment in a city is important in the sense that those cities with a great many in industry may encounter the greatest loss of jobs.
However, there are considerable variations between the cities.
Some fare much better at retaining manufacturing jobs and creating service-sector jobs than others.
There is also some evidence that cities doing well in manufacturing will also do well in service-sector employment.
This certainly seems to apply to those cities that appeared to perform the best in the 1970s: Cardiff, Bristol and Edinburgh.
Why did they do so well?
As Hall (1987) concludes, possibly because of the decentralization of information-processing functions from London to Bristol and Cardiff, and  because of the separate financial, institutional and political complexes in the provincial capitals of Cardiff and Edinburgh.
Spatial Explanations for Urban Economic Decline
A number of explanations for urban economic decline are based on the assumption that jobs and/or industrial investment have moved out of the cities because of prevailing production costs and the problems associated with the older urban cores.
These explanations are treated at length in the work of Fothergill and Gudgin (1982) and Fothergill, Kitson and Monk (1985).
This work attempts to explain the rural shift in manufacturing employment.
Between 1960 and 1981, London lost 51 per cent of its manufacturing jobs, and the major conurbations 43 per cent, at a time when small towns lost only 1 per cent and rural areas actually gained 24 per cent .
This marked urban — rural shift is explained by a number of causes.
Although industry now requires fewer workers per unit of factory floorspace, its actual demands for floorspace have increased.
While all areas of the country have lost employment as a result of the need for fewer workers, rural areas have gained in that they can accommodate new floorspace.
Many older urban areas do not have large, easily-developed sites for new investment, and existing firms are often accommodated in inadequate, cramped premises.
Once firms seek out new, more efficient premises, they tend to move to locations where production is more efficient and potential expansion easier.
In some cases this process may have been heightened by the imposition of regional policy discussed earlier.
In London and Birmingham particularly, regional policy since 1945 may have hastened this decentralization of industry as industrial-development certificates were required from central government before larger manufacturing developments could be implemented.
Of the applications, 90 per cent were approved but some — perhaps notably those relating to the car industry in the West Midlands — were not.
This inevitably meant the dispersal of production away from the more prosperous areas of the south and Midlands towards largely green-field sites in the Assisted Areas of the north and west of Britain.
The cities lost in this process.
London and Birmingham lost manufacturing, and little of this went to other cities.
Although most of the debate surrounding the urban — rural shift has concentrated on the question of inadequate sites and premises in the cities, one allied development needing mention is the incubator thesis.
Research (Fagg, 1980) has indicated that at least in some cities, inner-urban areas provide ideal factors of production for newer companies: cheap premises and labour can be obtained, markets are close and niches in production or distribution can be carved out.
As some companies become more successful, they begin to develop internally those functions once external to their operations — development, sales, catering and other functions may be assimilated into the company, which inevitably requires larger premises.
These functions, as mentioned earlier, are found increasingly beyond the urban cores.
The incubator thesis and other aspects of spatial explanations raise a number of issues.
In the case of the incubator thesis, there is evidence (certainly from London — Nicholson, Brinkley and Evans, 1981) that few sections of industry seek out inner-urban locations, and that only a small number of companies migrate outwards in the classical fashion.
This point is also significant in a broader context: spatial explanations are based on the assumption that the urban — rural shift is due primarily to company relocations in response to physical pressures.
However, in most cities only a relatively small proportion of jobs lost go elsewhere, most are simply lost.
Other explanations of urban employment change, therefore, need to be explored.
Urban Economic Change and the Role of Capital
Some of the most important contributions to urban economic analysis have come from those commentators who are determined to locate the declining output and employment in the cities within broader politico-economic considerations.
Although some of these analyses have proved abstruse and others untenable, this collective contribution (which can be only briefly explored here) has proved vital in re-orientating thinking on the urban problem and its resolution.
Those working within the paradigm of capital and its effect on the cities relate economic decline to the workings of the market (those interested in pursuing the topic should consult the National Community Development Project (1977);, Friend and Metcalf (1981); Massey and Meegan (1982); Scott (1982)).
The debate can be summarized roughly as follows.
Uneven development has always characterized economic activity in Britain and elsewhere.
For a variety of historical reasons, initial development occurs in some places and not in others.
Over a period of decades, however, the location of economic activity changes.
Output becomes less efficient and profitable in the earliest developed regions as diseconomies of scale arise.
Existing output and new production relocate, sometimes within different companies.
This can be seen to underlie economic change in the UK in that the older industrialized regions have tended to suffer in relation to the expanding regions of the south of England.
However, the picture is infinitely more complex than this.
The complexities lie with the processes of corporate restructuring.
Britain has a particularly top-heavy industrial structure.
By the late 1970s, about half of its industrial output came from its fifty largest companies, many of which were multinationals.
These companies tended to be characterized by a series of activities:
1.
They often acquired smaller competitors.
2.
They sought out the most profitable lines produced in the most efficient of their plants operating with the cheapest labour available.
3.
They tended to create complex company structures.
4.
Small, prestigious head quarters remained in London 
5.
Research and development centres were located in the shires.
6.
Routine administrative functions were sited in the free-standing towns and cities within a hundred or so miles of London.
7.
Production was possibly undertaken in the older industrialized regions, especially if projects could claim regional policy or some similar incentive.
Uneven development, and in particular the decline of the older industrialized regions, was therefore intensified by policies of corporate restructuring, which moved many non-productive functions to the south.
This brief summary only touches on what is a much deeper issue.
Massey and Meegan (1982), in particular, have expanded the analysis in a number of ways.
They point out that in practice there is great variety in corporate activities, even within one sector.
Companies may intensify production, improve productivity or reduce output — all of which tend to reduce employment.
In addition, the activities of management and labour can influence key decisions over investment and productivity, and these in their turn will have an influence on plant profitability.
Nevertheless, despite these important reservations, it is clear that the kinds of policies effected by larger companies have been unfavourable to the older conurbations.
Indigenous firms have been acquired by larger competitors, and production has often been abandoned or reduced.
The local control of companies is lost.
Industrial output is concentrated in the most efficient plants using the cheapest labour.
Increasingly this is outside the UK altogether: international industrial investment undertaken by British companies amounted to over £10 billion per annum by the late 1980s.
The role of the State is not neutral here.
Constraints on corporate activities become less limiting: planning controls are relaxed to encourage development in the south; regional policy is down-graded; international controls on capital are abandoned; and most takeovers are allowed by monopolies and mergers legislation, even when national and local benefits are not evident.
When the State itself undertakes investment, it rarely does so to the benefit of the older industrialized regions.
Notable examples include the siting of defence and research establishments to the south and west of London, in areas already attractive to the open market (Hall et al .,
1987).
It is this combination of corporate activities in an unfettered market, with limited State support for the older regions, that ultimately explains the scale of employment inequalities.
While the older cities and regions lose jobs and output, the areas in easy distance of London gain employment, receive the benefits of State investment, and attract better-off people who create jobs for others in both the public and private sectors.
These processes collectively impose unemployment rates of, for example, 4.5 per cent in Berkshire early in 1988, compared with 19.3 per cent on Merseyside (DE, 1988).
These perspectives on the urban problem — many of which have emerged from neo-Marxist debate — need to be treated with some caution.
It could be argued, for example, that even if the analysis is correct, what would it matter?
Markets have always sought out the most profitable locations, and this has inevitably  created problems for declining areas.
It is impossible to control market tendencies, and it is better to allow them to operate.
Ultimately, the majority benefits — as the 1980s have shown.
No matter how such thinking appeals to certain political and business interests, it is important to highlight the consequences of such attitudes for the older cities and the country as a whole.
Industrial investment abroad is unlikely to create wealth and jobs to the same extent as would investment within the UK.
Society cannot abandon extensive parts of the country — that would be socially unacceptable and economically untenable.
Most corporate acquisitions achieve little for society as whole and tend to worsen economic ills in the older cities.
The free market might provide the only politically-realistic model in which economic change can occur, but it still requires the tightest of legal and administrative controls.
The Urban Financial Context
Earlier sections of this chapter explored the inter-related effects of political, sociodemographic and economic trends on the cities.
In this final section, brief mention will be made of that particularly complex policy area, urban finance.
For many years, urban finance has been a system with which very few practitioners or academics have been totally at ease and procedures governing local-government funding have become more convoluted in the 1980s.
The full operations and defects of this approach have been explored elsewhere, both in relation to current expenditure (Audit Commission, 1984; Travers, 1985, 1987) and capital expenditure (Jackson, 1984; Davies, 1987).
Here we will highlight the impact, rather than the complexities, of the system.
By 1979, local-government current spending and manpower was at its highest level.
The incoming Conservative government was determined to reduce this.
Throughout the 1980s, the government tried to achieve this aim through a variety of measures.
In 1979–80, the Secretary of State for the Environment, Michael Heseltine, reduced the rate-support grant (money provided by central government to fund local authorities) by £300 million.
More fundamentally, in the early 1980s a new system of local-government support was introduced — the block grant.
This attempted to establish uniform expenditure targets that, if substantially exceeded, would initiate penalties.
By 1983–4, penalties on overspending authorities amounted to over £200 million — almost all of which fell on urban Labour councils.
However, despite these controls and a general reduction in the proportion of local-government expenditure emanating from central government (down from over 60 per cent of spending in the 1970s to well under 50 per cent in the following decade) the Conservative governments elected in 1983 and 1987 decided to continue the process.
The 1983 government considered that the penalties incurred under the block-grant system had not done enough to curb local spending.
It therefore implemented the Rates Act 1984, which allowed Parliament to restrict local rate revenues.
It did this through ratecapping, a system that allowed central  government to dictate rate-calls set by some or all local councils, and by joint boards governing areas such as fire, police and transport, established as a result of the abolition of the metropolitan counties.
Thus, as Travers (1987) points out, by 1987–8 almost one-fifth of current spending by English authorities was under central-government control.
This degree of control was introduced because the government believed that some urban Labour councils were profligate in their policies on spending — policies that would undermine the viability of local businesses.
Rates, however, represent a relatively small proportion of total costs for most companies, and rate rises tend to occur because of external inflationary effects and not because of local-government policies (Midwinter, 1985).
There also appears to be no relationship between high rates and unemployment (Crawford, Fothergill and Monk, 1985).
By the late 1980s, debates surrounding the rate question became largely irrelevant.
For many years the Conservative Party had been committed to abandoning domestic rates, a commitment the 1987 Conservative government decided to uphold.
In 1986 a green paper,Paying for Local Government (Cmnd. 9714) proposed to replace domestic rates by a poll or community tax, and to create a centrally-determined uniform non-domestic rate.
The question of how local services should be funded had been the subject of a number of previous official reports, notably the Layfield enquiry (1976).
In general, most of these commentaries had concluded that domestic rates were probably as fair and efficient a system as any.
Despite this, however, a poll tax will be implemented throughout the UK by 1990.
Under a poll-tax system, all adults over the age of 18 will pay a flat rate set by the local authority concerned, although there will be rebates for the less well-off.
One of the main reasons for the government introducing the system is to ensure that more residents pay for local services.
The implication of this is that the more profligate councils will not be re-elected.
However, only about one-quarter of total expenditure will be raised through the poll tax — the rest will come from a centrally-determined needs grant and a uniform business rate set by the government after a revaluation of non-domestic property.
What are the likely implications of the new system for the cities?
It is difficult to be precise until the system has been implemented, but some results seem likely.
The cost of setting up and policing the system in the inner cities, with their greater proportions of rented accommodation, will be high.
Many will not register and simply evade or try to evade the tax.
Larger families, with which the cities are over-represented, will suffer relative to smaller households.
The combined effects of the new central grant and the business rate seem likely to benefit suburban areas to the detriment of the urban cores (Huhne, 1988).
However, the ultimate effect of the business rate seems unclear.
Retailing is likely to suffer in relation to commercial and industrial property.
Rate-calls for commercial and industrial property may fall for companies in the more depressed regions of the country (Centre for Local Economic Strategies, 1987b).
This effect might be welcome in the cities.
On the other hand, it is likely to be more than counterbalanced by heightened household  poverty within the larger poorer families, and an overall reduction in local-government spending as a large proportion of expenditure will be controlled by central government.
Much of the debate concerning local government finance has concentrated on current, not capital, spending.
But capital spending retains its own intrinsic importance.
In the 1980s there has been increased central control (Davies, 1987).
This strategy has attempted to moderate expenditure while disposing of public assets.
It has not been a wholly successful policy.
In the mid-1980s, many local councils substantially overspent their cash limits.
This was due to a number of practices, including the willingness of local authorities to pre-fund or defer expenditure, and to enter into various lease-back arrangements with developers and/or funding institutions.
However, this should not hide the fact that many, especially urban, councils have capital resources that are inadequate to deal with the problems that face them.
The repair bill for public-sector accommodation is estimated to be at least £20 billion in 1986 prices (Association of Metropolitan Authorities, 1986), a year in which total capital spending amounted to about £5.5 billion.
With many of the creative accounting techniques implemented by councils in the 1980s being increasingly subject to central control, in the longer term public-sector capital investment looks very much like becoming a minority interest.
This is somewhat ironic when it is realized that local government has substantial resources that cannot be used because of centrally-imposed prescriptions.
Unspent receipts from the sale of council houses, for example, were estimated at over £6 billion in 1987 (Page, 1987).
This type of administrative regulation, when combined with a decline of one-quarter in current expenditure to the cities between 1981–2 and 1985–6, and the imposition of an administratively difficult and possibly inequitable poll tax, makes the financial environment within which the older urban cores have to operate singularly unfortunate.
Conclusions
This chapter attempts to raise some of the contextual issues that impinge on the inner-city debate.
Clearly, not all of these can be illuminated.
In many respects cities do no more than reflect the wider processes that prevail within society as a whole.
Few of the constraints identified in this chapter apply solely to the cities.
Processes of economic change, political marginalization, demographic restructuring and financial deficiencies affect communities that could not be identified as ‘urban’.
However, perhaps what does make the cities different is their scale of decline and deprivation: those seeking the most disadvantaged in contemporary Britain would do well to start in the older urban cores.
It is worth identifying those cities that appear to reflect most clearly those processes of economic decline, social deprivation and physical dereliction that epitomize the ‘inner city’.
Liverpool seems unique, not simply because of the scale of its problems but also because of the consistent pattern of political conflict that  has characterized so much of what has happened in the city and in its relations with central government.
Newcastle and Glasgow would Appear to be in a somewhat better position, for although both have lost substantial numbers of jobs in manufacturing, a more optimistic picture has emerged in the late 1980s, based on public — private-sector investment and cultural developments.
A third tier of cities might include Sheffield, Leeds, Manchester, Birmingham and parts of inner London.
Aspects of inner-urban problems are evident in a range of smaller cities and large towns, such as Hull, Sunderland (Tyne & Wear), Barnsley (S. Yorks.),
Nottingham, Leicester and many authorities within the North West and West Midlands.
There is an enormous variety in the urban experience that this book cannot hope to explore to any great extent: different cities have been subject to contrasting pressures and have responded in different ways.
And, although the major conurbations have received much assistance through inner-city policy, relative rates of deprivation may be evident in much smaller communities.
However, as the next part of the book shows, these smaller towns have gained relatively little from the urban dimension.
Inner-Urban Policy, 1977–88
The Labour Government and Inner-City Policy, 1977–9
As mentioned in Chapter 1, the publication of the 1977 white paper,Policy for the Inner Cities , signalled the emergence of permanent inner-urban intervention.
However, a number of policy changes affecting the older cores had been introduced before that date.
For example, changes were implemented in an attempt to ease the problems of London's Docklands, generally regarded as the largest area of urban dereliction in England.
Local authorities were encouraged to advertise the advantages of the Docklands.
This had hitherto been prevented in a desire to help encourage mobile industries to locate in the less prosperous regions of the north and west.
However, by 1976, local councils in east London were able to publicize the advantages of their areas to industrialists.
Additionally, the government announced changes to the system of industrial development certificates.
For many years industrial developments had required central-government approval, a mechanism designed to help employment relocate to the less prosperous regions, away from the South East and the West Midlands.
Companies unwilling to move to the older regions had the option of moving to the new towns.
From the mid-1970s, the Docklands were given equal priority with the new towns; after 1977 they were given a higher status.
Other policy changes designed to assist the cities were introduced before 1977.
In the late 1970s, almost two-thirds of local-government current expenditure came from central resources, as determined by the rate-support grant.
This varied between authorities according to the complex needs and resources formulae then in operation.
There is evidence that for much of the Labour government's period in office between 1974 and 1979, the older urban cores were to receive greater support than other areas of the country (Jackman and Sellars, 1977).
In 1977, Peter Shore, Secretary of State for the Environment, announced that the new-town programme was to be curtailed (Shore, 1977).
Since 1946, approximately thirty new towns had been built throughout the UK.
They were intended to achieve a number of objectives.
Some in the North East, such as Washington, were intended to act as regional growth centres.
However, virtually all were designed at least partially to house people and jobs from the older urban cores.
From 1977 onwards, though, the government decided to curtail the programme — a policy development the Conservative governments elected after 1979 were to endorse.
No new towns were to be designated.
Stonehouse, intended to relieve Glasgow's housing stress, was abandoned in 1976.
Staff and resources allocated to it were redirected to a major project intended to regenerate east Glasgow.
The emergence of inner-urban policy in the late 1970s seems inevitably to have coincided with the abandonment of the new-town programme: the emphasis was clearly changing.
The problems of the older cities were to be resolved — if resolved they ever were — on the spot and not through planned decentralization.
The 1977 White Paper: Policy for the Inner Cities
Policy for the Inner Cities (HMSO, 1977), remains the only white paper published on the problems affecting the older cities and the kinds of policies that might be introduced to overcome them.
It identified a series of constraints impinging on the urban cores and on many of those living within them.
Economic decline was the most serious problem, but it interacted with — and was partly responsible for — other aspects of urban decline: physical decay, social disadvantage and the particular difficulties affecting ethnic minorities.
A range of policy innovations were needed to overcome or to moderate the urban problems.
These would be undertaken by a number of organizations.
Local authorities were seen as ‘the natural agencies to tackle inner area problems’(ibid .
p. 8), but local communities, voluntary bodies, the private sector and, where appropriate, central government were all to be involved in implementing policy.
The white paper outlined a number of policy innovations.
Attempts were to be made to ensure that the cities would continue to do well out of the rate-support grant.
The Location of Offices Bureau, which for many years had been attempting to move commercial development out of London, was given the task of promoting office employment within the cities, including London itself.
Urban policies emanating from a number of central-government departments were to be co-ordinated.
In retrospect, only three policy developments outlined in the white paper were important in the long run: the revamping of the Urban Programme, the Partnerships and industrial improvement areas.
The New Urban Programme
The Urban Programme was originally created in 1968, running in its original form for nine years.
It funded many social and community projects in local authorities at a rate of 75 per cent.
In 1977 its administration and function changed.
It was substantially enlarged from £30 million per annum to about £125 million per annum, and was transferred from the Home Office (where it had been since 1968) to the Department of the Environment.
One reason for this  change was that the programme was to widen its coverage.
Throughout the late 1960s and for much of the 1970s, the Urban Programme had concentrated on social schemes.
After 1977 its brief was extended to include industrial, environmental and recreational projects — a reflection of the white paper's suggestion that economic decline was crucial to understanding the urban problem.
In 1977 the programme was changed in one other important aspect.
Before 1977 there had been no formal ranking of the local authorities, and more than seventy had gained something from Urban Programme expenditure.
However, inner-city funding introduced by Labour in the late 1970s began the process, which has continued since that time, of identifying and ranking authorities.
This was made clear in the circular accompanying the Inner Urban Areas Act 1978 (DoE, 1978).
Primarily, this Act provided local authorities with additional economic development powers.
But, when taken in conjunction with procedures governing Urban Programme funding, it became apparent that three divisions of urban local councils, or ‘designated districts’, were to be established.
At the base of the pyramid, 19 ‘other districts’ in England and Wales were identified.
In these authorities certain economic development powers were to be allowed.
For example, 90-per-cent loans could be granted for the acquisition of land or the carrying out of works on land and industrial improvement areas (see below).
At the intermediate level, 15 programme authorities were specified.
These councils were granted the same economic development powers as the ‘other districts’, but they were additionally invited to submit an annual programme that would normally lead to greater Urban Programme funding than would be made available to the lowest tier of authorities.
The most important developments, however, were to occur in the top tier of designated districts — the Partnerships.
The Partnerships
The concept of Partnership was first developed formally in the 1977 white paper.
The government argued that ‘if real progress is to be made in tackling some of the major concentrations of problems, special efforts must be focused on a few cities in the next few years’(HMSO, 1977, p. 16).
Therefore, within certain urban cores the government was prepared to offer special arrangements: it was willing to enter into formal arrangements with the then two tiers of local government to devise and to implement urban strategies.
Central government's commitment was important, as it would help to instil confidence in the areas concerned, and would assist in unifying the actions of both central and local government.
Although the government was placed under considerable pressure by many of its own back-benchers to widen the concept to other areas, only seven Partnerships were created in England: the Docklands of London, Hackney — Islington, Lambeth, Newcastle — Gateshead, Manchester — Salford, Liverpool and Birmingham.
With the possible exception of Lambeth, these were not surprising selections.
In Partnership areas, a committee was created consisting of representatives of local and central government, the health authorities, the police, voluntary groups, and so on, chaired by a central-government minister.
In most Partnerships, some form of Inner City Unit was created, to service the key committee and to co-ordinate the annual Partnership Programme.
The Partnership Programmes began to appear in 1978, tending to conform to a standard pattern.
Economic problems were often identified as important, although other constraints were seen to affect many of the deprived households.
Little analysis was apparent in many of the early Programmes — a defect that was never entirely overcome.
Instead, the Partnership Programmes consisted largely of lists of social, economic, recreational and other projects for formal Partnership approval, which was usually forthcoming subject to the total availability of resources.
Despite the somewhat bureaucratic and unimaginative nature of the early Partnerships, their creation stimulated interest, and a series of research reports on their initial development emerged.
The comments and criticisms made can be categorized into two substantial debates — funding and management.
Partnership Funding
A number of investigations were undertaken into the scale and direction of Partnership funding during the late 1970s (Hall, 1978; Nabarro, 1980; Lawless, 1981a).
It was evident that total resources allocated to the initiative were never great.
Of the first portion of enlarged Urban Programme funding of £125 million for 1979–80, the Partnerships received Approximately £66 million.
This was not evenly split.
Docklands, for instance, received £15 million, and Lambeth £5 million.
In addition, a number of one-off payments were made to the Partnerships.
They received £15 million from Operation Clean-Up (an environmental improvement project) and about £70 million from a capital projects' scheme announced in the 1977 Budget.
Derelict-land grant-allocations were also biased towards the Partnerships.
Even if all of these funds are taken into account, total direct funding to the Partnerships in the late 1970s has to be regarded as small.
Total funding for economic development projects in Liverpool for one year through the Urban Programme was less than Unemployment Benefit paid in the city in one week.
To some extent the spending was diversionary because it deflected attention from the cuts that were occurring in the orthodox funding mechanisms for current and capital expenditure.
Between 1974 and 1979, Liverpool's capital programme was reduced from almost £60 million to less than £40 million.
It was always assumed that Urban Programme funding would represent only a proportion of total expenditure in the Partnerships — most would come through a diversion of mainstream budgets to the benefit of the older urban cores.
However, there is little to suggest that this occurred.
Although it is not easy to establish exactly what proportion of total local spending goes to specific areas of the cities, where efforts were made, the inner-urban areas do not appear to have done particularly well.
Research done in Liverpool — albeit before the Partnerships —(Nabarro and McDonald, 1978), indicates that the inner areas received less than  might be expected considering their total population.
Similarly evidence for housing in the North East suggests that housing expenditure was not biased towards the Partnership areas (Butler and Williams, 1981).
It is extremely difficult for local government to discriminate positively in favour of certain areas.
More money for some areas means less money for others, which can obviously raise political issues.
As a large proportion of current expenditure goes on salaries (particularly in education) there may be little scope for re-allocating resources.
The Partnerships did not find themselves suddenly in receipt of substantial resources deflected from other local-authority budgets.
What of central government?
Is there any evidence that the Partnerships obtained additional resources from the bending of appropriate central-government expenditure sources?
It is more difficult to trace the spatial patterning of central-government spending than it is at a local level.
It is, however, possible to make reasonable estimates of where some budgets were allocated (Lawless, 1981b).
In the late 1970s, two budgets that were potentially important in urban economic development were the regional programmes implemented by the Department of Industry, and the policies effected by the National Enterprise Board.
These programmes were identified by the government (HMSO, 1977) as central to urban regenerative strategies, but neither programme was redirected successfully towards the cities in the last few years of the 1974–9 Labour administration.
In the case of regional development grant, for example, the three Partnerships in the assisted regions actually received less than their late 1970s industrial populations would have suggested.
On the whole, they were not favoured in the allocation of regional selective assistance where there was an element of discretion on the part of the Department of Industry.
This pattern was repeated by the National Enterprise Board (NEB).
The NEB was created by the government in 1975 to help restructure British industry by selective intervention, particularly in areas of high unemployment.
However, by the end of 1978 only 12 companies in the whole of the North West and North East of England had received financial support, amounting to a total of little more than £3 million.
This apparent neglect of the cities in the late 1970s by central-government agencies needs some qualification.
Certain programmes, for example, some MSC schemes and the construction of industrial property by English Estates (a Department of Industry subsidiary) were beginning to favour some cities, especially Liverpool and Newcastle.
But there was no abrupt re-orientation of government spending towards the urban cores from 1977 to 1979.
There may have been reasons for this lack of positive discrimination towards the older conurbations.
In some cases, such as the regional development grant, there was little scope for re-allocation as spending was demand-led.
It was difficult to redirect rapidly the thinking of the Department of Industry, which had traditionally been interested in regional, not urban, policy.
Inertia no doubt played a part.
Within the NEB it was clear that a regional — let alone a city — dimension was never to play a very important role in determining policy.
Not a great deal of intervention took place, and most that did was directed towards small companies in ‘high-tech’ sectors, which tended to be located in the south of England.
Although it might have been hoped that local and central government would redirect main programmes to the benefit of the cities, there is little to suggest that this occurred.
At least initially, additional resources to the cities were largely contained within the Urban Programme.
Although inner-urban funding in the late 1970s was limited, the direction of Urban Programme expenditure remains a valid area of investigation.
A great deal of the spending went on capital projects.
This was understandable, because it was far easier to direct capital projects to defined inner areas in very visible — and therefore politically appealing — projects.
The difficulty was that capital schemes often required current funding if they were to operate.
For example, social and community centres required staff.
As Urban Programme allocations were limited, covering only 75 per cent of total costs, capital projects did not always receive appropriate current support.
Some areas of spending received relatively little through the Urban Programme.
Education and, to some extent, housing, were allocated only limited support, partly because they were seen as dominating mainstream local-authority expenditure.
All of the seven Partnerships allocated at least 15 per cent of spending to economic development projects in the late 1970s, and similar proportions were spent on environmental schemes.
The social, community and recreation budgets received more.
Both Lambeth and Hackney — Islington, for example, granted these areas at least 40 per cent of Urban Programme spending in 1979–80.
The early allocations of Urban Programme spending might appear somewhat surprising when the emphasis of the inner-city drive in the late 1970s was towards jobs and economic development.
This was not reflected in Partnership spending patterns.
This apparent discrepancy can be explained in a number of ways.
There were difficulties in rapidly-increasing capital economic projects.
Much of this spending went on new industrial units, schemes that might take years to implement, and for which there may have been an appropriate upper limit.
Established departments, such as social services, possibly dominated early Partnership discussion.
The more powerful, well-established organizations were often able to put forward their own projects — many of which might simply have been cancelled because of capital cut-backs after the International Monetary Fund imposed constraints in 1976.
The initial allocations of Partnership spending in the late 1970s were often the result of the large, better-prepared and more politically-aware departments putting forward their cases more persuasively than the others.
This rather pragmatic approach towards Partnership spending allocations received unfavourable comment.
Hambleton (1981), for example, argues that the late 1970s saw a shift in policy towards a programme-dominated approach.
In Policy strategy, which had been well developed in the Inner Area Studies, Community Development Projects and the 1977 white paper, broader issues of  substance had dominated the debate.
The complexity and inter-relatedness of urban problems had been stressed, existing policies had been evaluated and a series of policy modifications had been proposed relating to the economy, housing, population dispersal, urban administration, and so on.
But once the Partnerships were formally created, the emphasis had switched to a programme-dominated approach.
Issues relating to the efficacy or the alignments of new or existing policies were not discussed.
Much of the debate was about the allocation of relatively small sums of money to specific projects.
The partnerships' essentially pragmatic approach inevitably meant that important debates were never really aired.
For example, there may have been little point in devising an ‘inner area’ and allocating resources to it.
Many of the urban deprived did not live in the ‘inner area’, and urban economic processes operated across entire city regions.
The narrow focus on an area also deflected attention away from such issues as economic and demographic mobility within and between the cities, and the problems associated with many public-sector housing schemes built on the edge of cities in the 1960s and 1970s.
Some indicators, such as unemployment, may have classified these developments as being at least as deprived as the inner-urban areas, but they did not gain from the inner-city initiative.
Partnerships tended not to address issues such as training, education, the needs of the elderly, the problems of single-parent families, race and Policing.
The assumption seemed to be that through some mechanism or other, the additional allocation of relatively small sums to be used for capital projects would moderate the problems of the inner-urban areas.
It is hard to understand how this might have occurred, especially when the primary cause of urban economic decline — the processes of corporate restructuring discussed in Chapter 2 — were never addressed.
The Management of Partnerships
Financial considerations proved to be only one of the problems facing the Partnerships, the other major constraint relating to the question of management.
The approach was based on notions of co-ordination and co-operation.
Representatives from as many relevant agencies as possible met a few times a year, and devised an agreed strategy for the inner area concerned.
The Partnership itself had no executive power.
Policy modifications and developments occurred through consensus and persuasion.
Not surprisingly, this approach met with formidable operational difficulties.
Not all central-government departments were convinced of the need for an inner-area strategy.
Between 1974 and 1979, for example, the Department of Industry allocated about £250 million in regional assistance to Merseyside — almost all of which went to green-field locations (Nabarro, 1980).
Why should the department suddenly have directed its policies to the benefit of the inner city?
Inevitably there were problems of intra- and inter-institutional conflict and jealousies at a time when three tiers of administration — the city, the county and  central government — were all involved.
Different organizations operated from different political standpoints, from within different boundaries and on different time-scales.
To one observer of the Lambeth Partnership, ‘the implications for future corporate behaviour within and between statutory agencies are hardly glimpsed’(Spooner, 1980, p. 105).
The creation of the Partnerships had considerable implications for the voluntary sector.
The old Urban Programme, run from the Home Office until 1977, tended to benefit the voluntary sector.
A great deal of spending went on social and community projects, an area where the voluntary sector flourished.
The reshaping of the Urban Programme, the creation of Partnerships and the specific emphasis on economic projects meant there was a real danger that the voluntary sector would be left out.
The Secretary of State for the Environment argued, however, that the voluntary sector would have a genuine role to play (Shore, 1978).
Certainly this happened in some Partnerships.
In Lambeth, for example, about one-quarter of expenditure in 1979–80 went to the voluntary sector, which was represented on appropriate committees (Spooner, 1980).
In Newcastle there was a distinct attempt to involve voluntary and community groups within a decentralized management structure (Beecham, 1978).
Elsewhere, tensions occurred between the voluntary sector and local government (Green, 1978; Liverpool CVS, 1978).
In some cases decisions were taken with little regard for voluntary interests.
In some Partnerships, voluntary-sector funding amounted to less than 10 per cent of total Urban Programme expenditure.
In most cases this was a substantial decrease compared with community funding undertaken by the old Urban Programme from 1968 to 1977.
The early development of the Partnership concept appeared to hold out little encouragement for the non-statutory sector.
However, with the election of a Conservative government in 1979, questions relating to the organization of Partnerships became of secondary importance: the important issue was whether Partnerships would be retained.
Partnerships, 1977–9: Conclusion
Partnerships represented the first major inner-city initiative in England.
They emerged as a result of substantial research undertaken by a series of urban experiments operating for the best part of a decade.
At the time they appeared to offer the greatest opportunities for the cities, yet ten years afterwards they appear to reflect a lost age.
Partnerships were based on the assumption that reasonable people working in a multitude of organizations could devise an agreed strategy for parts of urban Britain: local and central government would work in harness and would incorporate other interests — the police, the business community, voluntary groups, and so on, into a coherent administrative whole.
Consensus and co-operation would ensure success.
The reality of some of these assumptions is debatable.
The political climate has changed so rapidly since 1979 that many of the central principles of the Partnerships have been severely eroded.
Centrally-determined  control, commitment and conviction replaced consensus and cooperation.
The Glasgow Eastern Area Renewal (GEAR) Project
Partnerships were not created in Scotland; instead, in 1976, the Secretary of State for Scotland announced that a planned new town at Stonehouse would be abandoned, and that staff and resources were to be directed towards a major regenerative project based in east Glasgow.
The Glasgow Eastern Area Renewal project — GEAR — was to become one of the largest, if not the largest, urban-renewal project ever attempted in Europe.
A range of organizations was involved in the implementation of the scheme, notably regional and district councils, the Scottish Special Housing Association and the Scottish Development Agency.
These organizations were to initiate a renewal scheme for one of the most deprived areas in Britain.
East Glasgow's population had fallen from about 100,000 in 1961 to 45,000 in 1976.
There had been an enormous loss of jobs, and many of the younger and more mobile had left — sometimes voluntarily and sometimes through planned dispersal — to peripheral public-housing schemes.
The early development of GEAR was not without its problems.
The administration of a project involving so many organizations proved complex (Leclerc and Draffan, 1984).
The Scottish Development Agency (SDA), which had been given the task of co-ordinating the various bodies involved, was not over enthusiastic about the project (Morison, 1987).
However, unlike the position in England — where the Partnerships controlled so few resources directly — the SDA had its own funds to help expedite the strategy.
This strategy was based on a number of key objectives.
In some cases these have clearly been achieved: housing policies, for example, appear to have been successful (MacLennan, 1987; MacLennan, Munro and Lamont, 1987; Morison, 1987).
Almost 6,000 older properties were renovated between 1977 and 1982 and, by 1985, over 3,000 new Private-sector dwellings had been started or planned.
These policies have helped to stem population loss and have begun the process of social change designed to encourage more middle-class households to live in east Glasgow.
In addition, environmental standards have improved — sometimes dramatically — and leisure and recreational facilities have been substantially enhanced.
But a number of criticisms have been levelled at GEAR.
For example, it has been criticized for being unable to deal with problems of unemployment, which continued to rise throughout the 1980s.
Manufacturing employment, for instance, fell by 40 per cent between 1979 and 1982.
Training facilities have been marginal to local needs.
Although a great deal of economic development has occurred, with at least 150 new or refurbished units constructed by 1982, the total net number of new jobs for local residents has been very small, and about three-quarters of the companies operating within the area have relocated from elsewhere (McArthur, 1987).
Moreover, there is little to suggest that public-sector  investment has been successful in encouraging equivalent private spending.
Of the £400 million spent in GEAR by 1985, 60 per cent was by the public sector (Morison, 1987).
The most severe criticism of GEAR has come from Booth, Pitt and Money (1982).
They argue that a great deal of public-sector investment would have inevitably occurred, and that little of it was new.
In many respects the management of GEAR has been ineffective: goals have been defined too broadly, simply to ensure consensus; organizations have been assimilated within GEAR for purely cosmetic purposes; power has been too diffuse; and too much has been made of environmental improvements when the local economy has been subject to dramatic changes and unemployment has risen substantially.
Whatever the merits of these criticisms, it seems reasonable to conclude that this model of urban regeneration based on the co-ordination of public-sector organizations by a lead agency is unlikely to be used soon again.
It may have had a certain validity, especially in Scotland with its constellation of key organizations within or close to Glasgow.
However, changing political circumstances — notably the downgrading of public-sector intervention and the emergence of centrally-Appointed development agencies — make any repetition of the GEAR model improbable.
Industrial Improvement Areas
The third major initiative introduced by the government in the late 1970s were the Industrial Improvement Areas (IIAs).
The 1977 white paper,Policy for the Inner Cities (HMSO, 1977), argued that additional powers should be granted to local authorities to enable them to assist industry.
A number of suggestions were outlined in the paper, many of which were formalized in the Inner Urban Areas Act 1978.
These included powers to make loans for land acquisition and works within the designated districts; loans for site-preparation works; and grants for rent relief within Partnerships.
However, the most important power was that all designated districts could declare Industrial Improvement Areas.
The concept of improving older industrial areas was not new.
Authorities such as Rochdale (Grt Manchester) and Tyne & Wear had used existing legislation to declare informal IIAs before 1977.
There were a number of reasons why authorities began to look more carefully at older industrial property.
Much of it had disappeared during the redevelopment programmes after 1945.
Comprehensive redevelopment usually involved the removal of mixed land-use areas (often with a number of buildings dedicated to industrial production) and their replacement with property used for aspects of consumption, for example, housing.
This process often involved the compulsory acquisition of firms and hence their potential closure.
Many companies, however, used their compensations to re-capitalize (Chalkley, 1979).
Nevertheless, older industrial property could be useful for new companies wanting cheap premises and wishing to locate in the cities.
Considerations such as these provided the rationale for the formal creation of  IIAs in the 1978 Act (DoE, 1978).
They were declared in run-down industrial and/ or commercial areas, and were seen as a means of stabilizing economic activity.
Once declared and approved, authorities were advised to concentrate a range of activities on the IIA, including planning, traffic management and land-assembly functions.
The areas needed to be selected carefully.
Some industrial areas were too  dilapidated while others needed no support.
Central government assumed that typical IIAs would be up to 50 hectares in size, and that the programme would last about 3–5 years.
To assist in the implementation of IIAs, local authorities were given powers to provide loans and grants for improving amenities, and grants for converting or improving buildings.
By 1984, over two hundred IIAs had been declared, covering about 7,000 acres.
Almost all of the designated districts had declared at least one improvement area, and about one-quarter of declarations were in commercial or commercial/ industrial areas.
Most funding had come from the Urban Programme, amounting to about £9 million per annum.
Other sources of funding included the Derelict Land Grant and MSC resources.
There have been a number of critiques of the IIA concept (Tym, 1977; Topham, 1978; Etherington, 1987).
These culminated in a major review undertaken by consultants for the Department of the Environment (JURUE, 1986a).
In some respects, IIAs proved relatively successful.
There has tended to be an increase in confidence within IIAs, although this has rarely been matched by increasing private-sector investment.
Some, but not many, jobs have been created by companies receiving assistance.
Under Section 6 of the 1978 Act, which provides support for improvements to buildings, this amounted in 1984 to about £11,000 per job — which was relatively cost-effective.
Costs per job in schemes where developers had received assistance to improve property for use by others were much lower.
In practice, however, these represented a small total number of posts.
Some environmental improvements and land reclamation had additionally taken place.
It is apparent, however, that the IIA approach has produced a number of problems and complexities.
There is little to indicate that environmental and/or property improvements actually create jobs, boost output or encourage investment.
Support does not necessarily result in employment creation.
Difficulties related to access, parking and outmoded infrastructures often remain.
Improvements to rented property may raise rents to the detriment of the producers as opposed to the landowners.
Too much emphasis may have been placed on grants at the expense of loans for environmental improvements (Meyer, 1986).
Loans allow local authorities to make a profit and will impose commercial considerations on companies having to repay assistance.
The costs of building refurbishment may be greater than is often assumed.
The approach, however, is fundamentally marginal: it is not going to have a great effect on urban economies faced with the impact of massive corporate restructuring (see Chapter 2).
However, even if it is accepted that IIAs are marginal to the prospects of urban economic development and employment creation, it seems evident that some  approaches to industrial improvement are more successful than others.
For example, some authorities have selected inappropriate areas, have not fully appreciated local business trends and opportunities, have undertaken little publicity and have not encouraged participation by companies in the implementation of the programme (Meyer, 1986).
Equally, not all authorities have managed to coordinate the totality of their activities relevant to the operation of industrial improvement.
However, it is possible to link improvement to wider conservation Polices, to develop a range of financial packages appropriate to individual firms and to integrate IIA declarations with land-use planning (Etherington, 1987).
Even where councils are more effective in initiating and developing IIAs, the real effect of such activities can easily be overstressed.
The Labour Government and Inner-City Policy, 1977–9: Conclusion
It may seem harsh to criticize the Labour government for its inner-urban Policy at the end of the 1970s — there was little time for the introduction of a comprehensive programme of action towards the cities before the political realities of the 1979 election.
However, Labour's urban policy cannot be perceived as anything other than meagre.
Marginally, more resources went to the Urban Programme, but the cities lost funds from mainstream expenditure.
The Partnerships proved a largely bureaucratic device, with little influence and only minimal funding.
IIAs were given legal status but their impact was slight.
In effect, as McKay and Cox indicate (1979, p. 255), ‘no sensible observer inside government or out could expect the limited measure announced in 1977 to transform the inner city’.
The whole exercise was administratively top-heavy, with little in the way of innovation.
It could be seen as an attempt by the government to try to retain urban seats or, perhaps more accurately, as the reflection of a personal commitment towards the inner cities on the part of Peter Shore, Secretary of State for the Environment (MacKay and Cox, 1979).
There is evidence for this in, for example,The Castle Diaries (Castle, 1980).
The election of the Conservative government in 1979 resulted in the appointment of another Secretary of State for the Environment, who had altogether more radical ideas for inner-city intervention.
Conservative Inner-Urban Policy after 1979: The Search for Co-ordination
The Conservative governments elected in 1979, 1983 and 1987 initiated a number of inner-city policies.
By the late 1980s,Action for Cities (HMSO, 1988a), identified at least twelve separate interventions, although some of these were insignificant in resources terms and not all observers would regard some of the programmes as intrinsic to the inner cities.
Nevertheless, the period after 1979 undoubtedly saw a proliferation of inner-city projects.
In this and the next two chapters, we attempt to unravel and evaluate policies effected by the Conservative governments after 1979.
There are a number of possible classifications of urban intervention after 1979, including (most obviously) a chronological approach; here, however, we adopt a different approach.
Three main strands to Conservative policy can be discerned from the multitude of programmes that were either introduced after 1979 or that, although initiated before that date, were perpetuated in a modified form by subsequent Conservative administrations.
One major theme, already mentioned in the previous chapter, is the search for co-ordination, a search that has figured prominently in a number of urban programmes.
This is the main focus of attention in this chapter.
Two other important issues have also framed inner-urban policy in the 1980s.
One of these — deregulation and liberalization — is evaluated in the next chapter.
Chapter 6 examines the development thrust within Conservative urban Policy.
This thematic classification is not without its drawbacks.
Inevitably individual urban initiatives do not always fit solely within one or other grouping: there is a degree of overlap between the classifications.
Nevertheless, this threefold approach has its advantages.
It provides a means by which urban initiatives can be grouped into coherent themes and it highlights the underlying ideas on which so many of the programmes are based.
Co-ordination after 1979
Just as the search for co-ordination was a central rallying call for urban projects and experiments in the 1970s — with the creation of the Comprehensive Community Programmes and Partnerships — so the 1980s saw similar developments.
In 1988, for example,Action for Cities (possibly the most important statement on the cities made by a Conservative government after 1979 — HMSO, 1988a), highlighted the government's determination to pursue the theme of integration.
It argued that public-sector resources were substantial, ‘but efforts need to be pulled together more effectively, and brought to bear in the same place at the same time’(ibid .
p. 4).
In the press conference accompanying the 1988 launch, the Prime Minister made a statement reiterating this argument:Action for Cities was not about new resources nor new policies, but about co-ordination and about building on apparent strengths (Platt and Lewis, 1988).
This concept of improved co-ordination has emerged in a number of urban projects.
These can be categorized into three main areas of debate: the Urban Programme and the Partnerships; the City Action Teams and Task Forces; and other co-ordinating initiatives.
The Urban Programme and the Partnership
The Conservative government elected in 1979 inherited a number of urban policies that had been initiated by the Labour government between 1977 and 1979, and that are discussed in Chapter 3.
As that chapter points out, the underlying principles of the Labour government's approach in the late 1970s — Partnership between central and local government, and consensus and cooperation — became much less fashionable in the following decade.
Nevertheless, Conservative governments elected in 1979 and after continued to support the major urban drive developed in the late 1970s: the Urban Programme and the Partnerships.
This continuity in policy can be explained in a number of ways.
The Urban Programme and the Partnerships were relatively non-controversial, funding many worthwhile projects of a social, environmental and economic nature.
In addition, the Partnerships allowed central government a say in previously locally-determined issues.
In any case it is always easier to initiate, rather than terminate, policy.
In 1979, after eleven years of existence, the Urban Programme was particularly characterized by a network of local-government officials and councillors, voluntary-sector representatives, civil servants and a range of other interested organizations forming a mechanism through which valuable, if somewhat stereotyped, projects might be funded.
However, radical governments, such as that elected in 1979, might not be swayed by such considerations.
Indeed, there were a number of reviews of inner-city policy (for example, DoE, 1984).
None of these resulted in the demise of the Urban Programme, not least because after 1979 central government introduced a number of policy modifications.
The modifications introduced should not be regarded as fundamental.
The 1988 Urban Programme cannot be seen as dramatically different from the approach inherited by the Conservative government elected in 1979.
But there have been changes.
In 1981, the government re-affirmed its emphasis on economically-orientated projects within the Urban Programme — a trend made much more probable in that, particularly within the Partnerships, local Chambers of Commerce were invited to comment on programme submissions.
Throughout the 1980s there was also a gradual change in the list of qualifying councils.
By 1987, 55 Urban Programme authorities had been designated (see Figure 1, p. xi)(DoE and DE, 1987).
By 1987, 57 local authorities were requested to submit Inner Area Programmes which were to outline the objectives of Urban Programme funding, and to indicate how other funding programmes dovetailed into Urban Programme activities (DoE, 1989).
Of these 57 authorities, 32 had been Partnership or Programme councils, and the remainder had a lower status either as Other Designated Districts or benefited from the traditional Urban Programme from which very many councils had gained some, often limited resources.
The stratified approach to Urban Programme funding, with in essence a fourfold division of councils — Partnerships, Programme Authorities, Other Designated Districts and traditional Urban Programme councils — was effectively to be abandoned.
Instead a single Urban Programme designation was to be introduced, and the traditional Urban Programme was to be phased out.
This approach was adopted in order to concentrate resources on areas of greatest need (Young, 1986a).
In the event in 1987–8 all 57 authorities submitted an Inner Area Programme and all were approved.
Two other changes in the implementation of the Urban Programme after 1979 can be identified.
First, a more managerialist tendency is apparent.
One problem that had consistently undermined the Urban Programme was its lack of objective definition (National Audit Office, 1986).
Partly in response to this criticism, the government introduced in 1985 the Urban Programme Management Initiative (DoE, 1985c).
This provided a series of standardized measures against which to evaluate individual Projects, while at the same time laying down broader objectives for the whole Programme.
These objectives were to improve employment prospects in the inner cities; to reduce derelict land and sites; to strengthen the social fabric of the inner city; and to reduce the number of People in acute housing stress.
Second, it has been argued (Stewart, 1987) that one major (if implicit) trend within the Urban Programme was its determination to utilize inner-city intervention as a mechanism through which to address Problems associated with black communities.
To Stewart (ibid .
p. 134) for example, it appears that
whilst there remain widely varying explanations of the reasons for the disturbances of 1981, 1983 and 1985, there can be no doubt that the fear of social disorder, and its association with the needs and demands of black people, has  been a major factor in sustaining central government interest in inner cities policy.
The Urban Programme has been one policy instrument through which the government has been able, if only at the margins, to influence the position of black people in the major conurbations.
Bearing in mind the policy modifications imposed on the Urban Programme after 1979, what kind of supportive environment was it providing for the cities by the mid-to-late 1980s?
In financial terms, it wasn't a particularly large programme: by the mid-1980s it amounted to about £300 million.
In 1986–7, for example, it stood at £317 million.
Of that sum, the Partnerships received £123 million.
However, the tradition of allocating some Partnerships substantially more than others had been perpetuated: Birmingham received £24.5 million while Lambeth received £10 million.
In all the Partnerships, more than half the expenditure went on capital as opposed to current spending and, in some areas such as Manchester — Salford, the capital-expenditure figure was much higher.
There was in 1986–7 considerable variation between Partnerships in the balance of expenditure.
In the 1980s, the proportion of spending on economically-orientated schemes, for example, constructing small industrial units, rose in the Partnerships and in the Programme Authorities from 29 per cent of Urban Programme expenditure in 1979–80 to 38 per cent by 1984–5.
Liverpool, however, even by 1986–7 was allocating less than 20 per cent to economic projects, although the equivalent figure for Newcastle — Gateshead stood at 43 per cent.
Environmental projects (for example, clearing derelict sites) and housing expenditure remained relatively insignificant in all the Partnerships except Liverpool, where 40 per cent was spent on these two areas.
On the other hand, the largest single allocation in virtually all the Partnerships was for social schemes, which were usually concerned with leisure projects or with providing services for the disadvantaged.
At least 40 per cent of expenditure was usually directed towards social projects, despite the supposed economic orientation of the Urban Programme.
This Apparent discrepancy is to a certain extent explained by the relatively large sums in the Partnerships going to the voluntary sector, which is normally stronger in social rather than in environmental or economic areas.
In 1986–7, in most Partnerships at least one-quarter of expenditure went to the voluntary sector, and in Birmingham, Lambeth and Hackney the figure was much higher.
About £15 million of a total Partnership expenditure of £123 million was spent on projects likely to benefit ethnic minorities.
Patterns of expenditure in 1986–7 in the second tier — the Programme Authorities — were not significantly different from those in the Partnerships.
Slightly more was spent on economic projects and slightly less on social schemes.
However, rather more was usually allocated to capital projects: at least 60 per cent expenditure was so defined, with almost 90 per cent going to capital schemes in some councils.
The main point to make about the Programme Authorities was  that their total allocations from the Urban Programme were very small.
Cities as large as Sheffield and Leeds were receiving no more than £4 million per annum, little more than 1 per cent of their annual current expenditure.
Nevertheless, to receive their Urban Programme funding, they had to produce an annual programme for submission to the Department of the Environment.
In the late 1980s, the annual programmes produced by both the Partnership and Programme Authorities were in many respects not substantially different from those produced a decade earlier.
In line with the programmes produced in the late 1970s, a brief contextual statement would be followed by a closer definition of the objectives to be pursued in the economic, social, environmental and housing areas, and the role to be played by various statutory authorities and the voluntary sector (Birmingham City Council, 1987b; Newcastle City Council, 1987).
The bulk of the programme would then outline in some detail the specific projects being funded, and the resources allocated to them over a 3–4-year period.
The number of projects could be surprisingly large: for example, over 850 were listed in Birmingham's 1987–90 programme, of which 218 were new.
Although the programmes devised in the late 1980s were not dissimilar to earlier statements, there were some variations in emphasis.
The later programmes laid down clearer guidelines about the objectives and role of Urban Programme funding than was always apparent in the later 1970s.
Many objectives were rather bland — perhaps an inevitable reflection of (in the Partnerships at least) an executive committee comprising such varied interests as central and local governmental, district health authorities, the police, the probation service and chambers of commerce and industry.
However innocuous overall objectives might appear, there can be little doubt that a much tighter evaluation of Urban Programme funding had been implemented since the 1985 review (DoE, 1985c).
In the statements presented in the later 1980s, a whole series of forecast outputs frame expenditure categories.
Economic objectives, such as improving or converting buildings for industrial use, are assessed against measures that include units created, total floorspace involved and numbers of jobs created and/or preserved.
While no doubt imposing a degree of justifiable administrative rigour on Urban Programme expenditure, the attainment of such measures can too readily be equated with ‘success’; obtaining accurate assessments of some outcomes, notably job-creation totals, is fraught with difficulties (as examined in Chapter 9.)
More revealing insights into the operations of the Urban Programme can be gleaned from an examination of the Partnership's role rather than through explorations of anodyne objectives.
The Birmingham Partnership, for example(Birmingham City Council, 1987b), argues that Urban Programme funding cannot solve the Problems of inner Birmingham.
The Partnership can, however, play a distinctive role in promoting the effective direction of both public- and private-sector resources towards the most disadvantaged areas.
In particular, the Partnership can help to lever funds from other organizations into inner-city investment projects; it can assist in the creation of innovative approaches towards inner-urban renewal; and it can operate as a last-resort funding for worthwhile  projects that would not otherwise be implemented.
As the following discussion points out, not all observers believe these roles have been consistently applied to the Urban Programme.
The Urban Programme and the Partnership after 1979: a Critique
For the first fifteen years or so of its existence, little was published in the way of critical assessment of the Urban Programme.
However, from the mid-1980s onwards, a series of research projects emerged on the consequences of the programme, particularly within the Partnerships.
With more than 12,000 separate projects funded by the Urban Programme in 1985–6, some positive assessments of the approach can inevitably be anticipated.
Some reviews of aspects of urban intervention indicated that Urban Programme funding often proved crucial for the implementation of projects as diverse as business-development initiatives (DoE, 1988b) environmental improvements (JURUE, 1986b) and some employment-creation projects (DoE, 1986).
One particularly illuminating evaluation of the impact of the Urban Programme in the mid-1980s was the four-year review of Birmingham's Partnership (Aston University, 1985).
Some positive findings emerged from this assessment.
The Partnership had helped to stabilize conditions in the inner city, partly as a result of encouraging a range of organizations to focus attention on the older urban core.
Most projects had been efficiently run, and many had helped disadvantaged groups.
Both households and companies within the inner-urban area felt greater confidence in the inner city as a result of Partnership policies.
These had often operated most effectively in smaller areas within which housing or industrial-renewal projects could best be implemented.
Interestingly, a later internal annual review of Birmingham's Partnership concurred with some of these findings and also identified other positive outcomes (Birmingham City Council, 1987a).
For example, the Partnership had encouraged the creation of multi-agency working parties to explore such issues as crime, it had redirected funds from other agencies and the private sector through policies including industrial improvement and conservation, and it had helped to foster such new projects as promoting credit unions.
But, despite positive evaluations of the Urban Programme and particularly its operation within the Partnerships, it is evident that the whole strategy is open to criticism.
These criticisms can be divided into three major areas: administration, funding and policy development.
Urban Programme administration
The fundamental administrative problem has been the perennial difficulty in achieving a co-ordinated response to the problems facing the inner-urban cores.
These constraints were, of course, apparent when Partnerships were created in  1977: attempts to bring together different tiers of government and different departments of either local or central administration have proved consistently complex to implement.
A particularly scathing review of urban initiatives in Merseyside (undertaken by a House of Commons environment committee) makes this clear (House of Commons Environment Committee, 1983).
Different tiers of government refused to co-operate; Liverpool City Council disbanded inner-city working parties and incorporated Urban Programme issues into mainstream committees; and the Secretary of State steadily distanced himself from what he perceived to be a largely meaningless ‘talking shop’.
Problems of co-ordination probably reached their worst by the mid-1980s.
The disappearance of the metropolitan counties, and the adoption by many urban Labour councils of a rather more pragmatic approach towards central government, eased some of the particular difficulties facing the Partnerships.
Nevertheless, the need to develop an action programme from a diverse range of interests has undoubtedly encouraged an overly bureaucratic philosophy to dominate both Programme and Partnership Authorities (Stewart, 1983; Parkinson and Wilks, 1986; Stewart, 1987).
Too much emphasis was placed on the necessary function of actually producing an annual programme to which different parties can agree and that identifies the full list of projects seeking funding.
While such an exercise can be useful in highlighting and co-ordinating inner-city initiatives, it is usually time-consuming relative to the resources on offer (Aldridge and Brotherton, 1987).
Urban Programme funding
The limited size of Urban Programme resources has been discussed above; for many Programme Authorities, Urban Programme funds are insignificant.
However, for the Partnerships more is at stake.
All the cities have lost resources as a result of reductions in central-government support from the block grant: between 1981–2 and 1985–6, block grant to the cities declined by one-quarter in real terms, and by 1985–6 penalties imposed on the Partnership and Programme Authorities in the rate-support grant settlement almost equalled their Urban Programme allocations (Association of Metropolitan Authorities, 1986).
In the 1980s, cities have not gained in resources from central government.
Despite the limited size of the Urban Programme, the administration of grant has been consistently problematic (West Midlands County Council, 1986; Stewart, 1987).
Limitations on virement ensure that the annual budgetary cycle becomes vitally important.
Spending resources before financial deadlines has come to dominate the administration of Partnerships and Programme Authorities, instead of wider strategic issues.
The increasing emphasis on capital projects within an annual budgetary cycle creates problems in that it may take a number of years to acquire and to develop urban sites.
Some capital projects obviously need current resources to run them.
Government approval has been increasingly required for minor projects, which normally cannot generate income.
Finally, there is the contentious issue of time-expired projects.
Many schemes are funded for three to five years and, although some tapering mechanisms may allow continued but limited funding thereafter, in the long run local authorities may have to bear a larger proportion of total expenditure if schemes are to continue.
This has tended to happen, but declining local-authority current expenditure makes this practice increasingly unlikely — certain worthwhile projects will disappear because of a lack of resources.
The Urban Programme and policy development
Perhaps the most important criticisms levelled at the Urban Programme relate to policy development.
A number of assessments argue, for example, that the Department of the Environment has traditionally not been able to provide strategic guidance governing the role and direction of the Programme (National Audit Office, 1986; House of Commons Committee of Public Accounts, 1986b).
Until the 1985 major review of the Programme, objectives were ill-defined or absent, and broader issues of policy development and evaluation were neglected.
There was little monitoring until the later 1980s (Sills, Taylor and Golding, 1985).
The need for authorities to satisfy bureaucratic procedures generally stifled more important debates relating to, for example, the role of the inner cities, the position of the disadvantaged, the relationship between the inner cities and surrounding city regions, and so on .
Although it was always assumed that the Urban Programme would aim to initiate innovative projects, there must be some doubt whether this has always happened.
In the late 1980s there is little to suggest originality in the lists of projects supported by Partnership and Programme Authorities.
Economic projects tend to support companies and infrastructural provision; social and community projects usually involve funding for community and leisure centres or educational and advice projects; housing schemes are directed towards improvement and the needs of special groups; and environmental expenditure is allocated to improving older buildings and vacant sites.
Little in this might be described as innovative.
Most is common ground for local authorities and other agencies.
Some initiatives may have been initially funded through Urban Programme expenditure: the enveloping of the external fabric of older dwellings and managed workshops (discussed in Chapter 7) were initiated using the Urban Programme, but it would be difficult to argue that these would not have occurred if Urban Programme funds had not been available.
One can see why the Urban Programme has not, on the whole, fostered a great deal of innovation.
Departmental priorities have often featured prominently.
For some departments in local councils, the Urban Programme has been regarded as a way in which capital schemes cut from other mainstream budgets might be reinstated.
Urban Programme funding has, therefore, all too often operated not as a last resort, supporting imaginative projects, but as a substitute for resources cut from other budgets.
The administrative structure of Partnerships, with its heavy  emphasis on co-ordinating different agencies, would in any case tend to inhibit the unorthodox.
Certainly there is little indication of policy innovation or dynamism in the Urban Programme.
While presiding over the implementation of a large number of separate projects the entire structure of the Urban Programme seems increasingly marginal to the problems of both urban decline and mainstream inner-city policy.
It might have moderated things at the margins, but it has done little to address or solve issues of economic decline, deprivation or inadequate housing in the cities.
Will it survive long into the 1990s?
City Action Teams and Task Forces
The City Action Teams' (CATS) origins lie in the government's response to the 1981 riots in Liverpool.
Although many British cities saw riots in that year, the disturbance at Toxteth was the most significant in the context of inner-urban policy.
This was because the Secretary of State for the Environment, Michael Heseltine, was charged by the Prime Minister to take particular interest in, and suggest responses to, the problems of Liverpool.
To assist in this exercise, Heseltine, temporarily ‘Minister for Merseyside’, created a supportive Task Force.
This consisted of about thirty full-time civil servants, mainly drawn from the Department of the Environment but with secondees from the Departments of Industry and Employment.
At the same time, Heseltine also created a Financial Institutions Group, consisting of secondees from major companies who were asked to review the role of, and constraints upon, private-sector investment in the cities.
Some of these companies visited Liverpool in 1981 at Heseltine's request, and as a result some private-sector managers were invited to join the Task Force.
It is clear that, when Heseltine originally returned to the Cabinet from Liverpool in the autumn 1981, he was intent on expanding public-sector investment in Merseyside (Parkinson and Duffy, 1984).
The Treasury defeated this proposal, but the Cabinet was prepared to initiate a new approach to Liverpool's difficulties — the task Force.
Cabinet's vision of the Task Force was at variance with Heseltine's own ideas.
The role of the Task Force, as specified by the Prime Minister's Office, was essentially a strategic vision: broad issues were to be raised; the direction of any additional expenditure was to be stipulated; and longer-term policies were to be highlighted.
In the event, Heseltine encouraged a much more pragmatic approach, centred on project development.
Large-scale, politically-visible, catalytic schemes — such as the Garden Festival and Wavertree Technology Park — came to dominate the Task Force.
Strategy never figured prominently except in the most generalized way.
The private sector, for example, was central to the approach, and improving the city's image was seen as vital.
The Task Force, however, was not really about broader strategy and policy it — was very much the creature of the Secretary of State and, like him, it was proactive, project orientated and anti-bureaucratic (Morison, 1987).
There have been a number of evaluations of the Task Force (Parkinson and Duffy, 1984; Morison, 1987).
The approach brought central-government  departments into closer practical contact with problems, and thus encouraged civil servants to adopt more pro-active as opposed to supervisory stances.
It helped to develop valuable projects; it utilized market skills in the implementation of schemes; and it began that process of integrating central-government departments into corporate entities through which regional problems might be better addressed.
But the Task Force highlighted some of the intrinsic problems inherent to programmes designed to co-ordinate agency response.
Strategic analysis and vision was almost totally absent.
It failed to create a genuinely corporate approach towards the problems of a single, major conurbation.
The Department of Industry was consistently lukewarm to the concept of favouring one particular inner-urban area.
The Task Force brought no specific resources of its own.
It had to proceed through persuasion and encouragement — a difficult process with public-sector bodies, but almost impossible with major companies.
Having successfully seconded through the Task Force one manager to refurbish industrial estates in Knowsley and Kirkby, United Biscuits promptly closed a food-processing plant at Knowsley with the loss of 2,000 jobs.
There were problems in the relationship between the Task Force and local authorities.
Eventually, formal administrative structures were created between the Task Force and local government, but the Task Force's determination to implement specific projects rather than to help create a broader and longer-term strategy for the conurbation inevitably created tensions.
It seems in retrospect that the Task Force in Merseyside was driven by Heseltine's particular vision of urban regeneration.
The cities would not be reinvigorated by public-sector inspired and resourced strategies.
Instead, he promoted a ‘Disraelian sense of the obligation of local businessmen to exercise leadership in the big cities as their predecessors had in the Victorian heyday’(Parkinson and Duffy, 1984, p. 81).
Once Heseltine departed, succeeding Secretaries of State for the Environment such as King, Jenkins and Baker, were unwilling or unable to sustain this vision.
By 1983 the Task Force had become more institutionalized in that it had begun to deal with matters relating to mainstream local-authority funding programmes, Urban Programme submissions, derelict-land grant applications, and so on.
Even if the political status of the Task Force within Merseyside began to wane after Heseltine's departure from the Department of the Environment, one central objective of that initiative was to be retained: the co-ordination of central-government activity within the major conurbations.
To achieve this, it was announced in 1985 that five CATS were to be created in the Partnership areas of England.
One would deal with the three London Partnerships, and there would be others established in Birmingham, Liverpool, Manchester — Salford and Newcastle — Gateshead.
In 1988 two other CATS were announced based in Leeds and Nottingham.
These initiatives were designed to co-ordinate spending within the Partnerships from the key departments — the Departments of the Environment, Employment, and Trade and Industry — spending that by 1988–9 amounted to  about £850 million per annum.
They were designed to operate closely with local government and the private sector to bring about the economic development of the inner areas.
As with the Merseyside Task Force, they were to be primarily concerned with project development and not with issues of strategy.
Little substantive evaluation of CATS has emerged, perhaps not surprisingly when one bears in mind their location within central-government departments.
Under their aegis a range of economically-oriented projects has been effected, including training schemes, science parks, support for small businesses, industrial-improvement projects, and so on.
Anecdotal evidence suggests that CATS have not sought out local-government co-operation: they have implemented little that would not in any case have occurred.
And, most importantly, they have been unable to devise anything that might be termed a corporate central-government strategy towards inner-city areas.
One reason for this may be that the civil service's centralized administrative structure, based on line departments, makes the task of developing an integrated strategy in the English regions exceptionally difficult to achieve.
In part to complement the broad-based approach towards co-ordination developed within the CATS, the Inner City Initiative was launched in 1986 to increase Private-sector investment in small urban areas that were subject to high unemployment rates.
To achieve this, eight (later sixteen) Task Forces were created.
They were located throughout England (see Figure 2, p. xii) and included Chapeltown in Leeds, St. Pauls (Bristol) and North Kensington.
They consisted of small groups of civil servants and industrial secondees who attempted to initiate modest proposals to reduce local unemployment, in part by linking government investment in such areas as public works and training, to private-sector developments.
For example, they tried to link training placement to jobs, or to target construction jobs on local people.
Most have small-business development funds for new companies.
However, their budgets are small: the 1988 Action for Cities programme granted them £20 million.
It seems likely that they will make little impact, one reason being that they appear to be more concerned with targeting existing jobs rather than creating genuinely new ones.
Other Co-ordinating Projects
Mention should be made of some of the other urban projects that are designed to improve agency co-ordination.
Not all of these approaches are necessarily directed solely to the cities, and some would not feature in many classifications of inner-urban policy.
However, their potential implications for the major conurbations merits their inclusion here.
Three projects can be mentioned.
In 1988,Action for Cities announced the development of a Safer Cities scheme, designed to reduce urban crime.
Between 1988 and 1991, in 20 urban localities, representatives from the police and probation services, local businesses, local community groups, and so on, are to identify particular problems that increase local crime and to suggest appropriate  remedies.
In housing, there is the Priority Estates Project that, since 1979, has shown how the management of run-down estates can be improved by local authorities and tenants working together (Power, 1987).
In training,Action for Cities identified a number of initiatives that were designed to improve access to and awareness of training services for those in the cities.
Improved management techniques could include new information Points in the inner cities, a decentralization of some services to deprived areas and the appointment of specialist staff to deal with the problems encountered by the long-term unemployed.
Co-ordination in Inner-City Policy: Conclusions
In this and the previous chapter, policies designed to improve the co-ordination of urban agencies have been addressed.
The overwhelming conclusion emerging from any assessment of these programmes is that they have only a marginal impact on inner-urban problems.
There may be circumstances where an integration of different programmes can reduce duplication and sharpen policy effectiveness, but in general co-ordination achieves very little — it is extremely difficult to put into practice.
It assumes that an easy consensus can be achieved about the nature of the problem and its resolution, when this is rarely the case.
It assumes administrative efficiency will suffice when this may only have the most limited of practical effects.
It relegates crucial issues, such as equity and strategy, to minor roles.
It gives priority to project implementation when policy development is needed.
Finally, it almost invariably assumes that substantial improvements can be obtained with the same resources.
In brief, it doesn't work.
If it does achieve anything, it diverts attention from central issues of policy, expenditure and strategy.
It is surprising to see it figuring still as an important mechanism through which urban policy might be delivered when, as the next two chapters show, other approaches have made a much greater impression on urban development.
However, it may be wrong to assume that this inability to create a coordinated response is a bad thing: a truly-integrated response to the cities from the Conservative governments elected in 1979 and after might have been even more detrimental to the major conurbations than it has been.
Conservative Inner-Urban Policy after 1979: Liberalization and Enterprise
In the previous chapter we examined the strand of thinking and policy development that is centred on co-ordination.
A second important theme in the evolving urban debate after 1979 is the issue of deregulation and decontrol.
Conservative governments elected since 1979 have argued consistently that one reason for Britain's traditionally weak economic performance, when compared with other developed economies, has been the degree of regulation, control and taxation imposed on producers and potential entrepreneurs.
This theme has run through white papers (HMSO, 1985; 1986a), statements from central-government ministers (Rumbold, 1986), and has increasingly impinged on the urban debate.
The Prime Minister, for example, writing in Action for Cities in 1988 argued that ‘the Government has created a climate which supports enterprise and has set about removing obstacles in the way of inner city recovery (HMSO, 1988a, p. 2).
The truth of these assumptions — that Britain is a particularly regulated economy where enterprise might flourish in the wake of decontrol — is by no means held universally.
These debates are developed in Chapter 9, which provides an overview of the entire range of inner-city interventions.
Here, we outline and evaluate those urban initiatives that can be seen to have resulted from the drive for deregulation and decontrol.
Three policies merit consideration: enterprise zones, Freeports and Simplified Planning Zones.
Enterprise Zones
Although there has been a proliferation in inner-city innovations in the 1980s, there can be little doubt that enterprise zones, together with Urban Development Corporations (see Chapter 6), have been the most significant of initiatives.
Two major debates surround enterprise zones: there is the whole question of their origin, development and administration, which raises a series of issues in relation to governments’ ability to bring about radical change; and, second, and more  importantly by the late 1980s, their impact can now be assessed in some detail.
Enterprise Zones: Origins and Development
Enterprise zones originated in a number of ideas that began to amalgamate towards the end of the 1970s.
They reflected a concept that had been current for a number of years, that experiments in planning free zones ought to be devised (Banham et al .,
1974).
Those advocating such innovations were motivated most powerfully by aesthetic considerations, in particular by the deadening effect on design of development control.
One of those promoting a liberalization of planning regulations, Professor Peter Hall, developed his ideas of deregulation into what was to become an influential contribution (1977).
Hall's ideas, which he was later to endorse strongly (Hall, 1982a; 1982b) were based on the idea that inner-urban decline in some British cities had gone so far that orthodox approaches to regeneration would not work.
He argued instead for the establishment of a small number of what he termed ‘freeports’, within which unregulated free enterprise would be encouraged.
The zones would be outside the effective control of national government.
There would be free movement of goods, labour and capital.
Wage levels would not be controlled and personal and corporation taxes would be kept to a minimum.
Hall justified his approach in a number of ways.
Establishing such enclaves would inevitably encourage the immigration of larger companies seeking tax exemptions.
And so, overall, few new jobs would be created.
Hall argued, however, that even this least satisfactory outcome would be worth while if it meant some of the long-term unemployed in the inner cities obtained jobs, and were thus able to climb up the skills and income levels.
Those losing jobs from companies relocating to the inner cities would probably be able to acquire new jobs much more easily than those trapped within the cities.
More optimistically, Hall argued that the zones would be about enterprise, growth and innovation.
In some of the Pacific-rim economies, such as Hong Kong, unregulated enterprise had been associated with substantial economic progress since 1950 that, somehow, had resulted in real technological development.
On an experimental basis at least, Hall argued the effectiveness of liberalization within a few inner-city sites should be explored.
It could mean that some of the technologically-advanced jobs developing or locating in the Pacific might emerge instead in the UK.
These ideas, based on liberalization and decontrol, struck an immediate chord in the Conservative Party.
Mrs Thatcher's election to Party Leader in 1975 was to be immensely significant in the context of post-war politics: the tradition of consensual, one-nation government (which had dominated Conservative governments since 1951) was, if not to disappear, to become far less dominant.
Market-orientated, almost laissez-faire attitudes figured ever more prominently in the Conservative Party when in opposition in the 1970s.
Once in government in the late 1970s and early 1980s, Hall's deregulatory message was taken up with alacrity.
This attitude was most apparent in a speech given in the Isle of Dogs in 1978 by Sir Geoffrey Howe, later to be Mrs Thatcher's first Chancellor (Howe, 1978).
He argued that enterprise zones should be established in which detailed planning controls would cease to exist, certain legal obligations on employers such as employment protection legislation would no longer apply, various taxes would not be levied and the overall management of zones would be undertaken not by local authorities but by some other agency.
These ideas formed the basis of enterprise zones that received formal approval in the Finance Act 1980 and the Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980.
As a number of observers have pointed out (Taylor, 1981; Morison, 1987), enterprise zones differed in important respects from the outline statement made by Sir Geoffrey Howe in 1978.
The idea was examined initially by the incoming Conservative government in the Industrial Policy Group at the Treasury.
As a result of these considerations, the government decided that enterprise zones would be implemented by local authorities and not by some outside agency.
Employment protection legislation was to be retained, and tax havens were eventually ruled out because of the problems of potential abuse by incoming companies or firms moving some plant into the zones.
But certain exemptions would apply within a select and small number of zones.
Three issues are important in this context: land and planning considerations, financial incentives and zone designations.
Land and planning
Howe had argued in 1978 that planning controls had, to a certain extent, been responsible for urban dereliction.
Too much emphasis had been placed on supervising minor residential modifications and in rejecting applications, which had resulted in reduced economic growth.
Enterprise zones, therefore, introduced the concept of the simplified planning regime, intended to speed up planning applications and to give deemed planning consent for many developments.
Provided certain standards, such as height, access and land use were met, planning approval would not be required.
These kinds of exemptions were regarded as potentially harmful by organizations such as the Royal Town Planning Institute.
They would encourage the reincarnation of a Victorian urban Britain in which environmental standards would decline (RTPI, 1979).
These fears proved largely groundless.
As the first set of declaration reports were produced, it became apparent that development within the zones would not be significantly different from what would have occurred anyway (Corby District Council, 1981; Newcastle upon Tyne, 1981; Swansea City Council, 1981): planning controls were often retained along zone boundaries; Special Industrial Uses, including noxious and dangerous processes, were still subject to control; and, on occasion, environmental improvements were written into declaration reports.
Enterprise zones have not been environmentally harmful; in many cases standards have greatly improved.
The most contentious planning issue was perhaps the question of retailing.
Some local authorities expressed a concern about the potential implications of removing planning controls from shopping, on the grounds that the financial incentives (discussed below) would attract into the zones large retail organizations, thus undermining existing shopping patterns.
Certain authorities, originally identified by Sir Geoffrey Howe as potential recipients of enterprise zones in the 1980 Budget speech — notably Sheffield and Wolverhampton — were unable to reach agreement with the Treasury over this issue, and were thus not granted zones.
However, the government accepted that large hypermarkets would still require planning permission, and in some cases (for example, Clydebank and Newcastle), it was agreed that declaration reports should include clauses governing shops over a certain size.
The question of land ownership and development also became somewhat complex.
In his 1978 speech, Sir Geoffrey Howe said that new agencies would be created for the zones, which would re-allocate public-sector land to private users.
As Morison (1987) makes clear, this did not occur, and the public sector was vital in the early development of many of the zones.
In Dudley (W. Midlands), where a large proportion of land was privately owned, the Department of the Environment insisted that if enterprise-zone designation was to go ahead, it would only be approved if private-sector land was first sold to the local authority before a certain date.
The most successful zones were those where one public-sector development organization, such as the local authority or English Estates, owned most of the land and was able to undertake necessary infrastructural investment.
Too often, where land ownership was fragmented, development was slow to occur: statutory bodies were reluctant to sell unwanted land, and small, private owners did not often have the expertise and resources to benefit from financial incentives.
Financial Incentives
Although the simplified planning regime had, on the whole, a mild effect, some financial incentives, on the other hand, undoubtedly stimulated development within the zones.
The financial and business exemptions applying to enterprise zones in 1980 were rather eclectic.
They included, for example, exemptions for industrial development certificates and relief from development land tax, both of which were to become irrelevant when these regulations were abolished everywhere.
Firms within enterprise zones were also exempt from industrial training-board levies — hardly a massive concession, since the number of boards was to be substantially reduced throughout the 1980s.
Two concessions, however, proved much more important.
Firms within enterprise zones would not pay rates for ten years, local government being reimbursed for lost revenue by the Treasury.
This was an important incentive.
Rates are frequently a small proportion of total outgoings, but there is little doubt that they are unpopular within the business community.
The other concession was that  there would be 100 per cent capital allowances on both industrial and commercial buildings.
This was essential to the development of many zones, but not necessarily as had been anticipated.
It was an incentive that applied particularly to developers and developer/producers, but not to those simply producing goods and services.
It especially benefited commercial development.
It had already been possible to offset some of the costs of industrial building, but this incentive was now extended to commercial projects in the zones.
Zone Designations
It is important to stress that enterprise zones were regarded as a political experiment by the Conservative government elected in 1979.
Ministers ostensibly believed that economic progress had been limited by control, regulation and over-taxation.
Enterprise zones were a way of testing the viability of these ideas by liberalizing the market.
As we have seen, some of the radicalism inherent in Howe's 1978 speech was dissipated by the time enterprise zones were given legal status in 1980.
Nevertheless, observers on what might broadly be called the left were generally very much opposed to the creation of enterprise zones (Anderson, 1980; Massey, 1982).
The zones would apparently diminish employment protection and welfare legislation; they would create few, worthwhile, genuinely new jobs; and they diverted attention away from the dramatic contraction in investment and employment that was occurring in large parts of Britain in the early 1980s.
Many Labour councils held these kinds of sentiments at the time.
In the early 1980s, there had been a noticeably leftwards swing in some urban authorities, and to some councils the idea of upholding an initiative apparently rooted in the laissez-faire capitalism of the nineteenth century was unthinkable.
On the other hand, protracted financial limitations were in force, and enterprise zones offered the hope of some financial support from central government.
It was the hope of central-government support that, on the whole, dominated thinking within Labour councils.
Enterprise zones were simply not going to reflect uncontrolled capitalism.
Although in early discussions surrounding enterprise zones a few authorities were unable to reach formal agreement with the government, most Labour authorities, with varying degrees of enthusiasm, eventually sought designation.
By 1985, 25 enterprises zones had been established in the UK (see Figure 2, p. xii).
Eleven were designated in 1981–2, and a further 14 in 1983–4.
Extensions to 3 of the first 11 zones — Dudley, Wakefield (W. Yorks.) and Swansea — and to one of the second 14 zones — N.W. Kent — were made between 1983 and 1986.
In 1988, a further (and possibly final) zone was declared at Inverclyde.
Zones have been declared throughout the UK: 2 in Northern Ireland, 3 in Scotland, 3 in Wales and 17 in England.
About half of these are in urban localities, with designations in Hartlepool (Cleveland), Dudley, the Isle of Dogs, Rotherham (S. Yorks.),
 Middlesbrough , Tyneside, Speke (Merseyside), Salford — Trafford, Wakefield, Swansea, Tayside and Clydebank.
Political considerations governed the selection of some sites.
Corby (Northants), for example, received a zone after the closure of the British Steel plant, and an associated rise to over 25 per cent in male unemployment.
In general, it was apparent that as far as possible different regions of the country (with the exception of East Anglia and the South West) were to gain at least one designation.
The zones varied significantly in size and composition.
Some were little more than 50 hectares, although the Tyneside zone was over 450 hectares.
Many were scattered over separate sites.
This was perhaps predictable, since the Department of the Environment, in approving designations, wanted to declare vacant or derelict land as enterprise zones, thus avoiding the incorporation of existing companies, which would benefit from financial incentives, into designations.
Some zones, such as that at Clydebank, consisted of one large site.
Details of the physical characteristics of the zones, however, are of secondary importance to the central question — how has the private sector responded to these limited experiments in deregulation?
Enterprise Zones: Impact and Implications
One of the somewhat stranger requirements of companies in enterprise zones was that they would have to provide central government with only minimal statistical information.
One wonders how many firms believe this requirement has actually operated, for no urban initiative has ever been the subject of so much formal and informal evaluation.
For the first three years, consultants monitored the zones (for example, Tym and Partners, 1984).
The Department of the Environment has itself undertaken a number of reports updating progress in the enterprise zones (DoE, 1985b; 1987a).
The National Audit Office (1986) and the House of Commons Committee of Public Accounts (1986a) have produced their own evaluations.
Some local authorities have published assessments (Swansea City Council, 1986; Trafford Metropolitan Borough, 1988).
Independent observers have published widely on the zones and their effects (MacLeary and Lloyd, 1980; McDonald and Howick, 1982; Norcliffe and Hoare, 1982; Catalano, 1983; Talbot, 1988).
A major evaluation was undertaken by P.A. Consultants for the Department of the Environment and published in 1987 (P.A. Consultants, 1987).
This mass of material can be grouped into a number of key areas.
In the following discussion, four major debates are isolated: the jobs issue, economic development, planning and property implications, and costs and perceptions of incentives.
The jobs issue
Jobs have always been central to the debate surrounding enterprise zones.
In ways never always explicitly developed, early proponents of the idea argued that incentives within the zones would help sustain employment (Hall, 1977; Howe, 1978).
This might initially involve low-grade jobs relocating from elsewhere into the zones.
However, Hall (1982a; 1982b) hoped that higher-skilled and better-paid jobs would eventually Appear through the same processes that had driven countries such as Hong Kong, South Korea and Singapore from low-grade, low-paid economies into higher, if not always ‘higher-tech’ production.
The reality has turned out to be somewhat more prosaic.
By 1986 there were approximately 63,000 jobs in the 23 British enterprise zones.
This gross figure needs considerable refinement.
Consultants evaluating the zones suggest that only 55 per cent of these jobs are net additional jobs in the zones (P.A. Consultants, 1987).
Moreover, these net additional jobs are offset by reductions in jobs in surrounding areas — by a diversion of activity into the zones, and a displacement of jobs in firms out of the zones.
These job losses in off-zone areas total almost 30,000.
However, off-zone areas benefit from the creation of local construction jobs, and through multiplier effects: the expenditure available to new employees in the zones percolates through the local economy; and migrants attracted to the area create additional demands for jobs in housing, education, and so on.
The culmination of these processes suggests that about 12,800 additional jobs have been sustained either directly or indirectly by the enterprise-zone experiment.
Evidence is available relating to the occupational structure and characteristics of the jobs created within the zones.
Not surprisingly, the older and more industrialized zones have higher proportions of male employment.
In total, almost 70 per cent of jobs in British enterprise zones are taken by men.
Of posts available within the zones, 16 per cent are professional, 13 per cent clerical, 32 per cent skilled and 39 per cent unskilled.
These totals inevitably vary considerably from zone to zone, depending on its economic structure, location, and so on.
For example, 30 per cent of the jobs in Dudley are professional, but only 7 per cent of those in Wellingborough (Northants).
Whereas Salford — Trafford has 17 per cent skilled posts, the total in Scunthorpe — Glanford (Humberside) is 60 per cent.
Economic development
Using the information from the major review published in 1987 (P.A. Consultants), various aspects of economic development within enterprise zones have become more apparent.
By 1986 there were just over 2,800 establishments in the 23 British zones, 70 per cent of which were located in the first designations of Swansea, Tyneside, Corby, the Isle of Dogs, Wakefield, Dudley, Speke, Clydebank, Salford — Trafford and Hartlepool.
About 50 per cent of the companies in the zones are engaged in manufacturing, 7 per cent in retailing and 16 per cent in distribution, although there is considerable inter-zone variation.
Almost 90 per cent of firms in the Corby zone are in manufacturing, while over 25 per cent of Swansea's firms are in retailing.
Only about 12 per cent of companies might be termed ‘high-tech’, although this figure should rise as a higher proportion of post-designation companies fall into this classification.
As they increase  in proportion to the pre-designation firms, so the number of ‘high-tech’ jobs should increase.
Almost 90 per cent of companies have fewer than fifty employees.
An important debate surrounding the concept of enterprise zones has been the question of displacement.
Would existing firms relocate into the zones because of their incentives, to no overall effect?
By 1986 it had become evident that these fears had, to some extent, been realized.
About 34 per cent of employment within the zones was in pre-designation companies, and about 34 per cent had transferred in.
New start-ups provided 14 per cent, and new branches 18 per cent .
Of the employment in new branches, about 50 per cent had relocated from elsewhere within the UK, 35 per cent from the local area or the region and about 14 per cent from abroad.
In relation to transfer, about 50 per cent of employment had come from the local area and almost 25 per cent from the region.
Transfers from elsewhere within the UK amounted to 18 per cent and only a tiny proportion had come from abroad.
Most activity in the zones in 1986 was clearly either there pre-designation, or it represents movements in by existing branches or by firms within the region.
Another issue of considerable importance is the question of additionality: what proportion of companies have located on, or remained within, the zones as a result of designation, and what proportion would have located there without designation?
This issue raises a whole series of complex methodological questions that are examined in some detail in P.A. Consultants' 1987 review.
Total additionality for pre-designation firms amounts to 23 per cent of companies.
The zones have thus had some success in preventing the relocation or closure of preexisting companies.
For post-designation companies, about two-thirds would not have been in the zones had designation not taken place.
For new start-ups, the figure rises to over three-quarters.
When analysed by sector, it is the manufacturing firms that show the highest additionality.
It is also clear that additionality has varied considerably amongst zones: while Rotherham's additionality amounts to 60 per cent, others, such as Dudley and Clydebank, reveal totals of about 30 per cent .
One final issue in relation to economic development is the question of the performance of companies in the enterprise zones.
On the whole, the evidence (P.A. Consultants, 1987) suggests that companies located in enterprise zones have performed better than firms located elsewhere in the local economy.
This seems to be true whether performance in measured in terms of growth in output, investment or employment.
A large proportion of firms expected this expansion to continue throughout the 1980s.
However, most companies saw this growth related to factors such as increasing demand rather than to the enterprise-zone incentives themselves.
Nevertheless, between a fifth and a quarter of firms within the zones considered that their output, employment and productivity would be lower without on-site incentives.
Interestingly, a majority of companies both on and off the zones considered that if anything the zones had had a beneficial effect on local business, local economic development, environmental improvements and public- and private-sector investment.
Planning and property implications
About 90 per cent of development in the zones has been for industrial or warehouse use.
Most new units are (predictably) small, with 60 per cent less than 450 m&sup2; and a third less than 185 m&sup2;.
The designation of zones has certainly encouraged development, but this has varied from region to region.
Some — especially those in the south or those with a wide range of incentives such as regional and European Community assistance — have done much better than others.
Corby and Wellingborough fall into this category, while others, for example, Milford Haven (Dyfed) and Tayside, have done less well because of factors such as distance from markets, location within depressed regions, and so on .
In general, it seems that enterprise-zone designations have increased the supply of property.
Large sites are generally made available, which are more attractive to developers and investors because of more flexible planning regulations, capital incentives and public-sector infrastructural investment.
In fact, the P.A. Consultants' 1987 review of enterprise zones concluded that the capital allowances in the zones had begun to attract private finance capital to the north and north west, since incentives raise the yields to those levels required by the investors.
For this reason, much of the incentive provided to schemes in the south (and to retail schemes virtually everywhere) was unnecessary — the projects would have in any case gone ahead.
The development of the zones has had implications for surrounding areas.
Capital valuations tend to be much higher for on-zone property.
Rents also tend to be higher, particularly for smaller premises, and this differential has, if anything, increased.
However, this variation is due largely to the rate relief enjoyed by on-zone occupiers rather than to any obvious collapse of the property market outside of the zones.
In effect, landlords have clawed back for themselves an increasing proportion of rate relief on premises within enterprise zones.
Additionally, the zones have not created industrial dereliction, and properties vacated by tenants moving to the zones have been re-occupied through normal filtering processes.
The costs and perceptions of incentives
The costs of the experiment arise in a number of ways.
Between 1981–2 and 1985–6, total public costs associated with enterprise zones amounted to a gross figure of almost £400 million.
Of this total, 21 per cent came through rate relief, 38 per cent through capital allowances, 7 per cent through land acquisition by public agencies and 34 per cent through infrastructural expenditure.
This suggests that each of the 200,000 hectares developed by 1986 had required almost £200,000 of public expenditure.
On the infrastructural side, most of the investment had come from Urban Programme and derelict-land grant sources.
Some expenditure would have occurred irrespective of designation, but almost three-quarters of total spending occurred as a result of enterprise-zone  declarations.
Of this net figure, about 51 per cent represents capital allowances, 28 per cent rate relief and 21 per cent infrastructure and land-acquisition costs.
Some zones, notably Corby, Tyneside and the Isle of Dogs, have received a much larger proportion of total spending than have some of the later designations, such as Milford Haven, Scunthorpe — Glanford and  Middlesbrough .
The total cost of each additional job is estimated at about £8,500 in the zones, and about £23,000 for additional jobs within the local area as a whole.
Finally, how did companies assess the incentives on offer within enterprise zones?
Rate exemption was the most important, particularly for pre-designation companies and new start-ups, but less so for branch plants where the benefits might accrue to head offices.
Rate exemption was also seen as the most important factor in facilitating additional investment and in explaining why companies located in the zones.
On the other hand, a substantial minority considered that infrastructural investment was a significant factor for location within an enterprise zone.
These perceptions are predictable, if somewhat misguided.
Most additional public-sector investment has come through capital allowances.
Of the potential beneficiaries of enterprise zones — occupiers, developers, landowners and investors — it is the investors who gain the most.
Of the incentives on industrial property in the north, perhaps 90 per cent goes to investors.
Enterprise Zones: Conclusions
In some respects, enterprise zones have been relatively successful.
Between 1981 and 1986, about 1.5 m&sup2; of increased floorspace was constructed, representing a rise of 60 per cent on designation totals.
About 13,000 net new jobs have been created.
Environmental standards have improved in some of the older zones, and local physical and economic development has been improved.
Firms within the zones seem to have been doing better than equivalent companies elsewhere.
But there have been costs.
Job-creation costs for the zones and the areas around them are high.
There has also been a considerable degree of unnecessary subsidy.
In the south and in retail developments especially, many projects would probably have in any case gone ahead.
Of central importance to a government committed to reduced public-sector have been the incentives and other aspects of public-sector intervention have proved crucial.
The most successful zones have not been where the public sector has withdrawn, but where (as in Corby or the Isle of Dogs) one public-sector agency has been able to acquire and to service land for private developers and occupiers.
Whether this reality was important or not, the Secretary of State for the Environment announced in late 1987 that there would be no general extension of the enterprise zones in England (Ridley, 1987).
As the next chapter shows, by the late 1980s other mechanisms for restructuring the older industrial areas were of greater appeal to the government.
Freeports
Although enterprise zones have been the most important of the liberalizing initiatives, other developments fall into much the same category.
This is Perhaps particularly true of Freeports, although whether these can be regarded as central to inner-urban Policy is very debatable.
Abroad, the idea of Freeports has been current for many years.
In the most common form they can be seen as ‘enclaves treated as being outside the customs territory of the host state, where goods might be imported, stored, processed and re-exported without becoming subject to customs duties’(Morison, 1987, p. 103).
They have been particularly successful within the Pacific-rim economies, and perhaps as much as one-fifth of world trade went through them by the mid-1980s.
However, as Morison makes clear, their relevance to the British economy has always been doubtful because a large proportion of industrial imports enter free of duty, and membership of the European Community has limited their scope.
Nevertheless, the government in 1983 announced the creation of Freeports.
Although it was made clear that their incentives would simply extend to exemption from basic customs control (unless or until their products entered European Community territory) and that there would be no other special assistance, the government received 45 applications for designation.
Six Freeports were declared, in Southampton, Liverpool, Birmingham, Cardiff, Prestwick and Belfast.
Interestingly enough, as with so many spatially-discrete policies, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland did not miss out.
It is doubtful whether this was wise.
Some of the more obvious locations, such as Felixstowe (Suffolk) were not granted Freeport status.
Instead, the initiative became a mechanism through which the government hoped some form of economic activity would occur in what were, generally, depressed economies.
Progress was very slow in the mid-1980s, except in Liverpool, where the Docks and Harbour Company actively developed and promoted the Freeport.
Elsewhere, Freeport managers (generally private-sector companies) have presided over enhanced property development.
Since many of the concessions within Freeports can be obtained anywhere through clawbacks and concessions, it is hard to see what activity will be forthcoming, other than would have occurred in any case.
Simplified Planning Zones
Finally, we should briefly mention Simplified Planning Zones (SPZs).
In 1987, the government announced that local authorities would be able to declare SPZs under legislation contained in the Housing and Planning Act 1986 (Waldegrave, 1987).
SPZs are based on the liberalized Planning regimes pioneered within enterprise zones.
They allow local authorities to give advanced planning permission for specified types of development within defined areas.
Individual applications for  development will not be required if the proposal is compatible with overall regulations.
The approach was regarded by the government as being of particular benefit to the older urban areas.
However, it is difficult to see why SPZs should make any difference.
Most applications for development are dealt with very rapidly by urban local-planning authorities, which are mostly eager to acquire new economic activity.
In any case, if enterprise zones are the model, the overwhelming evidence is that financial incentives have proved the driving force, and that liberalized planning regimes have been of limited significance.
Liberalization and Cities: Conclusions
Three brief comments might usefully be made here.
First, the rhetoric of deregulation has not matched the reality: enterprise zones and Freeports have largely proved mundane.
The worries expressed by many in the cities and elsewhere about the possible return of social and environmental conditions reminiscent of Victorian capitalism have proved groundless.
Second, the major initiatives discussed here seem to have been poorly designed.
For example, if enterprise zones were supposed to create jobs or to boost new enterprises or to engender ‘high-tech’ industries, a more precise targeting of incentives could have been devised instead of the blanket concessions on offer.
Third, to re-iterate a theme central to this chapter, the private sector does not expand as the public sector withdraws.
The evidence from this, and from the next chapter, suggests that market investment follows State expenditure.
Conservative Inner-Urban Policy after 1979: Urban Development
The two previous chapters explore aspects of inner-urban policy after 1979: Chapter 4 examines questions of co-ordination and Chapter 5 focuses on deregulation and enterprise.
However, one other theme — development — has proved increasingly dominant in the 1980s.
It should be restated that these three aspects of policy, co-ordination, deregulation and development, cannot always be neatly separated — there are grey areas.
For instance, a great deal of development has occurred within enterprise zones, and the Urban programme has presided over a wide range of projects.
Nevertheless, this threefold distinction highlights key assumptions underlying different initiatives.
And whereas some initiatives have been primarily intended to integrate urban intervention and others to test the efficacy of deregulation, the mid-to-late 1980s saw a marked proliferation in inner-city programmes designed to boost development.
The objective of developing the cities, in both an economic and physical sense, has always been apparent within inner-urban policy.
The 1977 white paper,Policy for the Inner Cities (HMSO, 1977), proposed a number of development programmes including the creation of industrial sites and units within the older urban cores, and extensive refurbishment of the housing stock.
Other programmes outlined in the 1977 statement were less directly concerned with development.
Partnerships were to be developed between central and local government, social problems were to be relieved and a better demographic balance was to be achieved between the older cities and their surrounding conurbations.
It is tempting to contrast the 1977 approach with that outlined in the 1988 Action for Cities (HMSO, 1988a).
There it is made clear that Urban Development Corporations, the spearhead of the development thrust, ‘are the most important attack ever made on urban decay’(ibid .
p. 12).
Of the twelve initiatives announced in the 1988 statement, eight can be seen to lie within the general sphere of development.
In dealing with questions of urban development, there is  some point in making a twofold division between Urban Development Corporations (UDCs) on the one hand, and other development initiatives on the other.
UDCs are the most controversial of the urban innovations, and are given separate consideration later in this chapter.
Before that, however, consideration is given to other, relatively less important, programmes.
Urban Development Initiatives
Under this general heading we can identify perhaps seven composite programmes, which in some way are designed to enhance urban physical and/or economic development.
Some innovations undeniably lie within this definition, including urban-funding schemes, land registers, industry and enterprise, garden festivals and some specific projects outlined in the 1988 Action for Cities statement.
Two other approaches, somewhat more debatably, lie here as well: training and education, and housing programmes.
Urban Funding
In 1982, the Secretary of State for the Environment, Michael Heseltine, announced the creation of Urban Development Grants (UDGs).
These were based to some extent on the American experience of urban development action grants.
The American grants and UDGs were based on the concept of leverage, by which minimal public-sector support would stimulate substantially greater private-sector investment.
UDGs were thus intended as last-resort grants, which would push otherwise unprofitable projects into viability.
No restriction was placed on schemes supported by UDGs — industrial, commercial, residential, recreational or community-based projects or combinations of these could all be assisted.
However, after 1984 a greater emphasis was placed on schemes designed to boost the physical regeneration of the inner cities.
The private-sector contribution to these schemes was intended to be several times larger than that of the public sector.
A major review of UDGs was published in 1988 (Aston University, 1988).
In the same year, members of the consultancy team undertaking this evaluation also outlined the major findings (Johnson, 1988; Pearce, 1988).
By 1986 UDGs worth £78 million had been approved for 177 projects, with a public-to-private-sector ratio of 1:4.5.
About £350 million will have been invested by the private sector when the approved projects are completed.
Of the £78 million worth of UDGs, £35 million was for commercial developments, £26 million was for industrial developments and £17.5 million was for housing developments.
In some respects, UDGs have performed reasonably well: very few projects implemented through UDG have failed and most provided tangible benefits.
A large proportion had substantial additionality, although some projects could have been supported by other than public-sector funds, bearing in mind that UDG  is supposed to be a last-resort lender.
In addition, about 20 per cent of projects, mostly larger than average, had little or no additionality; that is , they could have been implemented by the private sector alone.
UDGs also helped to fund the construction of about 2,700 dwellings, at an average grant of £7,800 per dwelling.
Many of these houses represented virtually the only new private-sector accommodation available in the inner cities.
About three-quarters of land developed with the aid of UDG had previously been underused, vacant or derelict.
About half the developers associated with UDG-supported projects intended to further their urban activities.
Finally, UDGs helped to increase otherwise static urban-land prices, and many businesses moving into or owning premises supported by UDGs intended to boost their output.
However, it was also clear by the mid-to-late 1980s that there were drawbacks with UDG.
Many urban areas had not really benefited to any great extent.
Much of the investment was directed to Greater London, the West Midlands and the North West.
Some authorities were better organized in relation to UDG submissions, and some areas were simply not regarded as attractive to the market — even when UDG was taken into account.
There was a lack of good, implementable schemes that highlighted weaknesses in terms of development and appraisal skills in both the public and private sectors.
The effect was a substantial underspending of UDG.
In the three years between 1983 and 1986, UDG allocations of £148 million was matched by ultimate expenditure of less than £50 million.
There were other problems in the UDG programme.
First, the extent and costs of job generation were disappointing.
It is difficult to assess the total effect on employment of any assistance, but the 1988 Action for Cities statement (HMSO, 1988a) argued that UDGs provided nearly 30,000 jobs.
It was originally assumed that UDG could create jobs at around £5,000 per post.
However, more detailed analysis based on an evaluation of a sample of companies within UDG schemes were less sanguine (Aston University, 1988; Johnson, 1988).
Perhaps only about 30 per cent of jobs within UDG-supported schemes were new to the area, although of these, three-quarters were new to the national economy.
Approximately 20 per cent of employees were previously unemployed.
In terms of the cost of job generation, when taking into account only those jobs created by public-sector support, and that are new to the economy, total costs are two or three times greater than originally assumed.
A second major defect of UDG was that it did not make much difference to cities as a whole.
It had a pepper-pot effect that did not represent a comprehensive approach to urban regeneration.
Partly to overcome these constraints, Urban Regeneration Grants were announced in 1987.
These by-passed local government and allowed developers who intended to regenerate areas of 20 acres or more to approach the Department of the Environment directly.
However, only five were approved before a new City Grant was announced in Action for Cities (HMSO, 1988a).
The City Grant is to replace UDG, Urban Regeneration Grant and private-sector derelict land grant.
The new grant will be paid by central government, thus abolishing the 25 per cent contribution that local authorities have made to UDG.
The City Grant will be given to private-sector development projects that would not otherwise be implemented, and that can benefit run-down inner-city areas at reasonable cost.
Priority is to be given to the 57 authorities submitting Inner Area Programmes.
Land Registers
The problems of vacant and derelict land have been mentioned in Chapter 2.
The whole area remains complex.
Demand for inner-city land became very depressed in the late 1970s and early 1980s as traditional urban-based function, such as manufacturing and retailing, contracted and/or decentralized.
At the same time, supply constraints became more apparent.
Public- and private-sector users were both reluctant to put vacant land on the market.
Many owners — probably correctly — believed that prices would ultimately rise again, and few wanted to sell land at dramatically lower prices than had been initially paid to acquire it.
Public-sector land owners were often under an obligation to obtain the best price possible, which was unlikely to happen in times of such severely-restrained demand and when an urban-land market hardly existed at all.
Further, many public agencies wanted land for future development proposals, but a lack of activity within inner-city land markets, and accusations of land hoarding by the public sector, triggered a response from the 1979 Conservative government.
It could be argued that local authorities, in particular, were caught in an intolerable position.
In the 1970s they had been required to obtain land for future projects, and they could hardly have been expected? sell at such severely-depressed prices.
In many cities, most vacant land was not owned by local government but by the private sector and statutory authorities.
Despite these considerations, in 1981 the Department of the Environment announced the creation of land registers.
Land registers record disused public-sector land: between 1981 and 1988, about 50,000 acres were identified and subsequently developed.
However, by 1988 the registers still listed 90,000 acres of disused land.
In Action for Cities (HMSO, 1988a), the government announced that developers wishing to use recorded land could ask the Secretary of State to force its sale, and they could request additional listings.
An increasing proportion of land developed after registering was subject to Derelict Land Grant, of which £25 million was, by 1988–9, available specifically to the inner cities.
Land registers have been useful in identifying vacant urban land, and in imposing a degree of dynamism within urban-land markets.
However, their real impact should not be over-estimated.
Vacant urban land has much more to do with the changing fortunes of the market and declining public-sector resources than with local-government inefficiency.
This point was emphasized in late 1988, when a National Audit Office review of Derelict Land Grant concluded that growth in derelictions was outstripping efforts to bring such land back into use with or without grant (National Audit Office, 1988a).
Industry and Enterprise
In the late 1980s, a number of industrial initiatives were announced that were intended specifically to assist the older urban cores (DoE and DE, 1987; DTI, 1988; HMSO, 1988a).
These included inner-city offices for the Small Firms Service of the Department of Trade and Industry; grants for inner-city Local Enterprise Agencies (see Chapter 8); higher loan guarantees for small business in the Task Force (see Chapter 4); and investment of about £10 million in managed workshops by English Estates — a development agency of the Department of Trade and Industry.
In addition, Urban Programme authorities will also benefit from Trade and Industry incentives: in such areas, two-thirds of marketing, design, management and manufacturing consultancy costs will be paid.
In inner cities, within the Development Areas (where regional incentives apply), small companies with fewer than 25 employees will be eligible for 15 per cent Regional Enterprise Grant on fixed assets up to a threshold of £15,000 and a 50 per cent innovation grant up to a maximum of £25,000.
Ethnic Minority Business Initiatives are also available, providing venture capital, resources and counselling services for ethnic-minority businesses.
Garden Festivals
The idea of garden festivals was imported from Europe, particularly West Germany, where the concept had been in operation since 1945.
The first British festival was held in Liverpool in 1984, the second in Stoke-on-Trent in 1986 and the third in Glasgow in 1988.
Additional festivals are planned for Gateshead and Ebbw Vale (Gwent).
The idea is that an area consisting largely of derelict and/or vacant land should be landscaped and used for a variety of horticultural, leisure and recreational purposes, normally for a six-months period.
The site will attract visitors during the festival, and will later act as a focus for inward investment.
In addition, festivals can ensure a concentrated attack on a particular site, can stimulate local employment and help to solve local planning problems (DoE, 1983; O'Connell, 1986).
The festivals have been shown to be relatively successful by some indicators.
Between two and four million people visited each of the first three festivals, and the sites were dramatically improved — often at relatively limited net cost.
Glasgow, for example, cost about £18 million in 1988 prices, but the site is to be used for a variety of commercial, recreational and residential developments.
Some problems emerged in Liverpool when one company associated with the site went into liquidation.
However, at relatively limited cost, garden festivals have helped to renew derelict sites and to act as a focus for development.
Action for Cities, 1988
A number of development initiatives were outlined in the 1988 statement,Action for Cities (HMSO, 1988a).
These include environmental improvement projects; the creation of cultural infrastructure such as the Merseyside Maritime Museum, the Tate Gallery of the North and Granada TV's News Centre in Liverpool's Albert Dock; urban-road projects, such as improving the A13 in east London and the building of a new Black Country spinal road; and the formation of British Urban Development (BUD), backed by eleven construction and engineering companies that will realize profits from management fees and the sale of developed sites.
Training and Education
Inner-city policy has, on the whole, not related to questions of labour supply.
However, by 1988 the city technology colleges had been designated in a number of major cities.
Additionally,Action for Cities outlined in 1988 twelve schools/ industry compacts supported by the MSC, in which companies offer firm job prospects to pupils achieving certain standards.
In training,Action for Jobs programmes involved almost half-a-million inner-city residents by 1987.
New projects outlined in the 1988 Action for Cities statement include establishing urban information points, decentralizing training services and creating specialist staff for those with particular problems.
Whether these types of initiative ought to be included within the development theme is arguable, but labour-supply considerations may be seen as constraining urban output.
Enhanced educational and training standards will have demand implications for services in such areas as tourism, leisure and recreation.
Better-trained and more-qualified workforces also correlate positively with the creation of small companies.
Housing Programmes
Housing has not figured prominently in inner-urban policy.
Some Urban Programme resources have been used for housing rehabilitation, the London Docklands Development Corporation has presided over substantial housing developments (see below) and, as discussed above, UDG has boosted inner-urban residential schemes.
But housing has tended to be subsumed within other programmes.
However, by the mid-to-late 1980s, this was beginning to change, with additional resources being allocated for the management, repair, refurbishment and restructuring of housing.
The Priority Estates Project, designed to improve the management of public-sector housing, is discussed in Chapter 4.
Other schemes include the Estates Action programme, which, with resources of over £140 million by 1988–9, is designed to improve the management of council accommodation, to transfer dwellings to local management trusts, to attract in  private-sector resources and, through Community Refurbishment Schemes, to use local people to improve their own accommodation.
More importantly, the Housing Act 1988 proposes to create Housing Action Trusts (HATs) that would be centrally-appointed bodies with planned resources of £125 million in their first three years of existence.
Their functions would include taking over and improving public-sector estates and passing them onto new owners, such as private landlords, housing associations and tenant co-ops.
HATs clearly reflect the Conservative government's view that urban development requires the creation of autonomous, centrally-controlled and funded agencies, of which the best example is the Urban Development Corporation.
Urban Development Corporations and their Alternatives
In England, the single most important device through which urban development has been channelled has undoubtedly been the Urban Development Corporations (UDCs).
However, the real significance of the corporations extends beyond this.
1 he corporations have been the most intensive and the most controversial inner-urban English initiative ever devised.
The policies and attitudes of the corporations have, moreover, been thrown into sharp focus by the emergence of alternative approaches to wide-scale urban regeneration, which have been promoted elsewhere in the UK, notably in Scotland.
In the remainder of this chapter we examine the evolution and successes of UDCs, and evaluate these within the context of contrasting (but comparable) experience.
UDCs: Origins, Evolution and Powers
The concept of an independent development agency has a long tradition in Britain.
From 1946, for example, New Town Development Corporations were given extensive powers to acquire and develop land as part of the national new-town programme.
The success of these development corporations prompted organizations such as the Town and Country Planning Association in the 1970s to suggest that some kind of development agency for the inner cities should be created (Town and Country Planning Association, 1979).
These sentiments appealed to the Conservative government elected in the late 1970s.
Under the aegis of the Secretary of State for the Environment, Michael Heseltine, Urban Development Corporations were given legal definition in Part XVI of the Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980.
UDCs are primarily intended to secure the regeneration of their designated areas by bringing land and buildings into effective use; by encouraging the development of existing and new industry and commerce; by creating an attractive environment; and by ensuring that housing and social facilities are available to encourage people to live and work in the area.
However, it was always intended that UDCs would act primarily as catalysts, providing a framework within which  the prime agency for urban renewal — the private sector — would thrive (DoE, 1980).
UDCs were to concentrate on the reclamation and servicing of land and not, on the whole, on the development of that land.
UDCs were given certain powers to achieve these objectives.
These include the ability to acquire land at values that take an account of development gain arising from their designation and activities.
Land was vested in UDCs through statutory orders from the Secretary of State for the Environment.
The corporations are also the development-control authority for the designated area, so they may thus determine planning applications made to them or deem themselves planning permission by resolution.
They are not, however, plan-making authorities: these responsibilities remain with local authorities for the area.
UDCs must take account of such plans in formulating their own development proposals but are not bound by them.
It is important to stress that UDCs are not the lead agencies in such services as housing, Education and health, which remain with local authorities and other public agencies.
It is therefore important for UDCs to attain appropriate working relations with the relevant public bodies.
This has not always happened, as is examined later.
Control of UDCs lies with the Department of the Environment.
The department issues financial memoranda and written guidance, and discusses with each UDCs the form and content of the annual corporate plans.
Once approved, these are used as the basis for governmental policy review.
The department may be involved separately in approving particularly large schemes or where projects involve UDCs disposing of land at less than market values.
The department is also centrally involved in selecting the chairpersons and boards of the UDCs.
Key figures in the early evolution of the corporations included Nigel Broackes, Chairman of the London Docklands Development Corporation (LDDC), and Basil Bean, Chief Executive of the Merseyside Development Corporation (MDC), who were well known within City and market institutions.
Not surprisingly, under this kind of control the UDCs have tended to pursue market-orientated strategies within their designated areas (Ward, 1987).
UDCs have been designated in two distinct phases.
In 1981, the LDDC and the MDC were created, and much of the debate surrounding UDCs has inevitably centred on these institutions.
In 1986, the Secretary of State for the Environment, Nicholas Ridley, announced the creation of four more UDCs (see Figure 2, p. xii), each expected to spend about £150 million in the first five years of their existence.
these were to be on 2,400 hectares in the Black Country, 4,500 hectares on Teesside, a Tyne & Wear Corporation along the River Tyne and one in Trafford Park (Grt Manchester).
In 1986, the Secretary of State for Wales announced the creation of a Cardiff Bay Corporation.
This programme envisaged a barrage across the bay, the building of over 4,000 dwellings and the creation of 20,000 jobs.
In the following year, three small UDCs were also designated, each intended to spend about £15 million over four to five years.
These were located near Temple Meads station in Bristol, along the Aire-Calder navigation and south of the city centre in Leeds and in central Manchester.
Finally, in 1988 in Action for Cities , it  was announced that the Lower Don Valley in Sheffield was to be a UDC, covering about 2,000 hectares with a seven-year budget of £50 million.
At the same time, the MDC was doubled in size by the addition of 800 acres on either side of the River Mersey in which about £90 million will be spent over eight years.
At the launching of Action for Cities , it was announced that no more UDCs were planned for the foreseeable future.
The Merseyside Development Corporation and the London Docklands Development Corporation
Much of the debate surrounding UDCs has concentrated on the specific evolution of the two longer-standing corporations established in the Docklands of Liverpool and London.
The remaining sections of this chapter explore some of the crucial issues surrounding these two initiatives.
The MDC, as established in 1981, consisted of three separate sites: one near Liverpool city centre, one at Bootle and a third on the Wirral Peninsula.
The boundaries were tightly drawn by the Department of the Environment in order to avoid encroachment onto port land or on sites subject to local-authority initiatives (National Audit Office, 1988b).
However, most informed commentary suggested that its 860 acres had always been too small, and in 1988 it was virtually doubled in size.
The MDC was intended to regenerate one of the most depressed parts of a singularly-depressed city region.
Most of the land and buildings within the designated site were vacant, derelict and even polluted.
About only 400 people lived within the corporation's boundaries, and only about 1,500 worked in the area.
The MDC had also to operate in what it saw as a particularly unfortunate political environment.
The marked radicalization of Liverpool City Council in the early 1980s was clearly unlikely to assist the corporation in its demand-led, market-orientated strategy, which was based on public-sector pump-priming resources levering out greater private-sector investment (Adcock, 1984).
Nevertheless, in the early-to-mid 1980s, the MDC pursued a strategy based on the physical restoration of land and buildings, infrastructural investment, economic regeneration and social renewal.
However, by 1986 it had become evident that the collapse in manufacturing had been so severe that alternative approaches based on tourism and retailing should be given much greater prominence (MDC, 1986).
The MDC has had its successes (Wray, 1987; National Audit Office, 1988b).
By 1987 it had, for example, reclaimed more than 240 acres of land for commercial or housing development.
It had invested more than £30 million into the refurbishment of the Grade-I-listed Albert Docks.
It had brought other land and dwellings into effective use, partly because most leases for commercial use were relatively short and freehold interests could be rapidly acquired.
In addition, the corporation organized the 1984 International Garden Festival on a 125-acre reclaimed site, and it has helped to boost new enterprises through managed workshops.
On the other hand, there have been problems, such that in 1988 the National Audit Office could argue (pp. 4–5) that there was an urgent need for a fundamental review of the MDC, including consideration of its management, development strategy, the size of its area and the timescale and resources needed to establish the Corporation's effectiveness'.
The MDC cannot be held responsible for some problems.
Its limited size from 1981 to 1988 has already been mentioned.
There is also the constant difficulty that market-led strategies need private-sector investment.
By the end of 1986–7, MDC expenditure of about £140 million had resulted in about only £20 million of private-sector investment in commercial and industrial developments, although at least another £40 million was committed.
To some degree, the MDC has been placed in a particularly onerous position because of its having to compete for industrial and commercial investment with surrounding new towns and the local enterprise zone and Freeport.
Nevertheless, the National Audit Office concluded that much of its marketing ‘has lacked focus and drive and has been limited in scope’(ibid .
p. 4).
Other operational problems and constraints have affected the MDC.
There has been little development at Bootle and on the Wirral site.
Between 1981 and 1987, the number of permanent jobs had increased by only 1,000, although training has been substantially boosted by the corporation.
Of the 1,400 dwellings originally planned in 1981, work had started on only 170 by the end of 1986–7.
The garden-festival site proved a constant headache.
The MDC incurred capital and operational costs in keeping the now renamed Festival Gardens open.
In 1986 it entered into an agreement with a private firm to operate the gardens, despite clear warnings from a number of sources about the viability of the company concerned.
It subsequently went into receivership in that same year, with estimated debts of more than £5 million.
Three years of long and protracted negotiations characterized the proposals for an indoor-events arena.
In short, the MDC has presided over some successes, but not over what might be termed the regeneration of Liverpool's docks.
This has not been the case with the LDDC, where a very extensive regenerative programme has characterized the corporation's activities in an area of about 5,000 acres downstream of Tower Bridge (see Figure 3, p. xiii).
This area had been the subject of a number of plans and initiatives since 1973, when it became evident that the docks and dock-related activities were set to close and/or move downstream to Tilbury and elsewhere.
Whatever the causes of this rapid decline in port activities — containerization, competition, labour disputes, poor management or manning practices — by 1981 the docks had to all intents and purposes closed.
Throughout the 1970s, central and local government were responsible for the publication of a range of plans and reports designed to re-invigorate an area whose economic base might have disappeared, but one with tremendous opportunities and where almost 50,000 people still lived (Ambrose, 1986).
In 1973, for example, Travers Morgan published a series of development scenarios, and in  1976 a London Docklands Strategic Plan was agreed by the Greater London Council and the five boroughs concerned.
This plan argued that the renewal of the area should be based on the twin policies of the construction of social housing and industrial development, and it was to form the basis, in the late 1970s, of the Partnership established between the Labour government and the local authorities concerned (see Chapter 3).
However, the incoming Conservative government of 1979 opted for a different approach.
A UDC was to be created — the LDDC — that was to concentrate on attracting in Private-sector investment, partly by attempting to overcome what were seen as major obstacles to regeneration: poor communications and infrastructure, a deteriorating physical environment, problems with land assembly and the area's Poor image.
To the LDDC it seemed apparent that any effective programme for Docklands would need to concentrate on a number of key objectives.
These included land acquisition and development, widened housing and employment opportunities, enhanced community facilities and an improvement in the area's image.
These kinds of objectives were to be attained by public-sector pump-priming investment designed to lever out private resources.
Between 1981 and the end of 1986–7, the LDDC had spent about £380 million, most of this in the form of grant aid from the Department of the Environment.
These resources had encouraged private-sector spending in excess of £2 billion.
These rates are likely to be at least matched in the 1990s when, between 1987–8 and 1992–3, the corporation plans to invest at least £600 million — half through land sales and half through central grant (LDDC, 1987).
The redevelopment of Docklands has been achieved through five major policy issues; land reclamation, infrastructural investment, housing, economic development, and employment and social infrastructure.
In land acquisition and development, by the end of 1986–7, the LDDC had acquired almost 2,000 acres of land or enclosed water.
It had released more than 700 acres of land for development, which amounted to about 30 per cent of the total of derelict land within its designated boundaries (National Audit Office, 1988b).
The corporation sells land by tender or by private negotiation.
To ensure that developments are completed in time, the LDDC grants building licences to developers but retains the title to the site.
In housing, the LDDC grants freehold title to purchasers of individual dwellings.
In the case of commercial or industrial development, the corporation normally grants a 200-year lease at a peppercorn rent, without rent reviews.
As the National Audit Office (1988b) points out, however, this approach does not allow the LDDC to prevent the intensification of use by leaseholders, nor for the corporation to benefit financially from such developments.
The LDDC has presided over substantial infrastructural investment.
For example, the Docklands Light Railway has improved public transport within a traditionally isolated part of London.
The initial £77 million budget was split between the LDDC and London Regional Transport, and it involved the building of a railway from Tower Hill in the west through the Isle of Dogs to link up with  Stratford in the north.
Later plans involved an additional expenditure of about £150 million to take the railway into Bank, about half of which would be met by the Canary Wharf developers (see below).
Plans are also in hand to extend the railway to Beckton in the far east.
In addition, the LDDC plans to spend over £200 million by the mid-1990s on road improvements with Docklands, and the Department of Transport is to spend more than double that figure on linking the area to the national road network.
These projects include an improvement to the A13 — the main east-west road — and a new east-London river crossing.
Finally, in infrastructure, the LDDC has promoted the new London City Airport in the Royal Docks, with flights to a number of European cities.
There has been considerable development in housing since the creation of the LDDC in 1981.
At that time there were 14,000 dwellings within the designated area, only 4 per cent of which were owner-occupied.
The LDDC decided at an early stage that this figure should rise to 30 per cent or so, as a result of a house-building programme that was originally set at 13,000 houses within ten to fifteen years.
As almost 12,000 houses had been started by 1987, the overall target was raised to 25,000 new dwellings.
The substantial degree of housing investment within the LDDC area has been paralleled by a similar scale of economic development.
By the end of 1986–7, some 2.5 million square feet of commercial space had been completed and another 7.5 million was under construction (National Audit Office, 1988b).
In addition, at the time of writing it would appear that two other major projects are to be implemented.
In the enterprise zone on the Isle of Dogs, the Canary Wharf commercial project — costing between £3 billion and £4 billion private-sector investment coupled with some £250 million public-sector infrastructural costs, and providing over 5 million square feet of office accommodation — is to go ahead.
In the Royal Docks in the eastern segment of the LDDC, a comprehensive renewal project is likely to be effected, costing about £2.5 billion.
This will incorporate retail developments, hotels, houses and half-a-million square feet of commercial development.
The LDDC sees these kinds of developments as likely to boost jobs within its area from the 1981 figure of 27,000 to around 80,000 by 1991.
In an effort to increase job opportunities for the local population, the corporation intends to spend in the late 1980s and early 1990s some £20 million on education and training.
Finally, the corporation has become more interested in investing in social infrastructure.
In the six years after 1986–7, the LDDC is intending to spend around £100 million on areas such as education, health, community and recreational facilities, which represents a sevenfold increase over its social budget in 1981–6.
This enhanced investment will be undertaken in co-operation with statutory educational and health authorities.
Urban Development Corporations: the Debates
The previous section outlines some of the key characteristics of UDCs in general, and the MDC and LDDC in particular .
There are, however, a series of debates surrounding UDCs that need to be mentioned.
Many of the issues can be categorized into three central questions: democracy and UDCs, their effectiveness and their sectoral implications.
UDCs and democracy
One of the major debates surrounding UDCs is the question of democracy.
The corporations are imposed by central government and are given powers of land and development that have been seen as ‘staggering’(Cullingworth, 1985, p. 282).
The Secretary of State for the Environment also selects board members, chairs and deputy chairs.
This kind of administrative structure may be regarded as likely to lead to the implementation of policies that are at variance with those favoured by elected local councils.
This has been so in the MDC, although efforts were made to foster links with the now-defunct metropolitan county (Boaden, 1982).
In any case, development within much of the MDC was relatively modest in the early-to-mid 1980s.
The LDDC's position has been rather different.
At a very early stage in the evolution of the UDC concept, major political leaders in east London pointed out their essentially undemocratic nature.
A UDC would undermine the ability of the elected local councils to implement the 1976 Docklands Strategic Plan, which had been agreed only after many years of discussion and debate (Leaders of the London Boroughs of Greenwich, Lewisham, Newham, Southwark and Tower Hamlets, 1979).
At least to some observers — notably the Docklands Consultative Committee (1985; 1988), a grouping of local political and community interests — these and similar misgivings have proved all too real.
The LDDC has not given local authorities long enough to respond to planning applications; some community groups have not been consulted; until 1986, all meetings were held in secret; and the LDDC has paid only lip-service to local plans produced by the boroughs concerned.
Interestingly, in its 1988 review of UDCs, the National Audit Office commented on the lack of co-operation between the LDDC and other public agencies, particularly education and health bodies (1988b).
The LDDC has not been especially willing to enter in co-operative, collaborative arrangements with existing statutory organizations.
It could be argued that this lack of co-operation between UDCs (notably the LDDC) and local government is predictable.
It might be suggested that UDCs can cut through local bureaucracy and need to operate at different time-scales from those prevalent within local government.
Market-led regeneration strategies may, in any case, necessitate rather more of a developmental and rather less of a political stance: there is the view that the renewal of London's Docklands raised  issues of national significance that could not be left solely to the boroughs concerned.
Whatever the merits of these arguments, there can be little doubt that for much of its existence the LDDC has not sought out partnership arrangements with elected local bodies — it has pursued market-led strategies whose impact on local communities has proved far from advantageous; it has largely ignored local planning procedures; and there has been little public accountability of its Policies and spending.
The debate should not, however, be left there.
The question of democracy has been seen by the LDDC and the second generation of UDCs as an increasingly important issue.
The LDDC has opened up committees to the public.
It is to spend more resources on social and community facilities and to employ community liaison officers.
In 1987 it signed a memorandum of agreement with Newham regarding the redevelopment of the Royal Docks that stipulated that regeneration would include the construction of social housing, the provision of training and community facilities, and so on(London Borough of Newham, 1987).
Later generations of UDCs also show that agreement between corporations and local government (covering issues such as accountability, social audits, a sharing of planning functions, and so on) is possible, as events in 1987–8 in both Cardiff and Sheffield showed.
The issue is not so much that the LDDC was unwilling to effect democratic procedures with elected authorities in the early to mid-1980s, but rather (as is discussed below) that the policies proposed by the LDDC were different from those agreed by local government, and that co-operation would simply have proved impossible.
Are UDCs effective?
UDCs, and perhaps the LDDC in particular, have tended to receive favourable evaluations from many sections of the media and from developers.
The Financial Times , for example(1986), has suggested that ‘there is little doubt that in commercial terms the LDDC has been a success’.
Similarly, the Estates Times (1987) has suggested the LDDC has promoted substantial change in a development desert.
There can be little doubt that, in terms of property development, the LDDC has indeed presided over a dramatic transformation in London's Docklands.
However, a number of comments and qualifications ought to be made.
An initial point is that the LDDC could not have been operating in a more favourable environment.
The generally massive expansion in financial services, the ‘Big Bang’, the LDDC's location close to the City, £400 million of public-sector support in the first five years of existence and its extensive powers to acquire land, all placed it in an exceptionally favourable situation.
Given these kinds of powers, benefits and resources, it is interesting to speculate upon what the appropriate local authorities might have done during this period.
But it is naïve to assume that the LDDC has always operated as effectively as some reports would suggest.
It has not been prepared to consider the wider  implications of the massive developments planned for Canary Wharf and the Royal Docks, which will have all kinds of consequences for London and the South East.
It has in general avoided strategic issues that would help to identify needs and to assist in co-operation with local authorities (National Audit Office, 1988b).
Moreover, it is far from clear that the LDDC has managed to obtain anything like the best financial deals in its negotiations with developers: land appears to have been sold at substantially less than might have been achieved, and as the freeholder the LDDC has retained little control of, nor gained any benefit from, subsequent development.
The question of transport planning within Docklands has also proved chaotic.
The LDDC is not entirely to blame for this.
However, its activities in relation to the Light Railway, which are documented elsewhere (Docklands Consultative Committee, 1988), reveal serious shortcomings.
In particular, it should have been apparent from an early stage that the railway would prove totally inadequate to deal with the demand generated in the Isle of Dogs, especially by the Canary Wharf project.
In short, if the LDDC is seen to epitomize the UDCs, then there are questions to be asked about the effectiveness of this form of intervention.
UDCs: gainers and losers
One of the most contentious issues surrounding UDCs is that of gainers and losers.
Developing Ambrose's (1986) excellent analysis of this problem, we can identify four major interest groups or agencies whose status has been substantially altered as a result of UDCs, and in particular the LDDC: central government, local government, developers and local residents.
Central governments elected in 1979, 1983 and 1987 have clearly benefited from UDCs in general and especially the LDDC.
The government's development thrust has been furthered: a great deal of construction has taken place to the benefit of developers and major building companies.
Local councils — most of which are usually Labour controlled — have effectively been by-passed.
In London's East End, the social composition of the area will ultimately be substantially changed as a result of the building of 25,000 dwellings — the vast majority of which are for owner-occupation.
This will have clear implications for voting patterns at local and national elections.
If central governments have benefited from UDC activities, government on the whole has not.
In London, the 1976 Strategic Plan was overturned, and its emphasis on social housing and industry was abandoned by the LDDC's determination to promote the construction of owner-occupied dwellings and commercial development.
Local authorities have lost important development-control powers and have had to release land to UDCs at extremely low prices.
The three key boroughs in east London (Newham, Tower Hamlets and Southwark) had to accept 4,400 families as homeless in 1986–7 — a threefold increase on 1981–2.
Yet the resources available to these boroughs through Housing Investment Programme allocations fell from around £160 million at the end of the 1970s to about  £60 million in real terms by 1987–8.
It could be argued that local authorities will gain immensely when the UDCs are eventually wound up.
However, the areas they inherit will have been developed according to policies very different from those supported by the local council, which is after all the elected body.
Local government will also require appropriate resources to run the physical and social infrastructure the UDCs will have provided.
Will these be forthcoming?
These longer-term implications are unlikely to impinge on the development industry, which has done extremely well out of UDC designations.
This is not surprising.
Many chairs and board members are from companies with some property interests.
The first LDDC chair, for instance, was Nigel Broackes from Trafalgar House and the second, Christopher Benson from MEPC.
Land has been released to developers for residential and commercial prices well below what the market would bear (Klausner, 1987).
Bearing in mind prices prevailing for completed developments within the LDDC, developers and construction companies have gained enormous profits.
Obtaining planning permission for developments has been much easier than would otherwise be the case.
Wider social policies, which might have been incorporated into regenerative programmes effected by local government, have been muted if not abandoned.
Massive infrastructural investment undertaken by UDCs has made the marketing of developments much easier and development costs lower.
In some cases grants have been made available from UDCs for the implementation of specific projects.
The development industry has, in brief, benefited from UDCs.
Nowhere is this truer than in the LDDC where, as well as the benefits listed above, additional incentives were available in the Isle of Dogs enterprise zone.
Between 1981 and 1987, for instance, public subsidies of £130 million were forthcoming for rate relief and capital allowances within the zone.
This is surely unnecessary public investment.
The regeneration of the Isle of Dogs would have gone ahead without UDC support.
Finally, what of the local residents?
Much of the depressing evidence emanates from the LDDC.
In terms of employment, the corporation argues that between 1981 and 1987 about 10,000 jobs were brought into the area.
However, during this period local unemployment actually rose from 3,500 to 4,400.
This is not surprising.
The LDDC has used compulsory-purchase powers to acquire and to remove transport and manufacturing jobs.
These accounted for about 60 per cent of local jobs in 1981, but only half that figure by 1987.
Indeed, almost two million square feet of industrial space was lost on the Isle of Dogs between 1981 and 1987 — mainly to be replaced by expensive residential development (Docklands Consultative Committee, 1988).
Little new industrial development has been forthcoming.
Of the new jobs in the area, many are transfers from other parts of London, and have often involved substantial net job loss to the city (Colenutt, 1987).
For example, in moving to Wapping, News International cut its workforce from 5,000 to 1,500.
The new jobs that do arrive are not usually taken by locals — only 10 per cent of jobs on the Isle of Dogs have gone to locals (Tym and Partners, 1987).
Few of the jobs to emerge as a result of the Canary Wharf development will be taken by locals.
Their skills are unlikely to dovetail into demands of major financial institutions, except at the catering and cleaning level.
Local training is to be improved by the LDDC, but between 1981 and 1987 it spent only £2.2 million on its two major initiatives, neither of which deals with the over twenty-fives (Docklands Consultative Committee, 1988).
Many of the comments outlined above have been reiterated in a pointed House of Commons report (House of Commons Employment Committee, 1988).
This report accepted that unemployment had risen within the LDDC from about 3,500 in 1981 to about 5,000 in 1986; that approximately eighty companies had been relocated out of the area through compulsory purchases implemented by the LDDC; and that many locals were not gaining from the corporation's activities.
The recommendations of this committee included a suggestion that UDCs should make greater efforts to assist local residents; that local skills should be enhanced; that industrial uses should be retained where possible; and that as far as possible jobs would be directed to local residents.
This is far removed from the commercial emphasis of the LDDC in its early development.
Local residents within east London have not benefited from UDC designation in other respects.
Most transport investment has gone on road construction and not on public transport.
Many of the deliberations of the LDDC have been taken with little or no public scrutiny.
Very limited resources were allocated to general social and community facilities in the first six years of the LDDC.
Conditions for many minority groups have worsened.
For example, little sheltered housing has been constructed for the old and disabled.
Physical standards for ethnic minorities have deteriorated, with much higher proportions of Asian families living in overcrowded conditions when compared with white households.
The apparent drift from manufacturing and transport within the LDDC will have a particular impact on local women, who are unlikely to obtain worthwhile jobs in financial services.
Finally, one issue merits more detailed comment because of its implications for the entire Docklands community — housing.
Housing within the LDDC's area has been an exceptionally emotive issue.
On riverside sites, sometimes on land previously used for industry, new or refurbished units have been put on the market at prices in excess of a quarter of a million pounds.
Yet families living in overcrowded conditions in Newham, Southwark and Tower Hamlets increased from 16,000 to 25,000 between 1984 and 1988, at which date about half the dwellings in these three boroughs were classified as unsatisfactory (Docklands Consultative Committee, 1988).
In studying housing issues, questions of tenure loom large.
There are constraining elements affecting the owner-occupied sector, and those impinging on social housing.
About four-fifths of housing constructed in the LDDC has been for the owner-occupied sector.
To enable locals to buy housing, the LDDC has operated an ‘affordable housing policy’.
The LDDC negotiates with developers on a scheme-by-scheme basis to ensure that a proportion of dwellings is placed on the  market at around £40,000.
Priority for all purchases is given first to local-authority and private tenants in the LDDC area and, second, to local-authority and private tenants in any part of the Dockland boroughs, their children and the children of tenants in the first category.
Any dwellings not taken up within a specified time are placed on the open market.
A possible two-thirds of dwellings sold by the end of 1986–7 in the LDDC area fell into the ‘affordable housing’ category.
However, there have been abuses of the system.
Tenants have sold on at higher prices, and outsiders have attempted to prove local residence.
After 1985, these difficulties caused the LDDC to introduce tighter checks and a clawback provision if resale took place within five years.
More importantly, some commentators suggest that the central issue is that most locals still cannot afford owner-occupied housing (Docklands Forum, 1987).
Three-quarters of local households had an income of less than £10,000 in 1987.
For them, social housing remains a priority.
However, the possibility remains bleak of any substantial increase in investment in the construction and repair of social housing for the LDDC area, and for the adjoining boroughs.
In 1981, the corporation argued to a House of Lords Select Committee that the tenure mix within the LDDC would work out at about 50 per cent owner-occupied, 25 per cent shared-equity tenure and 25 per cent housing association.
By 1987, only about 15 per cent of housing was within local-authority or housing-association sectors.
The LDDC, in its 1987 Corporate Plan (LDDC, 1987), argued that, although it was not itself a housing authority, it intended to increase this figure by rehabilitating older public-sector estates through a programme of co-operation with local authorities.
However, as has already been mentioned, co-operation is ineffective when local councils find their housing budgets so severely pruned.
This is due to the attitudes of the central government that created UDCs.
One result is that, in 1985–6, enough land was allocated by the LDDC for the construction of 1,600 public sector-units, although financial constraints meant only 600 could be built.
For those in social housing in or close to the LDDC, there is little to suggest any short-to medium-term improvement in housing conditions.
UDCs: Conclusions
The rationale for UDCs is presumably that the scale of urban decline necessitates the creation of independent, centrally-appointed development agencies that are free from the apparent constraints of local government.
Seven or eight years into the experiment, this cannot, as yet, be verified.
UDCs have (and no doubt will) preside over a great deal of property development.
Some new enterprises have been created, infrastructural investment pursued and inner-city housing boosted.
However, several important questions need to be asked.
To what extent have UDCs promoted the relocation of economic and physical activity that would have occurred in any case?
What benefits have local residents received from UDCs?
Have they pursued pragmatic,ad hoc programmes of action when longer-term  strategic planning was required?
And would local authorities, given the same resources, have achieved the same results?
Alternative Strategies towards Urban Regeneration
Much of the debate about urban regeneration in England has focused on UDCs.
However, alternative approaches towards the comprehensive renewal of older urban areas have been devised elsewhere, both in England and particularly in Wales and Scotland.
In England, for example, a number of authorities such as Birmingham have created separate development companies.
The structure, powers and resources of these companies vary, but they are all intended to achieve the regeneration of specific areas by combining the talents and attributes of the public and private sectors.
They are usually created by local government, but have wide representation from financial and development sectors, and hope to obtain funding through European money, Derelict Land Grant, City Grant, and so on.
Central government can sometimes initiate these rather more informal approaches towards economic and physical renewal.
For example, in 1988 the Secretary of State for Wales, Peter Walker, announced a £500 million revitalization programme for the valleys of South Wales, which would involve land reclamation, business advice and support, factory construction, housing rehabilitation and infrastructural investment, and which would be implemented by local authorities, the private sector, central government and the Welsh Development Agency.
However, in seeking alternative approaches towards urban revitalization than those implemented by UDCs, it is the Welsh Development Agency's Scottish counterpart that offers the most interesting experience.
The Scottish Development Agency (SDA) was created in 1975 by the Labour government to revive the Scottish economy, and to co-ordinate industrial intervention with environmental improvements.
In the mid-1970s, it was seen by the Labour administration as part of a comprehensive strategy towards regional economic and physical development in that the SDA's activities were to be mirrored in Wales by the Welsh Development Agency (WDA) and in England by the National Enterprise Board (NEB).
However, although the WDA has remained, it has not been as interventionist in terms of urban policy as has the SDA.
In England, the NEB — designed to enhance State investment in production, especially in areas of high unemployment — had minimal impact, with only about sixty firms ever supported, and most of these in the south of England (Lawless, 1981b).
Despite this limited effect, the anti-collectivist Conservative government elected in 1979 was ultimately to abandon the NEB as an independent force.
In Scotland, events were to prove different.
The SDA was given (and has retained) wide powers over both the hard and soft aspects of economic development.
Hard aspects include land assembly, property development and management and environmental improvements.
The SDA has the additional facility to make loans, provide equity investment and establish a range of business services (Gulliver, 1984).
The SDA also operates within a very different political and  administrative environment to that in England (Morison, 1987).
The Secretary of State for Scotland, operating in effect as a regional political chief, is in an ideal position to co-ordinate and innovate public policy.
The types of conflict between different tiers of government — so obvious in England throughout the 1980s — are, while far from unknown, less apparent.
Intensive political contact in what is a relatively small country, has tended to soften and shift policy disagreements.
By the mid-1980s, the SDA's activities were primarily directed towards attaining four major objectives (Aitken and Sparks, 1986).
Some of these are not of immediate significance to the urban debate.
Two of its goals are to expand the range of service-sector jobs and to encourage the creation of small firms.
A third objective, that of enhancing the electronics' sector within Scotland, should be discussed in a little more detail because of its apparent success, and because many English cities would wish to expand into this sector.
The SDA's package of assistance to firms in the electronics' sector who wish to move into Scotland from abroad, includes help with premises, business and training advice and investment finance.
This assistance, aimed particularly at Japanese and American corporations, has in some respects undeniably been successful.
By the mid-1980s, about 45,000 people worked in electronics in Scotland, with a particularly high concentration in and around the new town of Glenrothes (Fife).
This employment figure probably represents the highest density of those working in electronics in any European region.
However, this approach towards electronics is not without its critics (Moore and Booth, 1986): few jobs have been created for the long-term unemployed; a relatively small proportion of posts are for managerial and technical positions; and the indigenous sector remains small, as do total exports and research and development capacities.
A great deal of the investment represents multinational corporate investment by firms wishing to use cheap assembly labour in the European Community.
The most important aspect of SDA policy is that of urban renewal.
Boyle (1988) argues that the SDA has evolved its urban interventions in four stages.
With some apparent reluctance, in the 1970s, the SDA was persuaded to co-ordinate the Glasgow Eastern Area Renewal project (GEAR).
This programme (see Chapter 3) involved the spending of over £400 million by a variety of agencies on the regeneration of east Glasgow, through the creation of new business centres, industrial development schemes, environmental improvements and substantial housing renewal and rehabilitation (Leclerc and Draffan, 1984).
The second phase of urban policy effected by the SDA, was its creation of two Task Forces in the late 1980s in Glengarnock (Strathclyde — a steel-closure area) and Clydebank, where the Singer plant closed.
In both areas the SDA created programmes designed to enhance industrial property, to help small firms and to reclaim and improve land (Gulliver, 1984).
The private sector was to be harnessed to stabilize — if not increase — local employment.
The SDA's third urban regeneration phase, according to Boyle (1988), occurred in the early 1980s.
The agency identified a number of locations for area or  integrated projects, of which at least seven were undertaken in places such as Motherwell, Leith (Lothian) and Dundee.
One important aspect of these projects was that the SDA entered a non-binding agreement with other local bodies, such as the local authorities and the MSC, to define objectives, funding and phasing.
The SDA thus co-ordinates an economic and physical strategy that is implemented by existing statutory bodies.
Finally, in its most recent phase of operation, the agency has shifted the emphasis towards self-help models, where the SDA supports attempts by local communities (including both the public and private sectors) to initiate and to effect local economic development programmes.
As part of this approach, the SDA has supported enterprise trusts designed to provide support for small companies.
Not all evaluations of the SDA's urban policy have been entirely favourable (Booth, Pitt and Money, 1982; Morison, 1987; Boyle, 1988).
In the case of GEAR, much of the investment would have occurred and, in some respects (notably job generation), that project was far from successful.
Its administrative structure was Byzantine.
The Task Forces were reactive responses on the part of the SDA to specific closures.
It is interesting to note that no similar exercises were launched when the Scottish vehicle industry — located at Linwood (Strathclyde) and Bathgate (Lothian)— collapsed.
Boyle (1988) also argues that the new emphasis on public — private partnerships seeking to enhance business confidence and investment contains unfortunate implications for more depressed Scottish communities.
A move towards supporting business activities is likely to lead to more investment in favourable rather than more depressed economies, as the SDA attempts to assist ‘winners’.
Issues of poverty and deprivation will become less important.
Indeed, the trend towards business support may eventually undermine and replace programmes intended to provide social, physical or economic investment for more depressed localities.
Nevertheless, the SDA's approaches towards urban policy have been innovative in a way that the overwhelmingly property-orientated UDCs have not.
The Task Forces and Integrated Projects attempted to co-ordinate a range of relevant public bodies, including local government, into coherent responses towards problems of deprivation and economic decline.
The SDA has been prepared to experiment with a variety of policy initiatives in a total urban budget of perhaps £220 million (in historic prices) between 1976 and 1990 (Boyle, 1988).
Relatively small sums from the SDA have levered out substantially greater private-sector investment.
And Glasgow, at the nadir of urban deprivation in Scotland, has improved relatively and absolutely in recent years, as a result of the activities of the SDA and other bodies.
Private-sector investment has increased; some middle-class households have returned to the city; and service-sector employment has increased.
The SDA has had a wider set of powers than those readily available to UDCs in England, but it has used them.
For much of 1980s, it has devised urban policies of a more imaginative and consensual nature than central government was able to create in England.
The National Enterprise Board might never have come  anywhere near what was required, but the principle was right: England needs a development agency or agencies with a wide range of social, economic and physical powers that are able to intervene in more depressed localities through corporate programmes emanating from the full range of public- and private-sector organizations.
It is to be hoped that recent changes within the SDA (notably its drift towards self-help, business-orientated projects) will not allow it to lose sight of wider goals in Scotland, where extensive areas of economic decline and outright poverty can still be identified.