

Book One
Chapter Five
I
Carew lay on the bed in his pyjamas reading the newspaper.
His eyes roamed over the small type indifferently.
The paper was four days' old.
It took that length of time for The Times to reach Carewscourt from London, where it was posted every morning.
His Uncle Walter declared that The Times was his only link with civilisation.
In spite of the fact that the Carews had been in Ireland since the middle of the seventeenth century, he still regarded himself as an expatriate living among a semi-barbarous people in a semi-barbarous land.
Carew folded the paper and put it down on the cluttered tray beside him.
Every morning at eight-thirty, a servant girl woke him and gave him breakfast on a tray.
Breakfast in bed, he mused; Uncle Walter and Aunt Emily are spoiling me.
He lit a cigarette.
He drew long and hard on it, before exhaling slowly, watching the faint blue tobacco smoke coiling lazily up towards the damp-stained ceiling.
It was going to be another long, hot, tedious day with nothing to do.
He was bored — utterly and completely.
He gave a slight sardonic grunt, remembering how excited he had been in that railway carriage on his way to Carewscourt.
It had been raining heavily — and it was to go on raining heavily for another nine days.
At first it had not mattered that the rain prevented him from going outdoors; there was so much to talk about between himself and Uncle Walter; they had not seen each other for twelve years.
But after a few days, with no sign of the weather clearing, he began to feel like a prisoner.
There was nothing to do but read, but it was impossible to read for long with Aunt Emily prowling about.
She was always seeking him out for one of her little chats.
She had been very lonely before he arrived, with no one to talk to but her brother, Walter, and he was the most taciturn of men.
The only other occupants of Carewscourt were the cook, Mrs Joyce, and two maid-servants, and they kept strictly to themselves below stairs.
After those first few chats with his Aunt Emily, Alec soon realised that she was slightly senile.
During the course of a conversation, her voice would slowly fade away, and she would lapse into silence, staring away from him with blank eyes, a wistful smile on her face.
She would remain like that for a while, lost in her own little world, completely unaware of his presence.
She was apt to confuse the past with the present, talking of events that had happened forty or fifty years ago as though they had happened only the day before.
Even though his father had been dead for twenty years, she talked about him as if he were still alive.
She was a small, frail old lady in her late seventies with remarkably clear, unwrinkled skin and wide blue eyes.
She had lost all sense of time; she still dressed in the fashions of the late 1880s.
As for Uncle Walter…
Alec heaved a sigh.
After the excitement caused by his arrival had died down, Walter Carew had retired to the library.
There behind locked doors, surrounded by old crinkly documents, title deeds and maps of the estate, he had resumed his writing of the history of the Carew family from the time of Richard Carew's arrival in Ireland with Cromwell's army.
He had been working on it for more than ten years.
The work occupied every waking hour of his day.
It had become an obsession; he was terrified he might die before he could complete it.
The ancient grandfather clock in the corner chimed ten times.
Carew yawned and stretched.
The cigarette had burned away between his fingers and he dropped it hastily into a cup on the tray beside him.
It hissed out in the dregs of tea.
Carew felt a sudden spurt of irritation.
Christ! he thought, I'm becoming more like an Irish peasant every day.
Lazy — slovenly in my habits.
He swung himself off the bed and took off his pyjamas.
Naked, he walked across to the washstand.
He poured water from the china jug into the basin.
He had become used to washing and shaving in cold water.
There was no piped water in Carewscourt.
Barrels of drinking water were delivered from the village once a week.
A few dilapidated rainwater tanks at the back of the house supplied other needs.
On his arrival, he had asked for hot water to be brought up to his room at nine sharp the next morning, but the sight of one of the young servant girls struggling up the stairs from the kitchen with the huge kettle of boiling water had made him feel so guilty and ashamed he had not asked again.
He dried himself, opened the door of the large mahogany wardrobe and took out his clothes.
He examined them carefully for signs of mildew before putting them on.
The whole place reeked of damp.
The top floor directly overhead had been abandoned for years.
The roof was  in an appalling state and the supporting beams were rotten.
He had overheard his uncle warning the two maid-servants not to go up there because it was too dangerous.
The warning was unnecessary.
Neither the cook or the two girls would go anywhere near the top floor; that part of the house was reputed to be haunted.
Alec descended the broad staircase slowly.
His ancestors stared at him from their portraits on the wall.
Soldiers, churchmen, squires.
The soldiers predominated.
Carews in lace collars and bucket boots; in Ramillies wigs and steel breastplates.
The uniforms were different but the faces were the same: narrow and stern with a hint of cruelty in the eyes.
The exceptions were his father and his Uncle Julian.
He paused before the portrait of his father.
The face smiled benignly at him.
No sign of the Carew hardness there, he thought, only the softness of the Hammonds.
The face was round and smooth, almost effeminate.
As the eldest he had inherited the estate on the death of his father, but he had relinquished it to his brother Julian, the second elder.
Henry Carew had chosen the Church as some of his forebears had done.
Not for him the life of a squire; not for him rain-swept, windswept Mayo with its barren mountains and bogs.
For him the small, ancient Saxon church of Clayton, nestling at the foot of the Sussex Downs.
There he had been content.
Alec moved down two steps and stood.
He was always impressed by the striking resemblance between his Uncle Julian and his father.
There was a difference of course; he could see it in the eyes.
The lips were full and sensual; the face flabby with a look of self-indulgence about it.
He too had abandoned Mayo, leaving an agent to manage the estate and collect the rents.
He had lived the life of a roué in the fleshpots of London and Paris, squandering the Carew fortune in gaming saloons and on an army of mistresses.
He died, burnt out by his excesses, at the early age of forty-four.
His younger brother, Walter, inherited a bankrupt estate.
There was a noticeable gap between that and the next portrait.
Walter Carew had placed the painting of himself further down, dissociating himself from his weaker, lecherous, spendthrift brother.
A taciturn man, he had no other way of expressing his hatred and contempt for the man who had brought disgrace to the family and ruin to his beloved Carewscourt.
He stared out at the world, arrogant and proud, helmet under his arm, resplendently handsome in his Dragoon officers' uniform.
He had posed for that portrait at the age of twenty-two; a year later he was in the Crimea.
Carew felt a twinge of envy.
His uncle had participated in one of the most epic cavalry actions in modern  history — Scarlett's Charge of the Heavy Brigade at Balaclava.
Three hundred, he thought with pride, against four thousand.
Hopelessly outnumbered, they had charged up that slope, cutting and slashing their way through the serried ranks of Russian cavalry, forcing them back, back…
He shook his head in wonder, and walked down the stairs to the hall, and out into the bright morning sunlight.
He stood at the top of a long flight of wide stone steps.
His Uncle Walter was seated at a table at the foot of them, writing away.
He wore a heavy buff-coloured cardigan and on his head was a wide-brimmed straw hat.
Carew gave a little groan of exasperation.
He marched down the steps.
His uncle turned stiffly round in the chair.
‘Good morning, my boy.’
‘Good morning, sir.’
Walter turned back to the ledger, writing slowly and carefully in his beautiful copperplate script.
Alec sat down on a step and lit a cigarette.
Carewscourt stood on the only elevated ground for miles around.
The ground fell gently away before him.
He could see over the tops of the trees of the demesne; over bog and river and plain to the distant Partry mountains.
‘Wisps of smoke out there on the bog.’
‘Breakfast fires,’ his uncle explained without lifting his head.
‘They've been cutting turf since daybreak, making the most of the good weather.’
‘Must be like a swamp after all the heavy rain we've had.
Treacherous, barren place, a bog.’
Walter Carew raised his head and stared at the grey tendrils of smoke climbing up from the brown barren waste.
‘Yes,’ he mused, lowering his head and continuing to write.
‘And yet,’ he said, ‘I had a tenant who reclaimed a good part of it.
Made it fertile.
Best tenant I ever had.
Not one of the yahoos from around here.
Donegal man.
Gallagher by name.’
‘What happened to him?’
Carew asked without interest.
‘Oh, he died.
Son took over.
Then some hooligans burnt the house down and ran him out of the district.
Never did find out what they had against him.’
Carew stared at the view, trying to imagine what it had looked like in Richard Carew's time.
The river in the distance had been the western boundary of the Cromwellian plantation.
The defeated Irish had been banished to the territory beyond it, then a vast tract of wild forest, bog and poor infertile soil.
The hill on which Carewscourt stood was the frontier, the edge of the wilderness.
He remembered the old map in the library, said to have been drawn by Richard Carew himself.
Beyond the river had been a forest, one of the great primeval oak forests of ancient Ireland.
In there had lurked the defeated and the dispossessed, with hatred in their hearts, their gaze uplifted towards the distant hill where the walls of Carewscourt rose higher and higher with each passing day.
Forays had been made at night; scaffolding had been torn down and a few workers employed in building Carewscourt had been killed.
Richard Carew had to keep sentries armed with matchlocks on watch day and night.
Years later, long after Carewscourt had been built and with an uneasy peace prevailing, Richard's two sons, beardless lads in their mid-teens, crossed the bog and river and entered the forest.
When they did not return that night, Richard led a search party for them at first light the following morning.
At dusk they found them.
Their throats had been slashed open and their bodies stripped naked.
Alec knew the story well.
It had been told to him many years ago when he was a boy, shortly after he had arrived in Carewscourt.
The man who told it, an old groom on the estate, was a traditional storyteller.
He had used words and gestures to their best effect, creating a vivid picture of what had happened more than two hundred years before.
He told of how Richard Carew and a band of twenty armed men had ridden into Irish territory, searching for the murderers.
They found them a few days later, taking refuge in a small village of thatched mud-walled cabins at the foot of the Partry mountains.
There were four of them; they had shared the dead youths' clothing between them.
One of them was an old man.
He was an O'Conor and a direct descendant of the last High King of Ireland.
Once he had been chieftain over the lands which had been rewarded to Richard Carew for his services to Oliver Cromwell.
A racing mountain stream ran through the centre of the village.
The four men were forced to kneel at the edge of it with their hands bound tightly behind them.
Then, as the whole village looked on, Richard Carew drew his sword and decapitated them one by one.
The old chieftain was the last.
He died cursing the Carews, seed, breed and generation.
As punishment for having harboured the killers of his sons, Richard had the village crops destroyed and the livestock slaughtered.
Then his men put a torch to the thatch roof of every cabin before they rode away.
That was in early November.
By spring of the following year, two-thirds of the village had died from exposure and hunger.
From that time, they called Richard Carew ‘The Exterminator’.
He had the great oak forest beyond the river cut down, ensuring that never again would it provide shelter for outlaw or wolf.
The clearance made Richard a very rich man.
Timber was urgently needed in England for ship building, house construction, charcoal…
Richard's fellow colonists, well aware of the enormous profits to be made from timber, did as he had done.
By the beginning of the eighteenth century they had stripped Ireland bare of her forests.
A piece of verse he had heard long ago came drifting back to Carew; the lament of some long dead, long forgotten Irish poet surveying his ravaged country.
But now the woods are falling,
Other lands are calling
And John O'Dwyer of the Glen!
You're worsted in the game.
Now I'm lonely, roofless,
Since all the hills are woodless;
The north wind stings me bloodless
And death spreads in the sky…
Charlotte, Richard Carew's wife, became a recluse after her two sons had been murdered.
She confined herself to the upper part of the house, severing all contact with her husband and the other members of the household.
By day she remained behind locked doors in the room near the north wing which her two sons had shared.
Food was left outside the door.
At night she emerged, wandering the corridors of the upper floor, a lighted candle in her hand, wailing her grief.
Carew glanced at the open ledger on the table.
‘In that history you are writing,’ he said offhandedly, ‘do you mention the old legend about Charlotte?
The servants used to say that she only cries when a Carew is about to die.
You know, like the banshee.’
Walter Carew slowly raised himself upright in the chair and stared stonily at him for a full ten seconds without uttering a word.
Then he turned away and reached for his pen.
‘You'll forgive me if I terminate this conversation,’ he said in a vexed voice.
‘Time is precious, and I don't intend to waste any more of it by listening to your nonsense!’
Carew sat forward and rested his elbows on his knees.
Let him be, he told himself; irascibility is a symptom of old age.
The sun was high in the sky now and he could feel the heat of it on his head and shoulders.
It  was going to be another long, hot, boring day.
Away below, a tall figure moved slowly through the trees of the demesne.
Tim Skerritt.
The Skerritts had been stewards of Carewscourt for generations.
Tim Skerritt emerged from the trees on to the gravel drive.
Carew watched him as he walked towards the gate-lodge.
Why, he wondered, am I always ill at ease when I'm with Skerritt?
Perhaps it was the evasive eyes; perhaps it was the permanent sly grin on the long narrow face which gave the impression that Skerritt was always secretly laughing at him.
There was even a hint of mockery in the way he tugged deferentially at his forelock whenever he encountered him.
‘A soft day, Master Carew.’
Carew grunted.
Master Carew.
Even after all those years, he thought, it's still Master Carew.
Tim Skerritt had been his playmate.
When he had first arrived at the then strange, adult world of Carewscourt, he had been delighted to find another boy of his own age living on the estate.
They had played together among the trees of the demesne.
The Last of the Mohicanshad been his favourite book at the time; he had insisted on being Hawkeye and Tim Skerritt on being the treacherous Indian, Magua.
And he had looked and behaved like a wild Indian, Carew thought with a feeling of wonder.
Tall and skinny in his ragged clothes, his skin tanned a deep brown by the sun, stealing from tree to tree in his bare feet.
Tim Skerritt had taught him how to catch a trout with his bare hands; had taught him how to light a fire in the open without the aid of matches or flint.
He had also taught him songs which, Carew discovered afterwards, were seditious.
They come, they come, see myriads come
Of Frenchmen to relieve us.
Seize, seize the pike, beat, beat the drum
They come, my friends, to save us.
Only a week ago, a drunk in the village had been arrested for singing that song.
Carew smiled wryly to himself.
Obviously the spirit of rebellion was still alive in Mayo — and the fear of it, considering the over-reaction of the police constable.
But then, as he remembered the constant requests for information from London, the same fear was shared by the chiefs of Intelligence in Whitehall.
Whichever foreign power captured Ireland held a pistol aimed at Britain's heart.
It would be a mad gamble of course, to launch an invasion from a European port and hope to evade the British fleet.
But the French had done it.
In the autumn of 1798, three frigates carrying more than a thousand soldiers  had sailed into Killala Bay.
The French quickly took the town of Killala and made it their headquarters.
Irish peasants from all over Connacht rushed to join them.
A few days later, the French general, Humbert, marched south and smashed and scattered the vastly superior British force under General Lake at Castlebar.
It was said that the British cavalry, in their mad haste to get away, rode over their own infantry in the narrow streets of the town.
Alec turned his head.
Walter Carew was hunched over the ledger, writing away.
It was all there, faithfully recorded in his uncle's stiff and formal style.
He had borrowed the ledger one night and read how a member of the Longford militia came galloping up on a foam-flecked horse to the doors of Carewscourt, yelling that the French and Irish had scattered Lake's army to the four winds and that they were coming south and for everyone to flee, flee, flee if they valued their lives….
Panic then.
The entire household running hither and thither, gathering belongings; women screaming…
His great-grandfather, Nigel Carew, a widower with one child, a lad of sixteen, had remained cool and calm.
He was in command of the local corps of yeomanry and quickly gathered about ten of them for the defence of Carewscourt.
The rest of his men fled with the servants and the local gentry.
Then they waited.
Day after day, they watched the north road with muskets at the ready, expecting to see columns of blue-uniformed men marching towards them, but they never came.
Word eventually reached Nigel Carew and his men that the French and their Irish allies had marched eastwards towards the midlands.
Two weeks later, at a place called Ballinamuck, the small French army surrendered after a short battle against a numerically superior British force and were taken prisoner.
The Irish rebels were butchered without mercy.
Some escaped the massacre and tried to make their way back to their own districts.
Among them were four of Nigel Carew's tenants.
When Nigel learned of their whereabouts, he began to hunt them down with the aid of his yeomen.
Some of the local gentry and squireens, who had returned now that the danger was over, joined in the fun.
‘This is better than fox-hunting!’ one of them laughed as he mounted his horse.
One by one, the rebels were captured.
Three of them were hung.
The fourth managed to elude his pursuers by escaping into a bog where no horse could follow.
Nigel Carew and his men followed on foot.
With  them was Nigel's sixteen-year-old son, Roderick.
A local man had been bullied into guiding them through the treacherous, quaking waste.
After two days they found him, an exhausted scarecrow of a figure hardly able to stand.
They stopped a short distance away from him and stood, undecided as to what to do: there was no tree in the desolate barren bog from which to hang him.
Then Nigel Carew drew his sabre and thrust it into the hand of his youthful son and pushed him forward.
That night in the huge draughty dining room of Carewscourt, with the flickering candlelight and a roaring log fire throwing dancing shadows on the walls and ceiling, Nigel Carew and his friends celebrated drunkenly and uproariously.
At the head of the table sat Roderick Carew, pale-faced and quiet.
Outside a storm raged; rain lashed against the windows.
Nigel Carew staggered to his feet, face flushed from too much claret, and raised his glass in a toast to his son.
‘I have blooded my son!’ he cried.
‘I have fleshed my bloodhound!’
Uncle Wafter heaved a sigh and slumped back in the chair, his hand covering his eyes.
Alec looked at him with concern.
‘Is anything the matter?’
‘Just a touch of dizziness.
I'll be fine in a few minutes.’
‘You're overdoing it, you know.’
‘I know,’ Walter admitted in a weary voice.
‘I've been working here since early morning.’
‘Leave it be for today,’ Alec advised.
‘I could be dead before tomorrow,’ Uncle Walter answered abruptly, taking his hand away from his eyes.
‘No, I'll keep on at it.
You see, I've nearly completed it.
Another page or two, and it's finished.’
‘Really?’
Alec gave a delighted laugh.
‘Why, that's wonderful!’
Uncle Walter gave an ironical grunt.
‘Is it?
I'm not so sure.
Writing this damn history has kept me alive for more than ten years.
Now that it's finished…’
He gave a helpless gesture with his hand and lapsed into silence.
Alec leaned back and tilted his head.
A dark speck marred the faultless blue of the sky, He screwed up his eyes against the glare.
A hawk hovered.
Suddenly it swooped down towards something in the bog and vanished from sight.
After a little while, Walter said, ‘Tell me, have you ever thought of marrying again?’
The question took Alec by surprise.
‘I must confess I haven't given it much thought.’
‘You should, you know.
You're not getting any younger.
How old are you now?’
‘Thirty-two.’
His uncle had mentioned every Anglo-Irish family in the district, hoping, he suspected, that he would meet some girl and take a fancy to her.
He had met a few he had liked, but they all had lacked something, he thought; some mysterious quality which Miriam Durkin alone possessed.
Although he had only met her briefly, he did not want to meet any more girls.
He was tired of making comparisons.
Miriam was a part of him now; he was unable to put her out of his mind.
He asked himself, I wonder what this old warrior's reaction would be if I told him I had fallen in love with a married woman?
Undoubtedly it would be one of shock and horror.
‘Look here, my boy…’
Uncle Walter turned stiffly towards him.
‘Don't think I'm trying to interfere in your personal life but…’
He paused, chewing on his underlip, embarrassed.
‘The fact is,’ he went on, ‘there are only a few years remaining for your Aunt Emily and myself.
And when we are gone, all this…’ he waved his hand ‘all this will be yours.’
He sat back in his chair.
‘You are the last, Alec,’ he said, ‘the last of the Carews.
I want you to marry; I want you to have sons; I want them to inherit Carewscourt.
‘Sometimes,’ he went on in a low voice, ‘I lie awake at night thinking of what would happen to this place if you should die without issue.’
He wagged his head slowly from side to side.
‘You have no idea, no conception of what it's like here in Mayo.
They're land hungry — they fight like hungry dogs over a few miserable acres.
Things have changed.
It's not like the old days.’
He stirred slightly in his chair, agitated.
‘Damn Gladstone!
Damn the Liberals!’
His voice shook with anger.
‘I knew what was going to happen more than twenty years ago.
I could see all this coming.
And now this damned Wyndham Act…
God!
That I should live to see the day when a British government would do this to us.
Don't they know — don't they realise?
Allowing the Irish peasants to buy land — did the government think they would be satisfied with just that?
Now look at what is happening.
Now they are demanding Home Rule!
Demanding!
God above!
In my father's day they would not have dared even to think like that!
When his coach drove the roads, they scuttled out of his way into the ditches like rats!’
He pointed.
‘Out there, beyond those gates, during the great famine, they gathered in hundreds, howling for food.
When it was refused, some of them tried to climb over the wall.
It was then my father ordered the gates to be opened and the dogs turned loose on the crowd outside.
That was the way.’
He said no more; his brief tirade had exhausted him.
Alec made no comment.
He knew better than to contradict anything his uncle said.
He always tried to be reasonable and logical in his arguments, but he knew reason and logic would be wasted on Walter Carew.
He was too narrow-minded and prejudiced — and bigoted.
When Henry inherited the estate and gave permission for a Catholic church to be built in the village, Walter had violently opposed the decision, but Henry had stood firm.
His brother Julian had sided with him.
Nevertheless, Walter's objections had been strong enough for them to yield a little.
Certain stipulations were made.
The church had to be located out of sight in a sunken cul-de-sac west of the village street.
Furthermore, its spire could not exceed thirty feet — it could not be allowed to dominate the Protestant church at the northern entrance to Carewstown.
Alec sighed.
His uncle seemed to be unaware that time had passed him by.
There were times when he spoke as though he was living in the days of his ancestor, Richard; regarding himself as a feudal overlord with the power of life and death over his vassals.
Poor, pathetic old man, he thought, watching as his Uncle Walter picked up his pen again and consulted some notes, preparing to conclude his long chronicle of the family.
as if we were royalty, Alec thought with an amused smile; as if we were Tudors or Plantagenets.
He felt sorry for the old man.
The demesne plantation was now very much smaller than it had been when Alec was a boy.
Then it had covered about two hundred and fifty acres, but it was now reduced to less than twenty.
There was a saying in Ireland that the ‘selling of the trees’ presaged the decline of the family.
Certainly the fortunes of the Carews had declined over the years.
When Uncle Walter inherited the estate, he had to sell the land around to pay for Julian's outstanding gambling debts, at a time when land values were constantly falling.
All that remained was the demesne and the village.
The other great Anglo-Irish landowning families had suffered as well.
A succession of ruinous harvests, coupled with falling land prices, had gravely reduced income from land.
Most had been forced to sell their private woodlands, which had been reverently preserved since the eighteenth century.
Travelling mills came over in force from England and Scotland and commenced the wholesale felling of demesne timber.
The wood was sold in bulk, mature and immature, for a lump sum and the land was left to become profitless rabbit-infested scrub.
There was very little replanting.
A series of Land Acts shook the confidence of the landlords as they recognised in them a forewarning of the change in the ownership of Irish land.
The Wyndham Act of 1903 gave the deathblow to the old landlord system which had existed for centuries.
A hundred million pounds was advanced by the British  government for tenants to buy out the farms they rented from the landlords.
The landlords were given a bonus of twelve per cent to induce them to sell.
Only a few — men like my uncle, Alec thought with pride — resisted the offer.
He could understand his uncle's concern.
Word had reached Carewscourt that several of the big landowning families in the county had sold out and had gone to England.
How long would it be, Carew wondered, before the Hacketts and the Merricks and the Townshends did the same?
We Anglo-Irish are a dying breed, Alec thought with despair.
The Big Houses in the district were now mostly inhabited by people of his uncle's generation.
The younger people had abandoned rain-swept, wind-swept Mayo for the bright lights of London and Dublin.
Confined to their own class and religion, the marriage prospects for the young women who remained dwindled with each passing year.
Conversing politely over the tea-cups in the huge drawing-rooms, he sensed their quiet desperation.
Once, as a guest of the Hacketts, he had taken a stroll through the rose garden with Jessica Hackett.
She had confronted him and, blushing furiously, had offered to be his mistress if he would promise to marry her eventually.
He had declined, trying to be as tactful as he knew how.
‘Thank God, thank God!’
Walter sighed and lay back in the chair.
Alec turned towards him.
‘Sir?’
Walter gestured with his hand.
‘I've finished it.’
He shook his head.
‘I thought I would never live to see the day.’
Alec forced enthusiasm into his voice.
‘Marvellous!
Congratulations, sir.’
Walter closed his eyes.
‘Ten years,’ he murmured wearily, ‘ten years of writing and careful research.
God, but I'm exhausted.’
What a terrible waste of time, Alec thought.
He has neglected his duties writing that damned family history and leaving Tim Skerritt to manage the estate.
God knows what way we are financially.
Uncle Walter remained seated with the thumb and forefinger pressed against his closed eyes.
Alec was beginning to think he had fallen asleep, when he took his hand away from his face and turned towards him.
‘I've been thinking.
Could we have it published?
Know anything about the publishing business?,
Carew suppressed a groan.
‘I'm afraid I don't,’ he replied.
He detected a note of excitement in his uncle's voice and thought that it would be something for the old man to look forward to, seeing his work in print.
It might add a few more years on to his life.
Nevertheless he tried to dissuade him.
‘We have to be realistic.
Naturally,we find the history of the Carews fascinating.
But would a publisher — or the reading public for that matter?
I think not.’
‘As it is now, I agree,’ Walter Carew said, the excitement still in his voice.
The idea had taken firm root in his brain and Carew knew that he was not going to be easily discouraged.
‘It needs the professional touch.
It needs to be rewritten by one of those writer chaps.
Know any of them in Dublin?’
How odd, Alec thought, I've been thinking about her all the time since I came here, trying to think of some way of seeing her again.
And now, just as I was giving up all hope…
‘Yes,’ he replied, ‘as a matter of fact, I do.
A man called Durkin.
Journalist.’
‘Good?’
‘Very.’
‘Do you think…
If you asked him?’
‘Let's invite him to stay with us for a few days, then you can ask him yourself.’
‘That's a splendid suggestion!
But do you think he will come?’
‘He might, if he's not too busy.’
In fact I'm surehe'll come, Alec told himself.
He could imagine Durkin boasting about it to everyone.
‘I'll take a little walk before lunch.
I'll go to the post office in the village and telegraph the invitation.’
‘Do that, do that!’
Uncle Walter's voice was full of enthusiasm.
‘And his wife.
We must invite her too, of course.’
‘Of course.’
‘She's an artist.
I'm sure she would be delighted to do a few pen and ink drawings of Carewscourt and its surroundings.
We could use them to illustrate your history if ever it is accepted for publication.’
Without his realising it, Alec's voice had become as enthusiastic as his uncle's.
Uncle Walter looked at him with gratitude.
His nephew had suddenly alive.
There were two spots of colour in his cheeks and his eyes were bright and lively.
He looked so animated compared to his usual dour self that Walter was compelled to remark, ‘You know, Alec, I've never seen you looking so happy and excited.’
II
Durkin's arrival at Carewscourt was dramatic.
A series of small explosions one morning brought Alec running out to the top of the steps.
There he had stared in amazement as Durkin came chugging up the drive in a cloud of black smoke, driving that wonder of the age, an automobile.
It was a two-seater, painted a vivid yellow, with bright red mudguards.
Carew's immediate response was that it was garish and vulgar, like Durkin himself.
Durkin was dressed for motoring in a long white dust coat and cap.
He wore leather gauntlets and goggles covered his eyes.
His wife wore a similar coat and a veil covered her face to protect against the dust of the road.
Durkin had struggled out of the car helpless with laughter, delighted with all the excitement he was causing.
Mrs Joyce, the cook, came panting up from the kitchen with the two maid-servants behind her, her hands and wrists covered in flour, while Uncle Walter and his sister peeped wide-eyed from behind the curtains.
It was the first motor car they had ever seen.
Indeed, it was the first motor car seen west of the Shannon.
Alec learned later that Durkin had created panic and excitement driving through the towns and villages of Roscommon and east Mayo.
Durkin quickly made himself at home in Carewscourt.
He lost no time in becoming familiar with each member of the household, treating each one differently.
With Walter Carew he was courteous and knowledgeable and enthusiastic.
Any doubts Walter may have had about having the book published, were quickly dispelled by Durkin's gushy optimism.
‘There are no doubts in my mind, sir,’ he boomed, flashing his gold-toothed smile.
‘This is a work of major historical importance.
Of course— if you will forgive me for saying so — it is a bit stilted in its present form.
But rest assured, when I have finished with it…’
In Emily Carew's presence he was kind and polite and remarkably subdued, listening with infinite patience when she lapsed into wistful nostalgia as she recalled the days when Carewscourt was the centre of social activity in this part of Mayo.
‘Oh, the balls we had!
All the officers from the garrison at Castlebar would come down.
I remember this very handsome young subaltern I was dancing with…’
Durkin would nod and smile gently as the tiny bird-like voice meandered on.
From the moment of his arrival at Carewscourt, Durkin adopted an over-familiar attitude towards Carew, calling him Alec, trying to give the impression that they had known each other for years.
One evening Walter invited the Hacketts and the Townshends over.
Durkin soon made himself the principal object of attraction.
He dominated the conversation, holding the Hackett and Townshend women spellbound as he told of how he had broken up a white-slave ring in Dublin, and how he had rescued an innocent young girl from a fate worse than death.
As the evening wore on, Durkin became very drunk.
He alluded to certain activities ‘in which the gallant Captain and myself are involved.
Cloak-and-dagger stuff, ye know.
Very hush-hush.
Not many people know about it.’
Alec glared warningly at him, but Durkin replied with a broad conspiratorial wink, and slurred, ‘We know the score, don't we, Alec?’
Alec was appalled; he swore under his breath.
No one, not even his uncle, knew that he was attached to Military Intelligence.
Miriam Durkin was so markedly different from her husband.
She was unobtrusive and shy.
She was clearly embarrassed at times by Durkin's bumptious behaviour.
Not once since she and Durkin arrived had Alec had a chance to talk to her alone.
Somehow she always happened to be in the company of someone, Walter, Emily or Durkin.
She had even formed friendships with the cook and the two maidservants.
He had a feeling that she was deliberately avoiding him — that she feared to be alone with him.
But she was alone now.
He stood at the window of his room, watching her.
She sat on a chair at the edge of the trees, an easel in front of her, painting.
Durkin had retired to the library with the ledger and a notebook.
He had locked himself in as he did not want to be disturbed by Emily.
He walked out of the room and down the broad staircase.
The door of the dining room was open.
Alec paused in the hall and looked in.
Thick golden bars of sunlight slanted down from the tall narrow windows.
Between the windows, in the cool shade, his uncle sat upright in a chair, asleep.
His head was thrown back and his mouth hung open.
Alec stared at him for a few seconds, then walked out into the heat and glare of the mid-day sun.
He strolled along by the front of the house until he reached the north wing, where he turned down the grassy slope towards the trees.
Miriam Durkin raised her head.
When she saw him approaching, she lowered her gaze to the canvas before her and began to dab at it with the brush.
He could sense her nervousness and paused deliberately to light a  cigarette, as he ambled casually towards her.
She continued with her painting, not raising her head as he leaned against the tree trunk behind her.
‘Do you mind if I watch?’ he asked.
‘If I make you nervous by standing here, please say so.’
‘You are not making me nervous,’ she said, but he could hear the tremor in her voice.
She was working on a water-colour painting of Carewscourt.
It was a three-quarter view.
The house stood out on the canvas, stark and majestic on its hilltop, against a light-blue background of sky.
‘You've succeeded in making an ugly house look beautiful,’ Alec said.
‘Imposing rather than beautiful,’ Miriam replied.
‘When I first saw it in the distance, dominating the surrounding countryside, looking so magnificent, it reminded me of the Acropolis.’
‘The Acropolis,’ Alec repeated and smiled.
‘My uncle would be delighted to hear you say that.
He loves this place.’
‘This painting is for him,’ she said.
‘But first I want to do a line drawing from it, which can be used as a frontispiece for the book when it is published.’
If it is published, Alec thought, watching the delicate movements of her paintbrush.
He said, ‘You have been avoiding me, you know.’
‘Oh, come now…’
She gave a laugh, as though she found his assertion absurd, but her laugh sounded a little forced.
‘Must you pretend —’
‘You have a wife!’ she cut in harshly, staring at him coldly.
‘Have !
Who told you that?’
‘Your aunt.’
He sighed.
‘My aunt, it grieves me to say, gets things confused.
She's no longer worthy of credence.’
He tossed away the cigarette.
‘My wife died some years ago,’ he said.
‘She killed herself.’
He had forgotten how sensitive she was.
His bluntness shocked her.
‘How terrible,’ she whispered.
As he started to speak, she forestalled him.
‘Please!
Don't talk about it.’
‘But I want to talk about it!’ he insisted.
‘I have to talk about it.
Please, try to understand.
I've kept it bottled up inside me for so long.’
Nevertheless he hesitated.
He thought, I want her, but I'll lose her if I tell her everything.
If I tell her it was I who was responsible for my wife's death, she'll turn away from me in horror and disgust.
‘Very well, then,’ she said, ‘talk about it if you think you must.’
He was reluctant to begin and his hesitancy made her look questioningly at him.
He sighed.
He had to tell her, no matter what the consequences.
‘Valerie and I married on impulse.
The South African war had just broken out and I had received my embarkation orders.
It was a mad time.
Everyone seemed to be infected with patriotic fever.
No one was thinking rationally.
I suppose Valerie and I were no exception.’
At long last he was able to talk to someone about it.
He talked on, feeling a great relief, thinking, it's not surprising Catholics are able to preserve their sanity; they can unburden themselves in the confessional.
Miriam sat sideways on the chair, her head bowed, listening silently and sympathetically.
‘I'm just trying to explain how things were at the time.
The war was over and it was a small peacetime army again.
Officers who wanted to stay on were discouraged from doing so.
And certainly the army people did not want incapacitated ones.
That's why I studied so hard at the Staff College.
When I left I went straight to Whitehall.
The department I was attached to was fighting an uphill battle against prejudice from the old school clique and the niggardly allowances from the Treasury.
We had to work hard to justify our existence.
And we did; from nine o'clock in the morning to eight at night, six days a week.
‘Our marriage suffered.
There were bitter quarrels between Valerie and me.
She was alone all day and bored to distraction.
She had no women friends.
I should have known that eventually some man would come along and take advantage of the situation.
Ironic — it was I who first introduced him to her.
His name was Dennis Sanquest, a politician, a Liberal.
Handsome chap, and charming, very charming.
They became lovers, but Valerie didn't know that Sanquest regarded her as a mere plaything — someone he could have a little fun with; someone he could display before his friends as his latest conquest.
‘When she arrived at his flat one night and told him that she had left me after admitting everything, he was furious.
The scandal would ruin him and mean the end of his political career if he should be named as corespondent in a divorce case.
He discarded her without a thought.
Abandoned by everyone, she rented rooms in Bloomsbury.
She had a small private income which was sufficient for her needs.
She was completely alone.
‘I did not know what had happened to her after she left me.
Nor did I care I felt, when she walked out of our home that night, she had walked out of my life forever.
I was dazed at first— numb with shock.
The anger came later.
I destroyed everything that reminded me of her: photographs, mementoes.
One morning a letter arrived.
It was from Valerie.
She begged for my forgiveness.
I tore the letter in two and threw the pieces into the fire.
I did not reply.
Instead, now that I knew where she was living, I contacted my solicitors and instructed them to start divorce proceedings.
‘A week later I received a frantic letter from Valerie imploring me not to go through with it.
She admitted she had made a dreadful mistake and appealed for a reconciliation.
Again I tore up the letter and did not reply.
‘More letters followed, each one more urgent than the last.
I did not answer any of them.
She made appointments to meet me at different places: restaurants, art galleries.
I did not keep any of them.
It was not that I did not love her.
I did, despite the fact that she had been unfaithful.
But the more intense the love, the more intense the hate.
I wanted to make her suffer.
I knew that I would take her back eventually, but I wanted to torment her with indifference.
I wanted to drive her to the very edge of despair.
‘Finally, a letter came which was different from the others.
She was making one last appeal.
She wanted me to take her back.
She wanted both of us to start all over again.
She wanted me to go to her rooms in Bloomsbury that night, to talk things over.
She would be attired for the street, ready to go.
Her things were already packed.
‘Please come and take me away with you,’ she wrote.
‘I'll be waiting.
I'll wait all night if necessary so long as I know you'll be coming.
But don't fail me this time, Alec.
Please!
Because if you do…’ '' He paused, then went on.
‘She threatened to take her life if I did not arrive.
‘At first I thought it was a ploy — a ruse designed to panic me into running to her, but then something told me it was not.
Perhaps it was the handwriting.
It was wild and erratic, as though she had been writing under severe emotional strain.
‘And yet when the time came for me to go to her, I hesitated.
I decided not to go until the following morning.’
He ceased talking.
Miriam raised her head and looked at him.
He was leaning against the trunk of the tree, staring with blank unseeing eyes at the ground.
She did not say anything, waiting for him to speak.
‘The next morning,’ he went on in a flat emotionless voice, ‘I rose late.
I washed and shaved and had breakfast, then sat down by the window and read the morning newspaper.
It was a Sunday — a grey spring morning and raining a little.
The window was open at the top and I could hear the church bells ringing in the distance.
I felt relaxed and, for the first time since Valerie had told me of her unfaithfulness, happy.
‘I knew what I was going to do.
I would leave at about noon and walk to Bloomsbury.
On the way I would stop at a restaurant and have lunch and then continue, taking my time.
I wanted to see the look on Valerie's face when she opened the door.
I wanted to catch her unprepared.
‘As noon approached, I put on a raincoat and hat.
I stood before the mirror in the hallway, fixing my tie, whistling.
It was one of those moments one remembers forever: the moment of supreme happiness just before disaster strikes.
I opened the halldoor.
A fat policeman came puffing up the steps towards me.
Was my name Carew? he asked.
I told him yes it was and brought him into the hall.
He began to talk.
All the time his eyes deliberately avoided mine; he kept them fixed on a picture on the wall behind me.
‘A woman had thrown herself from Waterloo Bridge, he told me.
It had happened in the early hours of the morning.
There had been a witness who had raised the alarm.
The body had been retrieved from the river after a lengthy search.
Three keys attached to a metal disc had been found in the pocket of the woman's coat.
The address of a house in Bloomsbury was engraved on the disc.
The police had gone to the house and had entered the flat rented to the dead woman.
On a table in the living room they found a letter addressed to me.
‘He talked on, but I was no longer listening.
I stood there, my senses numb.
I was in a state of shock.
I kept telling myself that it was all a mistake, some kind of ghastly mistake.
‘We travelled through the streets in a cab.
Then something suddenly occurred to me and I nearly cried with relief.
Valerie was not dead!
This was nothing but an elaborate hoax perpetrated by her in revenge for all the suffering I had caused her.
And this man sitting beside me was not a policeman.
Why, he didn't even look like a policeman.
He was probably an actor she had hired to impersonate one.
I nearly laughed out loud.
My nerves were so strained I was probably on the point of hysteria.
‘We alighted at the morgue.
As we climbed the steps I kept hoping to see Valerie standing there, a mischievous smile on her face, the whole episode a cruel joke.
But it was a man who was standing inside, a policeman.
He led the way.
I tried to keep despair at bay, telling myself that some sort of mistake had been made.
The detective pulled the sheet away from the face.’
He was silent then.
Miriam raised her head and looked at him.
‘Was it your wife?’ she whispered.
He nodded.
‘Yes, it was Valerie.’
His hands were covered in sweat and he thrust them into  his trouser pockets.
He turned towards the house and stared at it with brooding eyes.
‘There was an inquest.
The letter she had left for me remained in the possession of the police as evidence.
It was read aloud in court.
It contained nothing censorious.
She blamed herself for everything that had happened.
I sat there listening, feeling sick with guilt and remorse.
I kept telling myself that I had killed her — had killed her as surely as if my own hands had sent her plunging down into the muddy waters of the Thames.
I told myself, if there is any justice in the world I should be punished for it.
I wanted to pay for my crime.
I would have welcomed even a reproachful speech from the coroner but all I got from him was an expression of sympathy.
‘It was the same with my fellow officers.
I received nothing but sympathy and understanding from them.
They tried to lift me out of my depression.
They approached me one by one with invitations: some drinks over a game of cards; a night out at the theatre…
But I said no to all their offers.
I simply wanted to be left alone.
I asked for more work — anything to keep my mind occupied.
‘It was the nights I feared.
I began to have strange dreams.
Not nightmares, but unusual and disturbing dreams.
They were nearly all about Valerie.
They never varied.
I would find myself searching for her.
When I did find her, she always managed to evade me like a will-o'-the-wisp, and then I would lose her again.
Sometimes I would wake up weeping with frustration and despair.
Alec lapsed into silence.
‘Do you still have those dreams?’
Miriam Durkin asked after a minute or two had passed.
‘No, not now,’ he answered, ‘not since I arrived in Ireland.
Perhaps London had something to do with it.
There were too many unhappy memories there.’
He said no more.
Now that he had told her everything, he expected her to condemn him for what he had done, but she said nothing.
He searched her eyes for signs of contempt and loathing, but all he could see was sympathy.
He gave her a long intent look.
‘I can't imagine a future without you, Miriam.’
She blushed and turned away to face the easel.
‘You will have to put me out of your mind,’ she said quietly.
‘I can't.’
‘You must.’
‘You know I love you.
And you feel the same way about me.
I know you do.
Don't deny it.
We have a right to be happy.’
‘But I'm married —’
‘To a man you loathe!
Do you think I haven't noticed.’
‘That's not true!’ she protested in a shrill voice.
He could see she was agitated.
He placed a hand on her shoulder.
‘Miriam…’
A twig snapped.
They both turned, staring apprehensively into the cool green dimness.
He caught a glimpse of a tall thin figure moving away through the trees.
‘Who is it?’ she whispered with fear in her voice.
‘Tim Skerritt.
My uncle's steward.’
‘Do you think he heard?’
‘I don't know.’
Instinctively she reached up and gripped his hand resting on her shoulder.
III
At breakfast, Walter Carew expressed a wish to see the family solicitors in Castlebar and Durkin readily offered to drive him.
Shortly after lunch, Durkin, attired in his motoring outfit, climbed into the car and gripped the steering wheel.
Walter climbed in beside him, trying hard not to show the fear he felt for the mechanical monster.
‘You will drive carefully, won't you, Mr Durkin?’
‘Never fear, sir, never fear,’ Durkin laughed.
‘I'll get you there safely and back.
We'll be home before dusk.’
Alec had to twist the starting-handle six or seven times before the engine exploded into life and the car began to shudder and shake.
Walter gripped the side with one hand and his hat with the other, as they drove up the road in a cloud of black smoke.
Alec and Miriam tried to comfort Emily as she stared after them, wide-eyed and trembling.
It was a glorious day, warm and sunny with hardly a cloud in the sky, but by late afternoon a fresh breeze was beginning to blow in from the west.
It increased steadily in force.
As evening approached, Alec stood at the top of the steps, hair blowing wildly in the wind, watching the heavy black storm clouds moving in from the Atlantic.
I hope to God, he thought, Durkin does not try to get back before the storm breaks.
Durkin's car had no roof.
A severe drenching would kill his uncle.
A half-hour later the storm broke.
Carewscourt, standing on its hill high above the surrounding countryside, took the full brunt of it.
The rushing wind and rain dashed against the thick stone walls.
By nightfall, Alec felt as though he were inside a fort under attack.
The wind repeatedly struck the house with the force of a battering-ram.
He could hear it scaling the walls in fury, screaming over the roof.
He sat to the left of the huge fireplace.
Miriam was facing him, with Emily between them, her tiny body upright on the chair, staring at the crackling log fire.
‘I do hope Walter and Mr Durkin are safe,’ she wailed as another violent burst struck the house.
Alec stretched out his arm and laid a comforting hand over hers.
‘Of course they are.
At this very moment, Walter and Mr Durkin are snug in their beds in a hotel in Castlebar.’
‘But suppose they left before the storm broke?’
‘Then they would have been here hours ago.
Castlebar is only about twenty miles from here and Mr Durkin's automobile can do twenty-five miles an hour.’
Emily's eyes widened in horror.
‘Twenty-five miles an hour!’
Again the wail of distress.
‘Oh poor Walter!’
Alec patted her hand.
‘There, there.
You must not upset yourself.’
There was a lull in the storm.
They could hear the rain drumming against the windows.
It was as if the attacking force had drawn back their battering-ram and steadied it for one final assault.
Alec braced himself; he found himself counting.
One, two, three.
There was a rushing sound as though a speeding train were charging towards them.
It hit in an explosion of noise.
He could feel the house shudder.
The window frames rattled violently and glass cracked with the sound of a pistol shot.
Miriam cowered in terror, her hand up to her throat.
Emily sat with her hands in her lap, quite unperturbed.
Alec grinned reassuringly at Miriam.
‘This house was built to last.
The walls are of solid stone and eight feet thick.
There's no need to be afraid.
Carewscourt has stood successfully against the elements for more than two hundred years.’
Emily nodded in agreement.
‘You must not let the strong winds frighten you, my dear.
Here in Mayo we get them quite often.
Although,’ she added, ‘not usually quite as bad as this.
But Alec is right.
This house could withstand a hurricane.
I remember the night of the Big Wind.
I was only a little girl at the time.
Heavens, what a night.
Anyone who experienced it will never forget it.
It was like the end of the  world!
They said whole fields were ripped up into the air!
Imagine!
And yet this house, standing on a hill, survived.’
‘I do hope your husband will succeed in getting the book published when the manuscript is completed,’ Emily said to Miriam, changing the subject.
‘Walter is so looking forward to seeing his work in print.
Poor Walter, he worked so hard writing the family history.
He allowed me to read it.
It's most comprehensive.
Such a pity he does not mention Charlotte's ghost.’
Miriam Durkin stared at her, wide-eyed.
‘Charlotte's ghost?’
Alec groaned, but before he could interrupt, Emily started to explain.
‘A poor tragic creature.
She became insane after her two young sons were murdered.
She haunts this house, you know.
Oh yes, indeed.
I have often heard her crying at night.
And yet Walter never mentions that.’
Miriam glanced fearfully over her shoulder.
The flickering flames of the fire and an oil-lamp standing on the dining room table provided the only light.
Most of the room lay in deep shadow.
Outside, the storm howled about the house as though a pack of wild wolves were trying to get in.
Rain lashed the window-panes.
‘Now, Aunt,’ Alec said, ‘you promised Uncle Walter you would never talk about that again.
There are no ghosts.’
Above the noise of the wind and rain there came a long tearing sound followed by a heavy thud.
Miriam started.
Alec smiled to allay her fears.
‘A tree falling,’ he explained.
‘I'm afraid this storm is going to cause an awful amount of damage to the plantation below.’
‘I am not the only one to have seen Charlotte,’ Emily went on as though nothing had happened.
‘A guest, Colonel Merrick's wife, was in one of the rooms upstairs brushing her hair by candlelight in front of the mirror, when she saw this face peering over her shoulder.
Poor woman, she was dreadfully upset.’
Alec swore under his breath.
If I don't stop her, he thought, she'll leave Miriam a nervous wreck.
‘Aunt Emily…’
Emily smiled.
‘Yes, Alec?’
‘Forgive me for saying so, but all this talk about Charlotte is making Mrs Durkin rather nervous.
That, and the storm.’
Emily looked dismayed.
She turned to Miriam, her hand fluttering towards her throat.
‘Oh my dear, do forgive me.
I had no idea.’
Miriam smiled nervously.
‘You must allow for us city dwellers, Miss Carew.
Some of us find it hard to adapt to country life.
We never experience the full impact of storms such as this, and Carewscourt is so  huge.
Our house in Dublin would fit in one corner of it.’
She gave a weak smile.
‘And now to know that it is haunted makes me a little apprehensive.’
‘Oh, but you should not be frightened of Charlotte,’ Emily protested.
‘She would never harm anyone.
She just cries.
It's so sad to hear her.
At times, listening to her, I cry myself.’
Alec sighed and stood up.
‘I think it would be a good idea if we all had some sleep,’ he said.
He walked across the dimly lit room to the sideboard on which a number of candlesticks stood.
He lit one of the candles.
Emily rose slowly to her feet.
‘I do hope Walter and Mr Durkin are safe,’ she said again.
Alec stood beside her holding the candlestick.
The candle-flame wavered slightly in the draughty room.
‘They are asleep in their beds, Aunt,’ he said.
‘They have better sense than we have.’
He offered his arm to her.
She placed a small delicate hand on it and bade Miriam good-night.
Out in the dark cold hall she stopped him at the foot of the stairs.
‘No need to see me to my room, Alec,’ she said, reaching for the candlestick.
She held up her hand against his protest.
‘Please.
We have a guest who is sitting all alone.’
Nevertheless he stood watching the frail figure mount the broad staircase, her shadow moving past the portraits of her ancestors on the wall.
He could hear the wind moaning through the house.
On such a night as this, he told himself, one could believe in ghosts and phantoms, and yet this small, fragile old lady climbs up into the whistling darkness unafraid.
He waited until he could no longer see the reflection of her candle, before going back to the dining room.
He found Miriam crouched against the fire, her arms crossed over her breasts, each hand gripping a shoulder.
He could see the relief on her face as he entered.
He immediately went to the sideboard and poured two glasses of brandy.
He walked over to her and held out a glass.
‘What is it?’ she whispered.
‘Brandy.’
‘I never —’
‘Take it.
It will settle your nerves.’
He sat down opposite her sipping the brandy.
She did likewise, then coughed and made a face.
‘Keep on sipping,’ he said.
‘It will do you good — make you sleep.’
‘Sleep,’ she echoed and shuddered.
‘I don't think I'll be able to sleep tonight.’
‘You must not believe anything my aunt tells you.
All this nonsense about ghosts is just a figment of her imagination.’
He decided to divert her thoughts to other things.
‘How did you meet your husband?’ he asked.
The question took her by surprise.
She stared confusedly at him for several seconds, then lowered her head, gazing into the glass she was holding.
After a moment she spoke.
‘William lodged at our house.
My mother was dead and my father, due to ill health, had to retire from the university on a small pension.
It was far too small for the three of us to live on.
We were forced to take a lodger…’
‘I don't understand.
You said the three of you.’
‘I have a younger sister, Rhoda.
She's married now and living in England.’
‘Miriam and Rhoda,’ he said.
‘They're Jewish names, are they not?’
‘My mother was a Jew.
Her family disowned her for marrying a Gentile.
The same thing happened to my father.
His people were strict Presbyterians.
They cut him off without a penny.’
She said no more.
She stared at the fire, lost in thought.
The crashing wind had dropped to a vicious whine, but the rain had intensified and its thunderous noise filled the room.
‘You're neglecting your drink,’ Alec said.
‘Oh.’
She raised the glass slowly to her lips.
‘What made you decide to marry…
William?’
He hesitated over the name.
Durkin, he thought, is one of those men destined to go through life known only by their surname.
‘My father died.
Rhoda and I had to fend for ourselves.
Both of us had a very sheltered upbringing, you understand.
On our own, we couldn't cope with life, with things in general.
Then William took over — began to take care of us.
He was such a tower of strength.’
She hesitated and he could sense her reluctance to continue.
‘He became another father to you both,’ he spoke for her.
‘Yes.’
‘And when he asked you to marry him, you accepted, because you did not want to lose your new-found security.’
She stared at him coldly.
‘You're very perceptive.’
‘Do you love him?’
‘I married him.’
‘That's not what I asked you.’
She looked away and stared at the fire again.
‘No,’ she murmured.
An awkward silence grew between them.
He glanced at his watch.
‘It's getting late,’ he said.
‘I think we should retire.’
He lit a candle and handed it to her.
She grasped the candlestick firmly.
She had forgotten about the storm and the terrors the house held for her, but when Alec closed the dining room door and the cold whispering darkness enveloped them, her fear returned.
They walked slowly up the broad staircase, Alec holding the oil-lamp a little above his head.
They could hear the wild rush of the wind and the pattering of rain against floorboards from the deserted upper floor.
God, Alec thought, half the slates must have been blown away.
The paused at the entrance to the long corridor.
It stretched away into the darkness towards the empty north wing.
The noise of the storm was muffled now.
They were hemmed in on all sides by thick heavy stone, but still the wind managed to snake in through innumerable cracks and crannies.
It came moaning towards them out of the blackness.
Miriam had to shield the candle-flame with her hand as it fluttered wildly.
They moved up the corridor, their footfalls against the bare boards sending out hollow echoes.
Miriam could feel her courage ebbing with each forward step.
It vanished completely as Alec opened the door for her and she stood on the threshold, looking into the dark, listening to the wind whining away outside the house.
‘Come in with me,’ she pleaded.
He walked in before her and she followed reluctantly, closing the door behind her.
He placed the lamp and the guttering candle in its holder on a low table in the centre of the floor.
They formed a small aura of light, leaving both ends of the room in total darkness.
He said, ‘I'll leave the lamp and candle with you.
There's a candle in my room.’
As he turned to go, she cried out in a panicky voice, ‘Alec, don't leave me alone tonight!’
He turned and faced her.
She stared back at him, her cheeks flaming.
He said gently, ‘I won't leave you, Miriam.’
She walked slowly to the bed and sat down.
She took off her shoes, and lay down fully clothed, covering herself with a heavy quilt.
He stood watching her, then stooped and removed his shoes.
He snuffed out the candle and, putting his face over the glass chimney of the lamp, blew out the flame.
He moved slowly and cautiously across the pitch-dark room until his knees touched the edge of the bed.
He got under the quilt and lay sideways on the bed, facing her.
He could feel her breath against his face.
They lay like that for a while, not saying a word.
Then he reached out and placed his hand on her hip.
‘Please,’ she whispered, ‘don't make love to me.
Not now, not  tonight.
When we get back to Dublin there will be time for that, but you'll have to be patient with me.
You'll have to give me time.’
She began to weep.
‘You've destroyed the belief I had in myself,’ she sobbed.
‘I never thought I would surrender…myself…the principles I've always cherished.
I never thought I would be involved in an adulterous affair.
I never thought I would become one of those people William is so fond of writing about in that filthy newspaper of his.’
She cried herself to sleep.
Alec turned on his back and stared into the darkness.
He lay for a long time, listening to the storm as it blew itself out.
Chapter Six
I
Myles Burke gave a final wipe to the brass knocker, the letter-box and door-knob with the polishing cloth and then closed the heavy door on the cold winter night.
In the feeble light his hand searched for the bolt, found it and shot it home.
The sound echoed hollowly throughout the tall empty house.
He moved to the table in the hall and put the cloth and tin of Brasso in the wicker basket alongside the dusters, the tin of polish and a bunch of keys.
He put his arm through the handle of the basket, picked up the oil-lamp and moved down the hall on slippered feet.
He stopped outside a glass-panelled door on the left.
One hand, hampered by the basket, tested the handle.
The light from the oil-lamp shone on the brass plate.
EDWARD H CORCORAN Commissioner for Oaths
Satisfied, he shuffled down into the back passage and opened the door of the closet under the stairs.
A scuttling noise startled him.
He thrust the lamp in among the mops and brooms, but he could see nothing.
He waited for a few seconds, but the noise did not repeat itself.
He placed the basket on one of the shelves and closed the door.
He would go down into the cellar tomorrow and put down some rat poison.
He paused as he always did at the foot of the stairs, his left hand holding the lamp, his right hand resting on the banisters.
The thought of the long climb to the top of the house always daunted him.
Father Poole's plaintive voice came back.
‘Begob, Myles, I'd be a more frequent visitor if it wasn't for these stairs.
Man, dear, it's like climbin' the Matterhorn.
He began to climb the stairs slowly.
His giant shadow mounted the wall at the top of the stairs.
He paused for breath as he reached the landing, then continued.
He was used to seeing people with swollen jaws and pale nervous faces walking up these two flights to the rooms on the first floor.
THOMAS DUNLEAVY Dentist
He twisted the door handles, ensuring the doors were locked.
Once he had forgotten to lock Mr Corcoran's office and had been harshly reprimanded.
For one terrible moment he thought he was going to be dismissed.
He was determined never to let that mistake happen again.
Genteel respectability ended at Mr Dunleavy's landing.
There was no lino covering on the stairs leading to the second floor.
His feet thumped loudly on bare boards.
Shamefaced, shabbily dressed people mounted these stairs to the offices of Mr Samuel Gold (Personal Loans Arranged).
His mouth twisted with distaste.
He reached the third floor.
The rooms of the Hibernian Literary and Debating Society.
Voices drifted up through the floorboards every Thursday night.
Home Rule.
The dawn of a new era?
Is the Irish Literary Revival coming to an end?
He climbed the last two flights with effort.
His own rooms were squeezed under the roof.
He opened the door of the front room and closed it behind him.
He could feel the heat as he entered.
The coal fire burned steadily away in the grate.
The gas-jet projecting from the wall above the fireplace filled the room with a greenish glow.
The room was sparsely furnished with an ancient sideboard, a small kitchen-dresser, a table and two chairs.
In one corner stood a gas-stove on which a black kettle simmered gently.
A few books occupied the space between the two small windows.
Myles blew out the lamp and placed it on the sideboard.
He moved to one of the windows to draw the curtains, but before doing so he peered out.
The quays were deserted.
A wind was rising, blowing from the west.
He could see it skimming over the surface of the black waters of the Liffey far below.
He shivered and drew the curtains.
He put two spoonfuls of tea into the teapot, then poured in the scalding water from the kettle.
He cut two thick slices of bread and spread yellow, salty butter over each one.
He poured the tea into a mug, added milk and sugar, then sat down at the table and began to eat and drink.
The clock ticked away on the mantelpiece.
I've Father Poole to thank for all this, he thought.
He raised the mug to his lips and sipped the hot sugary tea, remembering the day when he had sat for the first time in Mr Corcoran's office.
Mr Corcoran had stared stonily at him through the pince-nez  fastened on to his thin beak of a nose.
He had a bony wizened face and an unhealthy pallor.
He cleared his throat several times before speaking.
‘Frankly, Mr — er — Burke, we prefer a married couple fulfilling the duties of caretaker.’
Myles had sat on the edge of the chair with his hands clasped between his knees, listening to the legal measured tones, telling himself, I'm not going to get it, I'm not going to get it.
‘This house is rather big and your duties would be many.
Too many, I'm afraid, for a man of your years.’
He had groomed himself as best as he could for the interview.
Father Poole had sent a large parcel containing clothes and shoes to the hospital just before he was released.
All were second-hand, but they were far better than the stinking rags he had been wearing.
Mr Corcoran lowered his head and examined his finger-nails.
‘However,’ he said, ‘Father Poole has been persistent — very persistent,’he added with a trace of exasperation in his voice.
He paused for a while, before saying, ‘We are prepared to give you a month's trial.’
Three months had passed since then.
He washed down the last of the bread with a mouthful of tea and stood up.
He picked up the mug and small plate, walked to the door and opened it.
There was a small sink on the landing.
He turned on the tap and washed them, then brought them back into the room and dried them with the tea-cloth.
He placed them on the kitchen-dresser, then put away the milk, sugar and butter.
From the top of the kitchen-dresser he took down a jar.
It was an old brown-coloured stone ink jar he had rescued from Mr Corcoran's waste-paper basket.
He poured what was left of the hot water from the kettle into it, then pressed the cork firmly down into the opening with the palm of his hand.
He then wrapped a piece of red flannel around it and placed it under his arm.
He walked into the bedroom.
He had left the gas low so that the room was poorly lit, but he could see well enough.
He pulled back the bedclothes and put the jar underneath them.
The bed would be well warmed by the time he got into it in about an hour from now.
It was a double bed.
The middle-aged married couple who had been caretakers before him had been dismissed on the spot for gross drunkenness.
He walked back into the front room and placed the keys on the sideboard and then hung his jacket on the inside of the door.
He brought a chair over to the fire and raised the flame of the gas-jet.
He walked over to the shelf between the windows.
His library.
Every Saturday afternoon, with the offices closed for the  weekend, he would stroll along the quays and browse among the second-hand book barrows.
It was amazing the bargains one could find.
Paradise Lost had cost him a mere twopence.
A Tale of Two Cities : threepence.
He took down a book and walked back to the fire.
This one had cost him sixpence, a lot out of his ten shillings a week wages, but it was worth it.
It was an old favourite,Les Misérables .
He sat in front of the fire and found his place.
Jean Valjean's long and tragic life was coming to an end.
Myles had more understanding and sympathy for this character than for all the others he had ever read about.
The years of imprisonment; the relentless pursuit by the police official, Javert.
Books had prevented him from going mad in prison.
The nights when he could not sleep had been the worst, when the dark thoughts of despair and depression came creeping into the mind.
On those nights, he would sit up and light a candle.
He had hoarded the butt-ends of candles as another prisoner would hoard pieces of food.
With the candle-flame held close to the page, listening for the measured tread of the warder on the stone-flagged corridor outside, he would allow his thoughts to escape to the sun-drenched wilderness of Coral Island;to the wind-swept moors of Wuthering Heights .
One night he had found himself chuckling at the merry escapades of Mr Pickwick; another night he had wept uncontrollably at the death of Little Nell.
The prisoners who went insane were those who were illiterate and without imagination.
As he began to read, he was faintly aware of the rising wind and of the rain beating against the windows.
II
Myles sat before the fire, waiting for Father Poole to arrive.
It was Sunday evening.
He could hear the bells of St Patrick's in the distance.
It was the hour of evensong.
From the time Myles had been made caretaker, Father Poole had been a regular visitor every Sunday evening.
He liked listening to Father Poole; he had a fund of stories about his boyhood and youth in the Dublin Liberties; stories about the colourful characters who once lived there.
Zozimus, the famed blind balladeer from Faddle Alley; his old friend, Stony Pockets; the poet, James Clarence Mangan.
‘Poor Mangan,’ Father Poole would sigh, ‘the street-arabs gave him an awful time — and I was one of them, God forgive me.’
It was hard to believe that Father Poole was eighty years of age.
He had been born in 1829, the year of Catholic Emancipation.
The heavy sound of the door-knocker came beating up from the bottom of the house.
Myles rose from his chair.
The oil-lamp on the sideboard was already lit.
He picked it up and opened the door of his room.
Half-way down the stairs he could hear Father Poole's feeble voice moaning through the letter-box.
‘Hellooo…anyone at hooome?’
He opened the hall-door.
Father Poole stood outside leaning on his stick, shoulders hunched a little.
‘A cold night, Father.’
‘But bracing, Myles, bracing,’ Father Poole said and stepped in.
At the foot of the stairs, Father Poole paused and transferred his stick from his right hand to his left.
Myles stood beside him holding the oil-lamp aloft, his right hand under Father Poole's left elbow.
It took them nearly ten minutes to reach the top of the house.
When they entered the front room, Father Poole sat down wearily on the nearest chair.
Myles took the tall silk hat from his head and the stick from his hand, but when he offered to take off his overcoat, Father Poole waved him away.
‘In a minute or two.
I'm out of puff.’
Myles stood over him, waiting patiently.
After a while Father Poole began to unbutton his overcoat.
Myles helped him to take it off and hung it up.
He picked up the two chairs and placed one on each side of the fireplace.
But Father Poole did not sit down.
He stood in the centre of the room, hands joined, looking around him, nodding in approval.
‘Ah yes, yes, very cosy.
You're as snug as a bug in a rug here, Myles.
He put on his glasses, walked over to the windows, and peered closely at the titles of the books.
‘Any new acquisitions, Myles?’
‘Not since the last time you were here, Father.’
Father Poole looked over his shoulder.
‘Tell me, Myles, did you ever read a book called Handy Andy ?’
‘I never did, Father.’
Father Poole heaved a sigh.
‘Ah, a pity.
A grand book, grand.’
After deliberating for a little while, the priest selected one and carried it towards the fire.
‘Paradise Lost,’ he read aloud.
‘Ah yes.’
Myles smiled.
‘Of all the books I've ever read, there are only two which are particular favourites.
That's one of them.’
‘Really?’
Father Poole muttered abstractedly, turning over the pages.
‘Of course,’ he said, ‘certain critics have argued that while Milton appears to be on God's side, his real sympathies seem to be with Satan.’
He continued turning the pages.
‘Now where,’ he growled, ‘are those lines I'm looking for?’
He stopped and gave a little grunt of triumph.
‘Ah, here we are.’
Here we may reign secure, and in my choice
To reign is worth ambition, though in Hell:
Better to reign in Hell, then serve in Heaven.
Father Poole raised his head and stared at Myles over the tops of his glasses.
‘Better to reign in Hell, than serve in Heaven,’ he repeated.
‘There now, Myles, doesn't those few lines tell yeh all yeh need to know about Satan?
Can't yeh sense all the insufferable pride behind them?
Ah…’
He shook his head.
‘Is it any wonder he was cast out of paradise?’
Myles shrugged.
‘Perhaps I never read Paradise Lost as carefully as I should have,’ he said.
Father Poole paused at a page.
Ah, but you did, my friend, he thought, you did.
The page, like all the others in the book, was musty and brown with age, but the red ink drawn under four lines of type was fresh.
Not more than a week old, Father Poole surmised.
He read the words underlined.
What though the field be lost?
All is not lost; the unconquerable will,
And study of revenge, immortal hate,
And courage never to submit or yield.
Father Poole closed the book.
If you want to know a man, he thought, first examine the books he prefers.
He rose slowly from the chair.
‘I'll put this back where it belongs.’
‘Oh, just leave it on the floor beside you, Father,’ Myles said.
‘I'll do no such thing!
It's too valuable a book to be left lyin' around.’
He walked stiffly over to the bookshelf and stood before it, taking down one book after another, turning the pages, pretending to browse.
It gave him time to think.
What did he know about this man, Myles Burke?
Very little, he had to admit.
He remembered Myles in hospital blurting out something about prison.
But he was not the criminal type.
Political prisoner?
Most likely.
There were quite a few of these old Fenian diehards around, still  bitter after all those years about their humiliating defeat, still hating the Catholic Church for its condemnation of their movement.
Is Myles like that? he asked himself.
…study of revenge, immortal hate,
And courage never to submit or yield.
Those lines had appealed to him; perhaps they matched his own thoughts.
Father Poole put a book back on the shelf and took down another.
What concerned him more was the fact that Myles had once contemplated suicide.
True, extreme poverty and hardship had driven him to the point when suicide must have seemed preferable to the life he was leading.
But this Myles Burke was different.
He was a cultured, educated man, yet he lacked the simple faith of the poorest of the poor.
And his disregard for the consequences of such a terrible sin was horrifying, horrifying.
Father Poole gave a weary sigh.
This should be an occasion for rejoicing.
At long last his prayers had been answered.
He had found the one he had been searching for all those years — the one wavering on the brink of eternal damnation.
All I can do, Father Poole thought despairingly, is to try and give him the spiritual strength to resist such a temptation.
He would have to probe this man first and get to understand him.
But probe with caution, he told himself, with the utmost caution.
He put the book back on the shelf and returned to the fire.
‘Yeh have a most interestin' collection there, Myles.
Indeed yes.
Yeh have a cultivated taste in literature.’
‘I'm glad you think so, Father.’
Father Poole reached into the pocket of his jacket and took out his snuff-box.
He sprinkled some snuff on the back of his hand and sniffed it.
He smiled apologetically at Myles.
‘The only little luxury I allow myself, Myles, apart from a nip of brandy during the cold winter nights.’
‘I'm afraid I have none to offer you, Father,’ Myles said.
‘Rules of the house, you know,’ and he uttered a mirthful little bark.
Father Poole stared at him in amazement.
He had never seen Myles Burke laugh before.
Silence fell between them.
The clock on the mantelpiece ticked away loudly in the stillness.
Father Poole sat forward a little on the chair, his hands outstretched towards the fire.
Myles sat upright, hands on knees, staring at the leaping flames.
After a while Father Poole straightened up  with a groan and lay back in the chair.
He stared at Myles with his heavy-lidded eyes, a slight smile on his face.
‘D'ye know, Myles,’ he said softly, ‘it states on your hospital record that you are a Catholic, and yet I never see you at Mass.
I stand up there in the pulpit every Sunday mornin' looking down at the upturned faces searchin' for yours, but in vain.
But then of course,’ he added, ‘you probably go to St Audoen's.
It's much nearer.’
Myles stared back at him, stone-faced.
‘I never go to Mass,’ he answered curtly.
‘And the Sacraments?’
‘Never.’
‘And yet Peter, the sacristan, used to see you sittin' in St Catherine's every day.
Sittin' there from early afternoon till the church closed at night.’
‘It was just someplace to sit.
Someplace to shelter from the cold and the rain.’
‘I see.’
Father Poole bit his underlip.
Myles eyed him warily.
He was tense now — on the defensive.
Father Poole noticed his hands gripping his knees, the whites of the knuckles showing.
‘We are old men, Myles,’ Father Poole sighed.
‘We've tramped the long hard road of life, sweated and toiled along it.
We stumbled and fell many times, and yet always managed to struggle up again and continue.
But we are nearin' the end of that road, my friend.
And when we do come to the end of it, we can take our rest — our eternal rest.’
He paused, waiting for Myles to say something, but Myles stared fixedly at him, saying nothing.
‘But some have difficulty reachin' the end of that road, Myles,’ he went on.
‘They wander off the highway and into the bush and get lost.
Then they roam aimlessly about, frightened and confused, trying to get back.
Sometimes, with luck, a guide appears.
Then they follow him obediently, relyin' on his knowledge and experience to get them back to safety.’
Again he paused.
‘Let me be yourguide, Myles,’ he said, quietly.
‘I'm not lost!’
‘I regret to say I think you are.
When a man reaches the winter of his life, there's nothin' he can look forward to but death.
Then he turns to God, not away from Him.
And He is waitin' for you, Myles.
He wants you to destroy willingly the barrier you've erected between Him and you.
Go to Him — go to Him absolved and with a contrite heart.
Receive the Blessed Sacrament at the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass.’
Myles began to twist about on his chair, agitated.
‘Leave me be, Father, leave me be.’
Father Poole went relentlessly on.
‘You told me once that going to a Workhouse was simply exchanging one prison for another.
Were you in prison, Myles?
You can confide in me.
You can trust me.’
Myles hesitated before answering.
‘Yes, I was in prison.’
‘Perhaps you think the crime they sent you to prison for makes you unworthy of God's mercy.
If you think that, then you're wrong.
Very wrong.
God loves all sinners.’
‘The crime they sent me to prison for!’
Father Poole was taken aback by the harsh voice and the sudden change in behaviour.
Myles' body was trembling with anger and outrage.
‘Are you implying that I was a common criminal?
A thief perhaps?’
Father Poole gave a hasty wave of denial with his hand.
‘No, no, of course not.’
‘They sent me to prison for trying to free my country.
And if that's a crime then I plead guilty.
Gladly!
Proudly!’
Father Poole nodded.
‘Ah, I see.
A political prisoner.
A Fenian.’
‘Yes, a Fenian.
One of the men who fought and lost.
We paid a terrible price for our defeat.
Imprisonment —.
condemned by the Catholic hierarchy from the pulpit.
Remember the words, ‘Eternity is not long enough nor Hell hot enough to punish the Fenians!’
Even in prison we were denied spiritual comfort.
The prison chaplain came to me in my cell and tried to make a bargain with me.
If I renounced my Fenian oath he would hear my confession and give me communion.
I told him to go to hell!
And you tell me there is a barrier between God and me.
It was not I who erected it!’
‘Oh, Myles, Myles.’
Father Poole shook his head.
‘All of that was so long ago.
Times have changed and so has the attitude of the Church.
The Church will gladly welcome you back into the fold.
There's nothing to prevent you from unburdening yourself to me right here and now if you wish to do so.’
‘Ah, I see.
The Church can break her own rules when it suits her, is that it?’
Myles asked with heavy sarcasm.
Father Poole sighed.
‘Try to understand.
There was a time when a priest had to sneak like a thief through the back streets and alleyways of this city in order to say Mass in some garret or other.
Perhaps he would say it in some lonely place in the hills with someone on the lookout for the searching redcoats.
Freedom to worship our religion in our own country has been bought dearly with blood and tears — and you do not surrender that sort of freedom easily.
If anything should jeopardise that freedom — an insurrection for instance— the Church, without  hesitation, will condemn it.
And it does not matter in the slightest if that insurrection is justified or not.’
‘And as the poor rebel goes to the gallows,’ Myles commented bitterly, ‘the Church looks idly on.’
‘Rebellions have never succeeded in Ireland,’ Father Poole said, ‘and yet they are always attempted.
Ours is a bloody history, Myles.
A horrible series of futile uprisings against impossible odds and always ending in butchery and defeat for the rebels.
And the sad aftermath — the executions, the transportations, the wailings of the widows and orphans.
Good God,’ he said in an angry voice, ‘do we ever learn!’
He shook his head.
‘But no more, no more.
The Fenian rebellion was the last.’
‘I wouldn't be so sure about that if I were you!’
Myles exclaimed harshly.
Father Poole glanced sharply at him.
‘What do you mean?’
‘Ireland is still not free.
There will be more rebellions until she is!’
‘Ahhh!’
Father Poole made a gesture of annoyance with his hand.
‘You're out of date.
Time has passed you by.
This is the twentieth century, the age of progress, the age of miracles.
A man climbs into a machine and takes to the air and crosses the English Channel.
Think of it — a machine that flies.
The eighth wonder of the world!
We're livin' in the dawn of a new enlightenment.
Men no longer take to the barricades to redress wrongs.
They sit at conference tables and discuss them in a civilised manner.
And you sit there like a dog chained to a stake fixed in the past, mouthin' your worn-out shibboleths, still full of hate for England and your Church, too arrogant to make your peace with God.
You're a rebel without a cause, Myles.
A museum piece!
A poor, pathetic old man.’
Father Poole drew back as Myles stood before him, trembling, his glaring face twitching.
‘How dare you!’ he grated.
‘How dare you use your condescending ways on me!
So I'm an object of pity, am I?
Why you snuff-sniffing, yellow-faced, craw-thumping pious old hypocrite!
What do you know!’
Father Poole blinked in dismay.
I've antagonised him, he thought.
He had allowed himself to be carried away.
He had gone too far.
He had been rash when he should have been circumspect.
O God, I've lost him, he groaned to himself, lost him.
Myles stooped and brought his face close to Father Poole's.
‘Do you know how I spend my week-ends?’ he hissed.
Father Poole shook his head.
‘I roam the streets, searching, hoping to meet an old comrade from  the past.
Sometimes I go into a public-house and sit there with a glass of lemonade in my hand, eavesdropping, hoping to hear some treasonable conversation.
But I'll find the men I'm looking for sooner or later.
Then I'll offer my services.
We'll plot and plan together for the day when it's opportune to strike!’
He gave a long shuddering sigh and gulped, tears in his eyes.
‘My God,’ he choked, ‘how I long for that day!’
‘You long for that day,’ Father Poole repeated.
‘And yet when you were sick and hungry, wanderin' through the streets, you had reached the point when you thought life was not worth livin'.
You thought of committin' suicide.
Remember?’
Myles shrugged.
‘When you're ill and have sunk to the depths of despair, black thoughts enter your mind.
I toyed with the idea of committing suicide, but I knew in my heart and soul I would never take my own life.
That's the coward's way out!’
Father Poole sighed.
‘I spent many a sleepless night worryin' about you; prayin' for you.
I wanted with the help of God to coax you away from such terrible thoughts.
I wanted to save you from being damned for all eternity.’
‘So that's why you've been clinging to me like a leech all these months.
Ever watchful — my guardian angel.
Well, you need not concern yourself any longer.
When I die it will not be by my own hand, but fighting for my country.’
Father Poole's mouth compressed into a thin hard line.
‘I see,, he said, feeling anger stir within him.
‘And how many young minds will you poison with your wild dreams of glory before that happens?
How many immature lads will you lead against trained troops, to be slaughtered like sheep?
You want to sacrifice yourself in a bloody revolution that will have no hope of success, and you want to sacrifice hundreds, perhaps thousands of young lives with you!
And for what?
So that your name may someday appear in the footnotes of history books!’
‘There is no such thing as a bloodless insurrection.’
Father Poole glared up at him from beneath white shaggy eyebrows.
‘I hope to God,’ he quavered, ‘somethin' happens that will divert you from the path you have chosen.
When I think of all those young lives already in jeopardy…’
‘Why don't you pray for a miracle, Father,’ Myles said sardonically.
‘Perhaps it will occur.
Perhaps I'll die from natural causes before I can do any mischief.
Or perhaps I'll fall under the wheels of one of those damned automobiles.’
‘Or perhaps some distraught parent will kill you!’
Father Poole  snapped.
‘Socrates, yeh know, was forced to drink hemlock for corrupting the youth of Athens!’
Myles gave a sharp intake of breath.
His mouth worked soundlessly for several seconds before he found his voice.
‘Get out!’ he choked, spittle forming on his underlip.
‘I've listened to you and your sanctimonious blabberings for the last time!
Now get your things and clear out of here!
I never want to see you again, do you understand, never!’
Father Poole sighed and rose slowly from his chair.
He had difficulty putting on his coat.
Myles stood glaring at him, not offering to help.
Father Poole placed his tall silk hat on his head and picked up his stick.
He turned towards Myles, his hand on the knob of the door.
‘I'll pray for you, Myles,’ he said in a low voice.
‘Get out!’
Ten minutes later Father Poole walked painfully, with the aid of his stick, up the steep deserted street that led to his church.
It was a bright moonlit night and frost glistened on the rooftops.
I won't let go of this man, he vowed.
I'll storm Heaven with my prayers!
He began to pray silently to himself.
He was a firm believer in the power of prayer.
III
He stumbled through the snow, half-frozen, half-insane with grief and despair.
The blizzard had swept on and now a full moon hung low in the dark-blue cloudless sky.
He struggled from one field to another, making for the safety of the hills.
Once he heard rifle shots far behind him.
The sounds made him go a little faster, but progress was slow and difficult and he was near the point of exhaustion.
He would have to rest.
A snow-covered hedge loomed up ahead of him and he made for the shelter of it.
As he reached it, the ground fell away from under him and he rolled down into a deep ditch.
There was water at the bottom covered by a thin skin of ice and he splashed into it face first.
He scrambled frantically out, coughing and spluttering.
He tried to climb the other side, but the snow was too deep and soft and he kept sinking into it.
Finally his strength gave out.
He had pushed himself to the limit.
Semi-conscious, he slid slowly down, his feet and legs sinking into the freezing slush at the bottom.
He lay there unable to move, his body half-buried in the snow.
Soon he was aware of the paralysing numbness creeping up his body.
He knew he was freezing to death, yet he made no effort to stir.
The desire to live had died three hours before in that village street amid the swirling snow, the volley of rifle-fire and the screams of wounded and dying men.
Defeat!
He gave a low moan of despair.
Inept leadership and disastrous hesitations had brought them to this.
And treachery.
They had been waiting for them, forewarned, rifles at the ready.
And they had blundered into them, half-blinded by the wind-driven snow.
A few volleys and it was all over.
Now the men were scattered and being hunted down like wild animals.
A hoarse shout followed by a flurry of shots cut through his benumbed senses.
Two more shots rang out.
He raised his head, listening.
The sounds had come far away to the right.
The military had placed picquets along the base of the foothills to prevent anyone escaping into them.
If he stayed he would be captured.
He knew what capture meant.
Rotting in prison for the best part of his life, or a dishonourable death at the end of a rope.
Far better to die fighting it out.
He groaned in agony as he pushed himself up into a kneeling position.
He sank further into the water.
He had no overcoat.
He had covered a dying comrade with it on the outskirts of the village.
He fumbled in the pocket of his jacket with stiff frozen fingers.
He carried a flask of brandy for emergencies.
He unscrewed the top with difficulty and drank the entire contents in quick gulps.
He threw the flask away and began to rub his hands vigorously together until circulation was restored.
He could feel his strength returning; could feel the brandy coursing through his veins, filling him with a warm glow.
Suddenly he crouched as a cry broke the stillness and another cry answered it.
The sounds came from the left this time and were much nearer.
They were closing in!
There was a belt around his waist with holster attached.
He drew out the heavy Colt revolver.
The ice-cold butt burned the skin of his palm like a flame.
This time he was able to make his way up the side of the ditch without much difficulty.
He peered over the top.
The full bright moon and the reflection of the snow made a mockery of the night.
The long line of hedge bordering the next field was a good fifty yards away.
He could see himself floundering across in the moonlight, exposed, a struggling dark blot against the shining whiteness.
An easy target.
But he could not stay here and wait to be captured.
He had to go on.
Gripping the butt of the revolver, he scrambled to his feet and pushed himself forward.
The snow was almost knee-deep; it took him nearly ten minutes to reach the hedge at the other side of the field.
Then he rested for a few minutes and pushed on again.
He was half-way across the next field when they caught sight of him.
There was a cry to halt, then they opened fire, but he was just outside their range; bullets kicked up the snow about five yards away to his left.
He did not pause to rest when he reached the next hedge, but continued on, driving his exhausted body ruthlessly onwards.
But there were no more cries to halt; no more shots.
He had broken through the picquet lines.
He pushed on; the ground was rising; he was almost into the foothills.
He could feel hope returning.
How many more had broken through?
Enough, he hoped, to form several companies and carry on the fight, using guerrilla tactics.
They would wipe out the shame of their ignominious defeat!
He did not see the soldier until he was almost on top of him.
He must have been crouched behind a bank of snow watching him all the time as he came struggling and panting up the long slope.
He stood up, long rifle and bayonet pointing, and challenged him in a frightened voice.
He came to a stumbling halt with the point of the bayonet less than a foot away from his chest.
He stood swaying, almost on the point of collapse, his arms hanging limply by his sides, the revolver dangling from his right hand.
His breath came out in quick tortured gasps.
At first his tired dulled brain could not comprehend what had happened.
Then realisation came seeping in.
Captured — and he had almost made it to safety.
His whole body sagged with despair.
A sob escaped him.
Perhaps it was that that made the soldier lower his rifle, out of a sense of pity.
As the point of the bayonet moved down from the level of his chest he acted without thinking.
He brought up his arm in one swift movement and pulled the trigger.
The revolver bucked and flared and the figure before him leaped and fell back with outflung arms.
But he had not killed him.
As he struggled past the soldier grabbed his ankle.
He snarled with fear and pointed the revolver down at the white blur of the face and fired —
He awoke with a start, the explosion of the revolver ringing in his ears, his heart thumping, beads of perspiration on his forehead, trying to collect his thoughts.
His trouser legs were scorching from the fire and he twisted to one side.
His foot touched the book he had been reading  before he had fallen asleep.
The only sounds in the room were his heavy breathing and the loud ticking of the clock on the mantelpiece.
Ten minutes to nine.
He had been asleep for less than half an hour.
The sound of singing came drifting up from the quays below.
He limped over to the window, pulled the curtains across and looked down.
Crowds of people were coming down the quays, all heading eastwards.
Young people mostly; some were singing and prancing along in the middle of the roadway.
He was puzzled for a moment, then he suddenly remembered with a slight feeling of shock.
Of course— it was New Year's Eve.
They were all going to Christchurch Place.
There they would gather about the old cathedral and sing and dance till midnight when the bells would herald in the New Year.
He had never felt so lonely, so isolated.
Even in prison he had not felt like this.
Alone in one's cell at night, one was always conscious of human life on the other side of the stone wall.
Even to hear the slow, measured tread of the warder in the corridor outside brought an odd feeling of comfort.
He had never felt so abandoned as here at the top of this tall silent house on Usher's Quay.
Something had happened to him after the severance from Father Poole.
The hatred that had motivated him for so long had inexplicably withered and died.
There had been a vacuum for a while until remorse came seeping in.
A memory came back to haunt him: the cold-blooded murder of a soldier on a bleak snow-covered hillside.
The man had lowered his rifle in compassion at his sorry state and he had shot him.
‘God forgive me,’ he whispered, ‘God forgive me.’
There was a pagan belief that the soul of a murdered person never entered Paradise, but wandered the terrestrial regions seeking retribution.
Reason told him that was all nonsense; but reason was being steadily eroded by a terrible unnatural fear over which he was losing all control.
He could hear more singing on the quays below: still more revellers on their way to the cathedral.
The old year was dying.
He thought, I'll be sixty-eight this coming March.
One year nearer the grave.
He was overcome by a feeling of terror.
I'll die unshriven, with the murder of a man on my soul!
I'll be damned for all eternity!
He gripped his arms in fear, his nerves at snapping point.
It was as if his mind was a leaking vessel, his sanity seeping out like water.
I've got to get out of here, he told himself frantically; out, quick, before I go mad!
He grabbed his overcoat which hung on the inside of the door.
He put it on, together with his hat and wrapped a muffler close about his neck.
He descended the stairs slowly in the dark, his hand  holding tightly on to the banister rail.
He could feel the cold of the house and the walls threw back the echoes of his footfalls on the bare stairs.
It was like being inside a tomb.
He pulled the heavy hall-door shut and stood on the steps.
The cold made him gasp; it nipped his cheeks.
It will snow before morning, he told himself.
He could feel it — almost taste it.
But the sky was clear,; stars twinkled.
He walked down the quay and turned into a narrow cobbled street, his head bent, and his hands buried in the pockets of his overcoat.
He paused at Wormwood Gate as a rocket shot up into the night sky and exploded a half-mile away to the east.
He could see the outline of the cathedral on the ridge.
The noise of the crowd surrounding it could be heard even at this distance.
He turned away and headed eastward, keeping to the safety of the deserted side streets.
Unruliness frightened him; he felt so vulnerable in his frailty.
As he turned the corner into Bridgefoot Street he stopped, daunted by the steep slope before him.
He rested for a few minutes, before pushing himself on.
Despite the lateness of the hour, some children were still playing on the footpath.
Ragged slum children, singing their absurd street rhymes.
Lizzie Daly sells fish,
Three ha'pence a dish.
Cut the heads off,
Cut the tails off…
When he reached Thomas Street he backed into a deep doorway to allow the boisterous crowd to pass by.
All Dublin seemed to be heading for Christchurch Place tonight.
The dark bulk of St Catherine's faced him on the other side of the wide road.
He waited until the street was clear of people and traffic, then stepped forward.
He came to a halt in the middle of the road.
It was a hallowed spot.
Here Robert Emmet was executed more than a hundred years ago.
His portrait hung over the fireplace in every tenement room and whitewashed cabin.
The ordinary people kept his memory alive in maudlin ballads.
Bold Robert Emmet, the darlin' of Erin,
Bold Robert Emmet, he died with a smile…
A cynical grunt escaped him.
He died with a smile, did he?
Faith then, the man who wrote that never saw Emmet being executed, or any other man for that matter.
He continued on across the road and down by the side of the church, heading south towards Pimlico, trying to  imagine how it had been on that September day all those years ago.
The Dragoons with swords drawn, sitting stiff-backed on their restless mounts; the noisy rebellious crowd; the pale-faced young man standing on the platform, waiting to die.
Then the drop and the slim, lithe body jerking violently at the end of the rope.
No merciful sudden death for that poor romantic young fool, he thought grimly.
No quick snapping of the neck, only slow strangulation.
The body was still twitching when it was flung on to a table and the head hacked off, blood spurting like a fountain.
It was said that every mangy cur in the neighbourhood gathered in packs after the execution, greedily licking the blood from the cobblestones.
The starry-eyed idealists who start revolutions, he told himself, are incapable of visualising the horrors that lie at the end of them.
He thought of Emmet's followers, twenty-one in all, who were hanged from the shafts of upturned carts in the narrow streets of the Liberties.
Who remembers them?
He shook his head.
No one, he told himself.
They were the forgotten ones like myself.
Father Poole was right.
Rebellions have never succeeded in Ireland; always they have ended in butchery and defeat.
He was astonished at the change in him.
It was as if reason had finally dominated a lifetime of emotion.
He groaned with weary anger.
I've wasted my entire life!
He found himself walking slowly through narrow and murky slum streets flanked by tall tenement houses.
The houses had triangular gables and brought back memories of Rotterdam and Brussels.
The old Huguenot silk-weaving quarter, but the trade was dying and the silk looms were now few.
Groups of men and youths hung about the street corners.
He could sense their apathy and hopelessness as he passed.
Dublin was not an industrialised city like Manchester or Birmingham; the city's industries of brewing and distilling could only absorb a fraction of the labour force.
Here in these slum streets existed an army of the unskilled, all trying to wrest a living anyway they could.
Here was hunger and despair and disease…
He continued down a cobbled footpath towards a pump where a woman was drawing water.
A solitary street-lamp shed feeble green light, leaving most of the street in shadow.
This was Jonathan Swift's Dublin.
The Dean of St Patrick's had strolled through these streets with muddied cloak, doffing his beaver hat in salute to the fond greetings of beggar and artisan.
He wandered aimlessly on from one squalid street to another.
Newmarket, Blackpitts, Long Lane.
He came to a halt and stood staring with nostalgia at the windows of the hospital.
Lights burned dimly in the wards.
Which ward was I in?
Ah, that one on the second floor.
Last window on the right, that's where my bed was.
Wonder who's in it now?
Whoever he is, I envy him, no matter how sick he may be.
He shuffled past the police barracks — formerly the Archbishop's Palace — and turned the corner into the cathedral close.
Silence enveloped him.
He could hear the echoes of his footsteps on the pavement.
Beyond the tall railings was the churchyard, the tombstones a ghostly grey in the starlit night.
Opposite, the Deanery.
Only one window showed light behind a lowered red blind.
Had that been Swift's study?
He could picture him hunched over his desk, busily writing…forever writing.
Never sentimental; always satirical.
Drapier's Letters; A Tale of a Tub; Gulliver's Travels…
He paused outside the side entrance of the cathedral.
He sleeps in there now.
His beloved Stella also.
Companion?
Wife?
Mistress?
No one will ever know for sure.
Swift took that secret with him to the grave.
In Patrick Street the pubs had closed, but the ejected patrons still clustered about outside.
Voices were raised in song and there were cries of ‘Happy New Year!’
He made his way through them and turned into steep Hanover Lane.
He mounted the slope with effort, breathing hard.
He felt exhausted.
I must have been walking for nearly an hour, he thought.
With luck I may be able to sleep tonight, without dreaming, without lying awake in sweating fear, listening to the sounds creeping up the house.
When he reached Francis Street he paused to catch his breath.
There was a bitter cold wind arising.
He looked up.
Dark heavy clouds were crawling across the sky, blotting out the stars.
As he watched, the first few flakes of snow came swirling down.
He pulled the collar of his overcoat up about his ears and crossed the road, entering a maze of narrow, ruined streets.
His pace slackened when he reached Meath Street.
He was on his way home.
Fear returned and his mouth went dry.
Ten minutes from now he would be climbing the stairs in the dark.
Who knows what would be waiting there?
Perhaps tonight, in these last dying hours of the old year, he would show himself.
‘0 Christ,’ he whimpered, shuddering.
He forced himself on.
There was nausea in his stomach and sweat was gathering on his forehead.
It was an effort to put one foot before the other.
The church loomed above him.
Suddenly his legs buckled and he went staggering sideways against the railings.
He clutched at a rail and held on, heart thumping, the blood pounding in his ears, his mind wailing for mercy.
A bell tolled above his head.
Only then did he realise he was outside a church — Father Poole's church.
Acting on impulse he pushed in the gate.
Holding on to the railings, he moved down the passage between the church and the presbytery.
When he reached the door he pulled on the bell and waited.
The snow was smothering everything in whiteness, deadening all sound.
After a minute he heard footsteps, and the door was pulled open.
A young priest faced him.
He was of medium height and of slim build, with a pale sensitive face.
‘Yes, what is it?’ he asked.
Myles opened his mouth, but all he could utter was an unintelligible croak.
His throat felt parched and raw.
Yes, what is it?’ the priest asked again, a note of impatience in his voice.
‘Father Poole,’ Myles managed to utter hoarsely.
A snowflake landed on his lower lip and immediately dissolved.
The priest shook his head.
‘No, I'm sorry.
Father Poole is not available.
Is it urgent?
A sick call?
I'll go myself.’
Myles shook his head.
‘No, no, no sick call,’ he said, regretting now he had rung the bell.
‘It's of no consequence.
Just tell him Myles Burke called,’ he said and moved away.
He heard the door close behind him, but just as he reached the gate it was hurriedly opened again and a voice called, ‘Just a moment!
Please wait!’
He turned, watching the priest coming towards him through the falling snow.
He had put on his overcoat and was pulling the collar up about his ears.
As he came into the light of the street-lamp Myles could see an exasperated look on his face.
‘You did say your name was Myles Burke?’
Myles nodded.
‘Father Poole became very excited when I mentioned your name, and very annoyed when I told him I had let you go.
Was he expecting you?’
‘No.’
‘Odd, somehow I got the impression he was.
No matter.
Come along.’
The priest led him down a passage, knocked and opened the door and entered the room.
Seconds later he poked his head through the doorway and beckoned.
Myles walked forward reluctantly.
Father Poole sat beside a crackling fire, his breviary on his lap, watching.
As Myles came into view, his hat in his hand, all arrogance gone, he thought, All praise to almighty God, he's come at last.
‘Come in, Myles, to the fire and don't be standin' out there in the cold.
Come in, man.’
Myles edged in, hands twisting the brim of his hat, while the young priest stood at the door looking curiously on.
‘Forgive the lateness of the hour, Father,’ Myles mumbled apologetically.
Father Poole pointed to the chair opposite him on the other side of the fireplace.
‘Sit down there, Myles, and thaw out.
Man, dear, yeh must be perished with the cold.’
He hoped the tremor in his voice went unnoticed, for he was appalled at Myles's appearance.
The grey skin; the red-rimmed eyes; the sunken cheeks.
The eyes had a darting, hunted look.
Father Poole turned his attention to the curate standing by the door.
‘Robert, two glasses of brandy, like a good lad.’
‘Now, Father,’ the young priest protested, ‘you know how I disapprove of —’
‘For medicinal purposes, Robert,’ Father Poole interrupted.
‘When you reach our age, you'll know what it feels like to have frost in yer bones.’
The young priest poured brandy from a decanter and handed each man a glass.
‘Leave us now, Robert,’ Father Poole said.
‘Only for a short while, Father,’ the young priest rejoined.
‘It's very late.’
Father Poole sighed as he closed the door.
‘That's Father Kinsella, one of my two curates,’ he explained.
‘D'yeh know what it is, Myles.
I'm Parish Priest and yet the pair of them treat me like a child.’
He raised his glass.
‘Here's wishin' you a Happy New Year, Myles,’ he said and raised the glass to his lips.
Myles did not drink.
He held the glass between his hands, staring shamefacedly down at it.
‘You're making it very hard for me, Father,’ he muttered.
‘How so, Myles?’
Father Poole inquired, placing the empty glass on a low table beside him.
‘Your kindness, your hospitality.
When I think of the abuse I gave you…‘
Father Poole raised a hand.
‘Ahhh, will yeh stop.
Sure I was just as bad.
Forget it now and drink yer brandy.
Go on, 'twill do yeh good.’
Myles drank slowly.
Father Poole gazed thoughtfully at him, noticing the way his hand shook.
Myles drained the glass.
A full two minutes passed before he spoke.
‘Father Poole, you can't imagine the hell I've been through these past few weeks.’
‘If there is anythin' troublin' you, Myles,’ Father Poole said, ‘I would suggest you talk about it.
It doesn't do, yeh know, to bottle things up.’
Myles raised his head and stared at him with wide terror-filled eyes.
‘Oh, God, how I fear him,’ he whispered.
‘If he would only leave me in peace.’
Suddenly his face crumpled and tears sprang to his eyes.
He bowed his head.
A sob tore free.
‘Fear who, Myles?’
Father Poole asked with concern.
‘The man I killed,’ Myles replied brokenly.
‘The man I murdered.’
‘You murdered a man?’
Father Poole gasped, horrified.
‘God between us and all harm!
When did this happen?’
‘When?’
Myles passed a hand dazedly across his forehead.
‘Oh, a long time ago.
After the Tallaght fight.’
‘The man was a soldier?’
‘Yes.’
‘Of course, in battle, one has to defend —’
‘It wasn't like that.
The man had pity for me and I shot him!’
He paused.
‘Now, at night, in that big old house, I can sense his presence.
Sometimes I think I can see him.’
‘Nerves,’ Father Poole stated firmly, ‘just nerves — and an overwrought imagination.
My advice is to see a doctor, Myles.
A good tonic can work wonders.’
‘I don't want to die in a state of mortal sin!
I don't want to die with a man's death staining my soul!
I want God's forgiveness for the crime I committed!’
Father Poole was startled by the expression of terror on the face and the rising hysteria in the voice.
He raised his hand.
‘Calm yourself, Myles, for heaven's sake!’
‘I want to confess!
I want your absolution!’
Father Poole nodded.
‘Yes, yes, but calm yourself first.’
He stood up and took his stole from the shelf where he always kept it.
He placed it around his neck and sat down again covering his eyes with his hand.
This was the moment he had been waiting for since his ordination.
No longer need he envy his long-dead friend, Martin Fenlon, for having saved the soul of an unrepentant sinner.
The envy was dead now.
Victory was his.
He had achieved his life's ambition.
He waited patiently.
Myles began to talk in a slow calm voice.
Father Poole listened, now and then muttering a few words of encouragement whenever the voice faltered.
‘God is all merciful, Myles,’ Father Poole said when Myles had finished.
‘He understands your agony of mind.
All He wants is for you to be truly sorry.
And you are sorry, aren't you, Myles?
For all your sins?’
Myles nodded.
‘Yes, Father.
Truly sorry.’
‘Then that's all God wants.
He wants you to come back to Him, contrite, beggin' forgiveness.
Like the prodigal son.’
He paused.
‘Say an Act of Contrition now, and I'll give you absolution.’
Myles looked at him helplessly.
‘I'm sorry, Father, I've forgotten.
It's been so long.’
‘Never mind,’ Father Poole assured him.
‘Just repeat after me…’
Outside the snow beat against the window-panes.
Above their heads the clock ticked away the last thirty minutes of the old year.
Father Poole closed his eyes and joined his hands, Latin phrases stumbling over his tongue.
Myles stared in wonder at the beads of sweat standing out on his forehead.
The mumblings ceased and Father Poole opened his eyes and smiled.
‘You are absolved, Myles.
Your sins are forgiven.’
‘I feel so much relieved, Father.’
‘You have made an old man very happy, Myles.’
‘Pray for me, Father.’
‘I've never stopped prayin' for you, Myles.
And I'll pray for him, the man you killed.’
‘And for all the other men I killed.’
Father Poole stared at him for a long while.
The clock ticked away in the silence.
‘All the other men you killed?’
Myles nodded.
‘But I never felt remorse about them the same way I did about him.
I slew them in the heat of battle.
It was kill or be killed.’
‘What battle was that?’
Father Poole asked dazedly.
A feeling of disquiet was beginning to stir in his brain.
‘Oh, there were quite a few.
Bull Run, Fair Oaks, Antietam.
But the bloodiest of all was Fredericksburg.
Have you ever heard of the Battle of Fredericksburg, Father?’
Father Poole shook his head.
‘Garret Lysaght covered himself with glory in that battle, leading his men in one final suicidal charge.
Less than a hundred men took part in that assault.
Only two survived — Garret Lysaght and myself.
Oh yes,’ he nodded in affirmation, taking the stunned look on Father Poole's face for disbelief.
‘When night fell, Garret and myself managed to crawl back to our lines carrying the colours with us, even though both of us were wounded.
The military histories never mention my name though.
I am always referred to as Lysaght's ‘second-in-command’.'
Father Poole raised a trembling hand to his forehead.
Oh God, he thought, how could I have been so stupid, so blind.
He had been dealing with human nature all his life; he should have been able to  recognise the symptoms before now.
The moroseness; the sudden upsurges of rage.
What was the name of that word mentioned in that handbook on psychology — the one in the chapter on sudden changes of personality?
Schiz…schiz…
But he was too upset to remember clearly.
He lowered his hand and stared at the man sitting facing him.
So relaxed now; yet only a short while ago he had been in the depths of despair.
‘…we were transferred to a hospital in Washington.
Later, we were brought to the White House and personally decorated by Abraham Lincoln himself.
You have heard of Abraham Lincoln, Father?
Why of course you have.
The President of the United States of America.’
Father Poole shook his head and sighed.
The poor creature, he thought, the poor creature.
The only way he could escape from the harsh realities of life was to lose himself in books, allowing his imagination to take over, seeing himself as the characters he read about.
‘…
I met Garret Lysaght in Paris many years later.
He planned to attack Pentonville Prison in London and release the Fenian prisoners there…’
No longer is he able to differentiate between fantasy and reality, Father Poole told himself.
He could feel tears pricking his eyes.
The poor creature, the poor creature.
‘…but we were betrayed by a British Secret Service agent posing as a Fenian officer.
Arrests were made all over London.
I was caught like a rat in a trap in my lodgings.
I was forced to shoot it out with detectives before being overpowered.’
Father Poole uttered a low groan.
Sweet God, he thought, from where did he get that from?
Some trashy novel about spies and anarchists?
‘…
Then someone took a grip on my hair and pulled.
I was dragged face downward across the floor and on to the landing and then down the stairs…’
Father Poole moved restlessly, agitated.
I can't listen to any more of this, he thought wildly.
He was overcome by a feeling of anger.
God had played a cruel joke on him.
His eyes filled with tears, tears of rage and frustration.
Myles ceased talking.
‘Why are you crying, Father?’ he asked in astonishment.
Father Poole tried to smile through his tears.
‘Just tired,’ he whispered, ‘just tired.’
Myles rose to his feet.
‘Forgive me, Father.
I did not mean to keep you so —’
There was a sharp knock, and the door was pushed open.
Father Kinsella strode into the room, rasping with annoyance.
‘Really, I must protest!’
Father Poole covered his eyes with his hand, not wanting his curate to see his tears.
Myles began to apologise.
‘My fault entirely.
I did not realise how late it was.’
Father Kinsella looked at Father Poole, lying slumped in his chair, his hand still covering his eyes.
‘There you are, you see,’ he exclaimed in a shrill voice, ‘he's overtaxed himself!
I should not have allowed you to see him!’
‘I'll go at once,’ Myles said.
He bent down towards Father Poole.
‘Goodbye, Father.
We'll meet again soon.’
Father Poole raised a hand feebly in farewell, and let it drop back into his lap.
Father Kinsella stood in the open doorway, looking up at the sky.
‘You're in luck,’ he said to Myles, ‘it has stopped snowing.’
He gave a curt nod to Myles's goodnight and closed the door.
Myles crunched his way homeward.
The streets and roofs of the houses were covered with a thick mantle of snow.
It gave a curious dignity to the tall crumbling tenements, covering the squalor and ugliness with purifying whiteness.
He too felt cleansed.
For the first time in his life he was aware of a blissful inner peace.
He was no longer afraid to go home.
Father Poole and his prayers had exorcised that particular fear forever.
The vision of Father Poole's weeping exhausted figure came back to him.
Burdened with the weight of my sins, he told himself grimly.
Just as he reached the bottom of the hill a church bell began to ring out.
More bells joined in, this time from the top of the hill behind him.
He stopped to listen.
There were churches and cathedrals all around this spot which once had been the centre of the of mediaeval town.
A ship's siren moaned from down river.
Then all the bells joined in with wild abandon, ringing joyfully and merrily, welcoming in the New Year.
Chapter Seven
I
‘God save all here!’
Father Devlin boomed, taking off his tall silk hat as he strode into the wide, big, lamp-lit kitchen of the O'Malley farmhouse.
A tall, middle-aged man followed him.
He had a narrow mournful face, tapering to a long pointed chin.
His iron-grey hair was parted in the middle and he had the mutton-chop whiskers of a bygone age.
Bull O'Malley and his wife rose from their chairs before the fire, Peg holding a basket containing wool and knitting needles.
‘Why, Father Devlin!’
Bull O'Malley exclaimed.
‘And Malachi!
Well, well!
Come over here to the fire.
This is a pleasant surprise.
Peg, fetch the whiskey.’
Father Devlin lifted his hands in protest.
‘Now, now, now…
Please, Mr O'Malley, don't go to any trouble on our account.’
‘Ah, wisha, Father,’ Bull O'Malley said in a grieved voice, ‘what trouble.
Here now, let me help ye off with yer coat and hat.
Come on now, Malachi, don't stand on ceremony here at home.’
Father Devlin, divested of his overcoat, seated his bulk on the chair facing the fire.
He was a powerfully built man, over six feet tall with sleek black hair greying at the temples.
The outward tips of his bushy eyebrows were tilted upwards slightly, giving him a demonic appearance.
There was a striking similarity between himself and Bull O'Malley.
Both were tall beefy men with the heavy, strong-boned features of the Irish peasant.
A stranger would have taken them for brothers.
‘'TIS a cold night to be travellin' the roads, Father,’ Bull O'Malley said, sitting down beside him.
Courtesy forbade him from asking the reason for this unexpected visit.
Father Devlin called twice a year to collect the Easter and Christmas dues.
Malachi was a more frequent visitor.
But the two of them together?
‘'TIS, 'tis,’ Father Devlin agreed.
‘But I like to visit my parishioners, cold weather notwithstanding.’
Malachi Drennan sat down beside the wide fireplace.
‘Father Devlin's trap broke an axle,’ he explained to Bull O'Malley.
‘It did, it did,’ Father Devlin said, nodding his head.
‘And ‘tis a great inconvenience.’
Bull O'Malley clicked his tongue in sympathy.
‘Will it take long to have it fixed?’ he asked.
‘I'll have it by the end of the week, I've been told,’ Father Devlin replied.
‘In the meantime, Malachi here has kindly offered to drive me in his own trap anywhere I wish to go.’
Malachi lowered his head in embarrassment.
‘Only doin' my Christian duty, Father,’ he murmured humbly.
Father Devlin clapped him on the shoulder with a large heavy hand.
‘And it does ye every credit, Malachi me son,’ he boomed, ‘indeed it does.’
Peg came in carrying a tray with three glasses of whiskey.
She went from one man to the other.
Father Devlin raised his glass in a toast.
‘And here are my best wishes to the O'Malley family.
May they remain in good health and continue to prosper.’
He turned his head.
‘And to you, too, Malachi.’
The two men raised their glasses in salute towards the priest and sipped reverently.
Peg sat down, picked up her basket and resumed her knitting.
Father Devlin drained his glass, smacking his lips appreciatively.
‘And where,’ he asked, ‘are the family?’
‘Sonny has set the date for next year,’ Bull O'Malley said.
‘Easter Monday.
It's yerself will be marryin' them, I hope, Father.’
‘Indeed and I will,’ Father Devlin declared, face beaming, ‘and with pleasure.’
Malachi Drennan leaned forward with a sly smile on his face.
‘Faith, and I'm thinkin', he sniggered, ‘Luke won't be long after him.’
Bull O'Malley chuckled and drained his glass.
‘Indeed and I think ye may be right, Malachi,’ he said, coughing a little as the whiskey burned his throat.
‘It's about time those two lads of mine settled down and started to raise families.
The testin' of a man is when he has the responsibility of a wife and children.’
Father Devlin nodded in approval.
‘True, true.’
‘Ye've two fine lads there, Barney,’ Malachi said, addressing himself to Bull O'Malley.
Father Devlin nodded in agreement.
‘Two fine upstanding young men,’ he said.
‘A credit to their parish — and to their parents,’ he added.
‘They're hardworkin' lads, Father,’ Bull O'Malley said, ‘both of them.’
‘Indeed and I've heard great accounts of them,’ Father Devlin said.
‘It's a pity the other young men of the parish don't follow their example.
Slack-mouthed idlers most of them, I'm sorry to say.
I see them in the village day after day, standin' outside the public houses with their hands in their pockets, passin' remarks on the people passing by.’
His face darkened with anger.
‘D'ye know what it is,’ he growled, ‘a few years in the army would do some of those boyos a power of good.
And a harsh taskmaster of a sergeant over them.
Man, then they'd hop to it!’
He twisted round to Bull O'Malley.
‘Is that fellow Gallagher still workin' for ye?’ he asked sourly.
Bull O'Malley nodded.
‘He is, Father,’ he said.
Father Devlin faced the fire again, scowling.
‘That scoundrel sets a bad example for the other young men of the parish.
He's a trouble maker!
Always was and always will be.
Whenever I meet him in the village,’ he said bitterly, ‘which is not very often, I'm glad to say, he walks right past me without even raisin' his cap in respect…’
‘Oh my,’ Bull O'Malley murmured in sympathy.
‘…without even as much as touchin' the peak!
Why, once he looked me right in the face and sneered.
Actually sneered!’
‘What class of a Christian would ye call that!’
Malachi exclaimed.
‘Of course he was away in England for a good many years,’ Bull O'Malley offered by way of explanation.
‘Ah well,’ Malachi sniffed loftily, ‘that explains a lot.’
Peg ceased her knitting and raised her head.
‘More whiskey, Father?
Mr Drennan?’
Both men looked at her in mild surprise.
Her quietness and unobtrusiveness had made them forget her presence.
Father Devlin raised his hands in mock horror.
‘Heavens no, Mrs O'Malley!’ he exclaimed.
‘Ye'd have that young curate of mine sniffin' the air like a hound.
He'd probably think I was after spendin' the entire night in a shebeen.’
Bull O'Malley and Malachi laughed.
Then Father Devlin looked about him.
‘And where is the girl?’ he asked.
‘Out visitin' friends, Father,’ Bull O'Malley answered.
‘How old is she now?’
Bull O'Malley scratched his head.
‘She'll be twenty-two in…’
He turned to his wife for confirmation.
‘April, isn't it?’
Peg O'Malley nodded.
‘And is she keepin' company?’
Father Devlin asked.
‘She is not, then, Father,’ Bull O'Malley stated emphatically.
‘Has she ever mentioned anyone — men, I mean?’
‘She never did, Father.’
‘It could be that the girl has a vocation.
Tell me, has she ever talked about becomin' a nun?,
Bull O'Malley's mouth dropped open.
‘A nun!
Una?’
Then gasped, and started to laugh as though Father Devlin had made a joke, but ceased abruptly at the stern look on Father Devlin's face.
‘Forgive me, Father, but the thought of Una becomin' a nun…
Not that she doesn't take her religion seriously,’ he added hastily, ‘she does.
But I know me own daughter well enough to know that she doesn't want to lock herself inside a convent for the rest of her life.
She's too high-spirited a girl for that.’
‘High-spirited.
Hmmm.’
Father Devlin frowned, shook his head and sighed.
‘And she's nearly twenty-two, you say.
A full-grown woman.’
He shot a reproving glance at Bull O'Malley.
‘It doesn't do, ye know,’ he said sternly, ‘to let the years slip past like this.
I don't approve of late marriages, especially for women.
A woman should be married young and have all her children before she's forty.’
Bull O'Malley gave a shrug.
‘I suppose you're right, Father.’
‘There's no supposin' about it!’
Father Devlin snapped.
‘I am right!’
Bull O'Malley could feel his temper rising.
If it had been any priest other than Father Devlin he would have told him to go to hell and mind his own business.
But he knew Father Devlin would never tolerate such talk from any of his parishioners.
He was a good man to have for a friend but a dangerous one to have for an enemy.
‘The fact is, Father,’ he said, trying to keep the anger out of his voice, ‘there's not a man in this parish I'd allow my daughter to marry!’
Father Devlin opened his mouth to say something, but Bull O'Malley raised his hand in objection.
‘Now hear me out, Father.
Una has a good home here and she wants for nothin'.
She gets anythin' she asks for: clothes, money — anythin'.
I spoil her, I admit it.’
He thrust his face aggressively towards Father Devlin, who sat looking quietly and steadfastly at him, his hands joined over his paunch.
‘Now you tell me, Father, what man in this parish could give her the comforts she's used to?
Eh?
Could he give her the best of food or pay for a doctor if she fell sick or buy her fine clothes or anythin' she fancies?
Answer me that.’
‘Not very many, I have to admit, Mr O'Malley,’ Father Devlin replied.
‘Them and their few miserable acres,’ Bull O'Malley went on contemptuously.
‘Paupers, that's all they are!
Aye, and I daresay  there's quite a few would give their right arm to marry Una — and the dowry that goes with her.
But by God,’ he added grimly, ‘let one of them approach me and I'll take the pitchfork to them!’
‘Now, now, there's no need —’ Father Devlin began.
‘There's that Brady girl that married the Finnegan fella,’ Bull O'Malley rasped.
‘Now there's an example for ye!
I remember that girl when she was the grandest lookin' creature on two feet.
Then she married Finnegan.
A bog farmer with a few sickly cows.
Now look at her!
Livin' on the edge of starvation with two small children!
Goin' around practically in rags!
Workin' on that small farm from mornin' to night!
And Finnegan spendin' what little money he has on drink, rollin' home at all hours of the night from the pubs in the village, drunk as a lord.
And to think his wife is the same age as Una!
My God!
The woman is only twenty-two.
To look at her now ye would take her for fifty-two.
And ye are wonderin' why Una is not married.
Well, that's the reason!
Who around here could give her the life and comfort she gets here?
Who?
Answer me that if ye can, Father Devlin.’
There was a brief silence.
Then Malachi Drennan cleared his throat and  croaked , ‘I could, Barney.’
The quick deft hands abruptly ceased their knitting.
Peg glanced sharply across at Malachi who was staring intently at her husband, two bright spots of red on his pale cheeks.
Bull O'Malley gaped back at him as Father Devlin sat in silence staring at the fire.
Eventually Bull O'Malley found his voice.
‘You , Malachi?’
He forced a smile on his face, prepared to accept Malachi's assertion as a joke.
He even tried to laugh.
‘Why, you're nearly as old as meself.’
Malachi straightened up in his chair, an aggrieved look on his face.
‘Well now, Barney, ye may think yerself an old man but I don't think of meself as such!’ he exclaimed testily.
‘Why, I can reap a field with the best of them.
I'm up at the crack of dawn every mornin' milkin' the cows, attendin' to the poultry, sowin', reapin'.
Pick any two young men ye fancy and by God I'll work them into the ground, so I will!’
‘But Una is not quite twenty-two,’ Bull O'Malley protested.
‘And I'm fifty-six years of age and I say what of it,’ Malachi retorted.
‘I have me health, thank God.
Aye, and I have all me hair and most of me teeth and that's more than many men ten years younger can boast of!’
Before Bull O'Malley could get a chance to reply, Father Devlin raised a conciliatory hand and waved it like a flag of truce.
‘Now men, men,’ he said, laying a hand on Bull O'Malley's shoulder,
‘I can understand your surprise at Mr Drennan askin' for the hand of your daughter.
It's a natural reaction.
If I was not a priest and if I was in your position, I imagine I would feel the same.
But I don't think Mr Drennan…’ he shot a quick look in Malachi's direction, before turning a sympathetic face to Bull O'Malley ‘I don't think Mr Drennan intended that he should ask for your daughter and expect you to make a decision on the spur of the moment.
Isn't that so, Malachi?’
Malachi gave a dumb nod.
‘No, no, no,’ Father Devlin continued, ‘nothing like that at all.
He is merely makin' a formal proposal of marriage and is simply askin' you as the girl's father to think about it.
Take all the time you want.
There's no hurry.’
Bull O'Malley's heavy eyebrows were drawn down in a confused frown.
His agitation was plain as he rubbed the palm of one beefy hand against the back of the other, as if he were suffering from a skin irritation.
‘Well, as you say, Father,’ he mumbled, avoiding Father Devlin's penetrating stare, ‘I'll have to think about it.’
‘Of course you'll have to,’ Father Devlin boomed cheerfully, ‘it's only to be expected.’
‘'TIS only the difference in the ages,’ Bull O'Malley persisted.
Father Devlin heaved a sigh.
‘Do ye know what it is, Mr O'Malley,’ he said, ‘I seriously think we attach too much importance to this question of ages between man and wife.
I really do.
Take for instance a young couple just married.
For a short while it's all sunshine and roses.
Then the children start to arrive and the husband has to stay at home at nights with the wife and help look after them.
Gradually, all kinds of little problems begin to crop up.
Responsibility after responsibility is laid on the husband's shoulders.
Then the burden becomes too much for him and he becomes restless.
He begins to long for the happy carefree days when he was single.
And that, by the Lord Harry…’ he slammed a fist into the open palm of his left hand, ‘is how all the trouble starts!’
Then he spread his arms wide.
‘Now a mature man would not do any of these things,’ he said.
‘He would not, faith.
He would be steady and sensible and considerate and would not have that rovin' gleam in his eye.
His wife and family would come first.
And that's what every household needs — a steady, sensible hardworkin' man.
Someone like Malachi here.’
‘Aye, I know what ye mean, Father,’ Bull O'Malley said.
‘But Una is of age and it's she who will decide who she wants to marry.
With my  blessin' of course,’ he added hastily.
‘She may be of age, but I won't allow her to marry someone who can't provide for her!’
‘Yes, yes,’ Father Devlin nodded, ‘so ye told me.’
He rubbed his chin reflectively.
‘But do ye really think,’ he said after a short pause, ‘it's wise to allow a young person to make a decision of that sort?
Marriage is a very important step to take.
It requires prudence and foresight, qualities, alas, sadly lackin' in so many young people.’
He laid a hand on Bull O'Malley's sleeve.
‘The best marriages of all were the made marriages,’ he said authoritatively.
‘And yet people scoff nowadays at the old traditional ways, sayin' that the day of the match-maker is gone.
Tommy rot!’ he snorted.
‘Drivel!
Tell me, Mr O'Malley, did ye ever hear of any of those marriages turnin' out bad?
Did ye now?
Answer me truthfully.’
He glared as if an answer to the contrary would be taken as heresy.
He gave a triumphant bellow as Bull O'Malley shook his head.
‘Of course ye didn't!
And I never did either.
And the reason why the made marriages were happy ones is because the people who arranged them were mature level-headed people.’
Bull O'Malley suppressed a sigh, and stared gloomily at the fire.
There was no point in arguing any longer.
Father Devlin had an answer for everything.
Peg sat rigid her basket on her lap, knitting forgotten, keeping in check the smouldering anger inside her.
She knew that Father Devlin and Malachi Drennan had rehearsed carefully before coming here.
Her sidelong glance had caught a quick exchange of looks between them as if Father Devlin were silently saying, ‘I've done my share; now it's your turn.’
She waited.
Malachi cleared his throat.
‘I have a great regard for the girl, Barney,’ he said.
‘I want ye to know that.’
Bull O'Malley merely nodded.
‘She would never lack anythin' she desires,’ Malachi went on.
‘Money, clothes…’
Bull O'Malley grunted.
‘She would never have to lift a hand to do an ounce of work — not as much as wash a cup.
There would be servants to do all that.’
‘Why, the girl would have the life of a lady,’ Father Devlin said.
‘She would, Father, she would,’ Malachi responded eagerly.
He took a deep breath.
‘D'ye know,’ he ventured cautiously, ‘if the marriage ever did take place, all this part of Mayo would belong to the O'Malleys and the Drennans.
If I should have children, all my land would go to them — your grandchildren, Barney.’
He looked towards Peg, who was staring at him with undisguised loathing.
He turned his head hastily away.
There was a long, awkward silence.
Father Devlin decided this was the time to be mute and neutral.
He sat looking at the fire with lowered eyelids, a contented expression on his face, looking like a big overfed cat.
Malachi could feel beads of sweat on his forehead.
He had played all his cards but one — his last and best.
‘If your daughter should ever consent to be my wife, Barney,’ he said, ‘I would be willin' to sell seventy acres of my land to you — but only to you.’
He knew the power Bull O'Malley had over his children.
He knew he was forcing his two sons into loveless marriages with the Costello sisters so that they could gain the Costello acres.
He knew Una O'Malley would never marry him unless she was forced to do so by her father.
Therefore he had to bribe Bull O'Malley, but the bribe had to be big enough and tempting enough for him to be unable to resist it.
Peg O'Malley watched her husband apprehensively.
She cherished a forlorn hope that he would curse Malachi Drennan for a damned lecher and order him and Father Devlin from the house.
She gave a low moan of despair as Bull O'Malley spoke.
‘Which seventy acres are ye talkin' about, Malachi?’
Malachi licked his lips.
‘The southern part of me farm borderin' the Westport road.
Between the village and the river.’
Bull O'Malley stared at him in astonishment.
Father Devlin took out his watch and looked at it.
‘Good heavens!’ he exclaimed.
‘Is that the hour it's at?’
He put the watch back in his waistcoat pocket and rose to his feet.
‘I greatly fear, Malachi,’ he boomed, ‘we've worn out our welcome.
We're keepin' Mr O'Malley and his good lady from their beds.’
‘No indeed,’ Bull O'Malley protested, ‘yerself and Malachi are welcome to stay as long as ye like.’
He followed them out.
Malachi climbed into the trap and took the reins.
Father Devlin got in alongside him.
Then Father Devlin placed a hand on Bull O'Malley's shoulder and lowered his head towards him.
‘I'm glad we've had this little talk, Mr O'Malley,’ he said in a low voice.
‘I hope ye'll give it plenty of thought.’
Bull O'Malley nodded.
‘And I'm doin' this just as much for the girl as for Malachi,’ Father Devlin continued.
‘I want ye to know that.
It's important that ye understand.’
Bull O'Malley nodded again.
‘I do, Father, I do.’
Malachi clucked his tongue, shook the reins and the mare, happy to  be moving again after standing in the cold for so long, trotted briskly away.
Bull O'Malley closed the door and walked back into the kitchen where Peg still sat on the chair, holding the basket on her lap.
‘Not a word about any of this to the lads or Una,’ Bull O'Malley said.
‘Especially Una.’
‘She will hear about it sooner or later,’ Peg replied.
‘Well, when she does hear about it,’ Bull O'Malley snapped, ‘'twill be from me and only me!
So ye keep yer bloody mouth shut!’
She glared up at him.
‘Your not going to encourage her to marry that old goat?’
‘Of course not!’ he answered hotly, but she could detect the lack of conviction in his voice.
She said no more.
A little later she lay in bed beside her snoring husband, staring into the darkness.
She was unable to sleep.
She could hear voices and movements in the kitchen below.
Una had arrived home first, followed by Luke and Sonny.
She knew Una had been with Con Gallagher, not with friends as her father and half-brothers thought.
Una confided all her secrets to her.
She would tell Una about the visit of Father Devlin and Malachi Drennan.
Malachi Drennan could not sleep either.
He lay awake in the big double bed where for sixteen years he had striven desperately to create the heirs to inherit his many rich acres, but there had been no children.
He did not worry too much in those early years of his married life, telling himself that some women were slow to conceive, but after twelve years and his wife still childless, he had to accept the painful fact that she never would have any.
The thought drove him to despair and drink.
He was the last of his line.
There would be no one to carry on the Drennan name, no one to inherit his land.
When he died the O'Malleys and the scruff from the hills would fight like tinkers for possession, dividing up the land generations of Drennans had fought and died for — had even apostatised for.
He shifted restlessly on the bed, thinking of what would happen if he should die without issue.
When his wife died he began to look around for another; someone who would give him the children he needed.
But there were few marriageable girls left.
Carewstown had suffered like every other parish in Mayo from emigration.
Each year saw the exodus of the young to the El Dorado they called America.
The few that were left he had rejected after investigating them and their backgrounds.
One belonged to a family with a long history of ill-health; another was a slattern with a fondness for the bottle; yet another had a family who had a habit of  making other people's homes their own.
He had crossed them off one by one until there was no one left but Una O'Malley.
But she was unobtainable.
Bull O'Malley and his sons doted upon her, treating her like a queen and letting no man near her.
This made him desire her all the more.
Whenever he visited the O'Malleys he found himself secretly staring at her, letting his eyes roam over her full breasts and wide hips, gauging her breeding possibilities as he would a heifer at a fair.
At nights he imagined she was beside him in bed, naked and wanton, submitting eagerly to his advances.
He had had to confess his carnal thoughts to Father Devlin and had been severely censured.
Perhaps that was why Father Devlin had volunteered to act as match-maker, preferring to have him married rather than have him fornicate, as he had in the past, with the tinker women passing through the district.
‘Remember Saint Paul's advice to the unmarried, Malachi.
‘But if ye do not have self-control, let ye marry, for it is better to marry than to burn.’’
But seventy acres!
He winced.
That was nearly one-third of his holding, but if he wanted Una O'Malley that was the price he would have to pay.
And she would marry him — Bull O'Malley would see to that.
He had seen the look of greed on Bull O'Malley's face and he smiled to himself in the dark.
II
They sat at the kitchen table sipping tea, waiting.
Luke and Sonny had taken off their jackets and high hard collars and now sat with their shirt sleeves rolled up, the noon sun shining through the windows warming their backs.
They could hear Doctor McCann moving about in Una's bedroom overhead.
‘Maybe it was somethin' she had for breakfast,’ Sonny said.
Peg, sitting at the head of the table holding a cup between her hands, nodded.
‘Maybe.’
They had been about to leave for Mass when Una had suddenly taken ill.
Sonny, alarmed at the deathly pallor of his half-sister's face, had jumped into the trap and had driven furiously to the village for the doctor.
Luke lit a cigarette.
‘She hasn't been lookin' too well lately,’ he murmured.
Peg closed her eyes.
Oh God, she thought, that this should happen now and himself away.
Why didn't Una tell me?
Was it because she was ashamed?
Did she think I wouldn't understand?
She sighed, and wondered if all she had done to help the young couple could possibly have been worth it.
But then she remembered how they would look at each other, the tenderness in Con's face as he gently held Una in his arms mirrored by the shining happiness in Una.
Oh yes, it had all been worth it.
They heard the door close and the heavy clump of feet on the stairs and rose to their feet as Doctor McCann stepped into the kitchen.
He was a tall heavy-set man of about sixty, bald, with a brick-red face and a walrus moustache.
He stood looking at them in silence, his leather bag in his hand, tweed suit smelling strongly of pipe tobacco.
‘Well?’
Luke asked.
Doctor McCann shrugged his shoulders.
‘Nothing to be unduly alarmed about,’ he said in his clipped Northern accent.
‘What's wrong with her?’
Luke asked impatiently.
The Doctor ignored him and turned his attention to Peg.
‘Your daughter is pregnant, ma'am,’ he said quietly.
He waited for her reaction, anticipating the floor of tears and the hysterics.
Her calmness surprised him.
He pursed his lips thoughtfully.
You knew all along, he thought.
‘What's that ye said?’
Luke hissed.
The Doctor turned to face him.
Luke's face was ashen.
Sonny stood behind him, his mouth open.
‘I said the girl is pregnant,’ he replied.
‘Two months, I would say.’
‘Yer wrong!’
Sonny cried wildly.
‘Ye've made a mistake!’
Doctor McCann turned an exasperated face away and addressed himself to Peg.
‘And where's himself?’ he inquired.
‘In Dublin,’ she replied in a low voice.
‘He won't be back till Friday.’
Luke suddenly strode forward, brushing past the doctor, making for the stairs.
Doctor McCann grabbed him by the arm and held him.
‘Where are you going?’
Luke turned a venomous face to him.
‘Upstairs.
I want to have a word with that…that…’
‘You will not go near her!’
Doctor McCann released his grip and blocked the way to the stairs.
He knew how to deal with Luke.
Thrusting his big red face forward he jabbed Luke in the chest with a thick forefinger.
‘Now you listen to me, laddiebuck,’ he growled.
‘That girl up there is  my patient, and if you harm her or the child she is carrying, then you'll answer to me — and the law,’ he added grimly.
He turned to Peg.
‘I'm leaving her in your care, ma'am,’ he said.
‘I'll drop in tomorrow to see how she is.’
Peg O'Malley nodded.
‘Thank you, doctor.’
She shifted her gaze to Sonny.
‘Sonny, drive the doctor home.’
Doctor McCann waved a hand.
‘Thank you, but no.
A walk before lunch sharpens the appetite.’
He hesitated for a few seconds, then gave a curt nod.
‘Well, good-day to you all,’ he said, and walked out.
When the door closed, Luke turned to his step-mother.
The look in his eyes frightened her: there was the look of murder in them.
‘I want ye to go upstairs to yer daughter,’ he said in a low, hard voice, ‘and ask her to answer one question.
I want her to give you the name of the man responsible.’
She stood erect with her arms by her sides, hands clenched, nails biting into the flesh of her palms.
She could not let Luke see how frightened she was.
She took a deep breath and then spoke, keeping her voice low and steady.
‘There's no need to ask Una.
I know who the father is.’
Luke's eyes narrowed.
‘You know.
How do ye know?’
Sonny took a step forward.
‘Tell us who he is,’ he cried, ‘and by Christ we'll!’
‘Stop that!’
Peg O'Malley commanded sharply, looking from one to the other.
‘I'll tell you,’ she said, ‘but first both of you will listen to what I have to say.’
They stood side by side, glaring, waiting impatiently for her to speak.
‘One night a few months ago — early spring it was…’
She told them about the visit of Father Devlin and Malachi Drennan; of how Malachi had asked for Una's hand in marriage; of how he had offered to sell seventy acres of his best land to their father if the marriage took place.
They stared at her in silence, too stunned to speak.
It was Sonny who managed to find his voice first.
‘Malachi Drennan !
Are ye tellin' us that he's the one responsible?’
‘Of course not!’
Peg O'Malley snapped.
‘My God, Una wouldn't allow him to touch her!’
‘I hope Da booted that oul goat outta the house!’
Sonny exclaimed.
Peg O'Malley's lips curled.
‘He did not, faith,’ she answered bitterly, ‘he was ever so polite.
He told Drennan and Father Devlin he would think about it.
He told me not to open my mouth to either of you and Una until such time when he would tell all three of you himself.
But I told Una the next morning when all of you left the house.
I warned her  that Drennan was trying to bribe your father with land and that I thought your father would accept the bribe!’
Luke took a step forward, his face white with anger.
‘Ye can't talk about Da like that!’ he rasped.
She stood her ground, her chin thrust out defiantly.
‘I can,’ she answered boldly, ‘and I will.
Ever since, your father has been a constant visitor to Drennan's house.
No doubt they sit at the table, plotting and planning, making arrangements.
Your father has been at Una to marry Drennan, cajoling her, pleading with her, aye, and threatening her!
Forcing her into a loveless marriage the same way he's forcing you pair into marrying the Costello sisters.
And all to satisfy his lust for land!’
Tears sprang to her eyes.
‘You can't imagine,’ she choked, ‘the hell that girl has been goin' through these last few months.
You can't…’
She plucked a handkerchief from her sleeve and dabbed her eyes with it.
She raised her tear-streaked face to her step-sons.
‘Can't you see?’ she wailed appealingly.
‘Can't you understand?
All the harassment she's been receiving from your father made her desperate.
Getting pregnant was her only way of escape!’
Luke was unmoved and spoke harshly.
‘I want the name of the man who made her pregnant.
I want it now!’
She gave a sigh of resignation and turned away, avoiding his eyes.
Either she told him or he would force it from Una.
‘Con Gallagher and Una have been lovers for about a year now.’
He gave a sharp intake of breath.
‘Jesus!
Gallagher!
Gallagher of all people!’
He turned to Sonny.
‘Get into the trap and wait for me.
I'll be with ye in a minute.’
Then he made for the stairs, taking them two at a time.
He went to his room and took down a whip which hung from a peg on the wall.
It was a South African sjambok, a heavy whip nine feet long, the lash not of leather but of rhinoceros hide.
A war veteran had sold it to him; part of the booty plundered from some Boer farmhouse.
The lash was wound tightly around the heavy handle; it resembled a police baton.
His step-mother was waiting for him, her back to the door.
‘Where are you going?’
Her voice was shrill with fear.
Then she saw the whip and her hand flew to her throat.
‘Oh God no!’
‘Stand aside,’ Luke ordered.
She shook her head.
‘No!
Please, Luke, don't do anything until your father comes back.’
‘Da can have what's left of Gallagher after I'm through with him!’
‘If you attack Con Gallagher with that whip you'll go to prison.
You nearly killed that tinker lad with it.
You were lucky to get away with that.
You won't be so lucky next time.’
Luke gripped her shoulder, digging his fingers in so hard she winced with pain.
‘Ye connivin' bitch!’ he gritted.
‘Ye knew all along.
Ye knew she was seein' Gallagher and ye kept yer mouth shut.
Well ye'll pay — ye and that little 'hure upstairs!
Now out of my way!’
She moved aside.
Luke pulled open the door and strode down the drive to Sonny who was waiting in the trap.
Luke took the reins from him and struck the horse's hindquarters with the handle of the whip.
The horse broke into a furious gallop.
Luke stood with legs wide apart, hitting the horse with the whip-handle  every timeit showed signs of slowing down.
They passed the tall figure of Doctor McCann walking home.
He stopped and stared after them.
Twenty minutes later Luke pulled back on the reins as they reached the crossroads.
The main street of the village faced them on the other side of the Westport road.
Luke jumped down from the trap.
‘Leave it here and follow me,’ he ordered.
He turned left at the crossroads, Sonny at his heels.
A hundred yards further on he turned left again, striding down the rutted track that led to Johnny Boyle's house.
Johnny was sitting with his back to the window reading when the door was kicked open.
Luke marched in, Sonny behind him.
Luke stood in the middle of the floor, looking about him, tapping the palm of his left hand with the handle of the whip.
‘Where is he?’
His strong white teeth were bared.
‘Where's Gallagher?’
Johnny stared at him open-mouthed.
‘Are ye deaf!’
Luke almost spat the words.
‘I asked ye where's Gallagher?’
Johnny struggled to his feet.
‘He's not here.
In the village, I suppose.’
Luke took two long-legged strides to the nearest bedroom door and kicked it open, the whip raised menacingly.
When he saw the room was empty he turned and walked through the open doorway of Johnny's room, searching.
Johnny watched him in a daze.
‘What are ye doin'?’ he asked as Luke came out of the room.
‘What's wrong?’
‘Don't act the innocent with me, Boyle!’
Luke snapped.
‘They've been meetin' here a few nights a week for the past year, haven't they?’
‘Who?’
‘Who the hell do ye think!
Una and Gallagher.’
‘Why of course they meet each other here,’ Johnny declared, pretending he did not know what Luke was getting at.
‘This is his home, isn't it.
And the girl comes to see me — has been comin' ever since I met with the accident last year.
She brings me books, cakes…’
‘Then they go out.’
‘Con escorts her home, as is only right and proper.’
‘They make love…in the dark.’
‘Ahh, yer cracked!’
‘She rolls about the ditch with him like a bitch in heat!’
‘Why ye filthy-minded cur!’
Johnny roared, his face flaming.
‘Don't ye dare malign the girl in my presence and under my roof!’
‘She's carryin' Gallagher's baby!’
Luke blurted, his voice breaking.
Tears appeared in his eyes.
Johnny was stunned.
Luke had exposed himself.
In one brief moment of weakness he had allowed the mask to slip.
Then Johnny saw and understood the reason for Luke's attitude towards Una O'Malley, the reason for his murderous hate for any man that desired her.
These were not the angry tears of an outraged brother, but those of a betrayed lover!
Johnny was stunned with the shock of it.
Luke O'Malley was in love with his own half-sister!
He glared into Luke's moist, agonised eyes, loathing on his face.
‘So that's how it is, is it?’ he said grimly.
For a second or two Luke did not comprehend.
Then, with horror, he realised that Johnny knew — had discovered the secret he had managed to keep hidden from everyone for years.
He turned his burning face away from the old man's contemptuous stare, a sick feeling in his stomach.
‘What class of a twisted, unnatural bastard are ye?’
Johnny growled disgustedly.
Luke gave a shuddering sigh that was almost a sob and a tear rolled down his cheek.
Sonny stared wide-eyed at him, dumbfounded.
Johnny took one step back.
His eyes on Luke, he hawked up a mouthful of phlegm and spat it towards Luke's feet.
It landed on the toe-cap of his shoe.
‘Get out!’
Johnny snarled.
‘Get out of me house, ye degenerate!’
Luke stared at him, face twitching.
He opened his mouth as though he was about to speak, then spun about and strode out of the house, leaving Sonny in a daze.
Sonny turned in bewilderment to Johnny, then lumbered out after his brother.
Luke strode furiously up the track towards the Westport road.
Sonny had to run to catch up with him.
‘What's the matter with ye, Lukey?’ he cried, coming alongside him.
‘Why did ye let that oul bastard treat ye that way?’
Luke did not answer him.
His face was grim; beads of sweat glistened on his forehead.
They mounted the slight slope and, turning right on to the Westport road, walked towards the village.
There were five public-houses in Carewstown.
Four were on the main street; the fifth was on the western edge of the village.
This was the one known to be frequented by Con Gallagher.
A narrow lane branching off the village street led to it.
Luke and Sonny headed towards the wide square of open ground which lay at the end of the lane.
To the left was a long low building with a blank, grimy whitewashed wall and a broken, galvanised roof.
It was used as a piggery and the stench hovered about it.
A low stone wall ran across the far side of the square.
This was the eastern boundary of Malachi Drennan's farm.
There was a row of whitewashed thatched cottages on the right.
A ragged child in bare feet stood outside an open door, finger in mouth, staring shyly at them.
Beyond the cottages stood the public-house, a ramshackle two-storied building, its whitewashed walls now a dirty grey.
There was a long wooden seat outside.
Two old men were sitting with glasses in their hands, enjoying the mid-day sun.
‘Lukey,’ Sonny whispered nervously, ‘mebbe we'd better wait and let Da deal with this.’
Luke turned a white vicious face to him.
‘If ye've lost yer nerve, then don't come!’ he snapped.
‘I'll handle this by meself!’
Heaving a sigh Sonny followed him.
The two stood just inside the door, blocking the sunlight.
The interior was gloomy; tobacco smoke hung motionless in the thin air.
In a corner a drunk was singing quietly to himself.
A group of men were leaning against the bar, their backs to the doorway.
There was a low hum of conversation.
Luke recognised Gallagher.
‘Gallagher!’
Luke's voice was high and harsh.
All conversation ceased and everyone turned around.
Surprise showed on Gallagher's face.
‘What are you two doin' here?’ he asked.
‘I want a word with ye, Gallagher.’
The menacing tone of Luke's voice caused a few of the men at the bar to stiffen expectantly: they could sense trouble coming.
One or two noticed the whip in Luke's hand.
This was not going to be another dull Sunday afternoon.
‘What about?’
Gallagher asked, leaning nonchalantly against the bar.
‘Outside!’
Luke snapped.
‘This is personal.’
Gallagher could not resist the old urge to tease.
He reached behind him, lifted the pint of porter he had been drinking and began to sip it, making no effort to move.
‘You can talk freely here, Luke,’ he drawled.
‘These are all my friends.’
He gave a grin.
‘What's it all about, eh?
Is it that ye can't manage the farm with yer Da away, and ye want me to take charge.
Is
There were a few partially smothered sniggers.
The sounds enraged Sonny; his face turned red with temper.
‘Don't ye dare mock us, Gallagher!’ he shouted.
‘Not after what ye've done!’
‘What have I done?’
Gallagher asked, smiling.
Before Luke could stop him, Sonny bawled, ‘Ye've made Una pregnant!’
There was a sudden hush.
The smile vanished from Gallagher's face.
Luke turned to Sonny, the whip raised as if he were about to strike him.
‘Ye and yer big stupid mouth!’ he snarled.
‘Shamin' us before everyone!’
Just that once, Gallagher thought, stunned.
Just that one brief moment of madness…
Then the bitter tears of self-reproach.
He had tried to comfort her, putting all the blame on himself…
‘Step outside, Gallagher,’ Luke ordered.
Gallagher sighed.
They have a right, he told himself.
If it was my sister, I too would come looking for the man responsible.
He walked forward.
Luke and Sonny stepped aside to let him pass.
He blinked against the strong sunlight, taking off his jacket, heading for the centre of the square.
There was a vicious crack like a pistol-shot and the lash struck him across the back, splitting open the shirt, tearing the skin.
He screamed with pain, dropping the jacket, twisting around to see Luke swinging his arm back and over.
This time Luke aimed for his face.
Gallagher flung up his arms, protecting his eyes.
When he heard the crack he ducked and the lash cut the air above his head.
He fell back.
Luke took a few steps forward, then flicking his wrist, sent the lash out at waist-level.
He had shortened the distance between himself and Gallagher.
The lash struck Gallagher under the ribs and encircled his waist.
He grabbed it and tugged, pulling the handle from Luke's hand.
He threw it away, gritting his teeth against the searing pain of his back, but the pain of his injured pride was worse.
To be flogged like a dog!
He walked towards Luke, fists up.
Luke advanced to meet him.
Gallagher stopped and waited, shoulders hunched.
Luke displayed his lack of skill.
He drew back his arm, aiming for Gallagher's eyes, making his intention obvious and leaving himself wide open for a counterpunch.
As Luke's arm curved in towards his  head, Gallagher flung up his left arm and blocked it, driving his fist into Luke's midriff.
Luke's breath exploded against his face.
Eyes bulging, he collapsed, hands feebly clawing at his mouth.
Gallagher hammered him again and again.
Luke went down on one knee.
Gallagher grabbed his hair with his left hand and swung with his right.
His hard knuckles ripped open the soft flesh over Luke's eye.
Luke screamed, blood running into his eyes and down his face.
Then Gallagher let go of his hair and Luke flopped face downward into the dust.
He lay moaning, his hand against his injured side.
Gallagher stepped back, breathing heavily.
The crowd from the pub and the cottages stood watching twenty feet away.
All the children had been rushed indoors the moment the trouble started.
Someone shouted a warning and Gallagher whirled around to see Sonny charging towards him.
He had forgotten about Sonny.
He waited until Sonny was almost on him, then swiftly side-stepped and struck out.
Sonny took the blow on the temple and staggered sideways.
He fell on his knees, momentarily stunned, his back to Gallagher.
Gallagher waited, tense, fists at the ready.
Sonny was tall and broad and as strong as an ox.
He was capable of killing a man with his bare hands.
Sonny shook his head a few times, trying to clear his fuddled senses.
He gave a roar of rage, scrambled to his feet and turned round, his right arm raised.
Gallagher drove his right fist into his stomach and followed it up with a left to the mouth.
Sonny went staggering back, arms flailing, spitting blood and fragments of teeth.
Gallagher walked after him, halting only to hit, weaving and ducking the wild swings of the powerful fist.
He broke Sonny's nose and closed his left eye.
He began to work on the body, aiming for the solar plexus all the time.
Sonny began to cry from pain and fear.
He was on his own now.
All his life he had relied on Luke and his father to support him in his bullying and to bolster his courage.
Now there was no one.
Gallagher drove his fist into his face and sent him sprawling on his back.
Sonny lost his nerve, knowing that if he stood up again Gallagher would hammer him.
He scrambled away on all fours, not stopping until he reached the dirty blank wall of the piggery twenty feet away.
There he sat, cowering against the wall, blubbering like a child, the blood from his broken nose streaming down his face.
Gallagher gave a contemptuous snort.
Sonny was finished as a man in Carewstown.
His exhibition of cowardice would never be forgotten.
Gallagher felt a warm glow of satisfaction.
You've paid, you bastard, he thought, for what you did that night ten years ago.
It came back to him then: the shooting flames, the moaning of a cow in terror, the booted foot swinging into his face.
He faced the crowd, and he raised his voice so that all could hear.
‘There's not a man or woman here who doesn't know what happened to me one night ten years ago!
Five men came to my place and beat me up and put the torch to my place.
All wore hoods over their heads.
But I know who two of them were.
One was that cowardly bastard behind me…’
He jerked his thumb over his shoulder towards Sonny cowering against the wall.
‘Another was Luke O'Malley.
And by God I'll prove it!’
He strode towards Luke, who lay moaning on the ground.
He had forgotten about Una; the only thought in his mind was revenge.
He bent over Luke, gripped his shirt with both hands and tore it apart, exposing Luke's back from neck to waist.
The broad white scar against the deeply tanned skin was visible for all to see, running down the full length of the back from between the shoulder-blades.
‘See that scar?’
Gallagher cried, pointing down.
‘I gave that to him with a sleán !’
Luke lay on his belly, the dusty ground soaking up the blood from the gash above his eye.
He still held his hand against his battered side; it was black and swollen.
Gallagher picked up the whip.
He flicked his wrist and sent it cracking high over Luke's prostrate body.
Luke flinched.
‘I want the names of the other three, O'Malley,’ he grated.
‘I want them now and you're goin' to tell me.
If you don't, I'll give you a few more scars to remember me by!’
Luke managed to shake his head.
Gallagher brought his arm back and over and laid the lash across Luke's bare back.
Luke screamed, writhing in agony.
‘Their names!’
Gallagher roared.
Luke shook his head and again Gallagher brought the lash down across his back.
Luke's refusal to tell enraged him.
Then something snapped inside him; all the choked up hatred he had for Luke suddenly spewed out.
He began to flog Luke unmercifully, bringing the lash down across back, buttocks and legs again and again.
Luke began to scream then — screaming out names; screaming for him to stop, but Gallagher did not hear.
He had lost all control.
He saw everything through a red mist.
A woman's hysterical wail rose above the crackings of the whip.
‘For God's sake stop him!
Stop him before he kills him!’
Her cry galvanised some of the men into action.
Three of them  charged towards Gallagher.
One of them came up behind him and hooked an arm around his throat while another snatched the whip from his hand.
Then both of his arms were grabbed and held firmly.
Gallagher struggled; a man cuffed him across the mouth as one would a bucking horse.
He quietened down then, shaking his head like a man coming out of a deep sleep.
His eyes were glazed.
They held him firmly until the madness drained out of him.
Luke lay on his belly squirming in agony, whimpering like a puppy, his hands clutching at sparse tufts of grass.
His back was a bloody torn mess.
Twenty feet away, Sonny sat against the wall of the piggery, paralysed with fear, staring at the writhing body of his brother with open-mouthed horror.
Johnny Boyle pushed his way through the crowd gathering about Gallagher, cursing himself for not having arrived sooner.
I could have prevented all this, he told himself despairingly.
He came to a halt before Gallagher, trying to control his temper.
‘Ye wouldn't listen to me, would ye!’ he rasped.
‘Ye wouldn't listen to good advice.
I told ye not to have anythin' to do with Una O'Malley.
Now ye'll do five years’ hard for what ye've done to Luke!’
He thrust his hand into the pocket of his jacket.
Somehow he had known what the outcome of all this was going to be.
He gathered what money he had just in case Gallagher was forced to flee.
It was all wrapped up in a knotted kerchief.
He pushed it into Gallagher's hand.
‘Here,’ he said roughly, ‘there's nearly seven pounds in that.
Enough to get ye far away from here.’
Gallagher pushed it back at him.
‘I'm not takin' that!’ he exclaimed harshly.
‘I'm not goin' to run away!’
Johnny slapped back his hand.
‘Don't be a bloody fool!’ he cried.
‘D'ye want to rot behind bars for five years!’
‘He's right, Con,’ one man said.
‘And that bastard,’ he added, nodding towards Luke, ‘is not worth doin' time for.’
Someone picked up Gallagher's jacket from the ground and handed it to him.
‘Make yer way down to the station,’ he said.
‘The train from Castlebar is due there in about an hour.
If ye leave now ye'll catch it.’
‘The O'Malleys left their horse and trap at the crossroads,’ Johnny said.
‘Take that.’
Gallagher shook his head.
‘I'm not runnin' away like I did the last time.’
Johnny grabbed him by the shirt collar.
‘If ye won't think of yerself,’ he said in a low voice, ‘then think of the girl.
Don't leave her to face Bull  O'Malley alone.’
He paused.
‘Take her with ye.
Peg will help.
She's an understandin' woman.
Catch that train and the pair of ye will be in Dublin before nightfall.’
‘And if the peelers come lookin' for ye,’ someone said, ‘we'll say we saw ye headin' north towards Castlebar.’
Still Gallagher stood undecided, holding the jacket in one hand and the money in the other.
‘For Christ's sake!’
Johnny half-shouted in exasperation, ‘yer wastin' valuable time!
Go!
Now!’
Gallagher put on his jacket slowly, reluctantly, then he put the bundle of money into his pocket.
He stared into Johnny's face for several seconds, turned abruptly on his heel and strode away without looking back.
A man raised his voice.
‘Good luck to ye, Gallagher,’ adding in an undertone, 'ye'll need it, God help ye.’
There were tears in Johnny's eyes as he watched him turn into the laneway and out of sight; he had a feeling he would never see him again.
There was an unnatural silence, like the uncanny hush immediately following an explosion.
Everyone stood in shocked, silent groups.
Suddenly the stillness was broken by a distressful wail that came from the other side of the square.
All turned to stare at Sonny.
He still sat crouched against the wall, hugging his sore and battered body, the lower part of his face caked with blood.
‘Help him,’ he cried appealingly, ‘someone help me brother.’
A woman turned and ran into a cottage.
She came out bearing a basin of water in which a cloth and a bar of soap floated.
She moved towards Luke.
Her husband stepped out from the crowd and stopped her.
‘Where are ye goin' with that?’ he demanded sternly.
She nodded past his shoulder.
‘That poor lad's back is in a cruel state.
It needs to be bathed and —’
He punched the basin out of her hands.
‘Not for that hoor!’ he snarled.
‘Not for that Judas!
He can lie there and bleed to death!’
He turned a livid, stubbled face to the crowd.
‘Dick Brogan, Stevie Kerrigan and Peter Mullen were never particular friends of mine,’ he asserted harshly.
‘They were always too chummy with the O'Malleys for my likin'.’
His eyes roamed over the faces in front of him.
‘We all know,’ he said in a lowered voice, ‘that it was the O'Malleys who burnt out Con Gallagher that night, for they were the only ones who had somethin' to gain.
But we never knew who the other three were.’
He nodded his head slowly, his face a rigid mask.
‘But now we know — and  so will everyone else from here to Castlebar, includin' the peelers.
And all because of…’ he half-turned and spat at Luke, ‘that fuckin' informer there!’
He went and stood over the crumpled heap that was Luke.
‘By Christ, O'Malley,’ he hissed, ‘there'll be hell to pay when Brogan, Kerrigan and Mullen hear how ye betrayed them.
From now on yer life won't be worth tuppence!’
He turned and walked towards his cottage, his wife following him.
Then the crowd began to disperse slowly; silently.
Luke O'Malley had committed the unforgivable sin — he had informed on his friends.
They shared with the rest of their race an almost paranoiac fear and hatred for the informer.
Life in Carewstown was dull and easy-going, but beneath the surface there was fear and distrust.
They were conscious of being constantly under surveillance.
They knew that the village police sergeant and constable were there not only to deal with ordinary crime but to report on any political activity in their district.
A drunken utterance against the Crown or the singing of a rebel song in the presence of a policeman would result in one's name being forwarded to Dublin Castle as being politically suspect.
One learned to be circumspect when a member of the Royal Irish Constabulary was around.
But the informer was far more dangerous.
He was one of the community, he knew everyone, their backgrounds and where their sympathies lay.
He was dangerous because he was unknown.
He could be the next-door neighbour, a friend, a blood relation.
His treachery was motivated by a variety of reasons.
Greed was paramount.
English gold had always been readily available for information of a political nature.
That night they sat around the turf fires discussing the events of the day.
It did not matter to them if Luke's betrayal of his friends was the culmination of a long-standing feud between himself and Gallagher concerning land.
An informer was an informer.
In time to come Luke O'Malley could betray local patriots fighting to free their country.
There was trouble coming; there were rumours that the Irish Republican Brotherhood were organising.
If trouble did come, survival would depend on knowing who could be trusted and who could not.
They talked of many things.
Of how Luke and Sonny were brought by cart to the infirmary in Castlebar; of the ‘roasting’ they would get from Father Devlin for not coming to their aid; of what Bull O'Malley would do when he arrived home from Dublin.
They speculated on Luke's future standing in the community after he was discharged from  hospital.
But Luke's future was already being decided in a little room attached to the school-house on the outskirts of the village.
Gerry Troy, the schoolmaster, sat at a table with three other men.
The three were the nucleus of a newly formed Irish Republican Brotherhood circle.
After thoroughly investigating their backgrounds and their political beliefs, he had approached them one by one.
All were now sworn-in members of the organisation.
One was Tim Skerritt, the steward of the Carewscourt estate; another was the youngest son of a small farmer; the third man was going to reside permanently in Castlebar where he had obtained a position in a draper's shop.
In time he too would recruit and form an IRB circle there, but he would have to be careful; Castlebar was a garrison town.
Tim Skerritt was doing all the talking.
He had been Gerry Troy's first recruit.
Gerry was impressed by his practical approach to things and his determination to get things done.
He had the qualities of a born leader.
‘I propose that we banish the two O'Malley brothers from this part of the country for good,’ Tim Skerritt said.
‘Make it so hot for them here they'll have to leave!’
‘That's a bit extreme, isn't it, Tim?’
Gerry protested.
‘An informer is an informer,’ Tim Skerritt said, repeating what he had heard so many times in the village that day.
He leaned forward across the table, staring intently at Gerry.
‘I'm thinkin' ahead, Gerry,’ he said.
‘I'm tryin' to work out in my mind what we could do in this district if a general rebellion should break out.’
He paused deliberately, before continuing.
‘I think a small guerrilla unit of not more than twelve men would be most effective.
We could raid police barracks for arms; quarries for explosives.
Then we could destroy lines of communication: wreck telegraph wires, blow up bridges and railway lines.
They would have to send troops down from Castlebar to seek out and destroy us.
Then we would have to go on the run, move from place to place, rely on the people to feed and shelter us.
It would mean havin' to place our lives in their hands.
A guerrilla unit can only operate in a district where the people are staunch and know how to keep their mouths shut.’
Gerry nodded.
‘Of course.’
‘That's why it's necessary we weed out the undesirables now .’
Tim Skerritt insisted.
‘We have to make this whole area safe and secure for a guerrilla unit to operate.’
‘But if you make trouble for the O'Malleys,’ Gerry said, ‘the police will blame Brogan, Kerrigan and Mullen.
They will harass them even if they don't arrest them.’
‘That's what I'm hopin' they will do,’ Tim Skerritt said with a grim smile.
‘I want them out of the district as well.
Brogan in particular.
He would sell out his own father if the price was high enough.’
There was a brief silence.
Then Gerry inquired in a quiet voice, ‘What are you going to do to the O'Malleys?’
Tim Skerritt shrugged.
‘I don't know yet.
But we'll think of somethin'.’
III
Bull O'Malley walked steadily under the hot mid-day sun.
Sweat trickled from under his billycock hat, down his hot perspiring face, down inside his high stiff collar.
His suit-case was heavy, and because of the heat he was forced to carry his overcoat.
He stopped to rest, cursing under his breath.
‘Just wait till I get home,’ he muttered furiously, ‘I'll give those two lazy hounds of mine a piece of me mind!’
Luke and Sonny knew he was coming on the afternoon train; they should have been waiting at the railway station with the horse and trap.
He picked up the suit-case and carried on.
His breathing was laboured.
That's what a week in Dublin does for you, he thought.
All that idleness; eating too much; drinking too much; going to bed in the early hours of the morning.
Nevertheless he had enjoyed himself.
A man needed a holiday after working hard all the year round.
It did not occur to him to bring his wife with him.
When Una had asked him why not, he was astonished.
‘Bring yer mother?
In the name of God, girla, is it mad ye are!
Who the hell would do the cookin' for the lads?’
He quickened his pace, longing to be home.
He wanted to throw off his jacket, kick off his boots, sit under the tree at the back of the house and drink a jug of cool buttermilk.
He turned the slight bend in the road.
He could see the dog stretched out in front of the gate about a hundred yards away.
It lifted its head, then, catching his scent, came charging towards him, barking with delight.
‘Get out of me way, ye mangy hoor!’
O'Malley snarled, giving it a kick.
He opened the gate, walked up the drive, and stopped, staring at  the bicycle leaning against the wall.
There were only about three bicycles in Carewstown and he recognised this one.
It belonged to the police sergeant.
The uneasiness he felt when he got off the train returned.
Mickeen Gavan, the porter, had been unusually quiet, his eyes evasive.
Normally, Mickeen would detain you as long as he could, jabbering away about this, that and the other.
O'Malley pushed in the door and walked into the kitchen.
Sergeant Hanafin was sitting at the table with Peg O'Malley.
His note-book was open in front of him and his helmet was on the table.
He was a tall, burly man of about fifty with greying hair.
His moustache was wax-tipped, military fashion.
Peg sat at the head of the table.
Her face was white and drawn.
She stared apprehensively at her husband.
Bull O'Malley lowered the suit-case to the floor, a fluttering feeling in his stomach.
‘What's wrong?’ he asked hoarsely.
The sergeant was not one to be hurried or flustered.
‘Sit down, Mr O'Malley,’ he said in a slow ponderous voice, as though he were inviting a weary traveller to take his ease.
‘For God's sake!’
Bull O'Malley snapped.
‘Has there been an accident or what?’
There was a movement to his left and he turned.
Sonny ambled reluctantly towards him.
His father's jaw dropped at the sight of his son's face.
A plaster lay across his nose and his face was bruised and swollen.
‘Jesus, Mary and Joseph!’
Bull O'Malley managed to gasp.
‘What the hell happened to ye?’
‘All in due time, Mr O'Malley,’ the sergeant intervened.
‘I'll explain it all to you.’
Bull O'Malley threw his overcoat on to a nearby couch and sat down heavily.
‘Holy God above!’ he exclaimed angrily.
‘I can't leave this place for one bloody week!’
The sergeant sighed sympathetically.
‘'TIS not a happy homecomin', right enough.’
‘I'm waitin', sergeant.’
‘Well, there was a bit of a fracas between your two lads and Con Gallagher.
It happened in the village at the bottom of Donovan's Lane.
There was a good deal of fisticuffs.
But I'm afraid that's not the worst of it.
Gallagher used a whip on your boy, Luke.’
Bull O'Malley stared at him dumbfounded.
‘Luke had to be sent to the infirmary in Castlebar,’ the sergeant went on.
‘The lad took a savage beatin'.
That Gallagher is an out and out blackguard!’
Bull O'Malley swallowed.
‘Lukey, is he…serious?’
Sergeant Hanafin fingered his waxed moustache.
‘Sixteen stitches above the eye, several fractured ribs, but his back was the worst.
Gallagher cut the flesh to ribbons, nearly killed him.’
He shook his head, sucking at his teeth.
‘Barbarous, barbarous.’
‘How long…how long will he be in…?’
Bull O'Malley could not speak further; he could feel his throat constricting.
The sergeant shook his head.
‘Hard to say.
The lad was left lyin' in the dirt.
The doctors are afraid of infection, you see.’
He shot a curious glance at Bull O'Malley.
‘D'ye know, you'll hardly credit this, but not one of that crowd from the pub or the cottages lifted a finger to help.
Not one.’
He heaved a sigh.
‘God bless and save us, what class of people are inhabitin' the earth nowadays.’
Bull O'Malley glared at Sonny.
‘And what the hell were ye doin' when all this was goin' on?’ he demanded harshly.
‘Now, now, now,’ the sergeant said soothingly, ‘sure the poor lad was in a bad state himself.
Just look at him.’
‘Where's Gallagher now?’
‘I wish I knew.’
The sergeant scowled.
‘When I made inquiries, I was told he was last seen headin' for Castlebar.
They deliberately sent me on a wild goose chase.
I should have known better than to take the word of any of that crowd from Donovan's Square.’
‘Johnny Boyle will know,’ Bull O'Malley growled.
‘He says he does not.
However, I think he's lyin.’
‘I'll get the truth out of him.’
‘Now, Mr O'Malley,’ the sergeant said sternly, ‘I strongly advise you not to; you'll only get yourself into serious trouble.
Leave this to the law.
We'll get Gallagher, never fear.’
O'Malley snorted.
‘Aye, and when the sky falls we'll all catch larks.
What was the row about anyway?’
Sergeant Hanafin closed his note-book, put it in his breast-pocket and buttoned the flap.
Then he stood up and put on his helmet.
‘Your wife and son can tell you all about that, Mr O'Malley,’ he said.
He did not want to be around when they told him; he had enough to do without becoming involved in a domestic squabble.
He inclined his head to Peg.
‘Good-day now to ye, ma'am.’
He shifted his gaze to Sonny.
‘A cold compress might take down that swellin'…’
He walked to the door, Bull O'Malley behind him.
He paused at the threshold, squinting at the sky.
‘That's a powerful bit of sun,’ he commented, ‘but I wouldn't say no to a wee drop of rain.
Me poor oul garden is in a sorry state for the want of it.’
He wheeled his  bicycle down the gravel drive, Bull O'Malley walking beside him.
At the gate the sergeant paused again, one foot on the pedal.
‘I think you should know,’ he said, ‘that Gallagher forced Luke to admit that he was one of the party that burnt down Gallagher's house.’
He stared up the road.
‘Luke also named Sonny, Dick Brogan, Stevie Kerrigan and Peter Mullen.’
He paused just long enough for Bull O'Malley to understand the implication of his words.
‘Gallagher made Luke confess in front of about twenty witnesses — that bloody rabble from the pub and the cottages.’
He ran the tip of his finger along the handlebars, waiting for Bull O'Malley to speak.
There was a lengthy silence.
Then Bull O'Malley asked with anxiety in his voice: ‘What do ye think will happen?’
‘Nothin', unless Gallagher is found.
If he is and if he can prove that Luke and Sonny and the other three were the guilty ones, then he won't be goin' to prison alone.
If I were you, Barney, I wouldn't be too keen on wantin' to have Gallagher caught.’
Bull O'Malley sighed and nodded.
‘I suppose yer right,’ he said.
He looked at the sergeant, searching his face.
‘Everythin' is all right, then?’
The sergeant stroked his chin thoughtfully.
‘It didn't take long,’ he said slowly, ‘for word to reach Brogan, Kerrigan and Mullen about Luke informin' on them.’
‘Ach!’
Bull O'Malley waved his hand contemptuously.
‘Those three!
Sure what can they do?’
Sergeant Hanafin looked at the ground and said softly: ‘That house Sonny is havin' built for himself and his future wife…’
‘What about it?’
Bull O'Malley asked testily.
‘It was burnt to the ground the night before last.’
‘Jesus Christ!’
‘That's not all,’ Hanafin continued.
‘Threatenin' letters — unsigned of course— have been sent to your house addressed to Luke and Sonny.
Slogans have been painted on walls in the village.
Brogan, Kerrigan and Mullen are tryin' to stir up trouble against your two lads.’
Bull O'Malley's red face turned a deeper shade.
‘Arrest the bastards!’ he spluttered.
‘Arrestthem!’
‘How can I, without proof?’ the sergeant replied.
‘But ye know it's them!
Who else could it be?’
Sergeant Hanafin nodded.
‘Aye, I know it's them.
I can't arrest them without proof, but I can make it damn hard for them to live here.’
He threw a leg over the saddle of his bicycle, and stared solemnly at Bull O'Malley.
‘You know what the Brogans are like, Barney.
A vicious tribe — injure one and you injure them all.
So you'd better see to it that  Luke and Sonny don't go often to the village.
If they do go, let them leave before nightfall.
It's a long lonely road between here and Carewstown.’
With that warning Sergeant Hanafin cycled up the narrow dusty road leaving Bull O'Malley staring after him.
Sonny was sitting at the table with his mother.
Bull O'Malley marched across the kitchen floor and glared down at the battered, apprehensive face.
‘What caused all this trouble?’ he growled.
Sonny gulped.
‘Well,’ he began hesitantly, ‘it all began when Una took sick and we had to get the doctor…’
‘Una!’
Bull O'Malley exclaimed in astonishment.
‘What has Una got to do with what happened?’
‘Never mind, Sonny,’ Peg said, rising to her feet, ‘I'll explain.’
She walked up to her husband and faced him.
She did not hesitate.
‘The doctor found that Una was pregnant,’ she said calmly.
For the first time in her married life she saw pain in her husband's eyes, as though she had plunged a knife into his body.
It gave her a feeling of vindictive pleasure.
‘Con Gallagher is the father,’ she went on blandly, brutally, turning the knife in the wound, watching the pain intensify.
‘When Luke was told, he went to the village looking for Gallagher, taking Sonny with him.
He used the whip on Gallagher, but Gallagher managed to take it away from him and then used it on him.’
She waited, watching as the pain and bewilderment slowly dissolved into murderous fury.
‘Where is she?’
Bull O'Malley hissed between clenched teeth.
‘Where is that little…little…?’
He was apoplectic with anger.
‘She's gone away with Con Gallagher,’ Peg answered coolly.
‘They're probably married by now,’ she added, not bothering to disguise the satisfaction in her voice.
‘Where to?’
Bull O'Malley choked.
‘Where to?’
‘I don't know.
Dublin, England maybe.’
He wanted to smash everything about him into smithereens, but he managed with iron self-will to control himself.
‘By Christ, that little bitch will regret this to her dyin' day!’
His voice shook with anger.
‘She'll regret it — and so will that penniless bastard she ran away with.
Before the month is out, the pair of them will be starvin' to death in some filthy slum!’
‘I doubt it,’ Peg O'Malley said.
‘What the hell do ye mean?’
‘I gave Una seventy pounds before she left.
That should keep the two of them in reasonable comfort for a while — at least until Una has her baby.’
‘You did what!’
He took a step towards her.
‘Where would ye get seventy pounds?’ he asked suspiciously.
‘I broke open the tin box you keep your money in.
After all,’ she said with mockery in her voice, ‘you did say you'd give Una her dowry when she got married.’
He struck her then, across her face, sending her head swinging to one side.
As she turned to face him, the mark of his huge hand was already apparent.
‘You'll never do that again,’ she said in a low voice.
‘I'll do it,’ he bellowed, ‘anytime I feel like doin' it!’
‘No you won't, because I won't be here.
I'm leaving you, leaving you for good.’
Both men stared at her in shocked silence.
Bull O'Malley gave a derisive snort.
‘Leavin' me, are ye?
And where would ye go to, tell me that?’
‘Back where I came from.
Galway.’
He guffawed contemptuously.
‘What, back to that slum in the Claddagh?
Back to that poky little shop, livin' off the takin's of penny bags of bullseyes and a few pence worth of paraffin oil!’
‘That's it,’ she replied, ‘that's exactly where I'm going.
My sister is a widow now without kith or kin.
The two of us will live at the back of the shop.
And we'll be happy.’
‘Ye'll bloody well starve!’ he shouted.
He could not believe it, but she was in earnest.
‘Near enough to it,’ she said.
‘But I'll be living with my own people.
In the Claddagh we're all poor and no one is ashamed of it.
There are no Bull O'Malleys there, no beggars on horseback.
They judge a man for what he is, not for how much money he has or the amount of land he possesses.’
He towered over her, breathing hard, trying to curb his temper.
‘So I'm a beggar on horseback, am I?’ he mouthed hoarsely.
‘That's the thanks I get for takin' ye out of a bloody hovel and givin' ye a proper place to live.
Ye never knew what it was to have a dacent meal in yer belly until ye married me!’
‘I can't deny that,’ she whispered.
‘Yer damn right ye can't!
Anythin' I ever did was for me family.
I clawed me way up from nothin'!’
There was pride in his voice.
‘But you became greedy, Barney,’ she said, ‘you became so greedy you were willing to sell your own daughter like a beast at the fair, forcing her to marry a lecherous oul wretch that's old enough to be her father.
And all because you wanted to lay your hands on seventy acres of his land.’
She saw a flicker of shame in his eyes.
‘I made no promise to Malachi,’ he blustered.
‘You're a liar!’
His face flamed.
‘Don't ye dare call me that, ye bloody cow!’ he roared, half-raising his fist.
She did not move, but stood facing him defiantly.
‘Yes, that's it,’ she said calmly, ‘that's your answer for everything.
Go on then, hit me!
For all the good it will do you.
For all the good it ever did for your sons.
What happened to Luke and Sonny had to happen sooner or later.
If it had not been Con Gallagher it would have been someone else.’
She gave a weary sigh.
‘I'm not blaming them.
I blame myself for looking on and allowing you to poison their minds.
If I hadn't been such a coward maybe they might have turned out better.’
‘So it's my fault, is it?’
His voice was bitter.
‘I make men out of them and for that I'm at fault.
I teach them never to let anyone outsmart them; I teach them to better themselves.
I gave them a sense of pride.
Ach!’
He waved a hand in contempt.
‘What am I explainin' all this to ye for?
Ye don't understand.’
‘I understand better than you think!’ she snapped.
‘Oh yes, you taught them well,’ she said in a sarcastic voice, ‘and they were good pupils.
You taught them so well,’ she went on, ‘you've made the name O'Malley hated and feared for miles around.
Men spit when your name is mentioned.
They have a saying: If Bull O'Malley was dividing Ireland, you can be certain he wouldn't leave himself last.’
‘Ye've said just about enough,’ Bull O'Malley snarled dangerously, his face twitching.
‘I haven't said nearly half-enough,’ she retorted recklessly.
She paused, composing herself, and added quietly, ‘I'm glad Una is gone from this house.
She's safe from you, from Luke.’
‘Luke!’ he echoed, a puzzled look coming over his face.
‘What the bloody hell are ye talkin' about?
If the lad was a bit stern with her at times, it was only for her own good.’
‘That's not what I meant.’
‘Then what in Christ's name do ye mean?
I can't make head or tail —’
‘All you can think about,’ she cried, ‘is how to make more money; how to lay your hands on someone's holding; how to get more cattle, more sheep, more of this, that and the other.
You can find out before anyone else who it is that's in trouble over rates or who's in debt or who's emigrating, so that you can get in first and grab their paltry few acres.
You can tell at a glance what it is that ails a cow or a sick calf better than any vet.
And yet when it comes to what is happening under your own nose and under your own roof, you're blind!
Blind and stupid!’
Sonny darted forward and grabbed his father's upraised arm.
‘Don't, Da,’ he pleaded, ‘don't…’
Bull O'Malley glared down at her, his mouth working soundlessly.
If it had been a man who had called him that to his face, he would have smashed him to a pulp.
I'll…’
‘I'll get out of your sight,’ she said.
‘Soon I'll be out of your sight for ever.’
She looked at Sonny.
‘Get the trap ready.
I want you to drive me down to the railway station in about half an hour.’
She turned and walked towards the foot of the stairs.
She climbed them slowly, without hurry.
The two men stood silently in the huge kitchen.
They could hear her moving about in the room over their heads.
The sounds of her packing stirred Bull O'Malley's smouldering rage.
Suddenly it burst into flame.
‘Very well then, go!’ he shouted, shaking his fist towards the ceiling.
‘Go and be damned to ye!
Who needs ye!
Barney O'Malley needs no one!
D'ye hear me — no one!’
Chapter Eight
I
Three men ruled Ireland: the Lord Lieutenant, his Chief Secretary and his Under-Secretary.
Both the Lord Lieutenant and the Chief Secretary were politicians and had to spend a good deal of time in London attending Cabinet and Parliament; therefore the Under-Secretary, who was a Civil Servant, was the effective head of British Administration in Ireland for most of every year.
An Irish politician once described the Administration in nautical terms.
‘The Lord Lieutenant wears the insignia of command and signs the log, the Chief Secretary is Captain of the ship, while the Under-Secretary is the man at the wheel.’
The Under-Secretary was a tall thin man of about sixty-eight.
He had a neatly trimmed white beard and used a pince-nez for reading.
He had the appearance of a scholar and the reserved manner of a clergyman: he had indeed been a professor of logic and before that a Presbyterian minister.
He sat at the head of the table carefully scrutinising the document in front of him as if it were a religious text which he had to examine for scriptural errors.
When he came to the end he sighed and straightened up, removing the pince-nez.
‘This then,’ he said, staring with mild reproof at the impassive faces of Regan and Harrison, ‘is all the information we have on the Irish Republican Brotherhood?’
Regan, the Deputy Inspector General, nodded.
The Under-Secretary looked at the document again and shook his head.
‘Not much,’ he murmured reproachfully, ‘for nearly three years’work, to say nothing of the expenditure.’
He raised his head and spoke directly to Harrison, the Assistant Commissioner.
‘I see here,’ he said, tapping the paper lightly with the pince-nez, ‘G division poached the ordinary detective branch for recruits.’
Harrison flushed slightly.
‘That was at the insistence of Military Intelligence,’ he answered curtly.
‘Oh really?’
The Under-Secretary stared questioningly at Major Calder and Captain Carew.
‘The War Office,’ Major Calder explained, ‘were pressing Captain Carew and myself for more and more information about the IRB.
When I asked Special Branch for extra men for surveillance work, I was told there were no extra men available.
Therefore, I suggested they get some from the ordinary detective branch.’
The Under-Secretary nodded slowly.
‘I see,’ he said, carefully replacing the pince-nez.
He studied the document again.
They stared at him in silence, waiting.
Carew thought, we're like a bunch of schoolboys nervously watching the master studying the exam papers.
‘Er, this fellow, Butler,’ the Under-Secretary said softly without raising his head.
‘It states here that he is under constant surveillance.
How many men have been assigned to watch him?’
Harrison cleared his throat.
‘Four.’
The Under-Secretary lifted his head in surprise.
‘Four?
That many?’
‘It's a round-the-clock surveillance.’
The Under-Secretary turned to Major Calder.
‘Is Butler that important?’
The Major nodded.
‘We have every reason to believe he's a member of the IRB Supreme Council, therefore it's vital we know who are the people he contacts.
If we could arrest the Supreme Council we could demoralise the entire organisation.’
The Under-Secretary stroked his beard thoughtfully.
‘We know for a fact that Fintan Butler is an IRB courier,’ the Major continued.
‘He's been to the United States three times during the past two years and returned with large sums of money, which he carries in a money belt.
The money is lodged in a bank under the name of Andrew Kinsella.
Kinsella is the IRB treasurer.
We have a complete dossier on him.’
The Under-Secretary shook his head ponderously.
‘I would dearly love to know,’ he murmured, ‘how much money they've accumulated.’
‘The bank allows us to inspect their account,’ Harrison said.
‘The last lodgement, that is the money Butler brought back from the States, brought the amount up to five thousand pounds.
But there have been a series of large withdrawals since then.
There's less than a thousand pounds left.’
‘Which means Butler will have to go back soon to the States for more funds,’ Regan said.
‘What is the money being used for?’ the Under-Secretary asked.
Major Calder shrugged.
‘Obviously to revivify the IRB.
We know the Germans are contributing most of the money.’
‘Arms?’
The Major gave a brief shake of the head.
‘The amount of money is too small.
Perhaps the odd purchase of a revolver or two, but that's all.’
‘I see.’
The Under-Secretary gave another of his slow nods.
‘A revolutionary organisation without teeth.
Not much of a threat, wouldn't you agree?’
The Major gave him a long hard look, but said nothing.
The Under-Secretary placed both hands on the table and lowered his head.
This was the first of the new weekly meetings he had initiated.
Until now monthly meetings with the heads of military and police intelligence had been sufficient, but not any longer.
Events were moving too fast.
The forthcoming introduction of the third Home Rule Bill had aroused wild reactions in the North of Ireland.
Two Home Rule Bills had been introduced by the Liberals during the past twenty-five years.
Both had been defeated.
The second Bill had passed through the House of Commons only to be thrown out by the House of Lords which could reject all legislation except money bills.
But now the power of the Lords had been cut down by an Act of Parliament, and they could only postpone the enactment of the Home Rule Bill for two years.
Most of Ireland was jubilant.
Home Rule was just around the corner.
Ireland would have her own Parliament once again.
But there was no jubilation in the North.
The Ulster Protestant Unionists, the descendants of the English and Scottish settlers who had been planted there in the seventeenth century, reacted with fury and dismay to the news.
Violence had broken out, and there had been anti-Catholic riots in Belfast.
There was talk of preparing an Ulster provisional government and creating an Ulster Volunteer Force.
What really disturbed the Under-Secretary was the report he had received two days ago about the smuggling in of arms for this new Volunteer army.
He gave a long weary sigh and removed the pince-nez.
‘You know,’ he said, raising his head, ‘I've been reading these reports concerning the IRB for the past two years, and have occasionally succeeded in extracting useful information from them.’
He paused deliberately, slowly switching his gaze from one side of the table to the other.
‘But I think the time has come,’ he went on, ‘when the same microscope should be employed in another part of Ireland, namely the North.
‘Information should be collected as to the goings-on in parts of Ulster of organisations which lately have been supplied with arms and are being detailed for eventualities.’
Major Calder stared coldly at him.
‘Are you saying,’ he asked in his rough Scots burr, ‘that you now consider the IRB to be no longer of any importance?’
The Under-Secretary shook his head slowly.
‘No,’ he answered softly, ‘I'm saying that I now consider the IRB to be of only secondaryimportance.’
Our of the corner of his eye the Major could see Harrison smirking, and he felt his temper rising.
Carew, sensing the other man's agitation and fearing he was going to say something rash, gave a warning glance.
‘I dread to think of what will happen,’ the Under-Secretary said, ‘when the Home Rule Bill is passed.
If trouble does come, the police are going to be put under enormous pressure.’
He turned solemnly to Major Calder.
‘I would therefore suggest that you military chaps use your own sources for gathering information.’
‘We haven't any.’
The Major's tone was brusque.
‘We're totally dependent on the police for information.
We merely give directives.’
‘Then that will have to cease, at least until this emergency passes.’
‘The War Office will have something to say about this.’
The Major declared threateningly.
The Under-Secretary remained completely unruffled.
‘I put my views to the Chief Secretary,’ he said calmly, ‘before he left for London.
He agrees with me whole-heartedly.
So much so, he intends to call to the War Office to explain the situation himself.
So you see,’ putting on a sweet smile, ‘there is really nothing for you to worry about, Major Calder.’
He addressed himself to Regan and Harrison.
‘If you gentlemen have any questions…?’
They shook their heads.
The Under-Secretary rose stiffly to his feet.
‘In that case, until Monday next, gentlemen.’
Regan gave a sigh and unbuttoned the side pocket of his tight-fitting uniform for his cigar-case.
The Under-Secretary strongly disapproved of tobacco and alcohol.
Harrison sat in smug satisfaction at the look of surliness on Major Calder's face.
Carew was studying the file in front of him intently.
‘That fellow,’ the Major growled, referring to the Under-Secretary, ‘should be retired.
He's completely out of touch with the situation.’
‘Oh, I don't know,’ Harrison drawled, ‘what he said made a lot of sense to me.’
Carew turned over a page in the file, pretending he had not heard.
Harrison had never tried to conceal his dislike for the Major and  Carew.
According to Castle gossip, he had behaved in the same way towards the Major's predecessor.
Perhaps, Carew thought, some overbearing staff officer had once ruffled his feathers.
Harrison was a man who loved to harbour a grudge.
Carew spoke to Regan, deliberately ignoring Harrison.
‘How long, do you think, could the IRB exist without funds?’
Regan removed the cigar from his mouth and shrugged.
‘Hard to say,’ he answered.
‘Judging from the large amounts withdrawn from their account over the last six months, not very long, I would imagine.
Why do you ask?’
‘If Major Calder and I are about to be deprived of your services,’ Carew answered evenly, ‘then we'll have to use another and faster method of disrupting the IRB organisation.’
‘Oh,’ Harrison's voice was tinged with sarcasm, ‘and how do you propose to do that?’
Carew eyed him coldly.
‘By discrediting them with the Irish-Americans and the German Embassy in Washington.’
They waited for him to elaborate as he unbuttoned the side pocket of his tunic and took out his cigarettes.
The Major had scotched his suggestion when he mentioned it to him over lunch, but the Under-Secretary's unexpected decision had now left them with no alternative.
He lit the long Turkish cigarette, taking his time.
Harrison drummed his fingers impatiently against the surface of the table.
Carew drew long and hard on the cigarette.
‘I take it both of you have read the dossier on this man, Kinsella?’ he said, giving a brief nod towards the folder in front of him.
Regan nodded.
‘Get to the point, will you!’
Harrison exclaimed testily.
‘Rather foolish of the IRB, wouldn't you say,’ Carew went on calmly, addressing himself to Regan and plainly ignoring Harrison, ‘entrusting their funds to a man who was imprisoned for embezzlement.’
Regan gave an indifferent shrug.
To him the question was irrelevant.
‘They may not know what he's done.
It was a long time ago.’
‘It would be something though, wouldn't it,’ Carew persisted, ‘if Kinsella started to dip into the funds for his own personal use.
If he did, and the news reached the States, the money would be cut off immediately.
And with no funds, the IRB would find it hard to exist.’
Harrison snorted irritably.
‘You're wasting our time with mere suppositions.’
Carew flushed with sudden anger.
‘I don't believe in wasting anyone's time,’ he snapped, ‘least of all our own.
Thanks to the Under-Secretary, he's left us with precious little of it to waste!’
There was a  cut-glass ashtray near his elbow and he savagely ground out the cigarette in it.
He took a deep breath.
Careful, careful, he told himself, don't let him get you rattled.
‘Now, now, gentlemen,’ Regan said gently, ‘no acrimony, if you please.’
Carew glared at him.
Regan smiled back.
‘But I would be obliged if you would come straight to the point, Captain Carew.’
Carew gave a curt nod.
‘Very well.’
He leaned across the table, hands clasped, and stared steadily at Harrison.
‘I want Kinsella forced into a situation where he will have no option but to steal from IRB funds.’
Harrison looked puzzled.
‘What do you mean, ‘forced into a situation’?'
‘Kinsella,’ Carew explained ‘is a weak little mouse of a man.
An underpaid scrivener in a solicitor's office.
He's a widower and the father of a large family.
The eldest is a priest in St Catherine's.
The second eldest, a girl, looks after the house and the rest of the children.
All, with the exception of the priest of course, have to exist on Kinsella's meagre salary.’
He paused.
‘What do you think would happen if Kinsella should lose his job?
Remember he's fifty-seven.
At his age he would find it hard to get another.’
Harrison gave a gesture of indifference.
‘That's a hypothetical question.
However, I think it would make him rather desperate.’
‘Desperate enough to steal?,
‘Possibly.
But you seem to forget Kinsella regards himself as a patriot.
To him, stealing from the IRB would be tantamount to treason.’
‘I've had someone investigate Kinsella's past,’ Carew said.
‘Do you know what made him steal from his employer all those years ago?’
Harrison shook his head.
‘Drink.
Kinsella is a dipsomaniac.
He spent most of his time in the prison hospital, being dried out.
Although he has not taken alcohol in twenty-five years, the craving for it is still there.
If anything disastrous should happen to him, such as being dismissed from his job, the urge to seek solace in the whiskey bottle might be far stronger than his strength of will.
If Kinsella were to go on a binge, he would drink his way down to the last penny of whatever money is available, irrespective of who it belongs to.’
Harrison turned in bewilderment to Major Calder.
‘I don't understand.
What is all this leading up to?’
‘Captain Carew will explain,’ Major Calder said.
‘We want you,’ Carew said, ‘to arrange to have Kinsella dismissed from his job.’
Harrison stared at him in  stony silence.
‘Counsel your men to be discreet,’ Carew continued, ‘we don't want Kinsella to suspect that the police were involved.’
He relaxed back in the chair.
‘Shouldn't be too difficult,’ he said.
‘I'm sure Kinsella's boss, being a member of the legal profession, will be shocked when he learns that an employee of his was once convicted for embezzlement.’
Carew said nothing more.
Both he and the Major waited for Harrison to say something.
Regan gazed abstractedly up at the ceiling, puffing away at his cigar.
He was not responsible for G division or the metropolitan area, so this had nothing to do with him.
Harrison cleared his throat nervously.
‘As both of you know,’ he said, glancing from Carew to Major Calder, ‘the Chief Commissioner is about to undergo an operation.
However, as soon as he is released from hospital, I will submit your request to him.’
‘Oh, that won't do at all!’
Major Calder protested.
‘That could be months away.
No, no, Harrison, this will have to be done within the next two weeks.
You alone will have to decide and take the responsibility.’
It was the Major's turn to smirk.
Harrison glowered.
If he refused, he knew Calder would immediately send a report to the War Office that he was deliberately being uncooperative, and the War Office would use its influence to have him demoted or transferred.
He gave a curt nod.
‘Very well.
I'll see what I can do.’
Carew was about to reach down for the attaché case resting against the leg of the chair when Harrison leaned forward towards him, his face contorted with bitterness and dislike.
‘But let me tell you — both of you,’ darting a venomous look at Major Calder, ‘that this is without doubt the most degrading and distasteful thing I've ever been asked to do!’
Carew lifted his shoulders in a gesture of resignation.
‘Yes, well, there are many things we have to do in this business that are distasteful.
Nevertheless we have to do them.’
Major Calder was chuckling as they walked across the Upper Castle Yard.
‘By God, I've never seen Harrison so nettled.’
His voice suddenly turned serious.
‘But be careful, Alec; he'll do you harm if he can.’
They passed under the stone archway and went out into Castle Street.
The cold night air had a bite in it.
The Major said, ‘You mentioned to Harrison you had someone investigate into Kinsella's past.
Who?’
‘Billy Durkin.
I put him on to Kinsella.
Durkin struck up an acquaintance with him — told him he was a traveller in ladies’ underwear.
They're great chums now, Durkin has even been invited out to the house several times.’
The Major gave a disdainful snort.
‘Leave it to Durkin,’ he growled.
‘Oh, Durkin is not such a bad chap,’ Carew said and immediately thought, Why do I always jump to Durkin's defence whenever he's criticised?
Conscience?
Because I made a cuckold of him?
They walked down Cork Hill past the City Hall.
The late evening rush was over and Dame Street was almost deserted.
The Major caught Carew by the arm.
‘They serve a damn good steak over in the Ormond,’ he said.
‘Care to come along?
Later we can have a chat about this business over a few drinks.’
The look of appeal on the Major's face made Carew feel sorry for him.
The Major was a lonely man.
He shook his head.
‘I'm sorry.
It will have to be some other time, Ian.
I have a lot of things to do.’
The Major smiled and nodded.
‘Of course,’ he said.
‘I understand.’
Something in his tone made Carew glance at him sharply.
He thought, does he suspect?
The Major still retained the grip on his arm as though reluctant to let him go.
‘One thing I don't understand,’ he said.
‘If Kinsella steals from the IRB fund, how do you propose to blazon the news abroad?’
‘Simple.
Give Durkin all the facts and let him publish them in the Eye-Witness .’
‘Good God, yes!’
The Major uttered a crow of delight.
‘That sort of thing would be meat and drink to Durkin.
I can imagine the headlines.
‘Secret society funds stolen by treasurer’ or ‘IRB funds blown on booze’!’
Carew nodded.
‘About a thousand copies will be forwarded to our Embassy in the States.
They will send some to the German Embassy in Washington and distribute the rest among Irish-American organisations throughout the country.
So you see,’ he added with a smile, ‘Durkin can be useful.’
‘I suppose he is,’ the Major conceded grudgingly.
‘Nevertheless I can't stomach the fellow.
He's an ill-mannered brute.’
Carew sighed, wanting to leave.
Miriam will be there now, he thought, waiting.
He was only half-listening; the Major's constant tirades against Durkin bored and irritated him.
‘Neither do I trust him.
No one knows anything about the fellow's past, but I'll wager it was an unsavoury one…
I wonder why he's always so bloody vindictive?’
Carew lost his patience.
‘You too would be vindictive,’ he blurted, ‘if you were driven out of your home by a howling mob just because your father had apostatised!’
The Major's eyes widened.
‘You don't say!’
He shook his head.
‘Well I'll be jiggered.’
Carew cursed himself for being so rash.
‘That's in confidence, Ian.
‘Oh, don't concern yourself, old boy,’ the Major assured him breezily.
‘My lips are sealed.’
Are they, wondered Carew.
All he has to do is to tell one person and then everyone in the Castle will know, from the Chief Secretary down.
He told himself: I'll have to be more careful; have to keep to myself the things Miriam divulges about her husband's past.
Pillow talk; lying together on the tossed bed, all passion spent.
She always chose that moment to talk about Durkin, and always in a disparaging way.
Perhaps, he thought, it helps to salve her own conscience.
He said: ‘I really must go, Ian…’
Alec strode down Dame Street, impatient to be home.
Durkin had gone to London to make final arrangements for the forthcoming publication of The Carews of Carewscourt .
He would not be back until Friday evening.
His absence meant that Miriam could stay with him in his flat until Durkin returned.
Four days, Carew thought joyfully, four whole days!
They had not been alone together since Durkin had gone to Belfast six months ago.
At Foster Place, one of the new taxicabs stood alone among the horse-drawn vehicles for hire.
He walked towards it, past the sullen stares of the lounging jarvies.
‘Wilton Place,’ he said and climbed in.
He lay back on the seat in the dark interior with the attaché case resting on his knees as the driver cranked up the engine.
I did the right thing, he told himself, renting that flat.
Obtaining the Major's permission had not been difficult.
It was necessary, he had told him, for an Intelligence officer to have private quarters.
There he could entertain certain people who might be useful — people with information to give but who were afraid to be seen entering a barracks or Dublin Castle….
The taxicab moved off slowly, making a wide turn in front of Trinity College.
He gazed idly out; the lighted shop windows in Grafton Street went sliding past before his tired indifferent eyes.
At the top of the street the cab turned left and headed eastwards along  Stephen's Green.
Already the prostitutes were out, patrolling the pavement in front of the park railings.
He closed his eyes.
I wonder whether Uncle Walter will be well enough to attend the reception when The Carews of Carewscourt is published?
He shook his head sadly.
Highly unlikely, he told himself.
His uncle had not been the same since Emily died.
Her death had come as a great shock to him.
Somehow Walter always believed he would die first.
All alone now, Alec thought, all alone in that big rambling house…
They were approaching the canal bridge.
He leaned forward and tapped the driver on the shoulder.
‘Stop here.’
He wanted to walk the rest of the way.
He alighted, paid the driver, then turned right, heading west, the tree-lined canal on his left.
The thought struck him suddenly.
Maybe she didn't come — maybe she changed her mind.
He was filled with dismay.
He swerved right into Wilton Place.
A short row of tall elegant Georgian houses overlooked the grounds of a lawn tennis club.
Only a few of them were residential.
The house he lived in was at the end.
His flat was on the top floor.
Underneath was a dentist and on the ground floor an estate agent.
They had arranged between themselves that if by chance Miriam was seen entering the house by day, she could always pretend she was visiting the dentist.
He paused before mounting the steps.
The house was in darkness: the dentist left at six o'clock.
He looked up.
Faint light showed through the blinds on the windows of the top floor flat.
She had come!
He climbed the steps.
His hand shook a little as he inserted the key in the lock.
II
He opened his eyes slowly and yawned, stretching his satiated body between the warm sheets with the lazy sensuousness of a cat.
He moved his leg and was immediately aware of the cold empty space beside him.
He struggled into a sitting position, rubbing the sleep from his eyes, and lay back against the headboard.
Miriam was seated in front of the dressing table with her back to him, brushing her hair.
She was fully dressed.
He glanced at the clock.
It was ten-thirty.
‘Why are you dressed so early?’ he asked in surprise.
‘Are you going somewhere?’
‘Yes,’ she answered in a low flat voice.
‘Home.’
He could see her face in the mirror.
She stared stonily into it as she brushed and brushed away.
‘But Durkin doesn't arrive home until tomorrow night,’ he protested, trying to keep the disappointment out of his voice.
‘I forgot to mention,’ she said, ‘we have a maid now.
I gave her a few days off when William went away.
She'll be back this afternoon.
If she doesn't see me there, she'll wonder where I am.
She could mention it to William.
He likes to know where I've been when he's away.
Not that he's suspicious.
He's just naturally curious.’
He sighed.
‘I see.
You're right, of course.
We have to be careful.’
‘Careful!
I'm tired of being careful!’ she snapped.
‘I'm sick to death of looking over my shoulder  every time I come here, wondering and dreading if someone who knows me has seen me and can guess what I'm coming here for!’
There was a touch of hysteria in her voice and picking up her hairbrush again, she began to attack her hair with swift savage strokes.
‘What I want to know,’ she said in a voice as cold as ice, ‘is when do I cease to be your mistress and become your wife?
When does this clandestine affair come to an end?
You'll have to tell William sometime, so why not now?’
He stifled a groan.
‘Miriam, Miriam, be reasonable.
I can't tell him now — not the way things are at present.’
‘Why not?’ she demanded.
‘Tell me — why not?’
‘Think of the scandal it would cause.
You couldn't keep a thing like that hidden for very long, not in this damn town.
I would have to resign my commission.’
‘There's Carewscourt.
You told me your Uncle Walter is willing to hand over the entire estate to you anytime you wish.’
‘That's true.
But…’
He hesitated.
‘Yes?
But?’
She sat stiff and motionless, waiting.
‘It's not that simple.
You see, my uncle has certain fixed views, certain principles which he adheres to rigidly.
Marriage in his eyes is sacred; adultery the unforgivable sin.
While I was in South Africa, Valerie came to Carewscourt for a holiday.
By all accounts, she and Uncle Walter got on famously.
Later, when he learned of her infidelity, he destroyed every photograph and memento of her he could find.
She had given him some gift, something which he cherished very dearly.
He smashed it to pieces.
So you see, if he should find out about us, he's quite capable of disinheriting me.’
‘I see,’ she said after a while.
‘So we have to go on meeting like this, ever watchful, always circumspect in our behaviour when in company so no one will suspect —’
‘Don't talk like that!’ he interrupted harshly.
‘It means of course,’ she went on in the same level tone, ‘that you will not be free to make a decision until your uncle dies.
Am I right?’
‘I'm afraid so,’ he answered in a weary voice.
He flung the bedclothes away from him.
Sitting on the side of the bed, he put on his slippers.
He stood up and reached for his dressing gown.
‘Try to have a little patience, Miriam,’ he said.
She turned to face him, her face flushed with anger.
‘Patience!’ she cried.
‘I'm almost thirty years of age!
I want a child!
And if we have to wait until your uncle dies, I'll be too old to have one!’
Tears sprang to her eyes — tears of despair and frustration.
She began to weep quietly.
He knew the sensible thing to do was to remain silent and let her cry away.
He sat down on a chair with his back to the window and lit a cigarette.
‘How is it you never had a child for Durkin?
He looks virile enough.’
He asked when she had stopped crying.
‘Oh yes, he's virile,’ she murmured, dabbing at her eyes with a handkerchief.
‘But he refused to have a child in spite of all my pleadings.
Why, I don't know.
Perhaps he was afraid of the responsibility, or perhaps it was pure selfishness.
It would be just like him to regard a child as a competitor for my affections.’
There was a brief silence.
Then she spoke to the mirror, ‘There were times when he was drunk, when I tried to take advantage of him, thinking he might forget to use one of those…things !’
She paused, embarrassed and ashamed.
‘But drunk or sober, he was always careful.’
Her voice turned bitter.
‘You are like him in that respect!’
‘That's not fair!’ he protested.
‘I'm cautious for a different reason.
I have to be careful for both our sakes!’
He walked over to her and placed his hands on her shoulders.
‘I want children too, Miriam,’ he said.
‘Heirs to inherit Carewscourt.’
They stared into the mirror, studying each other 's face.
‘There's something I have to tell you.’
‘What?,
He hesitated, wondering if he was doing the right thing by telling her.
‘I'm in Military Intelligence.
Do you know what that means?’
She shook her head slowly.
‘I'm not sure.
Has it anything to do with spying?’
He gave an amused little laugh.
‘In a way.’
His voice turned serious.
‘Your husband works for us.
He tries to gather information about a  certain underground political organisation.’
He felt a spasm of cold foreboding as he spoke.
‘Is it dangerous,’ she asked, ‘this work William is doing?’
‘It could be.
He's indispensable, Miriam.
At the moment he and I are working on a scheme which could wreck this political organisation for good.
It will mean a knighthood for him if we succeed.’
‘A knighthood.’
He stared at her, watching an expression of contempt steal over her face.
‘When the time comes for you to tell him about us,’ she said, ‘perhaps the pain will not be all that great.
After all, he may consider a knighthood a fair exchange for a wife.’
‘Oh come now.’
He felt he had to make some kind of protest, no matter how feeble.
‘He's your husband.
He loves you, in his fashion.’
‘I hate him!’ she exclaimed venomously.
‘Loathe him!’
He sighed.
Am I the only one, he asked himself, who cares anything for Durkin?
Durkin thinks so, he thought, remembering his drunken, maudlin behaviour one night.
‘Alec,’ he had blubbered, pawing at his sleeve, ‘yer the only true friend I have in the whole wide world.
The only one I can trust…’
Alec appealed to her.
‘Can't you appreciate the predicament I'm in?
If I do as you suggest and tell Billy about us, he will do his damnedest to destroy me in revenge.
He will deliberately wreck this scheme of ours.
The outcome — a court-martial and a dishonourable discharge.
Uncle Walter would not only disinherit me, he would disown me!’
He pressed his fingers gently into her shoulders.
‘Try to have a little patience and understanding,’ he said softly.
‘Things will work out.
You'll see, you'll see.’