

LOCAL MANAGEMENT OF SCHOOLS: AN INTRODUCTORY SUMMARY
Christine Gilbert
The general context
It is now commonplace to describe the Education Reform Act of 1988 as radical and far-reaching, and its impact on the education system as dramatic.
The Act's 238 sections and 13 schedules make it almost twice as long as the 1944 Education Act and it is certainly comparable in significance.
The 1988 Act has made fundamental alterations to the power structure of the education system laid down in 1944.
It has increased the powers of the Secretary of State for Education and Science, strengthened the role of central government, limited the functions of local education authorities and given considerable powers and responsibilities to governing bodies and headteachers.
The Act's main provisions relating to schools concern:
the establishment of a national curriculum;
the open enrolment of pupils;
financial and staffing delegation; and
the establishment of grant-maintained schools.
Although this chapter focuses on the key features of Local Management of Schools (LMS) as described in the Act and DES Circular 7/88, these four elements should be seen as part of a coherent government package designed explicitly to improve the quality of education by reinforcing the accountability and responsiveness of schools and their local education authorities (LEAs).
Before detailing the two main components of LMS, this introductory chapter sets out the general framework of change.
It then indicates the opportunity provided for a more participatory approach to school development planning.
Parallel legislative provisions clarify responsibilities and establish an integrated approach to change in schools.
The increased powers of the Secretary of State over a centrally directed system of curriculum and assessment and, indeed, over teachers' conditions of service, make  it ‘safe’ for the government to increase the managerial responsibilities of schools.
Open enrolment provisions, which remove the limits some LEAs had previously put on schools in their area, demand that all maintained schools accept pupils up to the limit of their physical capacity.
By apparently offering parents a greater choice of schools, these provisions — as indeed those establishing grant-maintained schools — seek to increase their power as ‘consumers’.
Formula funding, explained later in the chapter as the cornerstone of the new arrangements for resource distribution to schools, represents a way of rewarding schools which have attracted such consumers.
This wider context for LMS makes clear the government's intention of creating a more competitive environment for schools by putting them very firmly in the market-place.
The government believes that if a school produces what consumers want, they will send their children there and the funding will increase accordingly.
The Act intensifies the competitive pressures already experienced by many schools as a result of falling rolls throughout the 1980s.
Educational indicators across institutions take on even greater importance within this more competitive context as parents use them to choose schools.
Underlying this notion of parents as consumers is the government's belief in competition as a stimulus to improving educational standards.
Put simply, the assumption behind the package of changes set out in the Act is that accountability, and so educational quality, are strengthened by:
teachers striving to improve the results of national curriculum assessments and public examinations to make the school attractive to parents; and
increasing pupil numbers attracting funds and thereby securing staff jobs.
This assumption rests on a belief that the relationship between school and examination results is unproblematic.
It takes no notice of external factors such as the socio-economic, and fails to address what happens when the popular school is full.
Schools should certainly be accountable, especially to parents and pupils, but one of the dangers of such a competitive approach  to education is that the benefits of cooperation between schools and across LEAs will be lost.
Those likely to suffer most from this loss of collaborative endeavour will be the most vulnerable members of the community.
All children within a community have equal rights to the opportunities offered by education.
Although LEAs have sometimes held on to powers at the centre which prevented decisions being made quickly and flexibly, they did provide an education service which allowed an effective response to diversity and need.
Local Management of Schools must be judged on how far it enables the whole education service to respond to the needs of all pupils in the locality.
All are entitled to attend the local school, to receive an education which responds to their needs and allows them equality of opportunity.
Before they embark on LMS, it is vital for schools to clarify and articulate their educational philosophy as the basis of their School Development Plan (see Chapter 2).
This shared understanding should then inform decisions about priorities, responsibilities and activities within the school.
Such development planning commits the school to improvement and to constructive competition against itself rather than against the neighbouring school.
Substantial power is devolved to school level by LMS, but the issue of exactly who is to be involved in decision-making must be an area of keen debate for governors and teachers.
Viewed positively, LMS offers the opportunity of running schools more democratically so that greater delegation entails greater participation in decision making.
This would lead to more explicitly shared plans for the school's development and for the local management of the school's resources.
The staff of a school are its most important resource and their commitment to decisions made is likely to be of major significance in ensuring effective implementation.
Pupils too might be included in discussions of where the school is going.
Such ‘ownership’ of plans would give the school a clearer and more unified sense of purpose and direction and reduce the stress felt in such a time of educational change.
Local Management of Schools is a key reform of the 1988 Education Act.
Although Chapter III of Part I of the Act referred to ‘local financial management of schools’, by the time the DES Circular (1988b) offering official guidance appeared, the term ‘Local Management of Schools’ was in use.
The phrase had been coined by Coopers & Lybrand (1988) to make more explicit the shift in managerial responsibilities involved.
Such extensive managerial powers had not been built in to any of the LEA pilot schemes of financial  delegation in existence before 1988 although schools' experiences had often entailed a change in managerial approach (see Chapter 9).
The two major components of these new managerial powers and responsibilities are financial delegation and staffing delegation .
Based on a formula devised by each LEA, LMS delegates the school's financial budget to governors.
This is a major financial responsibility.
At the same time, LMS delegates related managerial authority and responsibility for staff.
Such financial and staffing delegation is intended to enable governing bodies and headteachers to deploy their resources in accordance with their own needs and priorities and to make schools more responsive to parents, pupils, the local community and employers.
The rest of this chapter outlines the extent of financial and staffing delegation so that governors and teachers are aware of the main aspects of this enormous shift in responsibility and power.
Financial delegation
To ensure financial resources are channelled in accordance with the principles of LMS, the DES has issued rules and guidelines (DES 1988a, 1988b) which all LEAs must follow in funding schools.
These reflect government thinking that certain aspects of the education service, and thus certain items of expenditure, must be held and controlled centrally.
Other items might be delegated, with the LEA acting as judge of which are best passed to the school's control and which need to be held centrally.
There is then a third category of items which must be delegated by the LEA to the school for control.
These make up the vast majority of expenditure.
For both delegated and non-delegated items, the LEA retains the duty of ensuring that spending is managed responsibly.
These DES guidelines have generated a barrage of terms used with increasing ease by headteachers and officers, but still unfamiliar to most staff and governors.
It is worth recognising the key terms in general use, so that these do not divert from an understanding of the major issues.
GENERAL SCHOOLS BUDGET
The LEA must first of all determine the General Schools Budget .
The GSB, as it has become known, represents the total financial resources available in any one financial year to all schools covered by a scheme of delegation.
These total resources include the  planned direct and indirect spending at both school and central LEA level.
From this excepted items are deducted.
There are first of all mandatory exceptions , to be retained centrally by all LEAs and not delegated to schools.
Mandatory exceptions comprise:
capital spending,
debt charges; and
spending taken into account in determining specific grants, for example:
Education Support Grants
LEA Training Grants
Travellers' Children Grants
TVEI
Section 11 Grants
European Community Grants
Secondly, there is a set of items known as discretionary exceptions , which may be delegated or held centrally (if the LEA perceives a need to retain control).
Discretionary exceptions comprise:
central administration;
inspectors/advisers;
premature retirement and severance;
school meals;
home-school transport;
governors' insurance;
transitional arrangements involving existing contracts (eg grounds maintenance);
structural repairs and maintenance;
premises and equipment insurance;
children with special educational needs in ordinary schools;
special units serving statemented or non-statemented pupils;
educational psychologists;
educational welfare officers;
peripatetic and advisory teachers;
pupil support (eg clothing grants);
special staff costs:
‘safeguarded’ incentive allowances;
supply cover (eg for long-term absence);
cover for teachers who are magistrates, local councillors, senior officers for teachers' associations etc;
school library and school museum services;
LEA policy initiatives (eg ‘pump-priming’ for aspects of curriculum development); and
contingencies (individual school or LEA-wide).
To ensure LEAs uphold the principle of maximum delegation, the DES has placed certain limits on the extent of discretionary exceptions.
Apart from the first seven items on the list above, an LEA must keep its costs of all excepted items within a limit of 10 per cent of the GSB.
Within three years of introducing its scheme, and as schools gain more experience of delegation, each LEA must aim to reduce this limit to the lower one of 7 per cent.
In submitting its scheme of delegation to the DES for approval, each LEA had to make decisions about which of the permitted discretionary items it intends to control from the centre and which it will delegate to schools.
The London Borough of Harrow, for instance, has decided to delegate the responsibility for all supply cover to schools, but is offering a service to schools on an ‘insurance’ basis (Coopers & Lybrand 1988).
Lincolnshire is also delegating much of this responsibility whilst retaining an item called ‘Permanent Supply Heads’ as a discretionary exception.
This item is a particular reflection of local need:
In many cases deputy heads of schools will stand in for heads who are absent or where there is a vacancy.
In Lincolnshire there are a large number of small schools where there is not a deputy head, and it is inappropriate to transfer a teacher from another school on a temporary basis.
This discretionary exception will cover the travelling and any excess salary costs of permanent supply heads.
Excess salary costs will arise where the supply head is employed on a salary higher than the group size of the receiving school.
(Lincolnshire County Council 1989)
Guidelines issued to LEAs allow them to pass on, as they feel appropriate,earmarked funds related to any mandatory or discretionary excepted item.
Several LEAs already do this with some of their specific grant funding such as the LEA Training Grant Scheme (LEATGS) or Education Support Grant (ESG).
Part of the LEATGS grant might for example, be delegated for schools to administer, but they would have to spend it for the specified purpose of in-service training.
Such funds would not, therefore, form part of the school's delegated budget and governors would not be free to deploy them according to their own priorities.
Consequently, LEAs earmarking certain discretionary items in this way would still  have to count them in calculating that they were within the 10 per cent limit.
Virement , the transfer of budgetary provision from one expenditure heading to another, is central to the whole concept of LMS.
Schools are able to deploy funds from their delegated budgets into expenditure on both mandatory and discretionary excepted items.
They might, for instance, wish to provide additional in-service education and training (INSET) or buy consultancy advice from outside the LEA.
They might even — subject to agreement with the LEA and government regulations — deploy funds into spending on prescribed capital expenditure.
AGGREGATED SCHOOLS BUDGET
The amount remaining after deducting all mandatory and discretionary exceptions is known as the Aggregated School Budget (ASB).
This is then shared among schools on the basis of a formula developed by each LEA and set out in its scheme of delegation.
The Secretary of State expects LEAs to give a ‘clear and explicit’(1988b) basis for devising or amending a resource-allocation formula so that all concerned understand exactly how it operates.
The formula must apply a consistent set of criteria for the allocation of the ASB to schools.
These criteria should reflect the schools' ‘objective’ needs rather than the historical picture of expenditure.
The major determinant of these so-called objective needs must be the number of pupils in each school.
In line with the whole spirit of ERA, indicated earlier, this is seen as an incentive to schools to attract and retain pupils.
The formula must therefore allocate the ASB as outlined below:
At least 75 per cent on the basis of numbers of pupils in each school.
Weighting is given for differences in age and, possibly, at sixth-form level, for different subjects.
This percentage is an average across the LEA and so the proportion allocated for individual schools may vary.
Up to 25 per cent for other factors, for example:
variations in the additional costs of pupils with special educational needs, both those having statements under the 1981 Act (except those treated as a discretionary excepted item) and those who do not;
socio-economic needs,
the additional costs in small schools of offering a comparable curriculum to that available in larger schools;
premises-related costs.
The application of the LEA's formula to the Aggregated Schools Budget produces each school's budget share .
This must be determined on an annual basis.
In those schools which have delegated   budgets control of expenditure rests with the governing body.
In those which do not, control still rests with the LEA.
A simple summary of the way finance is allocated annually to schools under LMS is given in Figure 1.1.
SCHOOL'S DELEGATED BUDGET SHARE
Although the school does not receive its budget share in actual cash, it is still free to decide exactly how the money is to be spent.
Given that it will need to meet the costs of items such as:
staffing;
internal building repairs and maintenance;
cleaning;
books, stationery, equipment;
postage and telephones;
rates and rent;
energy; and
examination fees;
freedom to spend will be marginal, but as Felicity Taylor suggests in Chapter 3, still important.
However, management of the school's budget share is about much more than managing the school's money.
As indicated earlier, LMS implies a coherent approach to the whole management of the school; budgeting should therefore be an integral part of the planning and decision-making process.
The budget is simply a way of costing and laying out the plans.
The governing body will also be able to decide, with due regard for value for money, when and where to place contracts for goods and services.
Appendix 1 explains what is entailed by competitive tendering.
BUDGET PREPARATION
Budget preparation leads to the presentation of a document indicating planned spending under various headings known as budget heads .
There are several ways of tackling such preparation and although these do not always fit neatly into discrete categories, some understanding of the general approach followed is useful for governors and staff.
Approaches fall into three general classifications.
These are ascribed a number of different names, but Knight (1989) offers the clearest:
the pragmatic approach;
the limited-plan approach; and
the full-plan approach.
Also described as traditional (or incremental) budgeting,the pragmatic approach starts with the previous year's allocation of resources and updates them for any anticipated changes in, for example, planned activities, prices, or the total money available.
This approach tends to preserve previous spending patterns because planned expenditure is based on historical and current practice.
It is easy to operate as it fits in with existing school organisation.
It is likely that, while gaining experience, most schools will approach LMS in this way during their first year.
The danger of this pragmatic approach is that it encourages too ready an acceptance of historical costs, and thus change becomes difficult.
It does not fit easily with the notion of an integrated and coherent management strategy as reflected in the School Development Plan, where resource allocation is linked to the achievement of the school's aims and priorities.
The School Development Plan emphasises a rational approach to decision-making by encouraging schools to focus on a limited number of priorities and devise action plans to implement and evaluate these.
A limited-plan approach uses the historical budget as a foundation and then costs the priorities — that is, those elements of the School Development Plan which focus on desirable change.
Examples of such priorities are given in Chapter 2.
This approach does indeed encourage more effective planning.
However, as it diverts resources from historical and current expenditure items and therefore continuing provision, it is essential that it rests on the establishment of carefully planned priorities which are important to the school's  development .
The practice of limited planning can be extended to include all the school's activities.
Based again on the School's Development Plan, such a full-plan approach attempts to use a decision-making model for budget preparation which proceeds in a highly rational and ordered sequence.
Zero-based budgeting is probably the best known aspect of this rationalist approach.
The view of school management on which this rests was set out by Coopers & Lybrand (1988) and is advocated by the LMS Initiative (1988):
Management is a cyclic process which involves:
identifying objectives;
planning how to reach them;
preparing and matching the financial plan and budget;
controlling execution of the plan;
monitoring and evaluating achievement and expenditure;
varying the plan;
reporting achievement.
The preparation and control of the financial plan or budget is an integral pan of the process of management.
This approach recognises continuing activities as part of the School Development Plan, but forces justification of them each year.
The budget is therefore set up anew each year.
There seems to be no experience of such an approach in the United Kingdom.
Caldwell and Spinks (1988) describe an Australian school which established such a model over a number of years.
Although this approach has much to commend in terms of logic and rationality, by requiring justification of every activity and expenditure item it places an enormous workload on schools at a time when they are already overwhelmed.
Commitments do exist from year to year and constant re-evaluation is impractical and might prove more destructive than constructive.
The reality of the process of change is that it is conducted in context.
However, this approach would be entirely appropriate when establishing a new school for instance.
Whatever approach to budget preparation is used, it should be discussed with governors and staff.
Governors have responsibility for agreeing the school's budget plans.
There should be a collective understanding of the issues, so that the judgements involved in decision-making can be well informed.
BUDGET FORMAT
Schools can organise their budgets in any form to suit this purpose, but it is likely that each LEA has already suggested a format which follows traditional conventions.
A common format enables LEA monitoring and evaluation to be carried out more easily.
However, a flexible and effective information system should allow schools to organise data to suit not only their own operational needs, but also LEA needs.
Items of expenditure are likely to be classified under headings such as:
Employee
teachers;
supply teachers;
welfare assistants;
administrative and clerical staff;
technicians;
librarians;
cleaners;
caretakers;
midday supervisors.
Premises
building maintenance;
grounds maintenance;
gas;
electricity;
water;
rates;
cleaning supplies.
Transport eg
car allowances;
minibus costs.
Supplies and services eg
books;
stationery;
equipment;
postage;
telephones;
examination fees;
recruitment.
Although they are likely to be far fewer, items of income — for instance, lettings — are also likely to be identified in any budget format.
When preparing budgetary estimates of income, schools should take attendant costs — for instance, caretaking, heating, lighting, wear and tear with lettings — into account.
BUDGETARY CONTROL
Each school's delegated budget share will be cash limited, which means there will be a specified amount to spend regardless of inflation.
Schools will therefore have to plan for possible alterations in price and salary changes throughout the year.
Regular budgetary control reports should be able to show for each item:
1.
The budget total for the year.
2.
Excepted expenditure to date (ie taking account of planned  increases or seasonal spending — for example, teacher salary increases, more expenditure on advertising in April and May).
3.
Committed expenditure to date (ie spending committed, but bills not paid).
4.
Actual expenditure to date (ie bills already paid).
5.
Differences, or variances, between 2 and 3.
Governors and teachers do not need to be able to work these out, but they should be able to understand how the figures were reached and what such a budgetary report means.
It would not be sensible for anyone other than staff with specific responsibilities in this area to get weighed down in mechanical details such as costing the specific details of any aspect of the school's plans.
However, members of the school community should have enough skill and confidence to be able to analyse and query budgetary data such as the regular statements which should be produced by the headteacher.
The latter should play a leading role in ensuring these statements are understood by governors and staff.
Staffing delegation
The staffing responsibilities given to governing bodies with delegated budgets are an integral part of LMS.
They apply to both county and voluntary aided schools although the extent of change for the latter is less marked as the governing body was already the official employer of most staff at the school.
Local Management of Schools transfers powers over personnel and staffing matters from LEAs to the governing bodies of schools which have delegated budgets.
This gives them the major role in making decisions about the most important school resources.
Although the LEA remains the employer of the staff in the school, the governors take on extensive powers over staffing and responsibilities under employment law.
These new powers of the governing bodies apply to teaching and non-teaching staff, to part-time and full-time staff and to temporary and permanent staff alike.
They also affect those — such as special-needs teachers or welfare assistants — who hold posts at the school but are not funded through the delegated school budget.
They do not, however, apply to either school-meals staff (unless provision for this area has explicitly been delegated to the school), or peripatetic staff (such as specialist music teachers) attending the school on an irregular part-time basis.
Although LMS sees LEAs transfer much of their powers, authorities still have a key role to play as the principal source of advice on the complexities of employment law and on fair procedures for appointment, discipline, grievance and dismissal.
The framework of support so established might well lead to a partnership between schools and LEAs which gives more effective support to those working within the institution.
Chief Education Officers (CEOs) retain certain rights over consultation and advice but governing bodies have a new role in relation to setting staff numbers (the school staffing establishment); appointment of staff; and dismissal and discipline of staff.
SETTING STAFF NUMBERS
Once a school has a delegated budget, an LEA will no longer be able to decide on just how many staff the school employs.
For most schools this represents a marked change from previous practice.
The governors have power to decide the school's complement — that is, how many people should work at the school and at what level.
They may wish, for instance, to change the balance between teaching and non-teaching staff.
Such decisions should rest on the needs of the school as outlined in the School Development Plan.
These needs will have to take into account factors such as the governing body's statutory responsibility for implementing the National Curriculum and the points about employment rights made later.
Given the pressures of open enrolment, governors will also want to protect the school's image and credibility by establishing a responsible complement of teachers and acceptable class sizes.
The governing body therefore, will have the responsibility for determining a staffing plan for both teaching and other staff in the school.
The LEA may offer advice about essential staffing levels and a model establishment figure given curricular demands and the size of the school's budget, but the governors have the ultimate decision-making power.
The DES guidelines (Circular 1988b) indicate that governors should seek the advice of the headteacher on staffing issues such as this.
APPOINTMENT OF STAFF
In practice, the extent of change engendered by the staffing delegation component of LMS will vary from LEA to LEA and from school to school and in nothing more so than in appointments.
The 1986 Education Act (No 2) sought to enhance and standardise the role of governors in this area, but nevertheless the LEA remained the ultimate authority.
With LMS, decisions about whom to select  for appointment rest with the governing body.
These decisions will be subject to a requirement to consult the head and, except for non-teaching posts of less than 16 hours a week, the CEO.
The LEA must appoint whoever is selected by the governing body unless they fail to meet legal requirements on grounds of health, qualifications or conduct.
In making appointments governing bodies will be bound by statutory regulations on, for instance, race and sex discrimination.
But they will not — unless they so choose — be bound by non-statutory LEA recruitment and selection policies.
Candidates have the right to complain if they believe a governing body's decision or procedures have been discriminatory and the latter will be answerable before an industrial tribunal.
Once a governing body has selected a member of staff, it is for the LEA to make the appointment
…taking account of statutory provisions and also of national and collective agreements, except where these conflict with the powers allotted to the Governing Body under the Act.
for example, the Act says that governors are to be responsible for disciplinary procedures for staff, and a collective agreement which gave this function to the LEA could therefore not apply.
(DES Circular 1988b).
By enhancing the role of governors for all schools with delegated budgets, LMS strengthens lay control over staffing responsibilities.
This control can clearly be seen in the procedures for the appointment of:
headteacher and deputy headteacher;
other teachers; and
non-teaching staff.
The governing body must set up a selection panel and the post of headteacher or deputy headteacher has to be advertised nationally.
The CEO, or representative, has a duty to offer advice and will be able to attend relevant meetings of the selection panel.
The choice of the selection panel has to be endorsed by the governing body as a whole.
Both the selection panel and the governing body must consider the CEO's advice before reaching a decision.
The headteacher has the right to attend relevant meetings whenever a deputy headteacher is being appointed.
Given the vital importance of the leadership of the headteacher  and deputy head in establishing the effectiveness of the school, these are major decisions for governors to make.
Consequently, they should prepare themselves for the process by shaping the plans for their appointment procedure in some detail.
The decision about which other teachers to select for appointment also rests with the governing body, but this function may be delegated to one or more governors, the headteacher, or one or more governors and the headteacher acting together.
The CEO, or representative, and the headteacher have the right to attend selection meetings and to offer advice.
The governing body has a duty to consider that advice.
This means that the LEA is no longer able to safeguard teacher employment by insisting on redeployment from one school to another in the LEA.
With LMS, therefore, comes the end of the redeployment or no-redundancy agreements operating in a number of LEAs and, as a consequence, the security of tenure entailed by this.
The LEA is able, however, to nominate teacher employees for consideration by a particular governing body.
It is then up to that body to appoint or not to appoint.
Appointment powers and responsibilities for non-teaching staff similarly rest with the governing body, and the LEA must appoint the person selected by governors.
Consultation with the CEO is required only where the post involves work of 16 hours or more per week.
GUIDANCE ON MAKING APPOINTMENTS
It is likely that LEAs will offer guidance to governing bodies not only on the general framework of recruitment, selection and promotion procedures, but also on the equal-opportunities aspects of appointments.
In brief outline, such advice would be likely to emphasise that:
the post should be fairly and clearly advertised;
all applicants should receive a full job description, person specification and relevant information on the school, together with a standard form which does not ask questions about family or marital status;
shortlisting and interviewing should involve more than one person;
shortlisting should be carried out on the basis of a previously agreed person specification detailing the qualifications, experience and skills necessary to do the job;
shortlisting should be done by the interviewing panel;
the interviewing panel should meet before the formal interview to discuss the relevant criteria based on the job description and person specification and to agree areas of questioning;
all candidates should be asked broadly similar questions, but not about their:
age;
sexual orientation;
marital status;
family commitments;
ethnic background;
political or religious beliefs;
membership of trade unions;
candidates should be informed of the outcome as soon as possible.
LEA guidance on appointments has usually been devised to provide for systematic and objective recruitment and selection by eliminating discrimination in appointments.
Governors should therefore at least consider this before embarking on different procedures.
PAY AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE
Local Management of Schools also entails the delegation to schools of various powers over pay and conditions.
Governing bodies will still be subject to the local and national agreements enshrined in existing staff contracts.
However, should these agreements conflict with governors' statutory responsibilities the latter will take precedence.
So, for instance, the responsibility of governing bodies for disciplinary and grievance procedures overrides previous local and national agreements.
Employment law provides employees with a range of rights including the right not to be unfairly dismissed, the right not to be subject to discrimination on the grounds of race or sex, and the right for women to receive the same pay as men if employed to do the same work or if the work is considered to be of equal value.
Teachers' pay and conditions are legally fixed by law (such as the Teachers' Pay & Conditions Act 1987) and set out in successive annual documents.
Once a school has a delegated budget governors have discretion over the award of incentive allowances to teachers and over acceleration up the main scale.
The Chilvers Report on School Teachers' Pay & Conditions (1990)points towards far-reaching changes which give governing bodies considerable discretionary powers to enhance the salaries of individual teachers.
Apart from legislation, conditions of service for teachers have, over the years, been consolidated into what is known as the Burgundy Book .
This contains details of agreed conditions on a number of issues such as periods of notice, sick pay, leave entitlements, maternity pay and indemnity against assault.
This book should be available from the LEA and with LMS its provisions remain binding on governors unless overridden by those of the Pay & Conditions Documents.
National pay agreements and conditions of service of non-teaching staff will continue to be on a non-statutory basis.
These are established through national joint councils, consisting of representatives of employers and employees, supplemented by local variations and agreements.
Those of the administrative, professional, technical and clerical (APT & C) staff have been consolidated in what is known as the Purple Book , and those of manual workers in the Buff Book .
Again, LEAs should provide these.
Governing bodies are empowered to specify the duties and to determine the grading of non-teaching staff appointed after LMS, but this should be within the scale of grades currently applied within the LEA.
In most cases these stem from national agreements.
The governing body will be able to select the grade it considers appropriate for the post.
DISCIPLINE AND GRIEVANCE
This new area of governors' responsibilities is delicate and of potential difficulty.
It requires a fine balance to be made between the sometimes competing needs of the school and its pupils and the needs and rights of the individual members of staff.
Governing bodies of schools with delegated budgets have responsibility for establishing both disciplinary and grievance rules and procedures.
They must also communicate these to staff at the school and be responsible for their operation.
It is likely that the early stages of all procedures will rest with the headteacher and other senior staff in school.
DES guidelines (1988b) warn the sensitivity of this area of personnel relations and suggest that governing bodies take account of existing good practice in their LEA when establishing their own procedures.
Discipline 
Disciplinary procedures are necessary if there is dissatisfaction with a member of staff's work or conduct.
As there is no nationally agreed procedure for disciplinary matters, procedures have differed from LEA to LEA.
Under LMS each governing body must establish its own procedure, which should be fair and consistent.
Employment case law indicates that governors would be wise to follow the code of practice produced by the Advisory Conciliation and Arbitration Service (ACAS) for the preparation and operation of disciplinary procedures (see Appendix II).
ACAS has a network of regional offices which might well prove a valuable source of information.
Generally, professional guidance or discipline suggests governors should establish procedures of good practice over:
the issue of formal and informal warnings;
the recording of oral and written warnings;
appeals; and
suspensions
Used properly, disciplinary procedures may prove a positive way of encouraging a member of staff to overcome shortcomings.
They may also ensure that essential standards of work and conduct are upheld, although the school's management and organisation should be such that they need be used only exceptionally.
If either considers it necessary, the headteacher or governing body may suspend, on full pay, anyone who works at the school.
Each must inform the other and the LEA if someone is to be suspended.
It is only the governing body who can end a suspension.
Grievance 
A grievance results from a member of staff feeling she or he has been treated unfairly; the governing body must establish a procedure as a means whereby she or he can seek redress.
Governors should take any grievance relating to employment very seriously and give proper consideration to it through a fair grievance procedure.
Governors must ensure that the procedure is clear and comprehensible to all staff.
They should outline the different stages through which a grievance may pass and the suggested time-scales for each.
Time limits are important and may well prevent a grievance from rumbling on, thereby causing ill feeling and low morale.
With some local variations, most LEAs have operated the recommended model on grievance procedure for teachers set out in the Burgundy Book .
Governors may wish to draw up a common procedure which applies to all staff working in the school.
Several models of good practice are available for consideration by governors.
(An example from one of the professional associations is offered as Appendix Ill.)
As John Mann suggests in Chapter 10, governors should consider the value of drawing on LEA officers as an external support in  implementing the various stages of their procedure.
They might offer detachment and greater objectivity.
Although governing bodies retain ultimate control where the grievance is against them, in certain circumstances grievances may be taken against the LEA.
In that case, the grievance would be taken under the LEA's own procedure.
Dismissal 
A governing body with a delegated budget will be able to stop people working at the school.
This might be for disciplinary reasons or for redundancies arising from, perhaps, reduced staffing needs or curricular changes.
Clearly, in the interests of staff morale and good personnel relations, this power should be used with great care; governing bodies should always seek advice before embarking on the process.
Local education authorities would be able to advise, for instance, on legal requirements and so governors would be more likely to avoid the possibility of having to appear before industrial-tribunal hearings.
The governing body must be able to demonstrate that it has acted on reasonable grounds following reasonable investigations.
As indicated earlier, employees have a right not to be unfairly dismissed by their employer.
Before deciding, for instance, to dismiss anyone on grounds of redundancy, governing bodies should consult the representative of the employees' recognised trade unions and work to explicit criteria.
Trade unions have a statutory right of notice and governors must always act in accordance with employment law.
If for instance, an employee has been employed for six months or more, the governing body must give the LEA a written statement of the reasons for dismissal.
Anyone who believes they have been subject to unfair dismissal can complain to an industrial tribunal.
Whatever procedure for dismissal is established must be seen as fair and just, so that governing bodies are able to demonstrate that they have acted reasonably.
(The essential stages in any such procedure, as suggested by the DES, are outlined in Appendix IV.)
If an individual's conduct is thought to justify it, dismissal could be without notice, but generally it should be carried out in accordance with the notice set out in a member of staff's contract of employment.
The dismissal arrangements set up by the governing body have to provide for the CEO, or representatives, and the headteacher, unless she or he is the person concerned, to be present at all stages when a dismissal is being considered.
It is possible for governing bodies to build in an external element in the appeal procedure: this is something they might wish to consider.
Costs arising from the dismissal.
or indeed from a resignation or premature retirement following the procedure, must generally be met from outside the school's own budget share.
The LEA must pay costs from excepted funds unless there is a justifiable reason for taking these from the school's own monies.
Such reasons might include a governing body disregarding LEA advice that dismissal would be likely to be found unfair before an industrial tribunal: or a governing body determining payments to departing members of staff which were in excess of the LEA's own practice.
However, the fact that the LEA has a no-redundancy policy would not, in itself, be considered a good reason for deducting the costs of dismissal from a school's budget share.
GOOD PRACTICE IN STAFF PLANNING
The strength of a school rests on its staff.
Good working relations are essential: the more effective the staff, the more effective the quality of teaching and learning.
The headteacher has a major role to play in encouraging governors to adopt a response to the staffing responsibilities of LMS which values people and ensures the successful development of the school.
Such a response involves sharing information with staff and involving them in decisions, some of which have budgetary implications.
Care should be taken to develop clear and effective channels of communication and decision-making structures which involve all employees.
Examples of such involvement are outlined in Chapters 4 and 5.
It also entails the preparation of a staffing plan as an important component of the School Development Plan described in the next chapter.
Such a plan would analyse current and future staffing needs in terms of the whole school, teams within the school, and individuals.
It would then suggest ways of meeting these needs in the short and long term so that the quality of the staff could be maintained and developed.
Planning would be likely to highlight the need for an effective staff-development policy so that existing staff were able to contribute more actively to the implementation of the School Development Plan and thus to the changing needs of the school.
Such a policy should make the school more self-aware, responsive and adaptable.
It would enable staff to know what was expected of them, to have professional support and encouragement and opportunities provided for future improvement.
Governors might find it useful to receive a regular report from the headteacher outlining the current staffing situation and its match with existing needs.
Such a report would also include some reference to priorities for the future including those for the staff training and recruitment necessary to realise the School Development Plan.
The LEA's training programme, for both teaching and non-teaching staff, should support the school's development programme.
It should be a product of dialogue and partnership with the school and should seek to develop the service as a whole.
Conclusion
Local Management of Schools was introduced to allow schools to decide for themselves how best to spend money to meet their pupils' needs.
Schools are increasingly positive about the opportunity for greater self-management offered by LMS.
By encouraging a shared and coherent approach to planning and decision-making, LMS could be a means of enabling schools to concentrate more collaboratively on the quality of learning.
A clear and agreed School Development Plan, which has the needs and interests of children at its core, should inform all major resourcing decisions.
Such a plan allows schools to manage themselves more democratically and to keep the curriculum as the major focus.
The worry is not so much the idea of self-management as the fear that the size of the budget will not allow schools to manage effectively.
Critics of LMS have seen it as a way of bringing about education cuts without blame being ascribed to either local or central government.
Governing bodies must develop strategies for cooperation across LEAs which enable them not only to share some resources, but also to apply greater pressure on decisions about the size of the education budget.
Indeed, the many benefits of schools working together within an LEA should underpin each school's plans.
The real danger of LMS is that it will encourage schools to go down individual and isolationist paths.
This will lead to the breakdown of a coherent local system of education which seeks to meet the needs of the whole learning community.
Schools will be poorer if the cooperation of the past is destroyed by the competitive ethos underlying LMS.
Strong and creative relationships between schools and within an LEA result in a richness of educational provision which could not be achieved by each school going its own way.
THE SCHOOL DEVELOPMENT PLAN
Peter Allen
Schools exist to promote effective learning among their pupils.
Their management is therefore concerned with the development of an educational philosophy and the deployment of resources to create an environment in which learning flourishes.
The word resources refers both to the staff and the means by which a school runs — namely the building, equipment, materials, and money.
The task of management is to use these to greatest effect.
This requires suitable systems and procedures, and is absolutely vital at a time of considerable change.
Schools are not static institutions, and good schools have always questioned their practice in an attempt to improve the quality of their provision.
This has involved the consideration of current educational thinking, responding to the needs of a changing world, and implementing legislative changes; the last seems to be the dominant force at present.
Good management has attempted to meet these challenges in an organised and rational way, maintaining that planned changes are better than haphazard ones since they give a greater sense of control to the school and are less likely to cause stress to all concerned.
Given the increasing number of changes that schools are having to make, the process of change is likely to feel more manageable if it is managed .
There is also a far greater chance of tackling the issues the schools feels are important and not having them lost in the large number of demands from outside.
Schools have always had a fair amount of control over their resources — making decisions about accommodation, capitation and so on— and their decisions have normally been used in accordance with the identified needs of the institution, whether explicitly identified or not.
Under current legislation the school will have increased control of its resources, even if the latter do not increase.
Local Management of Schools (LMS), therefore, enhances the need for a Development Plan but does not create it.
Formal planning has been a feature of many schools and local authorities for a number of years now, and for those who have yet to embark, DES Circular 7/88,The Education Act: Local Management of Schools has now made this a statutory requirement.
It will now be the duty of
the governing body, together with the headteacher, to develop and carry out a…plan for their school…to take account of the full range of their responsibilities…set out in the Act.
This chapter will look at what a School Development Plan might be made up of, and some of the issues involved in its construction, implementation and evaluation.
Items for inclusion in the Plan
As has already been suggested, the management of a school is concerned primarily with the development of its pupils.
Curricular considerations are therefore at the centre of the decision-making process.
Everything the school does should be geared to providing most effectively and efficiently for pupil learning — be it the structures and systems used to run the school, the deployment of staff, or the use of its other resources.
For that reason planning will have at its core the educational priorities for the coming year(s).
The School Development Plan will, therefore, be a complete plan covering all aspects of the school, its curriculum, staff development and resources.
When financial devolution was first mooted there was a tendency to divorce it from other considerations, but as suggested in Chapter 1, the change in title from LFM (Local Financial Management) to LMS (Local Management of Schools) reflects a significant change in thinking.
The Plan will probably include the following, though not necessarily in the order suggested:
a statement of curricular aims and objectives;
a review of current provision;
the changes/priorities identified for the coming year;
the strategies for carrying these out;
the staff development required to do the above;
a statement on the use of resources;
planned monitoring and evaluation; and
development priorities for the coming three or four years.
Constructing a Plan
The planning process that schools will need to undertake is cyclical and likely to include the following:
an understanding of where the school is now,
a decision in detail as to where it should be in the short term (one year ahead) and a longer-term plan for about the next three to four years:
a system for implementing proposals;
a system for monitoring what is happening;
an evaluation of how successful the changes have been;
a facility for drawing up the next plan in the light of the
The amount of time involved in the process will vary from institution to institution according to size, but also — more importantly — according to the procedures it adopts.
Consultation takes time: policy-writing by a few is more speedy, but also less effective in the long term for reasons which are suggested later.
One of the main starting points is therefore the drawing up of a time-plan dependent on the consultative structure to be used.
Careful consideration of the financial- and academic-year calendars is essential, and the planning process will have to be dovetailed into the LEA requirements.
Who is to he involved in consultation and decision-making?
The completed Plan will be a statement of the intentions of the school in the near future.
As a major policy declaration, the question of who should be involved in its construction is to be answered in the same way as that of who is involved in policy-making generally.
Governors are responsible for the ethos and general direction of the school.
They will have to agree the plan and will no doubt wish to have a significant part in discussions.
This does not mean that all the discussion and decision-making need take place at this level.
There is a danger, given the recently acquired powers, that policymaking will move away entirely from the school staff to the governors.
The proliferation of committees on finance, curriculum and premises set up by many governing bodies already bears witness to this.
It could have unfortunate consequences.
If staff find themselves having to implement policy which they have no part in making, they may have little commitment to it and may in the longer term become alienated.
This cannot be the way to provide a coherent and effective education.
Some governing bodies have been sensitive to this danger and have established committees and structures involving teachers other than the teacher-governors.
Ways may also be found of building on existing models of effective policy-making in school.
Governors should be an essential element in these: the current legislation gives a real opportunity for a meaningful partnership between staff and governors.
The consultative structure adopted can allow staff to have a say and be involved in discussions.
This gives the greatest chance of individuals understanding the reasons for decisions, having ownership of resulting policy and implementing it.
Teamwork is an important feature of a well-managed school and even more important in the context of LMS.
The contribution of the individual staff member is enhanced by working as part of a team  with a particular role, be it as the infant section of a primary school.
or a department, year-team, or cross-curricular group in a large secondary school.
These teams will need to feed into the making of the School Development Plan; they will no doubt be expected to carry out much of it and be involved in the monitoring and evaluation process.
If they meet as a matter of course throughout the year they can review and plan on a regular basis.
Working relationships will have been established and the chances of staff making a meaningful contribution increased.
Preparatory stages
Before sensible planning for the future can begin, those taking part need to know the current situation.
In a school context this means having a clear picture of current provision and the way in which resources have been used.
It seems essential that a curriculum and resources audit is carried out annually.
A curriculum audit may look at the following:
the skills or subjects taught and the amount of time allocated to each;
how cross-curricular themes are covered;
how the legal requirements of the National Curriculum are being implemented;
how far LEA initiatives and policy statements are being implemented or adapted to the particular circumstances of the school; and
how far the aims of the school are being fulfilled.
A resources audit will be concerned with how resources have been used, for example:
the deployment of all the staff working in the school, both in terms of how their time has been used and their cost;
the use of accommodation;
expenditure on equipment and materials;
expenditure on services from the postage and the telephone, to the cleaning and heating bills;
the use of resources from outside the school, such as the LEA Training Grants Scheme (LEATGS) budget; and
any income the school has been able to generate itself.
The starting point for any action will be the aims of the school; these may need agreeing anew.
Certainly the governing body needs to be happy with them.
That said.
many school aims are expressed in very broad (if laudable) terms, such as‘to value all students equally’ or ‘to encourage students to have lively and enquiring minds’.
To make such statements  usable it may be necessary to establish criteria which would recognise whether they are being fulfilled.
For example, a school may judge that developing ‘lively and enquiring minds’ among its students requires certain teaching styles, namely a move away from didactic teaching to active student participation.
This could give staff and governors something specific to aim for and a way of measuring success.
Beyond the key pieces of information outlined on the curriculum and resources, each institution will choose which further items it reviews.
This choice will reflect both the values held and the stage the institution has reached.
Much of the information may be gathered as a matter of course.
Where this is not so, individuals or groups can be given the task of reviewing a particular area.
One method of carrying out an audit is known as a SWOT analysis since it identifies strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats.
The first two involve reviewing current practice and provision.
The strengths might include, for example, a management structure, expertise among the staff.
classroom practice and so on.
The weaknesses would be identified gaps and areas in need of improvement.
Opportunities and threats refer to the demands and pressures on the school — for example, the legislative changes which require action.
These may seem problematic and appear to put the school on the defensive, passively accepting what has been decided elsewhere.
It may be better if the school can take some control of the agenda.
Very often the way in which change is implemented is left to the school to decide and this can then be done in accordance with its philosophy and aims.
There may well be an important role for the LEA advisers/ inspectors assisting an institution in carrying out a full audit.
Schools that have had an HMI inspection have found that much of their work has been done for them — though it is difficult to imagine that schools will therefore be applying in large numbers for a full inspection!
Detailed documents may be produced and these will need summarising so as to be  usable in the later stages of planning and prioritising.
Constructing a Plan
The starting point for this will depend on how familiar the school is with the procedures.
The first experience will probably take considerable planning and most of a term to carry out.
The authors of LEAP 1,Management of Education (1989) suggest that preparing a School Development Plan may be one of the most demanding management tasks of headship.
At a very early stage a whole staff meeting may be the best way to discuss with staff the concept of the plan, the issues concerned with its construction and the uses to which it will be put.
The following is a possible course of action for a school.
It presupposes the existence of a policy-making group of some kind, preferably involving governors and the school's attached ‘pastoral’ adviser or inspector.
It entails a planned schedule of meetings for the various teams that operate during the school year; these might be age-phase teams in a primary school, departmental or pastoral teams in a secondary school, or groups concerned with particular issues, for example, an equal-opportunities group.
A possible course of action
1.
The policy-making group meets to set the time-scale, to plan the introductory sessions and to agree the questions to form the basis of discussions; some are suggested in the next section.
2.
A staff meeting is held to clarify what the plan is for and to outline the procedures to be adopted.
If this is the first plan to be drawn up, this will probably be sufficient matter for one meeting; in subsequent years it will be possible to proceed more quickly.
A set of questionnaires could be issued at this stage as the basis for further discussion and as a focus for reviewing and prioritising developments.
3.
The next meeting will be one of scene-setting.
It will consider school, local and national developments so that when discussion of future plans takes place it is done with full knowledge of the school audit and national and local priorities beyond.
This could be a whole-school meeting, but in a large school may well be more profitably kept to those middle managers responsible for leading staff teams.
They can then advise their teams of developments relevant to their planning.
These smaller meetings will facilitate participation by all staff.
4.
Over a period of weeks the different teams meet to review and plan ahead.
They will use the questions agreed in 1 for their discussions and will be asked to limit the number of priorities to three.
This will establish a common format for responses and also encourage the consideration of the relative importance of each priority.
It also recognises that there is a limit to the number of changes that a school can undertake in one year.
5.
The responses are completed and a small sub-committee of the policy-making group, including the INSET coordinator, begins to collate the points for consideration.
6.
The policy group will meet again on a number of occasions.
Its job will be to consider the responses coming in and to decide the priorities.
It will have to judge which of the received suggestions are most suitable as well as possibly adding items which have not been suggested.
It will then draw up its recommendations for the coming year's School Development Plan.
This will include short- and long-term aims, general ideas on how these will be implemented, who will be involved, and how monitoring and evaluation will be carried out.
Plans for staff development will naturally follow and these will be costed.
The implications for staffing and the use of other resources will also have to be considered at this stage.
Some developments, such as the introduction of a new subject area, could be very costly, needing new staff, equipment and accommodation.
Available resources will affect the speed at which it will be possible to proceed.
7.
The plan of action will be written and taken to a full meeting of the governing body for its agreement or amendment; it will then be taken back to the staff.
8.
The plan will be forwarded to the LEA.
9.
Detailed planning of the implementation will follow.
A possible questionnaire
As a stimulus to reflection and discussion, this could be used to consider the work of a particular team or the whole school.
With a slight change of wording it could also serve the same purpose for an individual, but its use as part of staff appraisal is not considered here.
Putting the School Development Plan into action
Some thought will already have been given to this in deciding how many priorities will be tackled in the coming year.
Once the plan has been agreed by the governing body the details can be added.
Each priority will have to be broken down into manageable tasks and the methods for carrying them out and reviewing them identified.
This is the job of the staff in school.
The criteria by which success will be judged will also have to be established at this stage.
The targets will affect staff development plans, whether it be to increase knowledge and expertise in the area in question, or simply to provide time to consider issues in a way which will lead the school forward.
A suggested framework has now been put forward: two examples of possible priorities which could emerge are mapped out below.
EXAMPLE 1
A secondary school decides to introduce a new Technology course for its first-year pupils, in line with the National Curriculum guidelines.
It is to be introduced in the following September which will allow ample time for discussion.
It will bring together teachers of Art, Business Studies, Craft, Design and Technology, and Home Economics to plan a coherent course.
The changes will require funding from INSET.
capitation and staffing budgets.
The staff will need time to meet during the school day, as well as in after-school sessions.
Representative staff will keep abreast of national developments by attending conferences and by visiting other schools piloting such courses.
New computers are needed for the subject areas involved.
It is also decided that a member of staff should be appointed on a ‘B’ allowance to act as coordinator.
The success criteria against which developments will be judged could be:
whether a scheme of work has been written;
feedback from students on what they feel they have achieved;
teacher judgement of the course; and
the views of the LEA adviser and relevant advisory teachers on the course and student achievement.
EXAMPLE 2
Improved Science education is identified as a priority in a primary school.
It is decided that one topic per term in each year group should be Science-based.
The Science co-ordinator is the key person to lead this work.
A staff meeting early in the year is to be used to introduce staff to the key points in the National Curriculum guidelines on Science.
The staff development day which is to follow shortly afterwards is to be used by the different year teams to work out a programme of study.
Further meeting time is allotted to assess the topics after they have been taught.
Money is put aside from school capitation for the purchase of some new equipment, and from staff development funds to allow the Science co-ordinator to visit the main secondary school that pupils go on to, so that both schools can look at continuity.
The success criteria against which developments are to be judged could be:
whether the topics are being taught;
whether the schemes of work have been written up;
an evaluation of the provision and pupil achievement by the staff, LEA adviser.
and Head of Science from the linked secondary school;
staff confidence in teaching further Science-based topics;
pupils evaluation.
Monitoring and evaluation
These two aspects of development planning are complementary but separate; they are considered in more detail in Chapter 8.
At any particular time governors and staff may want to know how the plans are progressing and whether they are being carried out as was agreed.
This is the monitoring aspect.
They will also want to know how successful the plans have been in achieving what they set out to achieve.
This evaluation will consider whether the school is now more effectively educating its students, and whether the change has been carried out in the most efficient way.
Progress can be reviewed at any time — not just at the end — and can be done both informally and in written reports.
The criteria against which to measure success are termed performance indicators .
There has been a great deal of debate about the collection and use of these.
 Quantitive data, such as examination passes, tend to be the easiest to measure, and schools have rightly worried about the use to which these can be put when comparing one school with another.
They may also be of limited use when trying to judge the success of many plans.
For example, if a school has attempted to improve its image in the neighbourhood it may feel that it has been successful if the number selecting the school for the following academic year increases.
However, there could be numerous reasons for this happening: isolating particular factors may be very difficult.
This is not to suggest that an attempt at measurement is not worthwhile, just that it may not be as simple as some raw figures suggest.
It is probably best if the main criteria for judgement are identified as the plans are agreed.
as has been done with the two examples in the previous section.
This is also an area where the LEA could assist a school in offering its services as a ‘critical friend’, able to stand back and perhaps judge more objectively than those working in the school itself.
In fact when LEAs increase the amount of inspection work they are  required to carry out, this could well be one of the ways in which they are able to help schools move forward.
An agreed set of performance indicators would be a starting point for this.
The monitoring and evaluation completes the course of action for that year; it also begins to produce fresh information on which to base action for the following years, and so the cycle can begin again.
Conclusion
School Development Plans look set to become an established feature of school life.
They have the potential to bring together coherently all the different aspects of planning already going on in every school.
As schools become more practised and expert at constructing and implementing them, they should guarantee that the resources available to the school are used effectively to increase the range of opportunities and the quality of education for the pupil population.
GOVERNORS AND THE LOCAL MANAGEMENT OF SCHOOLS
Felicity Taylor
The two Education Acts of 1986 and 1988 brought about some revolutionary changes in education — nowhere more so than in the role of governing bodies.
As well as strengthening the role of governors, the 1986 Act made it impossible for political nominees to control governing bodies, as they often had in the past, while the 1988 Act transfers the management of most schools from local education authorities (LEAs) to the individual school.
The governing body therefore now has much greater potential to exercise control over the life and work of the school.
Under the 1986 Act all the interests involved in a school — parents, staff, the LEA and the local community — are represented on the governing body.
No one interest has a majority.
Every school, even the smallest primary school, should also have a governor from local industry or commerce.
Governors come from very different backgrounds and experience: they may be politicians, parents, teachers, workers in industry, commerce or the community.
But to be effective they all have to learn to work together for the good of the school.
They also have to learn that the various legal powers and duties given to the governing body mean very little in practice if the governors are at odds with the head and staff.
Heads and staff in their turn are having to acquire a skill new to many of them: the skill of working with their governors.
They have to understand that it does not diminish their professional authority and status if they share decision-making with the governing body.
This does not mean that the governing body should involve itself in the day-to-day running of the school.
That remains the professional duty of the head.
The focus of governors should be on planning and policies.
It is the head and staff who put these into  practice.
Circular 7/87. on the provisions of the 1986 Act, explains what is meant by the general conduct of the school: ‘It should be seen as being concerned with the whole ethos of the school's life’.
So the governing body has responsibility for the ethos of the school, for deciding what kind of school it is to be.
and how it is to meet the needs of its pupils.
This in turn determines the school's aims and objectives.
The governors must then decide on the policies and priorities that help the school to fulfil its aims.
It is not a job that can be undertaken on the basis of a business meeting of the governors once a term.
Governors must take every opportunity to get to know their school well, by visiting the school while it is at work and by getting to know the staff.
parents and pupils.
They have to be sensitive to the insecurities and low morale of many people working in education at present.
When governors are known in the school.
they are less likely to be objects of suspicion and distrust.
Good relationships and good communications will provide the best foundation for making the right decisions for the school.
The first step for the governing body which is taking local management seriously is to work with the head and staff in identifying the school's aims and objectives.
These need to be as specific as possible, including a timetable for action if they are to be of any use.
To do this you need the answer to four simple questions:
1.
Where are we now?
2.
Where are we going?
3.
How are we going to get there?
4.
How will we know if we have got there?
It may be helpful to carry out a SWOT analysis — looking at the school's strengths, weaknesses, opportunities and threats.
This will be a sound basis for the School Development Plan described in the previous chapter.
Governors will of course have to rely on the head and staff for much of the technical information about curriculum and what is needed to deliver it.
They will need to find out what the cost of the various activities will be — not just in terms of teachers, materials and equipment, but also in working space and support services.
Sub-committees
The governing body will almost certainly need to set up sub-committees  or working groups to look at different aspects of the school's development.
These can be an effective way of getting through the work because a small group can afford to take more time to consider different aspects of a topic and can call in others to help — members of staff, parents and people from the local community with special expertise.
They can also be used to develop different skills within the governing body.
People who are shy of speaking out in front of all the other governors may feel more confident in a sub-committee.
It also gives governors a chance to practise taking the chair and to report back briefly and succinctly.
Make sure that any sub-committees represent a genuine cross-section of the whole group, including different types of governor.
The 1989 Schools' Regulations allow governing bodies to delegate some of their responsibilities to sub-committees or to individuals, though the governing body can still be held legally responsible for any actions taken under these delegated powers.
In most cases it is safer and just as efficient for sub-committees to make recommendations and for decisions about these to be taken by the whole governing body.
Very few decisions can be taken in isolation.
There is always some knock-on effect on the rest of the work of the school.
Whether or not they are given delegated powers, sub-committees must have specific terms of reference and clearly defined tasks, so that everyone understands just what the sub-committees are to do and when it is to be done.
There are four main areas of the governing body's work that could each have their own sub-committee:
curriculum and staffing;
premises;
pupils, parents and the community; and
finance and management.
CURRICULUM AND STAFFING
The 1988 Act said that every child was entitled to a broad and balanced curriculum, contributing to their moral, spiritual, mental and physical development.
The governors are responsible for seeing that the demands of the law are met and that the school teaches the National Curriculum, and in county schools.
also follows the curriculum policy laid down by the LEA.
The National Curriculum subjects will therefore have to be given priority for resources, especially where schools have not offered the full curriculum to all  pupils, or in primary schools which may have done little science and  technology .
The staff are the school's most important asset and the main component of any budget will be the cost of staff, including cover for those absent.
Although it is intended to charge actual staff costs, including incentive allowances, National Insurance, pensions and other costs, to the school's budget, the formula by which the school's finances are allocated does not take this into account.
This is likely to prove expensive for schools with more experienced teachers.
Governors will require information about their school's staffing structure, including the duties and responsibility allowances of all the teaching and non-teaching (support) staff.
They will want to know how much time each teacher spends in front of the class and the size of classes in the different subjects and year groups.
This can be a good opportunity to take an audit of staff skills and qualifications.
Many teachers are not teaching the subjects for which they originally qualified and the audit can reveal other hidden skills and talents.
This could prove very worthwhile in coping with the National Curriculum and its additional demands on staff.
Some teaching unions have expressed worries that governors may want to reduce staff costs by cutting down on the number of teachers or allowances, or delaying filling a vacancy, or employing less well qualified staff.
This is unlikely, because governors and parents are generally convinced that good schools need good teachers.
There may however be some value in spending more on administrative and other support for staff in and out of the classroom.
This could relieve heads and teachers of clerical work for which they are not trained and allow them to make better use of their valuable (and scarce) teaching skills.
PREMISES
The relationship between the LEA and the governing body as far as the buildings are concerned will be very like that of landlord and tenant.
The LEA ‘landlord’ will be responsible for structural repairs and the external fabric of the building, while the school ‘tenant’will have to carry out internal repairs and maintenance.
Capital spending will still be controlled by the LEA in county schools.
Governors need to inform themselves thoroughly about the current state of the school building before they accept responsibility for it.
Under LMS, schools should be able, within their limited resources, to take rational decisions about building works and maintenance — though there may be disputes over what constitutes  wear and tear and what is structural work.
It should be easier to get minor repairs done than at present.
Most schools given control over their budget have been able to make savings on heating and lighting without much difficulty — savings which should go to education in the classroom.
Care of the school buildings is important because of the effect this has on the morale of pupils and teachers.
Health and safety 
The LEA is responsible for making sure that health and safety regulations are observed in county and controlled schools.
In voluntary-aided schools, the governors are responsible.
Under LMS, where governing bodies are given responsibility for matters that affect health and safety, they will be potentially liable for any offences against the 1974 Health and Safety Act caused by their decisions.
Section 28(6) of the 1988 Education Act makes it clear that governors will not be personally liable in cases of injury or damage if they have acted in good faith.
But this does not exempt them from liability if their actions result in negligent damage to people or property.
For example, if they failed to arrange for a minor repair in the science labs and a pupil was hurt as a result, they might be guilty of a safety offence.
Arrangements for insurance will be included in the financial delegation scheme, but governors should check that cover is adequate.
The LEA will be able to direct governors of county schools to carry out work essential for health and safety reasons.
If the governors fail to do this, the LEA can carry out the work and deduct the cost from the delegated budget.
The governors should ensure that any hazard is reported to the LEA as soon as possible, or rectify this themselves if it is their responsibility.
School lettings 
The 1986 Education Act gave county-school governors the right to decide the use to which the school should be put outside the normal school day, subject to any directions issued by the LEA.
Most LMS schemes will enable the school to keep net income from lettings, though the LEA will still have the right to set some conditions.
It can continue to offer a central booking system as long as governors wish to use it.
Schools planning to raise income from lettings will have to take into account costs, including wear and tear, overtime and fuel.
The DES asked governing bodies to be sympathetic to the  needs of the local community when setting up their lettings policy.
PUPILS, PARENTS AND THE COMMUNITY
Since the financial resources of the school will depend very largely on the number of pupils, and open enrolment may allow popular schools to take additional pupils, this will intensify the pressure on schools with falling rolls.
It will be even more important for a school to have good communications with parents and the local community.
Governors need to make sure that information about the school is available in the local library, welfare clinics and doctors' surgeries and that all local community groups are invited to school functions.
Don't forget simple ideas like having exhibitions of pupils' work in local shops and libraries; estate agents and building societies will sometimes do this too.
Some governing bodies appoint a press officer.
If you have succeeded in establishing good relations with local journalists, they may be more helpful when you want to avoid bad publicity.
Pupils can be your best ambassadors, through helping with local voluntary groups, taking part in local events, work-experience schemes, school-industry links, helping out in local special schools or playgroups.
Governing bodies will be all too aware of the danger that the image presented by their pupils may be negative rather than positive and do their best to see that high standards of behaviour are maintained in and out of school.
FINANCE
Governors need to be aware that sub-committees can develop a pecking order.
This often happens when there is a finance and general purposes sub-committee.
Finance sub-committees should be concerned with making sure that the school's financial systems work well, and with monitoring the budget and the school's financial management.
They should not be taking decisions about how money should be spent.
That should be decided in the light of the school's priorities agreed by all the governors.
Once these difficult decisions have been taken, the mechanics of setting out the budget are a relatively simple matter of listing the details of the year's spending plan.
Help will be available from the LEA not only in calculating the spending plan, but in monitoring the way it is working through the year.
This should be a safeguard against a school getting into serious trouble.
Computers and information technology will cope with much of the drudgery, but schools will need a finance officer (who may be  one of the existing administrative staff with extra training).
Small schools that might not need a full-time officer may be able to share one.
Decision-making
The crunch comes when you realise that the money allotted to the school by the LEA is unlikely to finance all the very desirable objects you have in mind.
Then judgements about priorities have to be made.
Here the governors' role is crucial because of their responsibility for the overall conduct and ethos of the school.
But if the School Development Plan has been carefully constructed, it should make the process easier.
It may seem that once stalling and premises costs have been accounted for, there is very little left about which to make decisions.
But this is where a real difference to the quality of life in the school can be made and real influence brought to bear.
Although the percentage of the total budget may be small, it is surprising how small sums can have a significant effect in boosting the morale of a department or subject.
In spite of all the anxieties about finance, then, governors can make a valuable contribution and can help to see that every department or area of the school gets a fair share of the limited resources available.
In addition, they can perhaps bring home to the community just how much education needs and deserves better funding.
Concluding checklist for LMS
Define the school's aims and objectives in manageable terms.
Draw up a School Development Plan and renew it every year.
Decide on priorities.
Decide how to measure progress.
Decide what information will be needed from the school and from the LEA.
Decide how that information will be used.
Allocate responsibilities for detailed planning.
Allocate responsibilities for monitoring.
Don't expect governors to take on more than they can manage.
Keep up the momentum by reviewing and building on progress.
LOCAL MANAGEMENT OF SCHOOLS: IMPLICATIONS FOR TEACHERS
Chris Moisan
It is not just a coincidence, nor is it simply a matter of ‘preferred newspeak’ that the ‘local financial management’(LFM) of the pilot projects of the mid-1980s has become the ‘Local Management of Schools (LMS) required by legislation.
Compared to LFM, LMS is a qualitatively different system.
Under LFM key areas of decision-making remained under the ultimate direction of the LEA not least the curriculum, staffing establishments and conditions of service and pay discretions.
The philosophy of LMS was rehearsed in the Coopers & Lybrand Report (1988) and the government has now adopted it and enshrined it in legislation.
There are many uncertainties, and a wide-ranging debate is taking place across the country as to the nature of this new relationship between schools and LEAs.
One fact is abundantly clear: schools have become increasingly responsible for not only their day-to-day decisions, but also for their short-, medium- and longer-term development decisions.
It is obvious that this transfer of power will have a real effect on teachers in schools.
However, there is plenty of evidence that many of the teachers whose working lives will be transformed by the introduction of LMS still think it has little to do with them.
This is understandable given the multitude of pressures and changes that characterise the teachers’ working environment.
The argument developed in this chapter is that teachers can ill afford to take this blinkered attitude towards LMS, even if in doing so they appear to be adopting a coping strategy that enables them to focus on those aspects of their work that they see as most important.
Possible consequences for classroom teachers
There has been widespread discussion of the possible effects of LMS on teachers.
The more reliable contributions to this debate have been informed by the experience of the LFM pilot schools.
These informed assessments have, however, been clouded by a profusion of misconceptions, misinterpretations and misunderstandings that have served to blur the picture available to teachers.
This has encouraged teachers to turn a blind eye to LMS in the hope that somehow, somewhere, someone will do something to protect them and their pupils from ‘it’.
The consequence has been an over-concentration on the negative possibilities of LMS to the almost total exclusion of the positive, democratising potential of the delegation of power from LEAs to schools.
This is not to say that teachers do not have a lot to worry about with the implementation of LMS.
The teacher unions and professional associations have produced clear and accurate documents for their members which inevitably highlight these problems.
A key area, of course, is the staffing or personnel implications of LMS.
As outlined in Chapter 1, LEAs will still be the employers of school staff; governors of schools with delegated budgets, however, will now have control over setting the total number of staff at the school; appointing and dismissing staff; setting certain elements of pay and working conditions; and controlling disciplinary and grievance procedures.
For the ‘ordinary’ classroom teacher this situation could mean that decisions taken within the school might lead to larger classes, less non-contact time (where this is actually available) and higher levels of cover for absent colleagues.
The context of pupil-led formula funding and the charging to schools of actual salary costs, could put governors in a situation where they are deciding to appoint and/or promote only younger and hence ‘cheaper’ teachers.
They might also seek to appoint unqualified staff because of the apparent savings that can be made.
Teachers should also be aware of the indirect effects that LMS could have on their work.
Most LEAs have been unwilling or unable to improve their ‘global’ budgetary provisions for clerical and administrative support for schools.
The government has also failed to accept the real need for improved provision at school level in this area.
There may well be more work for those staff currently employed in the ‘support’ role in schools.
The possible effect of this increased workload combined with the  pressure on schools to find ‘economies’ to help them live within their budgets, might be to reduce the already meagre levels of clerical/ administrative support available to classroom teachers.
Teachers might find their loyalties divided: a wedge driven between what might be seen as opposing interests — for example supply cover for staff or more capitation for pupils.
How much time might a teacher have to spend religiously chasing-up ways of making small-scale economies?
Classroom teachers might find their entitlement to leave of absence curtailed.
At present this condition of service is negotiated at LEA level, but with LMS governors have only to heed LEA advice as to entitlement.
How many governors, given the constraints many will face, will be tempted to ignore LEA advice and refuse, for example, paternity leave or study leave?
It does not take a crystal ball to foresee an increase in the number and scope of individual grievances as LMS becomes implemented.
Will many schools decide to devise their own procedures for dealing with these?
If yours does, will it be a fair and consistent procedure?
Who will be the final arbiter?
Will teachers have sufficient respect for them as to make their judgements acceptable?
One cannot discuss the staffing implications of LMS for teachers without addressing their greatest fear about the issue: compulsory redundancy and therefore the loss of ‘absolute’ security of tenure.
Local management delegates the power of dismissal, including dismissal on the grounds of redundancy, from the LEA to the school.
It is widely anticipated that LMS will lead to more job losses.
Although the irony of this situation at a time of teacher shortages will raise a smile among many teachers and educationalists, the real prospect of losing their jobs will make this the bitterest pill for teachers to swallow.
Local Management of Schools is not just about the delegation of staffing powers from LEAs to schools.
Other powers recently assumed by governors, all part of the LMS package, will also affect classroom teachers.
The National Curriculum and its attendant assessment arrangements will clearly dominate most teachers' minds and practice in the coming years.
Many decisions about the implementation, organisation and monitoring of the National Curriculum will have to be taken at school level and each of these could affect the ‘ordinary teacher’.
For instance, there is the question of the length of the school day: some schools will feel obliged to extend the ‘pupil day’ in order better to cope with ‘curriculum delivery’.
There is the concern about how the school can both maintain its  own curriculum priorities and meet statutory requirements.
Local management will throw into sharp relief the fact that staffing decisions (in turn determined by financial priorities) can determine curriculum provision, if not curriculum policy.
For some teachers this might mean that their services are no longer affordable .
even if they are both needed and wanted by the school.
The results of delegation of power from LEA to schools need not necessarily lead to the sorts of negative effects for teachers outlined above.
It is obvious that where there is scope for decisions which worsen the teachers' lot, there is also room for decisions which improve it.
For example, while LMS gives the governing body the power to cut their school's staffing establishment, they also have the power to exceed the level that would have been fixed by the LEA.
Where decisions could be made to use a fixed-term contract to cover a vacancy, the decision could instead be made to fill the post on a permanent basis.
Governors will have the power to improve staff facilities and to make classes smaller, to expand the support staff and to provide guaranteed non-contact time and supply cover for teachers.
Clearly, if LMS could bring real benefits for teachers it would also bring benefits to pupils too: LMS could enable curriculum development that might have gone unfunded by the LEA.
By improving the working environment of teachers, governors could indirectly improve relationships between staff and pupils.
The monitoring/evaluation process associated with LMS should assist schools in identifying and meeting the needs of pupils; funds could then be much more readily targeted to meet these.
Teachers should also be aware that LMS offers a real possibility for overriding the bureaucratic obstacles that can plague apparently simple tasks.
Examples that spring to mind illustrate how this can save time and money and hence improve the working environment:
rapid and cost-effective minor repairs;
the implementation of really effective energy-saving procedures;
the targeting of development funds on to school-based priorities; and
the engagement of supply teachers by schools direct, rather than via the LEA's personnel section.
This potential for improving the quality of teaching and learning  that underlies LMS probably accounts for the fact that few educationalists are opposed to it in principle .
However.
it is a comment upon current government policy towards schools and education in general that one can find hardly anyone with a professional interest in education who does not have reservations about how it will work in practice.
The reason for this paradox is clear: the potential benefits of LMS will not be realised where the application of a relatively crude pupil-led formula results in insufficient funds being available for the school to ‘run itself on.
Effects on teacher morale
If the worst effects of LMS are to be avoided and its potential benefits realised for teachers and their pupils then teachers must ensure that the decision-making process in their school operates in such a way as to enable their full participation.
It is a truism that schools exist primarily for the personal development of pupils.
Unfortunately the current climate which seeks to bring ‘market forces’ into the state-education arena has shifted debate away from this towards the question of ‘school management’.
The terminology of this debate has become dominated by concepts from the world of business and commerce: senior management teams, line  management , clients and customers, service delivery, product marketing and so on.
There is a real risk that in the sometimes frenzied attempts to make schools smooth-running, cost-effective, economically viable ‘enterprises’, the educational raison d'être will be relegated to a distant second place.
It is up to teachers — and also governors — to ensure that this does not happen.
Unfortunately, more and more schools are moving towards  decision -making structures that will actually assist this diverted focus.
The delegation of authority under LMS is from LEA to governing body.
However, the School Government Regulations (1989) enable governing bodies to delegate many of their decision-making powers to individual members and/or sub-committees of the governing body.
In practice, too many governing bodies are merely ‘rubber stamps’ to decisions made by the headteacher and/ or a group of governors with the headteacher in the guise of ‘subcommittees’.
The quality of the decisions thus made may be good or bad.
That is not the issue.
The real issue is the very conception of the school as an institution.
In the one conception, schools are like businesses and therefore need strong, decisive management.
That is best achieved by  ‘experts’ who have been ‘properly trained’in the ethos, language and mechanisms of ‘managing’.
This view stresses hierarchy, status, concentration of power, streamlined decision-making, minimal monitoring/evaluation/reporting.
It also suggests the need for a senior management team unfettered by the need to consult with or seek consensus amongst the staff.
A good headteacher (and chair of governors) in this conception is a person (usually a man) who is not only committed to the above ideals but can also see ways of circumventing any constraints upon this style placed by ‘outside interference’ such as the advice of the LEA and/or the teacher unions/staff representatives.
Although this crude characterisation of the ‘management mentality’ does not exist in most of our schools, many teachers will recognise this description.
There are too many schools where the ‘management style’ approaches this extreme, even if this is as a perceived necessity forced upon an unwilling or unwitting head/governing body by the pressures and pace of change.
Not least amongst the reasons cited for having a ‘closed’ system of decision-making, of course, is the advent of LMS.
Among the problems that closed decision-making could bring will be a further lowering of teacher morale.
The IAC's Third Report on the Pay and Conditions of School Teachers (1990) has a lot to say about teacher morale and motivation, particularly in relation to pay.
Despite the fact the LMS was beyond their remit, they indicated that
the introduction of LMS was a source of much anxiety among teachers.
…There appears to be considerable uncertainty about its effects and in particular, about the approach to formula funding adopted by the Government which is thought to threaten job security in schools with high staff costs…the present uncertainties are hardly helping morale in the schools and we hope that the Government at national level and LEAs and headteachers at local.
will do all they can to ensure that the details of the policy and of individual schemes are clearly understood by teachers.
( Chilver Report 1990, para 3.50 page 22)
Had their remit been wider, they might well have discovered that many of the teachers' anxieties about LMS arose from a lack of faith in school-level decision-making and a feeling of being somehow ‘outside’ the decision-making process: a ‘victim’of change rather than an agent of it.
This has been borne out to an extent by recent research into teacher stress.
Time after time, reports quote teachers as experiencing  stress arising from a lack of consultation and the consequent feeling of being ‘undervalued’ and lacking in self-esteem, confidence and commitment to the work of the school.
A recent research project funded by one of the professional associations explored the underlying causes of stress and identified a kind of league table of sources.
Top of the table came ‘classroom tasks and classroom situations’.
Second.
however came ‘the organisation and management of the school’, with the advent of LMS and the transfer of management powers from LEAs to heads/governors specifically identified by teachers as ‘making this worse’.
The research team concluded that.
while individual ‘stress-coping’ strategies do help to alleviate the symptoms of stress, only an organisational approach to reducing stress has a real chance of helping all teachers.
Following the report, the National Union of Teachers' ‘stress project team’ then drew up an organisational action plan which, it argued, would, if implemented, reduce the sources of stress.
This action plan makes it evident that many of the organisational improvements recommended are in fact features synonymous with an ‘openly run’ school with an ‘open’form of decision-making.
 Out of the 25 ‘points’ on the action plan.
the following 13 are likely to be already answered or more readily addressed within a context of ‘open-decision making’.
The task environment:
design jobs and allocate duties such that teachers' skills are better matched to the demands on them;
greater agreement on ‘aims and objectives’ of the school.
Problem solving and social environment:
develop a more cooperative and supportive culture;
develop idea of team problem solving;
legitimise this notion by providing time for staff to discuss problems together;
improve communication within school;
provide better feedback to teachers;
request senior teachers to share information.
Development environments:
develop better person-management within schools;
leadership and management styles used by heads to be improved;
more frequent and better use of expressions of appreciation contingent upon teachers' efforts and achievements;
more frequent and better use of feedback within school;
in-service training to be improved and made more relevant to teachers ‘real needs in coping with their day to day work…‘
(Adapted from The stress factor, in The Teacher 1 spring term 1990.)
If the ‘closed’ style of management described above is already a problem in many schools, then there are a great many more where such a style might permeate the existing decision-making process once delegated budgets are in place.
At the other end of the ‘open/closed decision-making’ spectrum is the conception of the school as an institution which requires ‘leadership’rather than‘management’.
According to this view of the school.
what is needed is organisation, administration and, above all, quality leadership.
It stresses teacher professionalism, equity of opinions, consensus and consultation, and seeks to harness the creativity, expertise, experience and commitment of the staff of the school to the realisation of agreed aims, priorities and values.
It never forgets that schools are about relationships between people and that the quality of relationships within the school will be the final determinant of the success of the school.
In reality, of course, most schools lie somewhere along a continuum between these two stylised camps, often shifting in one direction or another with changes in personnel and circumstances.
The point for teachers now is to ensure that this debate is held within their schools, within their governing bodies.
They must, in their own interests and in the interests of their pupils, ensure that their school is at or moving towards the ‘open’ end of the continuum.
The involvement of teachers
As argued above, ‘teacher involvement’ is crucial in establishing an effective school, in raising the morale of teachers and in giving LMS the chance to achieve its aim of improving the quality of educational opportunities for pupils.
This section will look at how this teacher involvement can be achieved, both in general terms and by looking at a specific example in detail.
However, it is first worth rehearsing the basic structure within which the delegation of powers will work under LMS and looking at the basis for teacher involvement that already exists in many schools.
In maintained schools since 1944 ‘managerial’ decision-making powers have ultimately rested with LEAs.
Headteachers were central to this school management process: making day-to-day decisions, advising the LEA (both officers and councillors), motivating their staff, supervising the administration and organisation within the school and ensuring that educational priorities were the basis of this management process.
They really were head teachers : educationalists first and last.
The 1988 Education Reform Act changes this long-established structure for those schools that receive delegated budgets.
In these schools, the decision-making process is delegated from the LEA to the governing body.
The governing body is charged with managing the school within its delegated budget.
The 1989 School Government Regulations elaborate upon this and clarify the powers of the school's governing body to delegate decision making further.
The regulations make it clear that certain decision-making powers must be exercised by the full governing body, including:
appointment of governors;
the curriculum policy
school hours;
principles of disciplinary policy;
annual report and meeting;
sex education;
collective worship and RE;
provision of information; and
proposals to opt out; and
the school's charging policy.
All other decisions can be delegated by the full governing body to a sub-committee, an individual governor, or to the headteacher.
Such delegated authority could include, for example, financial decisions.
Any decision taken by the individual, head or subcommittee with delegated authority is binding on the whole governing body.
The day-to-day running of the school (within the framework of policies and decisions made by and/or on behalf of the governing body) is still the responsibility of the headteacher who now ‘reports’ to the governing body rather than to the officers of the LEA.
These then are the new ‘rules of engagement’ in the running of schools.
However, one must not forget that there is already an  existing decision-making process in every school.
This will have to be reviewed in the light of these new ‘rules’ but the advent of new rules does not fundamentally change the principles of effective decision-making: open decision-making has always been possible and will continue to be possible even under LMS.
The 1987 (and subsequent) Pay and Conditions Order set down a clear statutory requirement upon headteachers to consult with the staff of the school.
Teachers in schools where decision-making is ‘closed’ would do well to remember this and utilise it to help them ease their school towards a more ‘open’system.
Wise headteachers, however, have long recognised the value of meaningful consultation.
Consequently, in many schools a cycle of educational decision-making is already well established: aims are determined, objectives and policies are set out and prioritised; planning their achievement leads to budgeting (ie resources are allocated); implementation is monitored and progress is evaluated; the cycle is complete.
This is a ‘management’ exercise which is most effective when it is primarily the detailed work of the headteacher and staff, although governors must be involved at various key stages.
The advent of LMS should mean the enhancement of this existing educational decision-making cycle.
Many LEAs are providing training and support which should ‘sharpen’ the work of schools in identification, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of priorities.
Such training should include some focus on consultation, participation and decision-making.
Local education authority schemes of delegation will invest the  decision -making cycle at school level with the power to make real decisions about the ways in which the school budget will enable the realisation of the educational priorities of the school community.
However, the legislation itself (1988 Act and 1989 Regulations) does not require the involvement of teachers (other than headteacher) in the school's decision-making process.
This situation need not mean that teachers are not involved.
As well as the statutory requirements on headteachers to consult with their staff, the legislation does enable governing bodies to involve teachers in decision-making.
The most obvious mechanism available for governing bodies to involve teachers is via the teacher-governors.
These are colleagues elected by the teachers in their school.
They should be fully involved in the decisions made by the governing body.
However, one would be wrong to argue that the involvement of one or two teachers in the decision-making process constitutes ‘open  management’.
It is a start.
a minimum level of involvement…but not enough.
Another strategy — and one which is proving to be very popular in schools with a history of open decision-making — is for the governing body to establish a structure of sub-committees which bring together LEA governors, parent-governors, teacher-governors, co-opted governors, the headteacher and teachers in the making of decisions.
Such a use of sub-committees goes a long way towards achieving an ‘open’ management process.
It enables governors to draw upon the creativity, expertise, experience and commitment of the teaching staff.
It can only improve the quality of the decisions taken and hence improve the effectiveness of the school.
It also has the benefit of involving the very people who will carry the burden of implementing the decisions made — the teachers themselves.
The importance of this should never be underestimated: it is a vital ingredient in raising morale, reducing stress, harnessing energy and commitment and in building the teams and teamwork that makes for an effective school.
Local management does however offer an opportunity for more imaginative and exciting possibilities for those schools where a real commitment to the open decision-making ‘philosophy’ exists.
To illustrate this I will describe in some detail the example of my own school, where the governing body has grasped the opportunity presented by recent legislation to formalise a long-established tradition of teacher involvement in decision-making.
A case-study: Whitmore High School
The school has a very active governing body.
It holds regular open meetings for parents, parent-governors have a presence at all parents' evenings and open evenings, publish a regular newsletter and have a history of establishing governors' task groups and working parties.
During 1989 one such working party met on several occasions to look at decision-making in the light of the ERA.
Their recommendation to the governing body was not to establish a structure of sub-committees.
The governing body's decision was guided by three very important considerations: principle, existing practice, and time.
The governing body believes very firmly in the importance of involving staff in decision-making and policy creation.
so that they have a sense of ownership of the decisions that they will have to implement.
A major reason for the governing body's decision of principle is the fact that the school has an established and open decision-making structure which works well .
Staff work together and are supportive of each other and have been involved in the decision-making process through the various ‘teams’ that make up the management of the school.
The focal point of this existing structure is the school's policymaking group: The management board.
The governing body was concerned that setting up its own separate committee structure would not only be perceived as competing with the existing structure (with all the attendant risks of a developing ‘us and them’ mentality where one rarely existed before), but would also be repetitive.
In deciding this the governing body recognised the successes of the existing educational decision-making ‘cycle’ and saw that this success should be built upon under LMS, not swept aside.
Finally governors recognised that a fully established committee structure might involve an unreasonable amount of their own time.
It might also involve staff in duplicating much of their contribution to the decision-making process — for example, making ‘presentations’ to the governors' sub-committees when relevant agenda items were being discussed.
Most importantly, the governors felt that this duplication of effort would probably prevent the staff being ‘proactive’ in the running of the school.
Instead they would be forced into a ‘reactive’ relationship with the governing body and thus the school could lose the creative and professional energies that have made it so effective.
The governing body decided to accept the recommendation of the working party to build upon the strengths of the existing system.
Thus they decided that: the number of governors on the school's policy-making group, the management board, should be increased by three; the right of governors to attend the meetings of all other groups in the  school's internal consultative structure would be formalised; the governors would continue to establish task groups and working parties of their own and these would continue to be open to all teachers.
In this way the composition of the management board changed as shown in Table 4.1.
The six teachers are all elected by a ballot of all teaching staff.
As staff representatives, they have full voting rights on the management board.
The LEA has a system of ‘attaching’ educational advisers to a cluster of schools.
Involving the LEA's representative in the heart of the decision-making process like this not only enables the school to draw on their individual and ‘corporate’ expertise, experience and knowledge but also recognises the school's belief in the LEA's   vital role in providing a comprehensive education system for the local community.
Any member of staff, including a union representative, has the right to address the management board in relation to any agenda item, with the prior notification of the chair.
They may also submit (and speak to) a paper or agenda item of their own.
Union representatives can of course, also make representations direct to the headteacher and/or governing body.
Meetings are held at least every three weeks and sometimes more frequently.
To understand the role of the management board it is necessary to see how it relates to the school's wider consultative structure.
The management board is the central policy and decision-making agent in the school and as such is the focal point of the consultative structure (see Figure 4.1).
Cross-curricular groups take several forms, from particular task groups (eg to provide guidelines on homework policy, to review the school's assessment policy), through more long-term tasks of working parties (eg equal opportunities: gender) to standing committees (eg TVEI steering group).
Many of these originate from priorities identified in thy School Development Plan.
from other staff initiatives.
or in response to national/LEA requirements and governor or parent initiatives.
They are often, but not necessarily, chaired by a senior member of staff.
They are always open to all staff and governors.
In practice, they are effective, hardworking groups of professionals and   laypeople who have a commitment to education.
They can make recommendations to the management board and refer matters to other teams or the ‘whole staff’ for consideration and response.
The school's organisational groups are familiar to all secondary-school teachers' ‘academic’ teams, ‘pastoral’teams and teams of organisers and leaders.
Ideas can be discussed, worked out and formalised within teams and can then be ‘fed’ into the consultative process.
Such a structure not only enables staff to organise and implement initiatives effectively but also enables them to generate, develop and share their own ideas, practice, problems and solutions, The consultative process being so thorough and involving helps to create a sense of teamwork and community within the school.
It refines policies and initiatives, acts as a sort of ‘vetting’ process where unrealistic and/or misguided ideas are amended or ‘sidelined’with the agreement of the staff.
In this way a whole host of potential ‘personnel’ problems such as lack of motivation/commitment and grievances are prevented, rather than being fuelled by a ‘closing down’of the decision-making process.
The management board offers advice to the governing body, but also makes many final decisions itself.
To be precise, they are made by the board through the power delegated by the governing body to the headteacher.
The exercise of this delegated authority by the headteacher is circumscribed by the processes and structures outlined.
The headteacher exercises the delegated authority with care and due respect for both the power and responsibility it entails.
Delegated authority without a meaningful consultation process would spell disaster for teacher morale, motivation, commitment and hence effectiveness.
As a result of the ‘legal’ relationships involved between LEA, governing body and headteacher, the head reserves a right of veto over management-board decisions.
In practice, since the board was first established in 1983, this power has never been exercised.
It is not anticipated that LMS will bring any difference: such is the power of consultation — of involvement and ownership — in creating a clear, working consensus within a school community.
The fact that the consultative process described serves to enhance, rather than hinder, the task of school management is borne out by the school's successful introduction over the last few years of development planning.
This process is described fully in Chapter 2; here it is sufficient to say that staff involvement in the decision-making process means that the School Development Plan  has the support of the staff, who feel a sense of authorship and ownership of it.
The relative ease with which the school's open decision-making process has been ‘married’ to the requirements of development planning is encouraging.
It means that one can be very positive about the same system coping with LMS decision-making.
It will help to ensure that educational priorities remain at the forefront of planning and that the school continues to work together as a team.
Open decision-making should prevent LMS from driving a wedge between governors and staff or between the headteacher and other members of staff.
LOCAL MANAGEMENT OF SCHOOLS: IMPLICATIONS FOR SUPPORT (OR NON-TEACHING) STAFF
Pamela Barrett and John Whittle
‘Who is the most important person in a school?’ a governor asked candidates during recent interviews for the headteacher post in a large primary school.
One replied, ‘The caretaker’.
Whilst this was not, perhaps, the expected answer, no one with first-hand experience of running a school would deny the importance of good support staff in ensuring its success.
Despite this, many staff view the introduction of Local Management of Schools (LMS) with considerable apprehension.
Governors are able to allocate the school's resources in accordance with their own priorities.
They have power to determine staffing levels and salaries, subject to legislation and local and national agreements.
They must, however, operate within their budget share and meet the actual cost of all expenditure, including staff pay, from that delegated budget.
So where pressure exists to reduce expenditure the reduction is most likely to be achieved.
it is argued, by cutting the level of support in the school.
The Lincolnshire experience
Our experience in Lincolnshire, where a County Local Management Scheme operated in all secondary schools between April 1988 and April 1990, suggests that such fears may be unfounded.
Excluding grant-maintained schools, there are 61 secondary and 294 primary schools in the county.
The total school population of approximately 80,600 includes 34,400 pupils of secondary age.
Lincolnshire is predominantly rural county, the main centre being  the city of Lincoln, with a variety of medium-sized market towns such as Louth, Gainsborough, Boston and Grantham.
The population is spread over a large area of agricultural land.
Most of Lincolnshire's schools are small by national standards, except for those in Lincoln itself.
Lincolnshire County Council had already introduced a pre-ERA scheme of delegation which had been used to fund much of its secondary education.
As a direct result of devolved management, the level of resourcing devoted to support staff in schools has increased considerably.
Administrative staff have been offered additional hours and upgraded posts.
The role of clerk to the governors has become increasingly important, and in recognition of this, more highly paid.
In some cases schools have taken the opportunity offered by a delegated budget to create new posts.
These have often been directly linked to LMS work, but in some schools new posts have been created to assist teachers in preparing and typing teaching materials and reports.
More caretaking and cleaning staff have been needed as heads and governors seek to maximise the use of school premises and income gained from lettings.
Overall, the evidence suggests that schools are more likely to increase than reduce the share of the budget devoted to support personnel.
More significant than any of these changes, however, has been the way in which local management has involved the whole school community, including support staff.
in an integrated approach to planning the way forward.
The emphasis in the Lincolnshire scheme and in LMS under the 1988 Education Reform Act is not merely on financial management so much as the management of the total school resource.
It is about extending decision-making to the level where it can take place most effectively and where it can be informed by local circumstances in the context of the policy and philosophy of the school.
Above all, it is about finding the most efficient way to use the available resources for the maximum benefit of the pupils in the classroom.
This process should be a cooperative one, involving LEA, governors and all the school's staff, since they all have an interest in its success.
An essential component of any local management scheme is the staff training which precedes its introduction and continues throughout its operation.
School office staff have received specific training in procedures and the use of computer software and governors are involved in an extensive programme concerned with their new responsibilities.
However, the emphasis in LMS training has been on a whole-school approach, with governors, teachers, office staff, cleaners, caretakers, technicians, ancillary staff and LEA representatives working together for a full day in a particular school.
Perhaps the best way of illustrating just how this operates in practice and how far-reaching its effects can be in terms of building up the involvement of an entire school community in a philosophy and policy for the future is to show what has happened in one Lincolnshire school.
The whole-school approach: a case-study
CONTEXT
Cherry Willingham Comprehensive is a typical medium/small school on the rural-urban fringe of Lincoln.
Four hundred and fifty pupils and 25 teaching staff are aided by 11 other salaried support colleagues.
A new head was appointed in 1987.
The school has already had considerable experience of managing its own budgets via the Lincolnshire scheme of delegation.
This has forced it to become very aware of ‘LMS Think’ and to adopt certain key strategies quickly, as in other smaller schools, margins for savings and efficiencies are relatively small.
The situation which the school faced in early 1988 was generally a positive one.
The school was well regarded, had firm links with community and industry and had a strong and experienced staff backed by good parental support.
Its reputation as a caring, child-centred school was already showing dividends with a climbing roll, against the local trend.
However, many of its buildings were poorly built and fuel-inefficient.
It had a non-resident, part-time caretaker, extensive grounds maintained by a part-time groundsman and a low level of clerical support.
Morale was good; most importantly.
there were strong and positive relationships between all staff.
Though the Lincolnshire in-house LMS was not an entire system, it provided budget heads to include:
teaching;
support staff;
ESG in-service training;
temporary teacher supply;
capitation (to include everything from window cleaning to telephone bills); and
delegated maintenance scheme.
This represented about 80 to 85 per cent of the school's total budget.
School cleaning in Lincolnshire is already carried out by private contractors.
RAISING AWARENESS
From the beginning the headteacher felt that LMS meant not only financial management, but also the opportunity to guide staff towards a new relationship with the organisation and community of which they were a part.
The headteacher believed that everyone on site should become aware of the new atmosphere and how it could be managed.
As a consequence of this initial perception he felt the general awareness of all staff had to be built — and built rapidly.
Teaching staff were given an initial briefing, and a month later the full governing body and PTA were briefed in detail.
These early forays were a top-down dissemination of LMS rules and the possible effects of such regulations.
What was really needed was a ‘whole-school’ day.
This would allow all adults connected with the school the opportunity to share their perceptions and ideas on the implications of the school's increasing self-managing role and to reflect upon this with each other.
A date was decided on, the LEA's support was enlisted and ‘The Self-Managing School’ training day came about.
The broadest range of participants was invited, including teaching staff, support staff, PTA members, school governors and key members of the local community as well as a range of observers.
The initial reaction was one of surprise: many of those invited felt that they had no place in helping to ‘manage’ the school, yet the school secretaries, cooks, SMSAs, ancillary assistants.
caretaker, groundsman and the organiser of the private cleaning company all accepted.
A total in excess of 70 attended with groups for the workshops definitely mixed-ability and mixed-experience.
The chair for each group was seldom from the teaching staff.
The day began with reflection on the present practice of the school, on establishing what policies already existed and what further policies/strategies might be needed to produce the best service possible within a realistic resource base.
Support staff, who were in a majority, were as a consequence involved in productive and creative dialogue with teachers and governors.
Hierarchical structures were set aside and all contributed freely from their own experiences and perceptions.
This collaboration was not only about generating some ideas which could become possible policies, it was also designed to allow a sharing of a common  challenge and to promote understanding of the fact that everyone in an LMS environment has a vital role to play.
The governors and head have overall responsibility for managing the school, but this will be effective only if the considerable pool of talent and experience within the staff is used successfully.
Though all share a common working environment, many support staff had never discussed the school's curriculum — its aims, objectives or management processes -with each other or with teachers and parents.
Several did not understand the curriculum, while teaching staff had little idea of the contracts and conditions of service of support staff; governors' perceptions of such things as the cleaning contract were often hazy.
Discussion was wide ranging and the ideas produced were rich and varied.
The day was accurately minuted throughout and all participants later received a printed report including synopses and outcomes of their discussions.
Above all, the day had included everyone: an essential sense of sharing, already reasonably in existence, had been greatly enhanced.
A common thread throughout the day was that LMS (plus National Curriculum, records of achievement, appraisal and assessment and so on) was clearly going to make excessive demands on the small amount of clerical time.
In the months after the training day, the new-found freedom of LMS allowed considerable restructuring to take place.
Each budget area was identified as a separate ‘purse’, or a budget head.
Money can be moved easily (‘vired’) between individual budget heads, the only exception being Education Support Grant (ESG) and INSET where withdrawals are prohibited.
The management of such a system was of immediate concern to the school, and support-staff involvement was considered necessary.
Three support staff directly concerned with the issue -two secretaries and a laboratory technician — were invited to join with the head in addressing the needs of the future.
They took rates of pay, hours and levels of pay, NALGO locally negotiated job-descriptions and their own personal needs into consideration.
Discussions were open and informed; each member of staff was kept aware of the overall needs of the school and the constraints upon them.
The final result was sensitive to — and by and large able to fulfil — all perceived needs.
Two years later, the selected strategy and its financial implications have proved themselves with little need for modification.
All three staff remain in post.
The school now has an ‘LMS secretary’ as well as a ‘school secretary’, their roles being quite separate.
In addition, the hours of the ‘school  technician ’ have increased and a ‘mini-supply budget’has  been created in case of illness (theirs or their families) and an ‘overtime budget’has been included in case of crises.
Additional training was perceived as a need and all three have received INSET to include a wide range of information-technology skills, accountancy, advanced first aid and health and safety training.
Financing the training and providing cover during their absences was a simple matter with such a financial structure supporting them.
CHANGING STAFF RESPONSIBILITIES
The LMS secretary not only monitors and administers the various budgets, she also sees her own costs and those of her colleagues displayed on the VDU that she operates.
As a result it has been a relatively simple matter to audit and evaluate the original decisions of two years ago.
Savings have not been made, but efficiency and effectiveness have both been greatly enhanced.
Staff responsiveness and understanding allows a clarity of process that was not previously in evidence.
The laboratory technician is now the school technician .
The wider field of responsibility has been rewarded by a variety of means.
The sense of involvement has grown considerably and what had previously been a relatively isolated job has now become increasingly rich.
It is a normal sight to see the school technician discussing audio-visual maintenance, helping with a video presentation, instructing children in camera techniques or maintaining duplicating equipment.
What is more pleasing is his growing involvement with pupils.
Involvement in the Christmas show (lighting and sound) and the school's sailing club are some of his more recent activities.
All staff share the social events and training days; some attend the daily staff meeting.
Although the caretakers salary is not yet under budget control his purchases of ‘consumables’ are.
Likewise the maintenance of the building is via the Delegated Maintenance Scheme.
The caretaker has had to learn to cost items, control his stock (in a specially provided store area), to anticipate demands and monitor the building in a variety of different ways.
A record of his budget-keeping is freely available for him to monitor and review via the LMS microprocessor.
His ability to see small maintenance items as important has provided significant savings because the present strategy has now allowed for the monitoring of the building.
This does not require the expensive crisis that was previously needed to attract LEA attention and expenditure.
The buildings are now in increasingly better condition and most work is relatively small  order.
It is hoped that in the next few months, following some training and an LEA-inspired new job description, certain simple maintenance tasks will be completed totally ‘in-house’.
Lettings are encouraged, not only by the head and governors, but by the service provided by the caretaker.
He is fully aware that his income and, to some extent, his job security, are based on the lettings, The school's popularity as a venue has as a result increased.
The caretaker is also increasingly monitoring fuel consumption.
Energy readings are scrupulously read and scrutinised monthly.
These are checked against LEA-provided target figures.
The level of consultation has become considerable and several successful projects have derived from the analyses.
The target has been to create a ‘self-managing environment’: this has resulted in acoustically controlled thermostats and water controllers, lighting systems which consume minimal energy and timer switches throughout the buildings.
Linked to a staff and pupil awareness programme, savings have been considerable and LEA capital outlay will be recouped quite rapidly.
A sophisticated burglar-alarm system has aided overnight and weekend security and although the caretaker is not on call from 11am to 3.30pm the levels of demand have fallen during this time as a direct result of his monitoring skills.
However, it is noticeable that as the activities at school increase, the caretaker's holiday entitlement is coming under increasing threat.
This is a problem yet to be resolved.
Catering was initially a problem.
The school kitchen consistently sustained heavy losses and was locked into an unhappy spiral of few pupils — low income — small choice — few pupils.
An aggressively commercial approach was required not only to solve some short-term problems but to provide a record of profit that would possibly be attractive for future tender.
Good fortune brought about the appointment of a new cook-supervisor: a chef from a successful local restaurant looking for more social hours, better pay and a challenge.
Again the situation was mutually assessed by the head and cook, and targets were set.
The dining room was redecorated, the menu revitalised (following a simple pupil survey) and a healthy-eating programme established (supported by the Home Economics/Technology staff).
Breakfast and coffee break provision.
a ‘quick-service hatch’ and lots of ‘go’have turned a liability into a success.
The dining room and kitchen are now a financial asset and a major addition to the atmosphere of the school.
Equally the morale of the staff in the kitchen has climbed and each week's profits  are anticipated with a strong degree of satisfaction.
The catering service now covers training days, local-authority functions held at school, social events and evening events (in conjunction with the PTA).
There is significantly, much discussion about the kitchen staff tendering for a ‘franchise’ when contracting-out of catering services becomes a reality.
The school meals supervisory assistants are yet another self-managing responsibility.
Like other staff, they enter into the discussions and decision-making which surround their work.
Resources available are considered and alternatives are discussed.
The outcome has been a very stable and valuable team.
They arrive early and leave late, have formed excellent relationships with pupils (most of whom they know by name), staff and kitchen staff.
They are supported by prefects and duty staff (inevitably the head and deputies) and have become integrated into the discipline and values of the school.
They understand the aims of the school and they provide consistency and direction.
Their views of procedures, new prefects and general behaviour are asked for and acted upon.
The groundsman is not under the present LMS scheme.
He operates on site for only two days per week.
However, he has become particularly aware of ‘image’.
The grounds, especially the front, are meticulously maintained.
He is aware that as his Property Services Department (Grounds Maintenance) has successfully bid for the Lincolnshire contract, his quality of service to school is a key element in our future preparedness to pay our bill.
Therefore, there are mutual benefits to be obtained.
His abilities and his attitude are crucial.
The sense of understanding and involvement that such staff have, is the key to successful self-management.
Finally the Special Educational Needs (SEN)assistants : again there is no delegated control over them via budget head.
Yet their support work with pupils is an intimate part of the ‘caring’ image the school has carefully fostered and a major encouragement to effective learning.
The school is acknowledged as providing equal access and entitlement to a rich and varied curriculum.
These staff are clearly involved in the learning processes of children.
They perceive their contributions in the broadest sense.
Though specifically allocated to individual pupils they have increasingly broadened their relationship with the school.
Pupils look to them for advice, encouragement and support.
They provide a breadth of experience and a presence that gives a service to pupils throughout the school.
Their work is discussed with the deputy head (pupil services) and they attend a staff meeting at the beginning of each day.
They are important  contributors to the service delivery promised by the school to current and prospective pupils and parents.
Their importance cannot be overlooked.
The support staff at the school are all used productively and positively.
There is no doubt that the school has had several advantages.
Its size allows for good communication and good relationships.
Its socio-economic setting and history allow flexibility and changes to be non-threatening.
Its LEA has been a forceful innovator of LMS which has allowed some early decisions to be taken and the results monitored and evaluated.
Overall the support staff are adapting well to LMS.
They have found a position which has advanced from that of the rather more  hierarchical structures that have pervaded schools in the past.
This contribution is positive and efficient; it may well also be profitable.
To see profit as the prime motivation to LMS would be to detract from the sense of involvement and success that support staff may potentially receive from its effective management.
A common sense of purpose and direction has been established.
Local management is primarily about people, their relationships with their colleagues and the service they provide.
By offering a secure and well-managed set of circumstances, the potential for the effective delivery of the curriculum to pupils is enhanced — surely a school's prime purpose.
General implications for other schools
The experience of Cherry Willingham School suggests that several key strategies need to be included if LMS is to be successful with support staff.
No divides .
Everyone must feel a genuine sense of being included.
It is a false hierarchy to pose teachers as more important than other staff.
All are equally important in delivering a sound and effective service.
The image of a school is created by all, not just its teaching staff.
High levels of awareness .
Everyone must be equally aware of the values and expectations of a successful school.
Schools are complex institutions driven by the powerful perceptions  of many people.
The service delivery is fundamental and must include everyone.
A school cannot  afford weak links in its system.
Knowledge should not be monopolised by management .
Including staff in the restrictions, rules, cash limits etc to allow them to consider all possible permutations has had considerable benefits.
Often those that have responsibilities have a far better understanding of their job's needs and their own requirements to fulfil that job.
Since LMS has restrictions (such as levels of pay, conditions of service etc.) it is important that staff are aware of these limitations rather than perceiving them as restrictions/lack of initiatives placed on them by management.
Shared decision-making .
Though eventually the head will have to recommend a decision to governors, the process by which that decision is reached can be shared.
Not only will everyone then understand why it has been arrived at, they will also be able to address and/or review it over subsequent years.
LMS is a whole-school business .
Whatever a non-teaching staff member's job, she or he may contribute in a positive way to its success.
Budgeting control/budget head involvement is not the only source of influence.
The means by which positive involvement can be expressed can be considerably varied.
Concluding thoughts
Through participation in a shared experience of planning for the future, individual members of the school community can develop an increased understanding of the school and a greater awareness of the part each person plays in the total organisation.
In keeping with Ackoff's principle (1988) that ‘It is better to plan for oneself, no matter how badly, than to be planned for by others, no matter how well'’, individuals who have contributed to the policy-making process are likely to be in a position to serve the organisation more effectively.
At Cherry Willingham everyone on the premises was involved.
including those employed by contractors.
In the future it is likely that an increasing number of services to schools will be contracted-out and any approach to whole-school planning must take this into account.
The future may also hold some surprises.
Greater involvement  may lead to increased job satisfaction and security for all staff, but it also follows that as support staff become more aware of the value of their contribution to the school economy, they acquire a more powerful bargaining position.
It may be that the conventional employer/ employee relationship will be replaced by a franchise system where the school receives a service which meets its needs, but the support staff are also able to sell their expertise to the community beyond the school.
Catering is an obvious example of how this might work, with the school premises providing a base for wedding receptions and other functions during weekends and holidays, or the kitchens providing meals for other establishments during the working week.
In a school where many support services are offered through contracts or franchises, it becomes especially important to preserve the corporate identity and to ensure, through effective communication and sensitive leadership, that everyone working in the school feels an important part of the whole.
The head will play a vital role in ensuring that the needs of the child are at the heart of the planning process, and his or her ability to work with all staff to develop a policy combining economic effectiveness with sound educational principles will be crucial.
Without a common understanding and shared commitment to the school's success on the part of all those who, in their various ways, contribute to it, there is no effective way forward.
Whatever may happen in the future, it is clear from the Lincolnshire experience that the introduction of Local Management of Schools has provided support staff with an unprecedented opportunity to define and evaluate their contribution to the effectiveness of the school, with a consequent increase in job satisfaction and self-esteem.
HEADTEACHERS, THEIR GOVERNORS AND THE LOCAL MANAGEMENT OF SCHOOLS
Mike Pugh
Several new initiatives detailed in the 1988 Education Act.
including most notably Local Management of Schools (LMS) combine to give governors duties, responsibilities and powers far greater than any previously envisaged.
Properly used, governors' skills, experiences and expertise can bring many positive benefits to their schools, but if the necessary sensitive relationships are not developed, they can quickly become the root cause of difficulty and dissension.
Thus it is necessary for every headteacher to consider very carefully just how governors are to be treated in the 1990s.
Many agree that ‘new’ governors are fully aware of their responsibilities, keen to undertake their duties.
willing to learn and, equally, determined to be fully informed and to share in the running of their schools.
The old political domination of governing bodies has largely been broken and a typical governors' meeting is a business session not a social occasion.
It must be run efficiently and effectively.
for under LMS a series of major decisions will have to be made on a regular basis.
Knowing the school
Initially in financial terms under LMS governors should aim to:
understand the money;
realise how to manage the budget,
be able to monitor the money;
and possibly
consider ways of making more money.
But  it is equally essential that they should know their school .
This task can only be embarked on in collaboration with the head, preferably with the support of other staff members, and is vital to the whole LMS operation.
If members of staff are involved in this process, it emphasises unity and partnership within the school.
How can any governing body discuss or ratify headteachers' proposals unless they are aware of recent educational reforms and thinking, understand the schools' organisation and planning and know of its successes and anticipated problems?
Headteachers' reports, parents' newsletters and other written evidence can also help, and a simple educational glossary can be invaluable.
But on their own these are not sufficient.
Many schools already have a regular item on the agenda of each full governing-body meeting which encourages discussion of a key educational issue.
Regular governor ‘teach-ins’, jargon-free and clearly presented, should encourage discussion and greater understanding of topics such as the National Curriculum, programmes of study, new testing and assessment procedures, pastoral care and the provisions available to special-needs pupils.
Many schools devise extra meetings for this purpose, several employ weekend INSET sessions for governors, while others participate keenly in their LEA's governor-training programme.
Governors should be made aware of key material relating to schools in the 1990s and demand from their LEA governor-training officers the courses they want and need as an individual group.
Ideally, they should also be given a simple précis of DES and LEA documents and regulations as they appear, with a final paragraph clearly delineating first, the implications for governors and secondly, action for governors to take.
Another way in which governors will be able to understand their school is through a series of visits; these should always be agreed with the head in advance and on a planned basis.
It is no longer wise or practicable for the odd senior local politician to ‘pop-in’ en route from one meeting to the next and ‘have a look around’.
Heads should encourage governors to visit with specific aims in view.
They might come, perhaps to see:
technology in action;
how individual coursework studies in English are compiled;
how special-needs pupils are catered for;
how practical science is completed with over-large classes.
Governors should also be advised that, while they are welcome in school, they are there to learn, to question, to improve understanding and of course to comment, but they are not advisers or inspectors.
In some schools, governors have ‘shadowed’ both pupils and teachers.
adopted a subject department, attended staff meetings and training days and even accompanied school parties on educational visits.
It is no longer enough to invite a governor invasion of the annual drama production or carol concert.
These new initiatives take time, energy and effort — in a period when all three are in short supply — but if heads are to manage LMS  successfully , correct relationships based on openness, honesty and mutual respect must be established at the earliest possible moment.
Disgruntled governors who feel, rightly or wrongly, that they are not fully informed about the school can become at best difficult and at worst disruptive to LMS and its development.
Understanding the money
Just how a school's budget is derived and totalled has been dealt with in the opening chapter, but perhaps headteachers should take time to disabuse certain governors of misconceptions they may have, usually culled from newspaper headlines.
Vitally, LMS is not primarily about money.
It is about educating pupils (and how rarely are they mentioned in recent major legislation!) effectively and efficiently based on the school's own unique needs and priorities at any given time.
Governors should control the money with this end in view and must not allow their thinking to become dominated by financial concerns.
Local management is not about scrimping and saving to allow major savings at the end of the financial year, but the spending of monies to meet sensible educational demands.
It is unlikely to be about producing handsome ‘profits’ for most schools.
Even with a budget of over £1 million, governors should realise that almost all is firmly committed from day one, particularly for the teachers' and ancillary-staff salaries.
In many primary schools, this is likely to be up to 88 per cent of the total budget.
Thus it is likely that no more than 1 or 2 per cent of the total budget would really be available for new projects and plans — and even that only if pupil numbers were retained and no other emergencies developed in any particular year.
Heads should therefore still be taking a key leadership role.
They should be providing governors with regular information about their school, carefully explaining the LMS budget and how it compares with ‘historic costs’, promoting financial understanding, raising awareness and allaying governors' fears — many still see LMS as a daunting prospect.
Managing the money
Governors are clearly charged under the 1988 Education Reform Act with the duty of implementing and monitoring LMS in their schools and ensuring that all monies are efficiently managed.
But exactly what does this entail?
Certainly, the head remains fully responsible for the day-to-day management of the school and thus, one assumes, for the day-to-day management of LMS.
But there is need for agreement before each financial year about exactly what will be totally delegated to the head under LMS.
There is a need for clarity about which plans or courses of action must be brought to any finance sub-committee or, indeed, the full governing body for discussion and ratification, or when, if ever, a phone call to the chair might be sufficient.
A checklist of items under these headings could be of value to governors.
Ideally, any decisions about delegated powers would be based on common sense and a desire to ensure that while fulfilling their duties and obligations, governors would never jeopardise the smooth and effective running of the school and the education of its pupils.
But the decision about just how much power remains with the head is a vital one for all concerned in LMS.
All teachers should also be briefed about LMS and its possible implications for them and their work.
Anything new is likely to cause alarm or create suspicion.
and interested parents have a right to know what this initiative actually means.
The successful delivery of LMS must be based upon partnership and understanding.
As detailed in earlier chapters, governors should be involved in the School's Development Plan which must lay out both short-term aims and longer-term objectives in priority order but with an inbuilt degree of flexibility, should circumstances dictate a change of plan at any time.
Governors should then be introduced to the budget in some detail, particularly the major headings under which spending is planned and thus to the benefits or problems raised by this allocation.
For example, heads might want to point out to governors:
the difficulties which might arise from the notion of average teacher salaries and those actually paid by the school;
whether sufficient monies are available for curriculum protection;
the picture regarding general building maintenance;
the implications for special-needs pupils;
supply-teacher requirements;
possible disaster scenarios, for example, if pupil numbers fall dramatically.
Governors need to know that savings remain with the school and that losses are immediately deducted from the next year's budget total; they must hold it important to understand the whole budget and grasp the concept of virement.
A cycle of activity for managing money is outlined in Appendix VI.
Procedures for managing LMS
Heads need to consider the value of asking governors to establish detailed sets of procedures for various major items of business and in anticipation of possible future difficulties.
The following are typical examples.
WORKING PARTIES AND SUB-COMMITTEES
If these are to be set up prior to the implementation of LMS.
careful thought should be given to such aspects as:
their number;
their size;
their composition;
their delegated powers;
different groups working in concert;
facilities for recording discussions and decisions;
the amount of powers delegated to each working party;
the need for the head or a representative to be present at all meetings;
means of reporting back to the full governing body; and
frequency of meetings.
Governors should recognise their power to co-opt on to their working groups, in a non-voting capacity, any member of the local community who could offer specific expertise and skills which they  may be lacking.
Such co-optees would not have the full status accorded co-opted governors.
The bank manager, accountant, solicitor or building contractor might have something to offer at a particular time or for a particular purpose but they would not be fully established voting members of the group.
TEACHING APPOINTMENTS AND INTERVIEW PROCEDURES
Since at least 80 per cent of any school's budget is likely to be earmarked for staff salaries, LMS may pose some very awkward questions for governors.
Thus as indicated in Chapter 1, well-defined procedures for the appointment of new teachers, based on previously agreed criteria, should be established.
Halfway through interviewing candidates is no time for governor discord or financial disagreements to surface, or for the true needs of the school to be hastily compromised.
Simple questions to be addressed are:
Are we seeking the best teacher or the cheapest?
Will we ever settle for economic expediency?
Even at Main-Professional-Grade level, the difference in costs between obtaining an experienced teacher of proven worth or a probationer straight out of college can be over £6000.
Will this cloud governors' thinking?
We would all pay lip-service to the demand that pupil needs must come before financial considerations, but the temptation to save will often be present.
Local Management of Schools also raises the problem of how extensively and at what costs a teaching post should be advertised?
Up to £500 could easily be spent in this fashion.
Also, in shortlisting candidates for interview, how widely will governors cast their net, remembering that train fares and an overnight stay could eat up some £100 per head?
Is this likely to provide value for money?
Or will governors consider taking the easy way out (and the cheapest) and appoint a local teacher, who has perhaps proved an adequate supply teacher in the recent past?
If it is difficult to forecast future savings for the school, will there be good reasons for appointing staff on a one-year or shorter-term contract and, if so, what effect could this have on school morale, planning, extra-curricular activities, or indeed on the teacher concerned?
Many more similar questions will arise.
Heads and governors should tackle them together to determine sensible procedures within the framework of LEA policies.
SERVICES AND EXPERTISE AVAILABLE FROM OUTSIDE THE LEA
Increasingly, under LMS, schools will have the freedom to choose a local firm or individual to provide the many services they need to run effectively.
Typically this would include internal decoration and repairs, plumbing, reglazing, simple electrical work, grounds maintenance and the provision of books and equipment.
They can dispense with the existing LEA workforce.
Before doing so, however, governors should know that they are responsible for understanding, complying with and enforcing national health and safety regulations.
In most cases the 1988 Education Act offers blanket cover for governors in that they will not be held responsible, financially or otherwise, for their actions and decisions as long as at all times they have acted in good faith.
But they cannot escape from their duties related to health and safety.
They should be sure therefore that any outside contractor can offer high quality, safe work at a sensible price, to an agreed time schedule and with a willingness to return should any of that work prove to be unsatisfactory.
‘Quickest and cheapest’ sounds an attractive proposition, but ‘proceed with caution’might prove a sensible warning, together with a reminder that in many areas, LEA experience and expertise — on legal issues, employment law, salaries and conditions of service regulations and bulk purchasing facilities, for example— are first class.
These are just three cases where advance planning will enable governors to cope more confidently with problems as they arise and for heads to ensure that school and pupil needs are paramount in all discussions and decision making.
Making money
In LEAs where a scheme of delegation has been in place over a period of years, the question of making more money soon arises.
Certainly all schools, via their classrooms, halls, gymnasia, grounds and playing fields, certain items of equipment, and perhaps teacher skills, have the potential to generate additional finances in a variety of ways.
Before embarking upon such a course of action, heads and governors must decide how far down this entrepreneurial road they wish to go, what scale of profits they seek and at what possible cost to their pupils.
Questions worth asking include:
What is the basic cost of providing any room or recreation  area for an evening, including of course heating, lighting, cleaning and caretaking?
What is a fair profit margin to add to this total?
Can local groups afford these prices?
Does the LEA wish to allow long-established bookings that they have previously subsidised to continue — perhaps OAPs, the disabled or unemployed, or Guides or Scouts?
If so, has it been confirmed that they will pay full compensation for this privilege?
Very importantly.
the governing body must decide who they will or will not accept into the school.
Are, for example,all political, religious and minority groups equally acceptable?
Who pays for any loss of, or damage to, school property and equipment?
Is there an in-built element for wear and tear included in the pricing and are all participants fully covered by insurance during the time they are on the premises?
Finally, who is delegated to accept and correlate bookings and who is available to supervise evening and possibly weekend activities?
An alternative form of fundraising or obtaining support for the school is through sponsorship.
Again, thought must be given to which local firms or businesses are acceptable and which companies governors would not wish to be associated with in the interests of pupils and the good image of the school.
Conclusion
For many heads and governors LMS is an exciting and challenging proposition.
Comfort may be taken from the fact that elements of the system have been working successfully in many LEAs.
It offers the basis for improved management and organisation in our schools.
It can and will work, but only if heads and governors involve themselves in a true partnership based on mutual trust, respect and understanding.
The 1990s will be nothing if not interesting.
THE CHANGING FACE OF COUNTY HALL
Derek Robbins
In order to understand the nature of the changes that are taking place following the Education Reform Act 1988, and in particular the changing role of the local education authority, it is important to reflect briefly on the nature of relationships which have been established over many years.
Central government and local government
The Education Act 1944 established the now classic description of a ‘national service locally administered’.
This instituted a partnership between central and local government with both having as a prime objective the promotion of the education service.
How this relationship has been perceived by both partners has depended on the particular historical and economic context.
interpretation of the legal statutes and political will.
Although the Secretary of State, and so central government, is implied as the senior partner in the duties imposed by the 1944 Act, the interdependence of the two partners' relationship is clearly one of  significance .
There can be little doubt that since the 1944 Act, and more particularly since 1974, power and influence have been moving significantly from the local scene to the national stage.
The present position is that the local education authorities are accountable to the local electorate for the condition of the education service in their area but, some would say, are effectively denied the powers necessary to deal with those responsibilities.
Some authorities give the misleading impression that they alone have the absolute right to deliver certain services to the public.
Often the attitudes presented reflect the ‘jobsworth’ approach where the right to do the job.
rather than the quality of the service, is uppermost.
It has been suggested by some that this approach possibly underlines many of the in-built attitudes that most need to change in local government.
Redcliffe-Maud and Wood (1974) suggest that English local government has no such right to deliver public services.
The responsibility for determining the source of most public services rests exclusively with parliament.
Many local-government officers experiencing the change brought about by recent legislation, are now beginning to reflect that culture.
Recent history is littered with examples of privatised or re-allocated responsibilities for a number of the public services.
Local-government reorganisation, which followed the Redcliffe-Maud Report (1969), has considerably strengthened the politicisation of local-government policy-making.
Since 1974 there has been increasing evidence of party politics intervening in local elections, with local-authority-wide campaigns being fought on national policy programmes.
Fewer and fewer independent candidates sit as elected members, with many commentators now referring to this process of change as the ‘nationalisation’ of local politics.
Such factors have conspired to add momentum to the drive for even greater central control by government.
At the heart of virtually all educational debate at present is the conflict between central planning and local flexibility.
The introduction of the National Curriculum, grant-maintained schools, open enrolment, and, earlier, the creation of the Manpower Services Commission (later to become the Training Agency), are examples of central government seizing the initiative and significantly influencing the control and direction of education.
However, all such initiatives need to be viewed in the context of the remarkable changes in the financial relationship between central and local government.
The changes are marked particularly by modifications to the Local Authority Training Grants Scheme and the timed targeting of Education Support Grants, a decreasing percentage of local-authority expenditure received from central government and now the introduction of the Community Charge.
The general trend towards central control, together with the introduction of LMS, which delegates to governors many of the management powers which have traditionally been the responsibility of the local authority, have conspired significantly to alter the role of the local education authority.
Local government: Schools
Most people think that local government is still run by ill-mannered bureaucrats who would not survive a minute in the rough and tumble of commerce.
Local government is seen as slow, wasteful, obstructive.
incompetent and lazy.
(Masterman, P.,Local Government Chronicle 27.2.87)
The apparently extreme view expressed by Masterman (1987) may perhaps be the public perception of local-authority services as a whole, but equally many people working in schools would also subscribe to this view when discussing the local education authority's administration of the education service.
Any superficial investigation into the role of the education officer will dispel the view expressed by Masterman once some appreciation and understanding is gained of the day-to-day duties that are performed both in terms of strategic planning and institutional management.
A view from county offices is equally, and often, a mirror image of the incoming ‘vibrations’.
An ill-informed perception of schools suggests that they need to be ‘protected’ from the ‘real’and harsh decisions involved in administering employment legislation, school meals, plant and buildings: ‘they do not understand what we do, the services we undertake on their behalf, in order that they can get on with teaching the children.’
Here again any measured view of life in schools will quickly demonstrate that many of the initial perceptions are largely groundless.
So why is it that these views exist?
The topic of school/local-authority relationships is an area worthy of a chapter in its own right.
However, it is from an understanding of some of the central issues embedded in these relationships that both schools and LEAs can reflect for the future.
This will be particularly important when recruiting for the new and necessary organisational structures which will be required to address the changed requirements now established by the Education Reform Act 1988.
A common feature of the local authority/school relationship is the lack of understanding of each for the other.
It has often been said that heads are recruited largely on the basis of having been successful classroom teachers and are therefore appointed to a new task on the basis of their ability in a different job.
Similar criteria have often applied to the education officer who, after a few years in the classroom.
has moved to a position as a  professional assistant in a local-authority education department.
The short time in school has not always provided the opportunity to become actively involved in the internal workings of the administration and, perhaps more importantly, the management of the school.
First-hand involvement in areas such as identifying staffing requirements for the delivery of the curriculum, financial matters relating to capitation, and personnel management issues, have not usually formed part of their educational experience.
In a very short period of time the education officer has probably found him/herself in school discussing these very issues with headteachers at the same time as presenting an interpretation of the detailed policy position of the elected members.
It could be argued that it is the blind leading the blind — with one of the partners having a more experienced guide dog tutored by on-the-job training!
Having made the point, it is worth reflecting that by all reasonable standards, many headteachers and education officers are remarkably successful.
This has often been achieved because of the professional relationships that have developed by actively working to improve levels of understanding and the quality of leadership.
Equally, the converse is true, and even where headteachers and officers have received considerable training in management skills, they still find it difficult to organise schools effectively.
It has been argued by some that training plays no part in refining the skills of headship which can only be learned through experience; presumably the proponents of this view would say that it also applies to officers.
It may well be in this mis-match of experience that the first seeds of misunderstanding and destructive tension are sown, particularly as the education officer is often perceived as ‘the authority’, in several senses of the word, while the head has a greater knowledge of the processes of education required in school to meet the needs of the children.
With the number of pilot schemes that preceded the introduction of statutory LMS, many heads now have considerable experience of the issues traditionally addressed by LEAs.
Few LEA officers have any experience of delegated budgets in schools or have themselves worked in schools where pilot schemes have been operating.
There are many other people besides the education officers who are part of the corporate body referred to as the local authority, even excluding the elected members.
The accountants, auditors, solicitors and personnel officers to name but a few, contribute to the running of schools.
Bound by other apparently non-educational legislation.
these people are key professionals who often influence the policy  decisions made by locally elected members within the committee structure of local government, particularly when major decisions are taken about educational issues.
It may well be that many local-authority accountants have no detailed working knowledge of school-based financial-management systems — to give them a very grand title for their current state of development.
Yet it is these people that are in the forefront of many system design changes being implemented to help schools and governing bodies manage their delegated responsibilities.
£1 this comes at the same time as having to make fundamental changes to central corporate systems to address the issues of, on the one hand, the Local Government Act 1988 (which contains the requirements of competition legislation) and, on the other hand, attempting to identify and apportion expenditure to individual schools and colleges to meet the requirements of the Education Act 1988.
In the past there has often been no such requirement for apportioning expenditure to individual establishments, only a requirement to identify expenditure to generic or ‘main code’ headings such as primary, secondary or further education, with a number of sub-headings such as staffing, premises, supplies and services.
Equally, a number of property services departments have often managed all local-authority properties from one budget for, say, property maintenance, with no absolute need to identify separate budgets for, say, social services or schools, let alone identify in the accounts individual invoices received following repairs to individual establishments.
Many local authorities fund crossing-patrol staff, who see children across the road outside schools, from budgets held by the police committee.
School library services may well be funded and managed through the recreation and leisure services department.
The legislation associated with LMS requires that all expenditure on the education service must be identified and form part of the General Schools Budget, or the General Colleges Budget.
Much of the GSB is subsequently allocated for the funding of schools within an authority in accordance with the principles of formula funding explained in Chapter 1.
The technicalities of the financing of schools are dealt with elsewhere.
The above examples seek to reflect the magnitude of the changes in systems and procedures that local government is having to come to terms with under differing sets of recent legislation.
Many of these fundamentally change the systems and organisational requirements of local government particularly in the delivery of an education service.
Few headteachers, let alone governors and teaching staff in schools, will have come across many of the local-authority service departments mentioned above and hence may often find it difficult to appreciate and understand the outcomes of their systems and policy-implementation decisions.
Because of this lack of contact it is hardly surprising that systems and policies do not immediately have the intended effect when related, often through an education officer, to the schools.
The Education Act 1988 touches fundamentally all major departments of every local authority, not just the education department.
For some time to come there will be a continuing mismatch between schools and the LEA regarding the theoretical application of legislation and the practical implementation of the same legislation in a working school environment be it LMS or the National Curriculum!
Delegation and authority
In seeking to set the scene for the changing face of county hall, and in summarising the changing relationships between all involved in education, it is important to consider the meaning of ‘delegation of authority’ and the values it contains.
It is essential to acknowledge that there are differences between the concepts of delegated authority and delegated responsibility: both include the notion of power, but to differing degrees.
Authority, like power, has an ultimate source.
This source can choose to delegate all or part of its authority to other bodies so that they can carry out duties on behalf of, or in the name of the source.
In the LMS context this applies to both local government, in its relationship with central government, and LEAs in their relationships with schools and colleges when drawing up schemes of delegation.
Delegated authority, under LMS, has passed to the governing body which is answerable for success or failure of the task to the authority, for whom it is acting as an agent.
Governors not wishing to be accountable to local government have the choice of being accountable directly to central government by taking the school into grant-maintained status.
The essential points here are accountability and power.
It has to be clearly understood that whether LMS or GMS there is inevitably going to be a change in the existing relationships at all levels; this will have implications for where differing and changed levels of power will lie.
Accountability for all will have a considerably sharper focus.
Few people can now deny that the Education Act 1988 will bring about fundamental changes in the way that the service is both managed and delivered to children.
Significant powers are being delegated to schools and colleges and there is a general belief in the need to switch the day-to-day management of educational resources from county hall to the institutions and their governing bodies to achieve better value for money and sharpen the focus for accountability.
Such a move is only a matter of time, but the time-scale will vary considerably from authority to authority depending on the phasing-in of their delegation schemes and the speed at which they restructure the various service departments to meet the new role which has to be created within the strategy and time-scale set down by the legislation.
It is perhaps interesting to note that whilst the LMS legislation would appear to be part of a wider strategy for the control of public expenditure, it has now spawned a range of better-informed pressure groups which, when focusing on the quality of the education service, find themselves increasingly calling for greater expenditure on books, teaching materials, equipment and the maintenance of school premises!
However, a realisation of the required changes is perhaps the biggest hurdle to overcome particularly when faced with the considerable barrage of recent legislation and the tight time-scale in which it has had to be implemented.
Others outside county hall also need to appreciate that many LEAs will effectively be managing parallel systems: not all schools will receive full delegated powers for several years to come.
The legislation at present does not require delegation to special schools, nursery schools or primary schools with less than 200 pupils, but each of the primary schools has to have a budget share which is managed individually.
For many authorities this may represent a majority of the schools in their charge.
What is already clear is that in order to discharge some areas of responsibility there will be a need for an increase in personnel such as inspectors, and additional support for financial management and monitoring.
This should be achieved by a re-evaluation of needs and a diverting of resources rather than any growth in centralised personnel costs.
It will, for example, be essential to set a short time-scale to phase out any remaining specialist LMS implementation teams in order that personnel within thy whole authority can take on and experience the new culture required by devolved management and competition.
As is the case in schools, the hardest task is to identify which past  actions are no longer required.
and then plan for the future within the total resources that are available.
It becomes a matter of redefining priorities in the short and long term rather than naturally assuming that all change means ‘bolted-on’ activity, Once LMS is embedded in the educational culture there is little doubt that resources should be freed as there will be less and less need for central staff to be employed in the day-to-day operational management of schools.
Some have taken the view that the increasing centralisation of policy control by government, and the devolution of responsibility to schools and colleges, accompanied by a range of alternative provision such as grant-maintained schools and city technology colleges, has all but made LEAs redundant.
This will certainly be the case if the people concerned at the local level take this view, failing to grasp the strategic role that they have always claimed but often failed to deliver convincingly because of time spent on day-to-day operational matters.
However, the future has to be built on a clear understanding of the new power relationships; there can be little progress or security if foundation stones are laid on the shifting sands of discontent which campaign against or refuse to acknowledge the times in which the education service is being delivered.
Much still remains for the LEA to do.
Local authorities will still retain responsibility for the organisation of educational provision in their area.
There remains a duty to ensure that there are sufficient schools appropriate to the needs, abilities and aptitudes of children as well as securing adequate provision for further education.
Whilst this may be a mixed blessing because of pupils switching between schools, and different types of schools created by the greater choice.
there will be a potential for greater local consultation on the needs of the service.
The creation of Training and Enterprise Councils, led by local employers and set up to plan training and vocational education strategically, are having a difficult birth at present.
However, they could mature and considerably affect the role of the LEA by attracting funds from central government which are currently directed at further education through local authorities.
However, the LEA will be responsible for the youth, adult and careers service and could well and an enhanced role to facilitate cooperation between the different phases of education, employers, voluntary organisations and the business community — particularly in the context of the Technical and Vocational Education Initiative as it goes into its extension phase.
Once divested of operational day-today management of schools and colleges.
the authority will perhaps  have the time to consider overall policy objectives and the context in which all the schools and colleges operate.
Local authorities will retain the responsibility for identifying the total amount of resources to be spent on education.
Although the method of distributing the resources is tightly constrained by statute there is considerable freedom, within the sharply focused political accountability of the Community Charge, to determine at the local level the quantum to be available to meet the identified local needs.
Additionally, the monitoring of expenditure, the assessment of educational outcomes and the achievement of value for money are essential functions which have been strengthened by statute and are clearly the role of local government.
‘Quality assurance’ is a fundamental part of the Education Act 1988 and is central to many if not all of the reforms.
The legislation makes it very clear that the  responsibility for the quality of the education service rests with the LEA.
The importance of the traditional monitoring role of the LEA has been strengthened by the recent legislation particularly as the 1988 Act has transferred considerably increased responsibility for the management of schools and colleges to governors, heads and principals.
At the same time there is now a more direct intervention in the nature of a school's educational work through the introduction of the National Curriculum, bringing with it a greater concern for monitoring.
Again there is a need for a clear partnership between the school and the LEA with schools and colleges having to carry out first-line responsibility for quality assurance.
The changing role of LEA officers and educational advisers/ inspectors will have to address issues which find ways of providing a focal point of contact for schools and colleges.
Such points of contact will require a human face, and one which avoids the appearance of apparently arbitrary support which can be so damaging to relationships.
Local education authority officers could have a central role in helping managers in schools and colleges make decisions, rather than the previous role of making decisions for them.
The secret of success here will be the basis of consultation and cooperation which can be seen as beneficial to both sides.
Equally, inspectors and advisors will be involved in helping schools and colleges plan for in-service needs and the allocation of resources received through education support grants, preparation of curriculum statements, advice, monitoring and inspections.
In the writing of inspection reports it will be essential to express findings in a positive manner  and in a language and style that address the concerns of the many non-specialists who make up the audience for the reports.
Many now feel that local government is vulnerable to extremism by both right and left and it is perhaps no longer the right vehicle to deliver major public services.
Perhaps the way forward from the potential abyss that local government could face is to return to its initial values of pluralism, public participation and local choice.
To achieve this it will be essential to create a culture where services are given back to the people and delivered with the attitude that the ‘customer is sovereign’.
This requires that the local-authority officers from all service departments will have to appreciate the new climate of customer choice in a competitive environment.
Local authorities will need to become more ‘customer sensitive’ and return to a culture where local government is about service to the public.
There has to be a very clear understanding of the requirements necessary to be a supplier of a service which the customers want to buy.
However, at the centre of the understanding must lie an awareness that schools and colleges have always been in the business of change, created by responding to the needs of individual children and students and that the child at school or the student at college must continue to be the central focus of all educational activity.
MONITORING AND EVALUATION: SOME THOUGHTS
Keith Holt
Plans at national level for the introduction of Local Management of Schools (LMS) have, from the first, emphasised the need for monitoring and evaluation.
Some have expressed the fear that financial delegation to schools is intended to allow cuts in spending and to weaken further the grip of recalcitrant LEAs.
But it has been countered that the main aim is to improve quality of provision, to get better value for the money spent — and that the key to this is better management of schools.
Ways must therefore be found to see whether things are actually improving: this will involve monitoring (ie gathering a whole range of information and evidence as to what is actually going on in schools and evaluation (ie the interpretation and critical judgement of that information).
The monitoring and evaluation process should not only inform us about the quality of what is being offered in schools, it should actually promote a raising of standards.
It is good management practice that any change of policy should itself be assessed: the process should help to decide whether LMS can take the credit for any improvements that occur.
However, the establishment of cause and effect in education is notoriously difficult.
Coopers & Lybrand (1988), commissioned by the DES to recommend ways of introducing LMS, stressed the use of ‘performance indicators’ and suggested a range of measures, as will be discussed later.
The terms ‘efficiency’.
‘effectiveness’ and ‘economy’were also used; the meaning of these terms, especially the first two, has not always been agreed upon by writers in the context of LMS.
There seems to have been a subsequent change of emphasis as evidenced by Minister of State Angela Rumbold's speech at the  Industrial Society in December 1989.
She joked that the use of performance indicators in education should include a ‘government health warning’.
During the debate of the previous two years, it seemed that LEAs would be asked to identify a number of measures to be applied to schools which would allow the wider public to assess the progress of a given school, year on year, and the differences between schools in the area.
But Mrs Rumbold eventually outlined a more modest proposal.
Performance indicators (increasingly referred to in the current climate as ‘success criteria’) were to be decided at school level, according to what each school felt to be useful areas to monitor.
Information gathered would be used in each school as a ‘management tool’, with no plans at present to insist on publication.
When we look in more detail at efficiency, effectiveness and performance indicators and the difficulties involved in using these ideas, we may agree that current proposals — while less ambitious — are more productive.
It may be useful, first, to look at how schools are judged, in practice, by various interested parties, starting with parents.
How do parents judge a school?
It is sobering for teachers and educationalists to hear that, for some parents, ease of access is the prime concern.
A lack-lustre school five minutes' walk from home with no major roads to be crossed may be preferred to a showpiece two miles away.
Good leadership from the headteacher has been identified by studies of school effectiveness as a crucial ingredient for success.
But anecdote suggests that some parents use the physical appearance of the head as their guide — or even firmness of handshake!
Press comment on the swingeing HMI criticisms of a Hackney comprehensive school focused on the fact that despite its obvious shortcomings, the school was oversubscribed.
A TES leader (9.3.90) suggested this was because it is a voluntary-aided Church of England school and its pupils were expected to wear uniform, unlike those of some other, presumably more effective, local schools.
Clearly, many parents in the area were not judging the school in the same way as HMI, who had access to a different range of information.
The need for information — essential if the ‘free market’ espoused by the government is to work — seems to be behind the pressure for publicised performance indicators, including the aggregated results of the tests which will follow the National Curriculum.
Examination results for secondary schools have been published since 1982, as a result of the 1980 Act.
It is difficult to assess the impact this has had, but there does not seem to have been a massive desertion of schools with poor examination results.
It is, of course, not easy to interpret the columns of figures which appear in the school brochure — and headteachers often seem to be adept at presenting their results in positive terms.
The widespread confusion between raw number of passes and percentage pass rates is illustrative here.
An ‘A’ level Chemistry set of 15 students may contain six whose performances in a trial exam six months before the end of the course suggests they are unlikely to pass, and another two who seem to be on the borderline.
One policy would be to enter only the seven ‘certainties’, thus achieving seven passes and a 100 per cent pass rate.
Another policy would be to enter all students — this might result in eight passes — but a percentage pass rate of only 53 per cent.
Which of the two alternatives represents greater success?
And should we consider the third E — economy?
Are we justified in ‘wasting’ the not-inconsiderable examination fees for six entries simply to secure one or two more ‘A’level passes?
Some LEAs (notably ILEA) have tried to present examination results in a way that relates them to the ability of the school's intake.
If, as Goldstein and Cuttance (1988) assert, the best single indicator of a pupil's future success in examinations is her/his ability at intake, it is essential to do this if exam results are to be used to compare schools.
The resulting tables, which seek to help us identify the ‘value added’ by the school, are, however, fiendishly complicated.
One wonders what parents with no background in statistics make of them.
It is essential, though, that attempts continue to be made to allow for differing intakes.
The TGAT Report (DES 1987) on testing within the National Curriculum has suggested that parents be helped by having schools' published test results set against the socio-economic circumstances of the pupils.
Exactly how this will be done remains to be seen, but one wonders what the effects will be.
Many parents living in inner-city areas, but with the power to make a choice, may remain unimpressed with the splendid job being done by a school which is raising the achievement of a largely ‘deprived’ intake.
They may instead become increasingly determined to gain access to a school in a nearby LEA with a ‘better class’ of pupil, irrespective of how well that school is doing for its intake.
It certainly seems to be the case that many of those who opt to pay for their children's education are attracted by the narrow social intake of most private schools.
Teachers often feel they have a wider view of what constitutes good education than do many parents, who are stereotyped as being over-concerned with ‘uniform, discipline and exam results’.
However, John Elliott (1981) has systematically researched attitudes at an 11–18 mixed comprehensive school set in a high-technology area and found strong support, among the parents who had selected the school at that time, for a balanced education which regards personal and social development as at least as important as academic development.
The same group placed much more emphasis on their children being happy and enjoying their lessons than they did on examination results.
The changes in the balance of power enacted by the 1988 Education Act have greatly increased parents' influence on schools, but have also increased opportunities for the teaching profession to explain and persuade.
Teachers must rise to the task of making sure that when parents come to judge schools they do so in a way which identifies — and, in so doing, promotes — genuine quality.
How do teachers judge a school?
Many teachers work in relative isolation within their own classrooms in both primary and secondary schools.
However, it is often argued that when barriers are taken down and teachers start to work in teams developing courses and assessing pupils' responses, real improvements begin to occur.
But even isolated teachers cannot avoid forming judgements all the time, for instance about general behaviour in the corridors between lessons and other indications of the ‘tone’ of the school.
Nor can they help forming snapshot impressions of their colleagues in action — the way they speak to pupils, the degree of calmness or rowdiness they seem to achieve in their lessons and the way they write about their pupils' work in formal reports.
Covering the class of an absent colleague can also be an informative experience.
When resolving disciplinary incidents teachers sometimes cannot help hearing criticism of colleagues' view of things — either from pupils or from their parents.
Developments such as individual guidance interviews or counselling discussions, and pupil's self-assessment in report booklets or records of achievement, are tending to increase this flow of information, particularly towards the tutor and senior staff in a school.
These may seem trivial examples, but they go a long way towards helping teachers assess the success of different parts of the school in which they work and, ultimately, that of the whole institution.
A variety of more objective measures have traditionally been used as well by teachers.
Exam results are looked at closely, subject by subject, and comparisons are made with previous years and with neighbouring schools.
Probing questions are asked: Why is it that a number of students, broadly successful across most of their subjects, have all done badly in…
Why does department X manage to enable all pupils to reach exam-entry standard, whereas department Y finds a steady dropping-out in terms of motivation and attendance, and its teachers seem content that only 75 per cent of the pupils take the exam?
The compiling of attendance figures is another objective measure taken seriously in many schools, in an attempt to assess both curricular and pastoral provision.
The data can be revealing: one technique which has been used by HMI is to follow two classes in a given year group: the one with the highest attendance and the one with the lowest.
This may help them assess the range of teaching quality within the school, on the assumption that a generally high level of provision across the week for a given class will tend to produce better attendance and vice versa.
The problem with this type of measure is that compiling the figures is a time-consuming and essentially clerical task.
As it is often undertaken by senior pastoral staff, it could be argued that calculating the percentages every week is not the most effective use of their time.
On the other hand, occasional sampling, while less time-consuming, will give less reliable data.
The computerised registration systems being introduced into some schools will allow sophisticated analyses of attendance patterns to be made much more quickly.
Headteachers are filled with consternation at the idea that comparative attendance figures across the LEA should be published.
Who will check them for accuracy?
Are all schools following the same rules?
Are suspended pupils to be counted as absent or temporarily off-roll?
Is there any allowance made for long-term illness? or for condoned truancy?
And so on.
In many schools, groups of teachers with a particular interest or point to make.
or individuals possibly working for a higher degree, have gathered information and analysed it.
In the equal-opportunities field observers can analyse the talk which occurs in a mixed class.
This has shown how boys demand, and receive, a greater proportion of the teacher's attention than do girls, and may lead to changes in policy and practice (Bousted 1989).
Suspension figures have been looked at to see whether certain groups (Afro-Caribbean boys  for example) are over-represented in comparison with their proportion in the school as a whole.
If they are, does this constitute discrimination and what should the school do about it?
Another formal way for teachers to judge the quality of aspects of their school is to seek feedback: the timetabling team can ask teachers how they found their personal timetables and those of their forms — with a promise to try to improve things next year!
Asking teams and individuals to identify the INSET they feel they need to help them to do their jobs better usually results in comment, possibly indirect, about quality of their work.
Peers School (1988) in Oxford, has taken this one step further and conducted an opinion poll among parents and pupils with questions such as‘Is discipline in lessons too strict, about right or too lenient?’
As is often the case with such surveys, no clear consensus emerged over many of the questions and some apparently contradictory points were made (‘Not enough homework’; ‘too heavy a coursework load’) but the whole exercise must have yielded useful information for teachers and a welcome awareness among parents that here is an open school much concerned about the quality of experience it offers its students and responsive to the views of all partners in the education service.
The influence of the accountants
It is not surprising, given the political climate of the 1980s, that there have been moves to improve the administration of public services by introducing management techniques more often associated (in the eyes of government supporters at least) with private enterprise.
The Audit Commission has become increasingly influential over education policy.
It has concerned itself not simply with financial concepts, such as‘cost per pupil’ but also with outcomes, including in its 1986 report, examination successes, staying-on rates and ‘sickness absence amongst teachers — a barometer of staff morale.’
The Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Administration (CIPFA) published a consultative document on performance indicators in 1984 and Circular 7/88 on LMS states that LEAs should develop ‘performance indicators for the financial and wider management of the governing bodies of schools with delegated budgets’ and that these should be ‘based on the indicators used by the schools themselves’.
The nature of these indicators, and related concepts of efficiency, effectiveness and economy have been the focus of much debate.
Some LEAs have long collated information obtained from schools in such a way that the results might be described as performance indicators.
One headteacher (Samuel 1989), has described how he found.
to his consternation, his school to be near the top of an LEA vandalism league.
The indicator here was simply the amount spent each year on repairs in each school.
But the cost of replacing a single architect-designed window in his school would pay for dozens of panes of glass in a more typical building.
Tim Brighouse (1990), referring to his time as Chief Education Officer in Oxfordshire, has pointed out how the selection of a performance indicator by the LEA can have a marked effect on practice in schools: the decline in the use of corporal punishment accelerated noticeably when schools were asked to submit figures relating to its use.
Efficiency of schools, as far as the accountants who advised the DES on financial delegation are concerned, relates output to input.
In physics this is a simple matter because when the efficiency of a system is measured, both input and output consist of the same quantity: energy.
For educationalists, things are much less simple: inputs and outputs consist of different quantities and there are many of each.
The pupil-teacher ratio (PTR) and the contact ratio (the time teachers spend directly teaching as opposed to preparing and marking work) might be regarded as inputs and, in addition to the examples taken from the Audit Commission report, outputs might include punctuality and values and attitudes acquired by the time the pupils leave school — though the latter would not be easy to quantify.
Coopers & Lybrand (1988) complicate matters by regarding contact ratio and PTR as ‘process indicators’, together with teacher-turnover, reward/sanction systems, homework policy and so on, while inputs include socio-economic background of pupils, degree of parental support, standards and levels of accommodation and so on .
It will be interesting to see how discussions over ‘efficiency’ in schools develop and whether they appear to be useful!
Economy simply relates to the best use of resources and as budgets are delegated we can expect a welcome change in attitudes towards waste.
More and more, simple ways of saving money will be found: lights will be turned off, as may water supplies during the holidays: cheaper estimates for repairs/maintenance will be sought and outside bodies charged more realistically when letting school premises.
Some expensive mistakes may be made but less so as, with regular monitoring and evaluation.
we become more skilled in this  area.
It does seem, however, that major savings can only realistically be made by reducing numbers of staff and that a focus on economy, whilst welcome, will have only marginal effects.
It is with effectiveness that we are on much more fertile ground, for effectiveness is concerned with the relationship between output and aims and objectives.
When groups of staff in a local comprehensive school (departments, year teams and a whole-school management group) were asked to identify their own performance indicators, two things soon became apparent:
any numerical measures need a good deal of explanation and background information if they are not to be misleading; and
you cannot assess performance unless you are clear about what it is you are trying to do.
The first point was conceded by Angela Rumbold (1989) when she emphasised that performance indicators must be interpreted in context rather than looked at in isolation.
As for the second, it has long been recognised that successful institutions are distinguished by clear aims.
Any discussion which leads to teachers sharpening their ideas and ironing out disagreements and misconceptions about aims and objectives is bound to be valuable.
The staff found the whole exercise to be a useful one.
Not only did it increase understanding of both quantitative and qualitative indicators, it also focused teachers' attention on issues of quality in their work.
Eventually, they decided to choose, in addition to those indicators selected by each team for its own use, one indicator for use by all departments: ‘what percentage of students successfully complete the upper-school course in each subject?’
This led to further discussion over what constitutes success.
The way forward: partnership with the LEA
School self-evaluation has been approached in a number of systematic ways during the 1980s — for example,Guidelines for Review and Internal Development in Schools .
or GRIDS (McMahon et al 1984).
One trap to be aware of is that of relying simply on checklists of good practice (like, ‘Keeping the school under review’— ILEA (1977)): teachers ask themselves whether or not their schools are carrying out each item, the implication being that if they are not, they should be.
The trouble is, this does not necessarily lead to greater understanding of why something represents good practice.
Michael Fullan (1988) has pointed out that to change practice in classrooms involves changing beliefs and attitudes as well as changing teaching materials and approaches — though such ‘changes in attitudes, belief and understanding tended to follow rather than precede changes in behaviour.’
It seems essential that the school should operate in such a way that all staff, including non-teaching staff, have the opportunity to think together about its work in a way that deepens understanding of aims and moves towards genuinely shared values.
At all stages of the process, involvement of people other than teachers is valuable.
Increasingly, governors are involved in schools, often as members of sub-committees, and they provide an important lay perspective and a good deal of common sense.
A welcome development has been the project on ‘Planning for School Development’ directed by David Hargreaves and David Hopkins, mentioned in Chapter 2.
Evaluation is identified as the fourth and final style of the planning cycle but it is emphasised that evaluation is not simply something that comes as a ‘big bang’ at the end of the process, but that  it is required throughout.
The starting point, or ‘Audit’, may seem like a dispassionate fact-gathering exercise to decide ‘where are we now?’ but deciding what to include and how to describe it will inevitably lead to debate over what constitutes the main priorities and what areas are succeeding or failing: these are evaluation issues.
Construction of the plan must also bear monitoring and evaluation in mind throughout (see Figure 8.1).
Each action plan leads to specific targets and each of these have its success criterion (‘a form of school-generated performance indicator’).
Implementation of the plan and evaluation are so closely intertwined that the four-section cycle is redrawn to highlight the regular to-and-fro between the first (‘sustain commitment’) and the second (‘check progress’) which leads to ‘overcome problems’ and then ‘check successes’.
The final stage of the cycle, before reporting, is ‘taking stock’; a relatively low-key affair, since much of the evaluation has taken place already.
Interestingly, in the list of purposes of ‘taking stock’.
‘assess the extent to which the school's aims have been furthered’ takes second place to ‘examine the success of the implementation of the plan’.
So ‘taking stock’ is not simply concerned with ‘How do we know if we have arrived?’, but crucially ‘Have we travelled by the   best route?’.
After all, we have a similar journey to make next year and the experience can have important effects on the teachers involved — leading, in some cases perhaps, to loss of enthusiasm and morale, though more often.
we hope, to greater commitment and ownership of new policies.
So it is important to evaluate the process as well as the outcomes .
The 1944 Education Act laid a responsibility on LEAs to monitor the work of their schools and this has been strengthened in the 1988 Education Reform Act.
A good deal of attention has been paid recently, for example by the Audit Commission (1989), to the role of LEA advisers (or, as they are increasingly being called, inspectors).
Such advisers will certainly be expected to spend much more time in schools and to ensure that the demands of the National Curriculum are being met.
Secretary of State John McGregor has suggested that in addition, they should be actively involved in  administering the Standard Assessment Tests (SATs) associated with the National Curriculum.
This will mean a change in the balance of their work which has traditionally involved planning and delivering INSET and curriculum development with advisory teachers and others, often based in teachers' centres rather than schools.
They will be less available than previously to sit on appointment panels and may have to limit themselves to advising on senior posts only.
We need to ask ourselves how LEA advisers should be spending their increased time in schools, bearing in mind that due to the ratio of schools to inspectors, the time spent in any one school will still not be generous.
Methods of evaluating schools are sometimes put on a spectrum with external inspection (parodied as ‘the clipboard approach’) at one end and self-evaluation and reporting at the other.
Both extremes have serious shortcomings.
Self-evaluation, no matter how carefully the staff and governors try to be objective, lacks the valuable insight of someone genuinely on the outside looking in.
And in terms of credibility with a wider public the idea that the work of a school is to be appraised by its teachers and governors alone simply will not wash.
On the other hand there is external inspection, of which most teachers have occasional experience through the visits of HMI, who were charged to ‘report as you find’ and ‘do good as you go’.
In doing the first they meet the need for accountability to the wider public, but they are less successful in the second — development of good practice.
Their criticisms and advice, usually relayed to teachers via the head.
all too often produce defensive or even hostile reactions: the more so because there is rarely the opportunity for teachers to  discuss the points directly with the inspectors.
All too often their impressions are dismissed as false, having been based on a short, unrepresentative glimpse of part of a lesson, even thought they are usually expert at getting to the heart of the pupils' experience in a particular classroom.
It has also been argued that a reliance on external inspection alone removes from teachers the responsibility to evaluate their own work.
Margaret Maden (1989) has suggested that ‘professional discovery from within a self-critical staff collegium’ is more likely to raise standards and expectations than are comparisons against nationally determined criteria.
One problem faced by inspectors/advisers is building their authority and credibility within schools.
They are more likely to do this if they are seen to be making a direct and positive contribution to the school's consultative and decision-making processes, rather than observing from a distance in a way that underlines the ‘us-them’ relationship.
The way forward, surely, is for LEA inspectors/advisers — and in some cases, officers — to work with schools in support of the school's self-evaluation.
The case for this is argued by Jo Stephens (1989)(CEO for Oxfordshire), when she characterises this partnership of LEA and school as ‘looking with’ rather than‘looking at’, and ‘doing with’rather ‘doing to’.
Thus evaluation will be a collaborative activity, based on the School Development Plan.
Local education authority inspectors/advisors are highly qualified educationalists and have the valuable experience of visiting a wide range of similar schools.
They are also in the best position to encourage a balance between national, local and school priorities.
During the audit stage of the School Development Plan, they may suggest areas that are in danger of being overlooked; if expectations are too low they may find tactful ways to remedy this.
Advisers and inspectors can be a stimulus to more rigorous thinking and have an important role to play in encouraging schools to be more self-critical.
When the plan is being constructed and teachers are deciding upon success criteria for plans they may put searching questions and suggest additional ways to ensure that objectives become reality: if a school aims ‘involve all pupils’ are checks being made to see whether this is occurring?
What percentage of pupils take up the offer of extra-curricular activities?
Are the Physical Education and Music departments only concerned with intensive coaching of small elites or are they also encouraging all pupils to improve their performances?
How can we measure this?
By sharing in this process the LEA is supporting the school in helping teachers to focus their  aims and objectives and to keep quality on the agenda.
They should also be building the conviction of teachers that it is possible to change things for the better.
During the implementation stages, it is all too easy for teachers, including the head, struggling to maintain the ‘helicopter view’ necessary for good leadership, to become bogged down in mid-term crises and the drudgery of routine paperwork.
A structured visit from the attached inspector, talking things through as a ‘critical friend’ with the head or others, possibly having visited them in their classrooms first, can focus attention on all parts of the School Development Plan and suggest changes of emphasis and ways round emergent problems.
By the time ‘taking stock’ is occurring in preparation for the annual report to parents, priorities are being considered for next year's Plan.
The LEA inspector, having been involved at intervals throughout the year, should not, in Bill Laar's (1989) phrase provide ‘awkward surprises’ in comments made.
The whole area of how the LEA inspectorate should report to a variety of audiences, including individual teachers, the head, the governing body, the Chief Education Officer, HMI and the degree of formality of each report is under discussion in most LEAs.
For Jo Stephens, apart from the statistical and descriptive returns required by Circular 7/88 (DES, 1988b) which will be made on standard forms, and similar information (eg on staffing and use of resources) required by the LEA, the records and reports of institutions should be ‘generated within them ’ and ‘belong to them ’rather than the LEA or DES.
The role of the LEA in monitoring and evaluation should be to see that the work is done within schools and to provide support and expert advice.
The desire to achieve success at work, and to be recognised as doing so, is thought to be a powerful source of motivation.
Properly handled, monitoring and evaluation should highlight the successes in school, including those which are less obvious.
In doing so it can go a long way towards lifting the depression which has afflicted too many teachers in recent years.
EXPERIENCES OF FINANCIAL DEVOLUTION
Dianne Johnstone
Involvement in financial devolution is an experience new to most of us.
However, devolution is already quite a commonplace activity in many educational establishments around the world.
In order to understand the effect that financial delegation is likely to have on schools, in terms of school management and the quality of teaching and learning in the classroom, it is helpful to look briefly at what has already happened elsewhere.
This chapter begins by examining what has been happening outside the United Kingdom.
It then focuses more closely on what has been happening inside the UK and at the experiences of some of the schools which have already been financially autonomous.
Outside the UK
Since the 1970s there has been a move towards financial devolution in many countries worldwide.
Some of these are considered below.
AUSTRALIA
Financial delegation started in Australia in the early 1970s, but did not really take off until 1983 when the Labour Party, committed to devolution, was elected.
In Tasmania, however, schools have been responsible for allocating resources for some time.
The effect that this financial autonomy had on education there is best explained by looking at The Effective Resource Allocation in Schools Project (ERASP).
The project, which commenced in Tasmania in December 1982, was concerned with identifying ‘the effective school’.
One of the  purposes was to identify examples of effective resource allocation with a view to establishing a training programme that would enable others to gain similar skills.
Highly effective schools were identified, based on the school's reputation and a checklist of 43  characteristics of effective schools and 12 characteristics of schools which allocated resources in a highly effective manner.
The checklists were devised by those involved in the project.
Rosebery District High School received more nominations than any other school.
This led to careful study of the school's management structure and its labelling as the ‘collaborative school management cycle’.
Rosebery became known as an example of ‘the self-managing school’.
Jim Spinks, the headteacher, identified the two key factors in his ‘effective school’(Caldwell and Spinks 1988) as:
collaboration between the head and teachers; and
a significant degree of financial autonomy.
Financial delegation was seen as a key factor in improving school quality because it encouraged a more systematic approach to policymaking and planning in school.
THE UNITED STATES
The United States has a tradition of programme budgeting, but mainly at school-board level.
However, states such as California and Florida have attempted ‘school-site management’.
Recent developments indicate more movement towards site-based management as the National Governors' Association, the National Education Association and the National Association of Secondary School Principals are calling for greater levels of financial devolution to bring about educational improvement.
CANADA
The Edmonton Public Schools District in Alberta, operates a policy of ‘school-site decision-making’.
Schools are allocated funding for resources such as teaching staff, equipment, supplies and services; staff are hired centrally but selected by heads.
The school board sets broad goals for all schools to meet, along with their own goals and priorities.
The district also operates a teacher-effectiveness programme.
Evaluation of the scheme is given a high profile.
DENMARK
Since January 1990 all governing bodies of schools in Denmark  have had complete control over school budgets, curricula, staff appointments and day-to-day management — the intention being to give teachers and parents more say in school management.
In the UK
The experiences of local education authorities such as Cambridgeshire and Solihull.
who have led the field in running schemes of financial devolution, have been an important factor in the decision-making leading up to statutory introduction of Local Management of Schools (LMS).
It is therefore instructive to consider the experiences of those with some experience in this area.
CAMBRIDGESHIRE
Cambridgeshire introduced a scheme of ‘Increased Financial Responsibility’ in 1977 which gave schools responsibility for budgetary control of their capitation.
In April 1982 Cambridgeshire introduced a four-year pilot scheme that involved seven volunteer schools: six secondary, one primary.
The seven schools were to manage their own finances, all items were delegated except school meals, premises maintenance, school transport and loan charges.
Each school received figures showing how the total sum available to them had been allocated under different headings.
Headteachers were allowed to move sums of money from one category to another (virement) and under/overspends were carried to the next year.
Decisions on spending were the responsibility of the head and governors in consultation with a school finance committee of staff and governors.
In the third year the budget was not detailed under headings but awarded as a lump sum.
All seven schools received a monthly statement in the form of a computer printout from county hall.
The annual budget was calculated on a historical basis of costs from previous years.
The scheme was judged to be a success and extended to all secondary schools in April 1986.
Schools involved in the scheme have been kept well informed of developments as they have occurred, aided by the Cambridgeshire termly newspaper LFM News .
The reasons for extending the scheme are outlined in a Cambridgeshire document (CCC 1986) on local financial management and can be summarised as follows:
Local financial management encourages:
local control rather than imposed central control;
financial responsibility at establishment level and ‘management’ rather than‘administration’;
a determined and sustained partnership approach to consultation in school and active involvement of staff and governors;
schools to shape their budget; and
schools to be flexible to meet local needs.
Since April 1988 the size of the budget for each school has been calculated using a formula (based mainly on age-weighted pupil units) rather than the use of historical costs.
SOLIHULL
Solihull introduced its pilot scheme, the School Financial Autonomy Scheme, in April 1981 in one secondary school, one primary school and one sixth-form college.
All items were delegated except meals, transport and loan charges.
The scheme was extended in 1985, 1987 and 1988 to include all secondary schools and more primary schools.
Schools involved in the scheme had to pay a ‘management charge’ to the LEA to cover administration costs.
The scheme was introduced by the chair of the council as a cost-cutting exercise; however the aims have since been extended.
Financial devolution was seen by Solihull as a means of achieving the following:
maximum educational benefit;
locally determined priority areas;
greater value for money;
maximised use of school assets;
greater financial awareness;
improved management information; and
greater job satisfaction.
The Solihull scheme allowed for 91 per cent of the education budget to be delegated, more than the amount required by the Education Reform Act.
Previously the budget had always been allocated on a historical basis.
OTHER EXAMPLES
There are many other examples of LEA initiatives.
The ILEA's Alternative Use of Resources (AUR) Scheme, set up in the early 1970s, gave schools limited control over staffing and other parts of their budget.
Cheshire's ‘Cost Centre’ scheme, where schools had  control of essentially non-staffing resources.
dates from 1976 and included all secondary schools in 1984.
Lincolnshire's pilot scheme giving a group of seven pilot secondary schools control over teacher staffing.
supply and school meals and linking this with a development of information technology for school administration.
began in 1983.
Cambridgeshire and Solihull, however, were cited as examples of good practice by the Audit Commission in 1986.
The Education Reform Act and the DES Circular 7/88 both called for budgets to be allocated by the use of a formula.
At the time Circular 7/88 was published, neither Cambridgeshire nor Solihull had had any experience of the use of funding based on a formula.
However, Cambridgeshire voluntarily introduced formula funding in April 1988, whilst Solihull continued to oppose it.
School-focused research
In order to look at the effect that financial devolution, in the form of LMS, is likely to have, both on schools and on the quality of education, it may be helpful to look closely at what has happened in institutions that have already experienced various levels of financial autonomy.
The research referred to throughout the rest of this chapter took place in a selection of secondary schools in three LEAs in 1989.
Each school varied in size (from a Group 8 with less than 40 teaching staff to a Group 11 with over 70 staff), in catchment area and age of buildings.
Each school had experienced a different degree of financial devolution, from limited delegation allocated by historical funding to almost full delegation to include staff costs based on formula funding.
The schools had been involved with financial devolution for a varying number of years, from just over one year to more than seven.
The heads interviewed had been in post from four terms to nearly 20 years.
The only common characteristic of all the schools visited was the willingness of the people interviewed to be involved in the research.
At each school the headteacher (or in one school a representative) and at least one other member of staff were interviewed.
Each headteacher was asked a series of questions, covering the following areas:
the reason(s) for a school's involvement in financial devolution;
the changes in resource allocation before and after financial devolution;
the advantages and disadvantages of devolution;
the effect of devolution on the quality of education in the school;
the extent to which devolution had led to a change in personal level of job satisfaction;
changes in styles of school management;
the difference between pilot scheme and LMS;
time personally spent on financial devolution; and
staff involvement.
The teachers interviewed were asked questions about:
the effect financial devolution has on the role of the teacher;
job satisfaction;
the advantages and disadvantages of financial devolution;
reasons for the introduction of LMS;
time spent on LMS by the heads; and
general comments and feelings about LMS.
THE HEADTEACHER INTERVIEWS
Reasons for involvement 
Many of the heads had voluntarily opted to trial a scheme of financial devolution because they had expected to benefit from it.
They had.anticipated being able to save money on salaries, perhaps from long-term absence, or by reducing expenditure in one area in order to spend it elsewhere.
Other heads had no choice as financial devolution was LEA policy for all secondary schools.
Resource allocation 
There seemed to have been a real shift from the closed systems of resource allocation that tended to exist before devolution, systems where a person, usually the head, made all the decision about capitation.
As the level of delegation increased, so too had the level of consultation that took place in order to identify and prioritise spending needs, although the degree of consultation varied greatly from one school to another.
In one school the head had created new ‘decision-making bodies’ of staff with the specific task of identifying the needs of the pupils.
Once needs were identified a curriculum was planned that would meet the needs of the pupils, which then led  to planning resource needs and costing exercises.
This was a system whereby devolution was clearly ‘curriculum driven’.
In the other schools the head or the senior management team still decided on how to divide up the money with little or no consultation.
There was a greater emphasis on the concept of spending needs which had to be costed out and in some cases justified and even evaluated.
This represented a move away from the department head receiving capitation and simply spending it because it was there.
In schools where the head had encouraged the staff to take part in decision-making, leading to finance allocation, he/she was frequently disappointed by the apparent unwillingness of the staff to get involved.
Schools where the size of the delegated budget was seen to be adequate, or even generous, were able to take more steps along the path to staff involvement in decision-making than those with a reduced budget.
The schools where staff had made little or no input into financial decisions were both experiencing cutbacks equivalent to a cut of 5 per cent to 10 per cent of teaching staff.
A couple of the heads appeared to see devolution as an additional chore aimed simply at calculating how to allocate the money and making the books balance.
Advantages and disadvantages of devolution 
The advantages highlighted ranged from ‘saving money’ to ‘enhancing capitation’.
The increased capitation was seen as enabling schools to offer their pupils an enhanced curriculum.
A ‘devolved’ school was seen to be meeting local needs more quickly.
On the whole the interviewees believed that the advantages greatly outweighed the disadvantages.
The latter ranged from problems caused by errors in the monthly computer account statement to problems faced by governing bodies having to decide on which cuts were needed in order to keep within the budget.
These were decisions which would have been made by the LEA before devolution.
Devolution and the quality of education 
Most heads saw the quality of education as having risen in their schools due to devolution.
Extra materials had been purchased as a result of savings in some areas.
Quicker response times, once needs had been identified, and the ability to create a better working environment were pinpointed as improving life in school generally.
In an attempt to demonstrate the benefits two heads cited improvements in public exam results as performance indicators.
Others suggested  that their schools had an improved and more balanced curriculum, as a result of much more careful planning and prioritising, something which they felt could not have been achieved without devolution.
Levels of job satisfaction 
The heads reported an increase in the level of job satisfaction that they had experienced due to devolution — although one said he hadn't had time to think about it!
They felt that they were now able to be more flexible and to make decisions which led to action.
Devolution made it easier to see the results of their decisions.
Changes in management styles 
Devolution was seen by heads as a process that lent itself to a more collaborative style of management.
However, financial delegation was seen as running efficiently with or without the involvement of the staff.
Some heads thought that a change in style was more likely to happen with a change of personnel on the senior management team rather than devolution.
Pilot schemes of devolution and LMS 
LMS was viewed as being very similar to the pilot schemes, although the heads' opinions tended to be related to how kind they expected the formula to be to their situation.
The main difference, in the heads' eyes, seemed to be the change from historical to formula funding.
Most of the heads' experiences had been based on the former, although some of the schools had experienced formula funding since April 1988.
The changing role of the governing body was also perceived as a key issue: as one head put it, ‘There could be conflict over the next ten years as the governing bodies try to claim their legal rights and powers from the professionals.’
Time spent on devolution 
The time ranged from half an hour a day to 13 hours a day, depending on whether devolution was viewed as a separate activity concerned only with finance or whether it was seen as being curriculum driven and/or inseparable from all the activities performed by a head in a working day.
Staff involvement 
The level of staff involvement varied greatly from school to school.
Heads tended toward the notion of involving all/some of the staff in decision-making.
Few staff actually felt involved, even in schools  where the head thought that he or she had actively tried to promote staff participation.
THE TEACHER INTERVIEWS
The teachers that were interviewed ranged from those on the Main Professional Grade (MPG) to heads of departments.
The views of the teachers tended to be directly related to how involved they were in managing a department and thus how involved they were in spending capitation.
The effect of devolution on the role of the teacher 
The MPG teachers tended to notice few changes; they felt that they were still not involved in decision-making and, therefore, devolution had had no effect on their role in the school.
Some teachers were aware that they could now contribute to decision-making but still saw the head as deciding all the issues.
The teachers who were involved in spending departmental capitation were now more conscious of the need to use their allowance wisely — spending had to be justified and overspending wasn't allowed.
Some teachers identified an increase in paperwork and one felt that he spent too much time trying to raise the money for new projects from sources outside school before the head took the request for funding seriously.
Devolution and levels of job satisfaction 
This question drew a big ‘no’ reply.
Job satisfaction simply hadn't increased; in fact, people seemed surprised even to be asked to consider that devolution and job satisfaction might be related!
One head of department thought that it had increased marginally as a result of being more involved in decision-making, but this was less important to him than teaching.
One MPG teacher thought that, in theory, job satisfaction would increase if there was greater involvement in making decision, but he had had little experience of this!
Advantages and disadvantages of financial devolution 
The advantages and disadvantages identified by teachers depended upon their own experiences of devolution.
Some teachers felt that the advantages were directly linked to the headteacher and whether or not she or he was a good business manager.
The advantages identified can be summarised as follows:
a psychological improvement due to feeling ‘in charge’ of the money;
money was spent more wisely;
more money was available for capitation;
decisions on bids for extra money were made quickly;
the head was in a better position than the LEA to make decisions about the school;
the school was able to save money on non-educational things like waste collection, and then use it for educational items; and
more resources were available generally.
The disadvantages of devolution included:
an increase in time, paperwork and account-keeping;
more time spent on devolution resulted in less time spent ‘running’ the school — teachers expected to spend their time educating the pupils rather than running a business;
spending by departments had been guillotined by the head because the school had received an unexpected bill; and
staff appointments could possibly be made by choosing the candidate on the lower salary.
Reasons for the introduction of LMS 
Four possible reasons were given.
In order of popularity these were:
general government policy of ‘the market place’;
to make schools more accountable;
to make schools more enterprising; and
to reduce LEA power.
The idea of improving the quality of education did not come into any of the replies.
Time spent on devolution by the head 
The replies ranged from ‘not much’, because the school had a bursar, to ‘all day’, because a non-teaching head ‘has to do something all day’ or because the head was always seen to be going out to talk about devolution!
General comments 
On the whole the teachers interviewed had no major concerns over the introduction of LMS.
Points raised included the question of training for headteachers and governing bodies, the end of  redeployment opportunities if schools were overstaffed and the need to increase levels of staff involvement in decision-making in schools.
Conclusion
The need to raise the quality of education has received much publicity over the last few years.
The section of the Education Reform Act 1988, which forces all LEAs to devolve financial power to the schools in the form of Local Management of Schools, is only one of the many new initiatives designed, apparently, to bring about an increase in quality.
Other measures include teacher appraisal, the National Curriculum, open enrolment, standardised assessment tasks.
This chapter, however, is only concerned with the introduction of LMS and the effects that this may have on schools.
Any conclusions based on data collected in such a small number of schools, from just three LEAs, are bound to have limited application and, clearly, there are dangers in making sweeping statements based on this research.
However, one statement can be made and substantiated:
The introduction of a scheme of financial devolution into a school guarantees that some changes will be made in the management and organisation of that school.
The type of changes that schools experience seems to be determined by two key factors:
the personnel in the school, but particularly senior management, and especially the head; and
the amount of money that the school receives in comparison with the sum received the previous year.
It is clear that a reduction or increase in funding did not automatically lead to similar changes in each of the schools.
Specific changes were determined primarily by the head and senior management team and only latterly by the rest of the staff.
Furthermore, some of the changes happening in those schools visited were not due purely to the introduction of financial devolution, being in some cases the result of a change of personnel at senior level.
The key change that could be identified in all the schools visited was that of a rethink about departmental allocation, As a result of devolution, capitation seemed to be allocated to departments using  criteria that were more public and in most cases fairer; for example, a formula based on pupil and subject weightings, or a system of bidding or, inevitably, the use of last year's figures plus an allowance for inflation.
A claim for money generally had to be substantiated by evidence of careful planning, identification of areas of shortfall, prioritising and cost-effective exercises.
Gone are the days of spending frantically because the end of the financial year was nigh.
The involvement of an increasing number of staff in financial planning is another interesting area.
Many of the heads had made an active move towards involving more people (even all staff in one school) in an attempt to make more staff aware of the need to plan finance as a ‘whole-school issue’ and to prioritise resource needs.
The degree of success varied from one head to another.
One had tried to involve some of the staff but they apparently refused to get involved; another head wanted more involvement and had a plan of action that would lead to this: another was sure that all staff were involved and departments were compelled to discuss finance at least once a month.
The perceptions of the staff questioned about involvement in school finance decision-making did not often agree with that of the heads.
Many staff felt that their involvement had simply not increased with financial devolution.
The degree of change seemed to depend upon how the head viewed devolution.
Some saw it as simply a matter of making the books balance, an additional chore or responsibility in an already busy schedule.
Other heads saw devolution as a whole new way of life and adopted an approach whereby the power of devolution was used to enable the school to drive the curriculum.
The final issue must be that of quality of education and whether LMS will lead to an improvement.
All interviewed felt that there were no simple performance factors that could be used to measure the effect that devolution has on quality.
There are so many variables that the task of measuring quality was regarded as impossible.
However, certain key facts indicate general improvements:
1.
All schools could identify additional resources,(for instance, computers, a music laboratory, enhanced INSET, staff) that had been purchased and which were perceived to be available entirely as a result of devolution.
2.
Most heads felt that their level of job satisfaction had increased because they were able to make decisions quickly and then see the results of those decisions.
3.
All schools identified a change in their methods of identifying  needs prior to spending leading to more effective use of available resources.
4.
Most heads could identify changes that had led to a more balanced or improved curriculum, either as a result of the purchase of additional facilities or due to a change in curriculum planning.
5.
Most heads felt that the quality of education in their school had increased due to either financial devolution or a change in personnel or a combination of both.
The evidence would suggest that devolution can be seen as a chore for the head or as an opportunity for the school.
The only way forward must be to view LMS as an enabling device that will allow schools to plan more effectively and then use their resources more efficiently to meet identified needs.
HOW TO MAKE THE MOST OF LOCAL MANAGEMENT
John Mann
Introduction
The big changes in British education have a shelf life of up to 40 years.
Voluntary school grants began in 1833, Board Schools in 1870, Balfour's Council Schools in 1902, Butler in 1944, Baker in 1988.
Local Management of Schools (LMS) looks like running until the 2020s.
We had better learn how to use it well.
Schools are people intensive.
They need pupils and they need staff.
Formula funding will be a constant reminder of the need for pupils.
No pupils, no staff.
By a neat twist, schools which cannot recruit and retain staff are unlikely to go on recruiting pupils.
The two basic questions for schools are how to recruit pupils and how to recruit staff.
Local management and grant-maintained status encourage schools to think competitively.
But competition and self-sufficiency are not the same.
Even the largest schools may need outside help.
Where should they turn to?
However remote shire halls may be, however bureaucratic town halls are, the local education authority is a school's most accessible source of support.
Success under LMS depends on learning how to use the LEA.
This chapter addresses these three questions: how to recruit pupils, how to recruit staff and how to use the LEA.
A final section asks how we shall all know whether LMS itself is a success.
How to recruit pupils
When CTCs and grant-maintained schools are merely ancient monuments maintained by English Heritage, The Education  Reform Act 1988 will stand in one respect with Magna Carta and the Bill of Rights.
It enshrines the principle of rights.
The ERA gives every young citizen the right to a basic curriculum which includes the National Curriculum.
Entitlement is what will give the ERA its niche in history, not compulsion and testing.
At this stage the emphasis is on tests.
Their results will be published in the belief, apparently, that this kind of accountability will help to raise standards.
Parents will shop around to find ‘good’ schools.
Schools with poor results will be obliged to make further efforts and those with ‘good’ results will redouble their efforts in order to stay high on pecking order.
In these circumstances schools may try to recruit and retain only those pupils whose performance is expected to improve the school's position in the league tables.
That would be shortsighted.
A reputation for being exclusive is not very useful in a market where success depends on recruiting large numbers.
Far better to have a reputation for being inclusive , ready and able to help pupils whatever their difficulties, whatever their needs, to be able to provide the entitlement curriculum for every kind of pupil.
There are problems.
Providing for exceptional and individual needs may be more costly than providing for the average needs of fairly homogeneous groups of pupils.
Funding based on age-related pupil numbers may not run to small groups and bespoke programmes for individual pupils.
But there is scope within the regulations for special funding, as explained in Chapter 1.
The funding formula is to include provision for special needs within the mainstream and funding for statemented pupils lies outside the formula.
Enlightened self-interest suggests that schools should press their LEA to fund special needs as generously as possible, so that they in turn can advertise their ability to provide appropriately for every pupil.
This too should be the focus of any fundraising the school undertakes.
More vigorous action may sometimes be needed.
Some schools have insufficient specialist accommodation to be able to give their pupils the basic curriculum.
The first school to take successful legal action to compel its own LEA to provide sufficient accommodation will gain a deserved reputation for looking after its pupils' interests.
How to recruit staff
With local management, governing bodies and heads will replace LEAs in the front-line struggle to recruit and retain teachers.
This  will be a proper call on both delegated and private funds.
Governing bodies could offer a splendid range of benefits.
They should ensure as a minimum that the staffrooms are well furnished and equipped, with decent workstations for every teacher.
a good supply of books and periodicals, coffee and sandwiches freely available.
Comfortable staff dining facilities would be the norm.
Teachers are expected to do a good deal of work at home.
Books, wordprocessors, videos and conference phones for use at home would enable the staff to work far more effectively.
Subscriptions to professional bodies, group membership of local clubs and patrons' seats at local theatres and concerts might all feature in advertisements for staff.
Baker weekends in Mediterranean resorts would be an added perk!
There are less costly ways of recognising the contribution teachers make.
The chair of governors might write a welcoming note to all new teachers and a thank you to the leavers.
That the governing body might record the names of those whose work in or out of school is particularly noteworthy.
At hardly any cost the governors could celebrate each year their school's ‘Outstanding Teacher’, as some American institutions do.
Name and photo in the school brochure would be a good start.
Governors will also have to deal with grievances and discipline.
They have a hard row to hoe.
In a disciplinary case the head may be complainant, investigating officer and the defendant's manager.
The head is quite likely also to be the subject of any grievance.
Whether the head is a governor or not, she or he will almost certainly have worked more closely with governors than any other school employee has.
In these circumstances it may be hard for other people to believe that the governors' proceedings can be as fair as they should be.
Until now this has not been a matter of overwhelming importance because there was provision for appeals to the LEA against the governors' findings.
It is now much more important because even in dismissals the ERA provides only for an appeal to another panel of governors: there is no provision for appeals to the LEA.
Potential recruits might be reassured if they knew that in matters like these the governors would call on independent investigators or assessors from outside the school.
Such a commitment would be strong evidence of enlightened staff management.
Schools may wish to call on their LEA for this kind of independent advice.
The LEA's detachment and its knowledge of a few dozen (or even a few hundred) other institutions could be of great value.
How to use your LEA
It may be true that under the ERA LEAs have lost an entire empire and not yet found a role.
Once the dust has settled they will be seen to have half-a-dozen key tasks.
One of these is to support their schools with a range of expert services.
When catering, cleaning and grounds maintenance are subject to competitive tender the education department will need a ‘consultant’ to advise what standards to specify in the tender documents and how to monitor the service provided.
Schools and colleges which choose to make their own arrangements may welcome help from the department's consultant.
The LEA might usefully provide similar kinds of expertise in other services which are not subject to competitive tender.
As landlord it will have its own building surveyors and, as LEA, it will need some expertise in supplies, equipment, personnel, health and safety, accounting, VAT, computing management and the law.
Some of these services might come from the LEA's administrative budget or its share of the General Schools' Budget: others could be provided at cost to the users.
The idea of schools and colleges buying services from their local authority may sound novel, but it is implicit in local management.
Governing bodies may sometimes wish to look to independent consultants for advice in these matters.
But the more schools use their LEA's services the better those services will be.
Is it working?
Local Management of Schools will be judged a success if it has been up and running reasonably well since 1 April 1990.
That is a short-term view.
In the long run, ‘LEAs will need to evaluate the success of local management in improving the quality of teaching and learning in their schools,’ and ‘the government will wish to evaluate…the success of local management in raising the quality of education in schools’says Circular 7/88 (DES 1988b).
Standards may well rise from 1990, but the rise may stem from the National Curriculum, testing, parental choice, opting out, or other factors which have nothing to do with the ERA.
How will LEAs or government be able to say whether LMS has affected standards?
Local Management of Schools rests on three principles: equal funding, freedom of choice and economy; it rests on the hypothesis that the quality of education will rise if:
all the schools in an area are funded on the same basis;
governing bodies are free to make expenditure decisions which match their own priorities; and
schools benefit directly from any savings they are able to make.
The Circular clearly envisages that LEAs will set about testing these hypotheses.
They will need to work closely with schools to do this.
EQUAL FUNDING
Under equal funding there will be winners and losers.
There may also be changes in performance, with some schools doing better and others less well than in the past.
It will be relatively easy to compare changes in funding with changes in performance to see whether there is any correlation.
It would be a resounding triumph for LMS were all the schools with more funds to do better, and those with less funds to do no worse, than in the past.
Equal funding within each LEA will throw into sharp relief the differences between LEAs.
The public may find it hard to stomach for very long the fact that schools in one area should be much better or worse funded than those in neighbouring areas, or that age weightings should vary greatly from one area to another.
After the National Curriculum, can national funding norms be far behind?
BETTER CHOICES
Testing the hypothesis that better choices will raise quality is a little harder.
The freedom to make expenditure decisions which reflect governors' priorities is bound to lead to greater variations in patterns of expenditure.
Local education authorities will need to monitor these variations between schools to see whether there is any correlation between particular decisions about spending and a school's performance.
In the past many decisions depended more on hunch and lobbying than hard evidence about the educational consequences of funding allocations.
In future, some governing bodies and their LEAs may wish to proceed on a more rational basis.
They may wish to test any of a dozen or more hypotheses.
‘Extending the Christmas holiday and cutting the summer holiday by two weeks would save money and would not affect performance.’
‘Terminating the window-cleaning contract would not affect performance and would not affect the number of applicants for places.’
‘Reducing the external painting cycle from five to eight years would not affect performance and would not affect the number of applicants for places.’
‘Reducing temperature levels by three degrees would not affect performance and would not cause any complaints.’
‘Raising average class sizes from 26 to 30 and giving teachers more preparation time would improve performance.’
‘It is more/less effective to employ experienced teachers at the top of the scale than to employ a larger number of less experienced teachers.’
‘Switching 5 per cent of teachers’ salaries to buy more administrative or technical staff would improve/worsen performance.’
‘Switching 2 per cent of teachers’ salaries to buy more equipment and materials would improve/worsen performance.,
‘Providing 24-hour seven-day surveillance of the building would reduce vandalism and theft enough to cover the cost.’
‘Allocate 1 per cent of the budget to governor training and support would improve/worsen performance.
‘A professional fundraiser costing £x from the delegated budget would/would not raise £5x.’
Local education authorities will need to know about expenditure decisions so that they can monitor the effects and advise other governing bodies addressing the same question later.
BETTER VALUE
The third hypothesis is that governing bodies will get better value than LEAs have done: cash savings without any consequential loss of educational quality.
They will find ways of
buying the same goods or services at a lower price (pencils, computers, repairs, off-peak electricity);
managing with less once they are responsible (fuel, cleaning materials);
finding less expensive alternatives (gas instead of oil, second-hand furniture instead of new):
finding longer-life alternatives;
getting more productive work out of staff (encouraging the caretaker to become a caretaker-handyperson).
Two separate issues arise from the search for better value.
There  must of course be no consequential loss of quality.
Beyond that, to show that LMS improves the quality of education it needs to be shown whether the savings are used in ways which enhance quality.
To reach conclusions about this kind of question LEAs will need to scrutinise school spending patterns in some detail.
Conclusion
Schools will be free under LMS to make their own spending decisions; LEAs are to assess the cumulative educational effect of these decisions.
If LEAs take their assigned task seriously, schools may begin to hanker for the days when they were given the tools and told to get on with the job.