

The Nightly Round: Updo, Downdo
IN May 1919, a Metropolitan police officer was sacked for misconduct.
He had ‘paraded at 10 p.m. for beat duty until 6 a.m.
Before 1 a.m., he was noted missing from his beat and could not be found.
At 5.10 a.m., an officer purposely posted outside his lodgings heard an alarm go off.
At 5.30 a.m., the police constable appeared in uniform ready to resume duty, with a view to leaving it at 6 a.m.’
The central feature of police work between the wars was the beat, the cornerstone of police practice, the crucible of the constable's experience.
To the outsider, the civilian, beat work was directed at controlling the street population.
Its regulated, preventive surveillance features, in practice meant ‘moving on’ those civilians who dared to stand idly at the street corner.
To the insider, to the lowly constable, however, it was an insidious device of control and discipline.
From his perspective, it was intended as much to control his own actions as to cow the lower classes of the street.
The beat was the site where police control of the urban population was felt most acutely.
It was also the crossroads at which the constable felt most subject to authority.
Every officer spent some years on the beat.
For 90 per cent of them, it was the reality of their normal working day in the Liverpool Police.
The beat, a hangover from the early Metropolitan Police as well as from the older watch system, had clearly defined features.
It was carefully controlled by time and by geography — a day divided into three eight-hour slots.
Each hour in turn was subdivided into quarters, at any one of which the feared ‘sergeant’ figure might appear.
It was also measured in yards.
Neighbourhoods of terraced streets, shops, and warehouses were segmented into one-hour slots.
Clock and distance, in confining police work-life, were reinforced by the dictates of superiors in a quasi-military organization.
It was an isolating experience with penalties for those constables who wished to exchange civilities with their peers or with passers-by.
Time, distance, and social isolation ensured that each patrolling constable carried a mobile Panopticon with him.
It was a process studded with ritual — from the initial parade, the displays of truncheon and Beat Book, in a curious combination of coercion and submission, to the final signing-off in a weary station-house or bridewell.
It was generally hated by its subjects for its tedium and excruciating monotony, as the isolated officer patrolled the city streets at night, and was physically separated from both peers and public.
It was a practice requiring the submission of the lower classes on the street, yet at the same time reflecting subordination of the constables to the whims of senior officers and to a manipulative body of law.
Inevitably, it gave rise to both unthinking acceptance — the weary, slow plod from point to point — and resistance, as a variety of easing devices were contrived.
The beat was the core of police practice, the hub of policing around which other activities revolved.
Beginning and ending with formal parades, it displayed all the paradoxes of an occupation whose function was simultaneously to be both the controllers and the controlled.
RITUALS
Rituals are a central feature of police work.
From careful staging of interments for officers killed on duty to the daily parade for beat patrol, police work is played out on a stage to both internal and external audiences.
B. T. When you were going on duty, you had to parade at the station at half past, as a rule — a quarter of an hour before the beat.
You looked through the Order Books that were posted to us — read the Inspector's Orders, the Superintendent's Orders, the Crime Orders, Complaints Books, Families Away from Home Books.
Then you went on parade.
A. M. We fell in like soldiers in a square.
When the sergeant had been to every man, made sure that he had his key, his baton, boots were clean, and all the rest of it, then he told the man when to take his refreshments and what beat he was on.
The sergeant stood in front of his men and when the Inspector came along, all the men stood to attention, and the sergeant said, ‘All correct, sir.’
Then the inspector said, ‘Stand at ease.’
He read the Orders that we had already read, in case we hadn't read them.
Some of the old inspectors tried to catch you out.
They read out a complaint at perhaps, 22 Dale Street, and you would say, ‘Aware of it, Sir, ‘and he would turn around and say, ‘What is it?’ and if you didn't know, you were in lumber.
Inspector was very annoyed if you didn't say that you were aware of it when he read things out.
However, the uniformed, sixteen-legged crocodile was an easy target for ridicule.
K. R. Then you had to produce your appointments — which was your baton and brass keys [for the police telephone boxes], hold them in your hands, and then you were issued with the Beat Book on parade.
It contained quite a bit of information — the position of the police telephones, the infirmaries, the hospitals, fire brigade, fire boxes, and so on.
That finished, he gave us: ‘Attention.
Right turn, and quick march,’ and we all marched out of the parade room by the left foot.
When we were out on the street, we followed section by section, and each section went to its own beats.
We were marched out in a crocodile, just like schoolgirls — weren't allowed to go out two-by-two or in threes or fours, but all in a line so we wouldn't disturb the pedestrians.
Young kids used to quack at us as we went past.
When we reached our beats, we dropped off the crocodile.
There'd always be an extra man who had a  different beat every day.
Finish, there was only one man, the sergeant, who had come out with us, and then went back to pick up his correspondence and what not.
In the parade, detailed knowledge of the day's work was required, the raw material for the day's duties.
The line-up, like the singular march to the beat, also had the symbolic function of dramatizing the ordered hierarchy, the disciplined Panopticon structure, of the police organization.
The police audience, the constables, had their status and office dramatized.
The public — even the kids who mocked — were confronted with disciplined state power on their doorsteps.
Proceeding in the Direction of —
Rituals have to be learned, rites to be imparted to the novices, with curious rationalizations.
T. B. You're walking slower than the average person, when you're first about.
When you do your first beat, you're walking with the sergeant and suddenly a voice will call out, ‘Where are you going, son?’ and you're about ten yards ahead.
His idea was that if you come on the scene and there was a right old set-to, you wanted to be as fit as you can to get into the set-to.
THE BORED 'UN OF THE BEAT
Joe Soap up to the city came,
His hands were large, his feet the same,
To join the Police Force was his aim,
Tho' tired, so tired.
Joe's chest was measured, 'twas not too bad,
Inside him Joe felt quite a lad,
Though outwardly he looked most sad,
And tired, most tired.
He tackled the tests with commendable zeal,
Then in front of the M.O.
he did peel;
But yawned when asked ‘How do you feel?’
So tired, so tired.
Joe got allocated to the beat,
Then out was sent on the night treat,
The Sergeant said ‘You're rather beat’,
Said Soap ‘I'm tired.’
Joe's feet they felt like lumps of lead,
His helmet hurt his poor fat head,
‘Great Scott! young man’ the Inspector said.
‘You're tired, too tired.’
Soap, went on duty in the Mall,
Soon scotched himself against a wall;
The Super.
then did him call,
‘You tired?
You're fired.’
The Chief his record marked — ah, me!—
‘Dismissed, with much ignominy,
Because as far as we could see,
He was born tired.’
The moral comrades, is quite plain:
If in the Force your bread you gain,
Tho' hard the duty, great the strain,
Don't show you're tired.
(Police Review , 1927)
For the novice, who had spent a mere two months in training in the city, far from home in Scottish pit village or Norfolk town, the introduction to beat work was like plunging into a cold shower.
W. S. I was posted right away on nights.
I came out into a strange city — hardly knew my way around.
You were simply given a lamp and told, ‘Your beat starts here.
Off you go.’
I promptly got lost.
When I first started, I got a paper to go to Rose Hill Station on Scotland Road.
The boss said, ‘You go to Scotland Road and come in here for your tea, Bill.
’ I couldn't find my way to Scotland Road.
I see a van coming up.
‘Stop, mate.
Where's Rose Hill Police Station on Scotland Road?’
I arrested one man early on.
I had only been in the force five weeks.
I had to ask him the way to the police station.
Normal policing meant night-beat policing.
For eight days on end, beat officers, half the rank-and-file establishment, saw little daylight.
There are in this force a number of young men who have fixed hours of duty — 8.30 a.m. until 5.30 p.m. with every Sunday off.
These men are comparatively young in the Service.
In contrast, the Constables who do alternate duties and have rotary leaves with one Sunday off in seven are, during the week-ends, called upon to do extra work.
This happens when a man's ordinary hours of duty are 6 a.m. to 2 p.m. and when one likes to look forward to spending a few hours with one's family.
During the football season (eight months of the year!) the early turn men parade at 6 a.m. to 2 p.m., return for a few hours, then re-parade 6 p.m. to 10 p.m., and sometimes have to go on duty at 6 a.m. the following morning.
Having regard to the time taken up in travelling, to and from the place of parade, the time taken to perform twelve hours' duty is spread over seventeen hours.
The night duty men are also called early from their beds to parade for the football matches, therefore with insufficient sleep, coupled with hours of standing in the cold within a short space of rising from a warm bed, it is not surprising to have a heavy sick list…can not matters be arranged more conveniently for the family man?
(Letter in Police Review , 1935)
T. D. The day beat was twice as long so, in effect, there were twice as many men on night duties as on days.
The parade I had to lead down from the station to the beat was much longer on nights.
You did a fortnight of mornings — 6 to 2, a  fortnight on afternoons — 2 to 10, and a month on nights — 10 to 6.
It was a six-day week — one day off in eight.
So if I was working a full week, Sunday to Sunday, the next day would be my rest day, and the next week, it would be a Tuesday.
Otherwise, it would be continuous duty.
Whatever the official view of police work, to those on the ground, it was above all else a job.
As a working man, your concerns on beat patrol were mundane but real — above all else, the unsocial hours and the peculiar daily rota.
Keeping the Points
Point-to-point, with its connotation of upper-class steeplechasing, had quite a different meaning to the patrolling officer, whose work-life it structured.
The discipline of the points made constant supervision unnecessary, with the sergeant able to strike randomly at any one of sundry crossroads, an arbitrary arrangement whose authority was backed up by the total recall of the Beat Book record.
K. R. Not even shown round the beat first time.
Given a Beat Book.
You made quarter-hour points and you didn't know where the sergeant was going to pick you up.
If he couldn't find you, he wanted to know where you had been.
He wouldn't report it unless it was deliberate and too often.
My beat went up Duke Street, turn left on Great George Street, up past the David Lewis Hostel for Seamen, down Park Lane, back to the bridewell and the quarter-hour point at the top of Duke Street.
‘Milking’(checking) locks was a key practice.
It was assembly-line production without a product.
K. R. In that time, I had to do all the side streets, milking padlocks.
You had to run up the warehouse steps.
Half-hour point was by the David Lewis, and then three-quarter-hour point down Park Street.
Ridiculous making them quarter-hour points — because the burglars knew where you were.
If the sergeant got there before you and didn't find you, he would tap with his signalling stick and it goes for miles in the middle of the night — give him a little tinkle, and you walk towards one another.
He doesn't say, ‘Where have you been and why are you late?’ because you're on your way immediately.
If you don't see him, you've got to make all your points religiously until you see him, and having found him, he makes a note in his diary, and you make a note in yours and you're away.
The Police Union expressed the rank and file's perception of the contradiction between the reality of beat patrol and the expectations of superior officers.
Theoretically a constable when taking up his beat is to concentrate on preventing crime.
In practice, however, the young constable soon learns that it is a more paying proposition from his point of view so to work his beat that the time-table is not deflected from.
Sergeants and Inspectors know almost exactly where an officer can be found at a certain time, and woe betide the constable who keeps his superior officer waiting.
A constable who in the course of patrolling sees something which in his opinion is of a suspicious character, should satisfy himself one way or the other before proceeding to work the remaining portion of his ground.
To delay half-an-hour means that his Sergeant is kept waiting half-an-hour, so that the latter is compelled to work the P.C.'s beat in the opposite direction in order to find him.
A sergeant with a large area to cover and under the necessity of visiting each constable, which visits have to be duly recorded, becomes testy if one or two of those under his charge are late arriving at certain points on their beats.
It is not that the Sergeant really objects to the constable having a legitimate excuse for being late, but it is because he too has to satisfy his superior officers that his omission to visit all the constables regularly is due to efficient Police duty.
DIALOGUE
P.C.
All correct, Sergeant.
SERGEANT
.
All correct, eh?
Where have you been?
P.C.
Working my beat, Sergeant.
SERGEANT
.
You are three minutes late.
Haven't you got a watch?
If not, you had better get one.
P.C.
Yes, I've got a watch, Sergeant.
SERGEANT
.
Well, where have you been that's made you so late?
Hanging up somewhere?
P.C.
No, Sergeant.
I have worked my beat as near as possible to 2 and a half miles an hour, and I don't think there is much to complain about.
SERGEANT
.
Well, don't keep me waiting another time, or you'll find yourself on the Report for improperly working your beat.
I don't believe what you say.
(Bull's Eye , 1921)
Managing, massaging time is central to beat work.
Where timekeeping signifies authority, the overseer's watch and chain, the ability to organize time to one's own advantage is a subtle form of subversion as well as a device for self-preservation.
Preventive policing, the backward and forward travails of the patrolling constable, summed up in the police clerk's jargon of ‘updo, downdo’, was a repetitive assembly-line process in which locks, shop doorways, and street lamps marked the passage of time.
A. T. I was posted to D Division, Scotland Road, night duty round Great Howard Street leading to the Northern Hospital by the big tobacco warehouse and I had to patrol round there and along one street, up the next, down Dixon Street, up the next, down Regent Street — downdo, updo, updo, downdo all the time, trying shop doorways and all the locks.
We used to call it ‘milking locks’.
It's the only thing you did.
On nights, it was a constant checking of locks.
You started off at the beginning of your beat — set out on the north side of Lime Street — took a quarter of an hour to walk round and try all the locks.
When you tried all the locks and doors, you were responsible.
If one was found unlocked, you were responsible and in trouble.
So you made sure, all your locks, doors, were  made secure, no lights left on because if there was a suspicious light, you had to report it.
And having done that, you repeated it all night.
I was on Mill Street for a bit and some of the padlocks there on the fish shops were filthy — you had to be very careful to wash your hands before you had your refreshments.
I started Chisenhall Street on first quarter points, then I would walk along to the next very scruffy part — all broken down garages and yards and things.
The only thing I heard was dogs and rats.
I'd go down to the bottom and try all the locks, come up, go along the next street.
On the right hand side — the full length, from Howard Street to Gardner's Row — was the stables for the Corporation drayhorses.
S. H. We were held responsible for property and we had to go round and test every doorway and that would occupy the first time round — say an hour and a half — and then usually you had to go round and test them a second time, just to make sure.
What we used to do — you know in the olden days, the ladies used to use stays.
They had whalebone in these stays and we used to cut pieces about half an inch long and in the daytime, I used to make a bag full and put them in between the doors and I'd go round the first  time and put them in and when I went round later, if that whalebone was missing, I'd make enquiries.
One unlocked and you got in touch with the station and they would contact the key-keeper and they would come out and lock the place up.
In those days, you used to have special police telephones and you would ring in direct to the station.
A Liverpool Police Constable stated that his beat included the Communist Party offices in Hope Street.
In consequence of a previous burglary, he placed a secret mark on the street door, and on the morning of May 23rd, he found that the mark had been interfered with…the accused descended…
(Manchester Guardian , 1925)
The institution had its own ideas about how to relieve the monotony of the beat.
Occasional breaks in routine were available, to be undertaken either as a sign of enthusiasm, or as a momentary release from tedium.
Some locations, such as the city centre, A Division, offered more release than others.
H. P. You had to go round keeping your eyes open for various things.
There were all sorts that we dealt with in those days.
For example, we would get into trouble if we failed to notice that there was a blocked gas lid in the wall that someone could fall over.
If we missed anything on the beat, even sunken flags in the roadway — and we didn't report them, we'd get a report back wanting to know why.
If it started to snow, say at four o'clock, we would have what we called snowmen — and we would knock them up and they would come running to get a day's work in the snow.
Other times, in the outside divisions, we would often have a list of people to call up in the morning — such as our own men for early morning duty.
There were also other things such as places where people were away from home — the Plain Clothes could have as many as twenty or thirty places where people were away from home, and he was expected to pay attention and he would have to go round and visit them all.
Now I'd had quite enough of my duties by day;
How I welcomed Night Duty, I need hardly say.
One hour after midnight.
All is quite calm,
But hark!
Oh!
Great Caesar; a burglar alarm.
Very soon several Policemen had answered the call,
Surrounding the building.
I stood near the wall.
Lonesome I waited, 'twas as silent as death,
When a sound in the darkness made me catch my breath —
Like a flash I had laid him all out on the ground,
He fought like a fiend, but made not a sound.
I was feeling around for his safe-wrenching tool,
When he gasped, ‘Off my chest, you great blundering fool’,
The voice was the Sergeant's.
Upset he was too!
And the names he called me turned the air blue!
I could only stand quietly and scratch my poor head.
‘Out of my sight, do you hear?’ he said.
As a P.C. I felt I was not a success.
(Police Review , 1937)
B. A. In B Division, during the day, there were so many things happening all the time.
It was a good division for learning police work.
But it was quite different at night.
We learnt by practical experience — that a chimney on fire is an offence or a dog without a collar.
If a chimney was on fire, you couldn't just let it burn away.
My first traffic accident was someone walking into a horse.
There are obvious similarities between beat supervision and a more recent form of Panopticon control — the probation ‘tracking’ system in which convicted offenders can be ‘supervised’in the community by random checking, at any one of a series of timetabled points during the day.
For the constables, this clock discipline was reinforced by more severe castigation — perhaps for missing an unlocked door or newly broken window.
Like tracked offenders, the beat officer between the wars carried his prison with him.
Surviving that mental control led to improvisations.
ALIENATION
‘TIME WASTED IS EXISTENCE, TIME SPENT IS LIFE’was the inscription read every night by a constable on the Picton Clock.
On the beat, the officer conducted an array of largely meaningless and low-status tasks — checking, checking, and checking again.
Patrol officers rarely encountered any ‘action’.
But beat duty was of course not the only punitive experience for the rank-and-file policeman.
The immobile custodian of the Dock Gates did not have even the dignity of movement.
Worse still was the permanent flapping of the scarecrow on point duty, directing traffic.
J. V. Night duty was what got me off the job.
The beat I had started in Garston village went right through to Speke.
Your principal job was trying doors and keeping your eyes open for anything suspicious.
There was nothing more boring than flogging around, looking for something like a bike without lights.
Some areas were very boring, especially in the suburbs.
You could go all night and not see a single soul and the same in the city on a Sunday morning.
You wouldn't see anybody walking round these big buildings and not a soul in sight.
There was no crime, nothing.
Time dragged terribly, you had to keep going round, but it was bloody awful.
M. B. On Dock Duty, you'd stand all night and not see a soul and the Liver Building up there with the clock gradually going round and you'd think: ‘I won't look at it, I won't look at it at all.’
Then after one chime, you'd think: ‘It must be three o'clock now.’
But it was one o'clock.
…
We see a smart ‘Pointsman’ stand waving his hand,
And to the onlooker it all seems so grand;
But ‘jam’ made of traffic is not very ‘sweet’
And ‘tastes’ rather sour to ‘him’on the beat.
There are tourers and ‘buses, lorries and trams,
All have to be guided by one pair of hands,
And if by confusion you make a mistake,
Your kit to headquarters, you'd soon have to take.
Then take the bad weather and out in the night,
Of course in the summer it all looks alright;
But ‘on point’ even then it is not quite all fun,
Being melted and scorched by the heat of the sun.
(Police Review , 1931)
M. B. Point duty was pretty hard work, particularly on a busy junction — the Legs of Man, bottom of Scotland Road.
You could stand there with your arms and legs like lead.
You got half an hour plus ten minutes relief for your refreshments and that would happen at ten in the morning and you'd been there since seven.
When you came back, you stayed there until three.
Later on, they encouraged the beat man to take over for five minutes — for a man to go and stretch his legs.
A very tiring job it was, particularly in winter, when you had a heavy overcoat on.
The Liverpool Stipendiary the other day confessed he had upon more than one occasion watched members of the City Police Force on point duty in various parts of the city, and he admitted he had been extremely confused at some of the signals given to traffic.
When a policeman raised his hand as a signal to approaching traffic to halt, there was no definite indication as to which vehicles were requested to move on when the officer waved his other arm.
(Police Review , 1921)
Most police work, the daily grind, was similar to many repetitive tasks — from the treadmill of the Victorian workhouse and prison to the modern-day assembly-lines — both physically  tiring and mentally tedious.
That endurance was not a quality that induced ready sympathy from a class that still looked on the constable as a kind of public flunkey.
‘It Always Rained’
Troubles have a habit of being compounded.
It always seemed to rain more at night.
Snow rarely fell hard during the day.
The weather God had it in for the night patrol.
Rain could shape every incident on the beat.
P.P. It was a tough life, especially in wet weather.
I've gone on duty with clothes drenched — you'd have night uniform on, and a cape.
Now that cape, it would be raining on it all night, and we had no means of drying it so that cape was left on a hanger in the house and the next coat was taken and that was worn but for some reason it seemed to be always raining on nights and you had coat wet and you came to go out it was still damp.
Dark is the night and stormy the weather,
Cape drips water on dubbined boot-leather,
Overcoat skirts on wet trousers flap,
Helmets are watery from spike to chin-strap.
Rubber heels squelch and rubber soles squish
Rain water from buildings descends without.
As watchful and wary, in lanes, roads, and streets,
The Policemen patrol the lone night-duty beat,
From slates in the city, from tiles in the town,
Unendingly, unceasingly, it gurgles pipes down.
On highways and pavements rain splashes and streaks,
As though it would turn them to watercreeks.
While sodden and sopped in lanes, road, and streets,
The Policemen patrol the long night-duty beats.
Then the wind round high chimneys in eddies and whirls,
Up streets and round corners, its cold fingers curl
Shaking and shuddering most buildings small,
Shrieking at others, broad, solid, and tall,
Uplifting light litter, downhurling loose slates,
Slamming and banging on all unfastened gates;
But with ears on the listen, in lanes, roads, and streets,
The Policemen patrol the weird night-duty beat…
Oh, townsmen, so smug and warm in your bed,
Oh countrymen, blanket drawn up to your head.
Did you give a just thought 'ere you dropped off to sleep,
To slumber and snore till day doth again peep,
That on nights such as this, the burglar or worse,
Might slit your windpipe for the gain of your house,
Were it not for the fact that in lanes, roads, and street,
The Police are patrolling the night duty-beats.
(Police Review , 1928)
P.P. You're looking for anything such as traffic accidents that were no bother except that you're worn out walking.
But then came the bad weather and the frost — they didn't allow for you being knee-deep in snow — they expected you to be where you should be.
W.R. At night, out in the rain, you put your greatcoat, cape, and water leggings on.
Back home at six in the morning, then out again for the football match duty at half past twelve (you got 7/6d. for it), then back on again at night.
They still expected you to come nice and clean with your leggings nice and clean.
Weather was a hazard for which the organization had little to offer — apart from a heavy serge cape, and a stout pair of boots or ‘scuffers’.
ORGANIZATIONAL SOLUTIONS
Present-day patrol work is relieved through peer-group contact, the occasional camaraderie of the cigarette or the joke in the back of a Panda car, the crackling spontaneity of the personal radio.
To save on personnel and consequently to minimize undesirable social contact, the original Metropolitan Commissioners had submitted the personal qualities of ‘forbearance’ and ‘calm demeanour’as the major responses to the threat, as the inhibiters of opposition, and as a substitute for colleague support.
Solidarity in time of threat, support when problems emerged, was to be provided by some notional public ‘front’ and a tin whistle.
M.B. You could rely on your colleagues if they were there.
But the only means of communication we had, apart from the police telephone boxes which were far apart, was a whistle that didn't carry miles.
It's no use blowing a whistle asking for help, if you know the policeman is a couple of miles away.
I remember a little kiosk outside Allerton Cemetery.
It had been bust.
First thing you've got to do is inform CID about the chocolates and cigarettes that had been stolen.
Nobody in at CID, and I had to get someone to secure it.
I blew my whistle till I blew the pea out of it.
Then I had to go down to the station to get somebody and by the time I came back, most of the stuff had gone.
You were normally by yourself and sometimes you were lucky if some of your colleagues came or even if members of the public came to help you.
There was a lot of support from your colleagues if you were in trouble for the very reason that they knew if they gave you help, you'd automatically give it them.
We used the police telephone boxes when we were locking somebody up and you had to handcuff them to a railing while you rang up for the van.
We all carried a key but the boxes were a long way apart.
Inside the Section Box he lay,
His key grasped to his breast;
His head was bare; his greying hair
Against the kerb was pressed,
With tunic burst, and trousers torn,
He sprawled there, half-undressed.
Benumbed, exhausted, spent and done;
There in the dirt he lay;
He'd run in answer to the Light
Full thirty times that day.
But peacefully now he dreamed a dream
Of green fields far away…
While sobbing, he made up his mind.
‘Today I shall resign.’
He'd never had such a peaceful sleep
Since Nineteen-twenty-nine
With signal-boxes came the dawn
Of his torment — and mine!
(Police Review , 1937)
Improvisation and improvements came slowly, from those who had also suffered.
D.A.
Later on, a fellow named George Menzies was good on radios.
He tried to make a set which could be taken on a motor bike.
They put them on pedal-cycles.
The pedal-cyclists only had receiving sets and a little loudspeaker that you clipped on the handlebars of the bike.
The cyclist had a big leather bag strapped on the bicycle frame and they kept the set in there.
I remember the call sign.
It would start off with ‘GBO calling MBO.
Constable 192F’.
They gave you the message and told you where to go.
But the ordinary man on the beat had nothing like that.
Technological changes came about as much by rank-and-file initiative as by management innovation.
It was those who suffered the isolation of the front-line patrol who demanded changes.
When Menzies opened the door to radio communication, he could have had little appreciation of one aspect of its future impact.
While it might be used by management to deploy resources more effectively, it could also give opportunities for diversions from tedious duty — for example, by allowing outside officers to join in dramas outside their own subdivisions.
HUMANIZING THE MACHINE
Contact with colleagues can serve several functions.
It allows a repetitive task to become tolerable; but it can also threaten the ordered hierarchy of an organization where discretion is to be minimized by directive communications.
Social interaction between the rank and file can subvert the organization and breed resistance.
T. D. There were men on the opposite beat and sometimes you could spend a little time talking to them as long as you weren't caught.
It was looked on as a very  serious offence.
Gossiping, it was called under the regulations.
You'd do anything to break the boredom of the beat.
A man might go off his beat to have a chat on the Docks, and have a smoke in the Dock bobby's hut, when you knew the sergeant wasn't around.
T. B. I couldn't go across the road to speak to another policeman if I saw him, never spoke to anyone.
You'd be reported — three charges: failing to work your beat, idling your time, and gossiping.
They would do you on one charge but they always laid three against you and you would have no escape.
Occasionally, after refreshments — two would go in at two o'clock, two more at half past two, and so on— the only time you could have a natter with your colleague was when you left the station and you saw the sergeant going in for his refreshments.
Perhaps another chap would come along and stop on the other side of the road.
He would be in as much danger as me because if he shouted across to me, he'd have been done for idling his time and gossiping.
They would have got two of us.
Communication between constable peers was a threat to the discipline of command.
Isolation of those at the foot of the pyramid of authority, the Panopticon principle, was central to maintaining the image of the force on the street.
All time on duty was the property of the Chief Constable.
‘STEALING POLICE TIME’
Time was a precious commodity.
There was no dilly-dallying when you went to book in for your break at the bridewell.
The adage ‘time equals money’ ruled.
The ratepayers and the Home Office wanted their penn'orth.
The bridewell sergeant would book you in and out.
It was on his head that you returned to the beat on time.
Even the toilet was timed.
H. P. Just prior to my joining, all policemen had to have their refreshments in shop doorways.
Only allowed twenty minutes.
There was a mini-rebellion about that just after the Police Strike and then they allowed policemen to go in for half an hour's and eat breakfast.
Later, you had half an hour break to have your meal.
It was very inadequate at times, especially in winter if you were on point duty.
You'd go in and have to queue up, wait for the chance to get the frying pan to put bacon and egg in it, and your hands so cold you could hardly hold it, and that would take up a quarter of an hour.
As soon as you got in, and your foot crossed the threshold, you called out your number.
I would say, ‘74D in for refreshments’— recorded in a book and in that half hour, I had to make my tea, eat my sandwiches, wash my cup, put on my coat or whatever I was wearing — cape if it was raining — and be out for that half hour.
P. H. One time I came on duty at Rose Hill and left my cape at the bottom of the stairs — on the banister.
When I came for refreshments, I rushed through down the stairs and back again, walked into the bridewell, and called out for my  refreshments.
The inspector was there.
He says, ‘What are you doing here?’
‘I've come for refreshments, Sir.’
He says, ‘You're stealing police time.’
‘But I've only been down to the banister to pick up my coat.’
‘It doesn't matter.
You're stealing time.
’ And I had to come out a minute early to pay it back.
In our station, the only facility was an iron cauldron of boiling water.
No cooking possible.
On one occasion, the wife gave me a tin of beans, small kettle, and I put it in the cauldron.
I was told to go to the telephone.
There was a terrific bang.
The tin had blown up.
I went back and there was pork and beans covering everyone.
A. T. I was reported one day.
I came out of the station, having had my break and was putting it into my notebook —‘refreshments at such-and-such a time, leave such- and such a time’.
Sergeant came round the corner and he said, ‘Where have you been?’
So I said, ‘Just coming out of my refreshments.’
‘Well,’ he said ‘it's now six thirty-two.
I'm reporting you for idling your time for two minutes.
’ And that's exactly what he did.
D. A. On the Dock gates, you were allowed into the police hut for refreshments.
But if it was breakfast, you had to cook it within the half hour and get out.
If you were in for 9 in the morning, you were out at 9.30 and the other fellow must not book in till 9.31 a.m.
A lot of them brought bacon and eggs but you had to cook it and they had to leave the pans and things clean when they left — so it was always a rush job and all policemen suffered from bad stomachs.
A meal-break is not just a response to a physical urge.
It is also a time for sociability, a release from the tedium of the job.
In the Liverpool City Police, no such considerations were possible in force orders.
Time wasted equalled theft.
The eight hours' duty was the property of Watch Committee and Chief Constable.
Using a couple of minutes for private imperatives was a serious violation of property rights.
‘THERE'S TROUBLE ON T'BEAT’
Traditionally, the beat in the city had been the area for serious mischief — the dread of young men playing pitch-and-toss (the first such incident is reported in 1839, and the latest in 1979), and the perils of children flying kites.
In the 1920s, the incidents were a little more prosaic — but useful if they gave the patrolling constable something to chuckle over for an hour or two.
K. R. There were mainly annoying types of things — such as lads playing football in the street and that sort of thing, and the drunks coming out of the pub, and on the corner.
An awful lot of indecent exposure used to go on.
You were pleased to find a hand-cart on your bear.
You should take it in but you didn't — just rolled it on to the next beat.
You took everything in your stride — walking up Henry Street, a bucket of water went right in front of me.
I wasn't annoyed except that it was bitterly cold, freezing.
I put my head round the corner: ‘What if a horse came and broke his leg on the ice?’
‘Oh, I'm sorry.
’ 'Well, go and brush it into the gutter.’
Then you went on your way.
When something happened, you were delighted.
If the [bobbies]heard there was a break-in, or anything, they'd all be in a rush to get there.
A bit-part might be played in somebody else's drama.
T. D. I was on the beat round Stanley Hospital and I got to this point at four o'clock on the Saturday morning.
I walked round the front of the hospital.
The gates were all closed and there was a mother and a daughter who was pregnant and walking around it.
All of a sudden, the baby starts to come.
She got hold of the railings and all I could hear was screams.
There was no traffic about.
I ran round to the Casualty Department, rang the bell, couldn't raise anybody.
Thought, ‘What am I going to do?’
We had a system of telephone boxes that connected you to the bridewell.
I rang from the nearest box to the station where they controlled the ambulances.
I couldn't convince them at the other end that I needed an ambulance because I was outside the hospital.
When I ran back to the girl, there were a couple of railwaymen on their way to work and another policeman carrying her to the Out-patients.
Suddenly, all the lights came on in the hospital and they eventually opened a side-door and let her in.
Other duties, of course, could also be pretty tedious, especially when you were stuck carrying out a rotten job against your own sympathies, your loyalties divided.
A. T. I once did a month on the canal bank, looking after Tate and Lyle's coal that was brought in when there was a strike on.
People were trying to pinch it all the time.
It was a terrible job, standing there for eight and a half hours — because you didn't finish after eight hours.
No refreshments, you just kept straight on.
The barges used to come down the Leeds and Liverpool canal right down to Tate and Lyle's, where they had chutes that came down from the building into the barges and the coal was sucked up because the coal was very fine; and the poor people there — they'd be on the other side of the canal and one would perhaps get on a barge and throw two or three pieces of coal and then scamper up.
I had about five barges to look after and you couldn't see everyone — not that I cared so very much, to tell the truth.
I got one, one day and he had a sackful — four stone of it.
One of the few differences between beat policing and assembly-line work was that it contained a measure of unpredictability.
While ‘real police work’, crime, was almost non-existent, other dogsbody incidents could provide a measure of relief.
Encounters in the Night
Social contact was vital, if you were to retain your sanity and some vestige of independence from the ‘job’.
A friendly encounter gave a glow which lasted through the night.
Even an awkward meeting with a tiresome drunk, or a disputed stop-and-search, was a desirable  break from the pedestrian routine.
Some beats had more to offer than others.
The occasional encounter with someone who seemed out of place was a relief.
There was a class of ‘night-people’ with life-styles far removed from the humdrum daytimers.
B. T. If there was a night-watchman, you could stop and have a little talk with him — they had these coke fires.
Lime Street was the place for drunks and policemen were always keen.
A drunk turned up and he was wheeled up the road to the station.
Drunks, men coming from the clubs, occasionally a seaman coming home with a kitbag on his shoulder and you would say good night to him.
But beyond that, you would never stop.
A. M. If the road was up and there was a night-watchman with a bit of a fire, you went up to him.
You used to look in and see if he was awake.
You could smell the gas from the coke and ‘Are you awake there?’ and then you might have a little natter with him — but only for a couple of minutes because if the sergeant saw you, you'd be ‘on the peg’.
Once you had been visited by the sergeant, you'd go for a scrounge, somewhere you could get a smoke — a bakery where there was a bit of heat in the winter-time.
You'd be glad to get in there for half an hour but you wouldn't risk more than half an hour.
Stand around the fire, talk to the night-watchman but all the time taking a risk that the sergeant might have doubled back on you, to see if you were working your beat.
At two o'clock in the morning, you would find two men with a hose back of Rose Street, hosing round a big pile of fish entrails as high as this — the retail fish market was just there.
You knew everyone who went to work in the early morning — the chappie who came round on his bike and rod to put out the gas lamps or to light them.
On A Division, it was comparatively lively.
During the night, there was always something about — vehicles, mail-vans stopping about the station, and occasional people.
One person I always remember was a window-cleaner — about half past three in the morning, I walked along Lime Street, trying my doors, locks, and windows.
Suddenly I saw a man cleaning windows in the dark.
‘Oh,’ I said, ‘what a lark.’
I thought he was a burglar.
First I quizzed him: ‘Who are you?
What are you doing?’
‘Oh, I'm cleaning windows.’
I was a bit stumped then.
‘How long have you been doing this and where do you go afterwards?’
Ultimately, the man convinced me he was in fact a window-cleaner, starting about half past three to four o'clock.
He worked till nine o'clock and that was his day's work.
B. T. In those days, the days of tram-cars, there were always gangs of men.
You'd hear them clinking all night.
They would come around at about ten and place their lamps out.
Doing the overhead wires and lines.
Down Lord Street, they'd have big hose-pipes out — not just one or two men but big gangs of men.
Then there'd be the Corpy watchmen all the way round, wherever there was a hole in the road.
W. S. On night duty on Scotland Road, there was always something moving.
When I went there, the Corporation men used to come and wash the whole of  Scotland Road.
I'm at the top of Hornby Street one night/early morning.
I could see an image moving.
Go along and have a look at this.
And it was an old woman — she was a religious maniac and she was rushing out of the house in her nightie and praying in the gutter.
Urban life depends upon an invisible stratum of people who repair the city's infrastructure while all the rest are abed.
In a sense, the patrolling constable blended in as part of this hidden social group, of whom most of the city's population were largely ignorant.
Night-time contact had a levelling quality, in which night-watchman and beat constable could meet as relative equals, sharing the strains of isolation and tedium.
CREATIVITY
In the absence of such contacts, excitement had to be manufactured.
D. A. Round where I was it was particularly deserted.
There was very little night-life except a fellow coming home on his bike.
I used to tell him off for riding a bike without a light — summonsed him in the end and he was fined about ten bob.
People didn't speak to you.
There was a Masonic Hall in Island Road.
Many a time, I sat outside waiting for someone to come along but it was never bust while I was there.
If the sergeant had caught you there, you'd have been in trouble because you weren't flogging the beat.
It was just walk, walk, walk.
…why should he light up his front lamp to time?
An errand boy must have his fling, you know.
Faster he fled along the quiet street,
And boldly glanced around this way and that;
He did not hear the sound of heavy feet,
Or in the gloaming see a spiked top hat.
From out the dark, a blue clad figure appeared,
Stolid and stern, it almost blocked the street,
The cyclist saw one mighty arm upreared.
He jammed his brakes, and stopped his circling feet.
Then from his bike he almost fell with fright,
And on his lips there died the cheery lay.
Gone was the pride he felt as through the night
He dashed, without a lamp to light his way.
Then boomed the voice, ‘My boy, just what's your game?
No light, Good Lord! no red reflector?
Now,
Come on young man, I want to know your name,
And tell the truth, for truth is best, you know.’
A still small voice, that seemed so strangely small,
In contrast to the loud and blatant tune.
With eyes downcast, he did nor seem at all 
The youth that winked defiance at the moon.
With sinking heart, the errand boy replied,
‘I'm Harry Smith, of Baker Street, Walsall.
I'm sorry, sir, I did not mean to ride
Without a front lamp on my bike, at all.’
‘Now then, my lad, your tale I don't believe;
I'm too old, boy, I know your little game.
Come on — the truth — it s useless to deceive;
Inside you go — or — What's your proper name?’
The youth looked up, shame showed upon his face,
Repentant tears welled quickly to his eyes.
Sadly he spoke, ‘Yes sir, to my disgrace,
I've told you nothing but a pack of lies.’
‘I'll tell the truth; I'm Willyum Shakespeare,
Hathaway House, or 9, Ann Arden's Lane,
Stratford-on-Avon, in Warwickshire;
My Aunt lives there, Jane Harvard is her name.’
Then said the Law, ‘My boy, that's what I want,
Your proper name; you see you can't fool me.
Now get that lamp of yours alight in front,
And never tell more lies to a P.C.'
(Police Chronicle , 1932)
If you weren't to be turned into a zombie, a walking automaton, in the absence of other night-people, incidents had to be manufactured.
That process was not easy.
Potential suspects were a little difficult to come by.
Civilians at night, threatening little damage to the fabric of society, might be taken aback at being suddenly confronted with the majesty of the state in the form of a bored constable.
RESISTANCE
Various strategies, individual and collective, were developed to combat the organizational pressure.
In Liverpool, resistance was not as co-ordinated as it had been in Chicago a decade earlier, where the implementation of a quarter-hour telephone call-in system collapsed when all the police call boxes immediately developed mysterious malfunctions.
Scrounges — unofficial ways of resisting the uniformity of the beat — often meant little more than an illegal cigarette or a beer, forms of resistance accompanied by their own surreptitious rituals.
Too much control and predictability might eventually subvert the organizational goals.
T. D. You could always have a cigarette if you wanted it but if you got caught, you were in trouble.
On night duty, there's always plenty of deep doorways.
A lot of them used to catch it.
The sergeant would appear from somewhere and you'd  dash the cigarette quickly, but the smoke aroma hung around the doorway.
The sergeant would go sniffing around so that he showed he knew what you were doing.
Sometimes you'd get a nasty sergeant and it was painful.
You were watching him and he was watching you, so there were less catches than when the easy-going feller was on.
A. T. If you wanted to have a smoke — we used to have smokes: we weren't angels by any means — you had to get into a shop doorway, put your cigarette in your mouth, strike a match, shield it with your hand, and then blow the match out and then your hand would go up your sleeve.
The smoke was coming down your sleeve, standing in the doorway, watching for your sergeant coming out from his refreshments.
You'd meet the chap on next beat and have a smoke somewhere.
You'd make arrangements beforehand, perhaps with the station-keeper, who would say to call down and he'd have a cup of tea made when the sergeant was out.
T. D. A woman in Kent Street used to come to the corner with a bottle of beer.
Used to chat to her, standing in the door.
With one sergeant I had then, I used to make up stories about keeping an eye on thieves if he didn't find me at the points.
P. H. George Low was very fond of a midday noggin.
The Tuebrook Funeral Parlour, belonging to MacDougalls, had the franchise for everybody killed on the streets.
George had a standing order there.
A certain inspector, not very friendly to George.
He watched George going into MacDougalls, let him settle down for three minutes and then he'd strike.
One of the funeral fellows said: ‘George, what you do is to lay in one of the shells [coffins], take your helmet off, and we'll drive round back of the cinema, and you're on your own.’
Inspector was standing there and George came up behind him and threw him a beautiful salute.
The inspector couldn't believe his eyes.
Both of them were discharged two years later.
Of course, all gamekeepers were once poachers.
Every sergeant had served his time as a constable.
Few strategies of resistance were unknown.
But even gamekeepers can find the rules restrictive.
K. R. One night we had a strange sergeant in from the South End of the city who was filling in for our missing sergeant.
I waited and waited for him at the points and eventually met him about three or four o'clock in the morning for the first time.
He signalled me from Pitt Street and I met him and he gave me the peg [the notebook entry you both make].
‘Which way are you going?’
‘I'm going down to the Customs House.’
‘I think I'll go up to the Cathedral,’ says the sergeant.
We separated, and as soon as I got into a side street, I went down it and there at the bottom was Cuttle's Bakehouse.
I went in as usual, took off my greatcoat and tunic and tie and made some small pancakes and dipped them in boiling fat — used to take me a quarter of an hour every night.
There's me turning over the pancakes, hear the door moving.
It's the sergeant.
Now he'd told me he was going up to the Cathedral.
But he didn't.
He waited for me to get out of his sight, and then he  worked his way down to Cuttle's Bakery.
(I found out later this was his old beat.
) I felt terrible.
He says, ‘All right, 125’; and then after ten minutes he says, ‘On your way,’ so I got dressed and went out and thought, ‘Now I'm for it,’but I heard nothing more.
The Sergeant and the Constable.
Were walking round the beat;
They wept like anything to see
Such quantities of street.
If this was only cleared away'
They said, ‘It would be sweet.‘
If seven cops with seven mops
Trod it for thirty year,
‘Do you suppose, the Sergeant said,
‘That they would get it clear?’
‘I doubt it said the Constable,
‘Unless it was filled with beer.’
The Sergeant and the Constable
Walked out a mile or so,
And there they rested in a pub,
Inspectors didn't know;
And all the half-pint measures stood
And waited in a row.
‘The time has come,’ the Sergeant said
‘To have a little talk
About Inspector Crabface
Ere we resume our walk.’
And so they started whispering
With one eye on the clock.
‘Hot boiling oil’, the Sergeant said,
‘Is what he really needs;
In fact, no punishment could fit
That bad old man's misdeeds.’
And thus and so, they whispered low,
Forgetting how Time speeds.
‘Have one on me,’ said Sergeant Stripes;
But Hanifeet turned blue!
‘Old Crabface has arrived,’ he gasped,
‘Whatever shall we do?’
‘The night is fine,’ old Crabface spoke.
‘Do you admire the view?’
‘It was so kind of you to come,
Said Sergeant; ‘really nice.’
Inspector he said nothing, but * * * *
‘Wish you were not quite so fat,
I'll need the barrow twice.’
‘It seems a shame,’ the Sergeant sobbed,
‘To play us such a trick;
After we've brought you out so far,
And made you trot so quick.
Old Crabface shook his head and said,
‘Your speech is much to thick.’
‘Although I weep for you, he said,
Undoing the barrow straps,
‘I've plenty handkerchiefs at home,
I'll need them all, perhaps;
But Discipline must be maintained
And not allowed to lapse.’
‘I see,’ said Crabface, counting,
‘You've had a pleasant run;
Fourteen — fifteen pints you've had —‘;
But answer was there none,
And this was scarcely odd, because
They'd finished every one.'
(Police Review , 1938)
In developing surreptitious techniques to break up the beat monotony, superiors were not always what they seemed.
Some sergeants, heading for promotion, would clamp down heavily on minor infringements.
Others, serving their time, recalled that they, too, had once been constables.
Weighing up the Costs
Resistance took different forms.
Wherever the pressure occurred, a different tactic had to be developed to release it.
Techniques of avoidance, easing strategies, were especially important to prevent unpaid overtime.
Discretion in law enforcement could be a two-edged weapon.
Before initiating an incident, you weighed up the pros and cons of the costs in time.
A. T. In those days, if you locked somebody up at night, you might be let off duty at three o'clock in the morning.
But if they were short, they would keep you on until they could get another man from a different station, so that you might only have two hours off.
And you had to walk home, go to bed, and set your alarm, and you had to be up at the court at 10 a.m.
What made it worse, was that the police had the time of the tram-cars and the time it took to get to a certain stop.
They allowed you five minutes from your house to the tram-stop they had selected, and then five minutes to walk to the courts.
Then when you arrived, you might be there an hour, two hours.
At your first court, you got a ticket when you arrived from one of the men, gave you the time you got to the court.
When you had finished there, there was somebody on duty to give you a slip.
You had to keep this slip to show the time you had left.
And they had the time worked out for every policeman the length of time he was allowed to travel from court to home and back again and you added that time to the time you were engaged in court and it was worked out to the minute — worked out officially how long it took the tram.
So if you were on night duty, it wasn't much use getting off early and going to bed for a couple of hours and then going to court — you might be engaged in court for a long time.
So whatever duty you were on — morning duty, that was all right, it was in the firm's time, but if you were on afternoon duty, you would have to attend court and maybe go straight on afternoon duty.
T. B. I was about to lock a fellow up at ten to the hour I was going off at.
I thought, ‘I'll be kept in the station for an hour dealing with all this.
’ So I waltzed him across the road and put him in a doorway and left him for somebody else to find.
S. H. I'm going along Scotland Road one night, going home, and I could hear someone smashing a lot down and this woman came saying, ‘Bobby, come quick.
He's smashing the home up.
’ Her old fellow's smashing the place up and so I says, ‘Listen, there's a bobby standing in the next street.’
We didn't tell her we were going home.
‘Go tell that bobby on the street there.
’ And as soon as she disappears, we beat it as fast as we can.
We weren't going to get mixed up in a job, when we were going home off duty.
And there was no bloody bobby there at all.
Painful experience taught you when to use an avoidance tactic.
T. D. I was on duty on Lambeth Road junction one day when a feller came up to me and said, ‘There's a body floating in the canal.’
I said to myself, ‘Christ, I'm due in for breakfast in another quarter of an hour.
’ So I went down to the canal.
There's a man's body there.
Oh, you should have seen it.
The stench!
I don't know how long it had been there.
There was no axiomatic concern with the call of duty.
Easing actions were subject to an instant cost-benefit analysis.
Law as a Two-Edged Sword
Law enforcement has always had mythical characteristics — the notion that infringement always results in some corresponding reaction by the enforcing agency.
In the same way that the discretion ‘not to arrest’ was a means of avoiding punitive extra hours, the power to arrest could also help the other way round — coping with the tedium.
T. D. You might be glad to lock up a drunk to get out of the rain for a while.
Sometimes, we'd lock two or three up — sometimes only one.
When we were six to two on evening patrol, to be truthful, we used to go out looking for drunk and disorderlies — just to stop the bloody boredom.
We'd say, ‘Come on — we'll see what we can find.’
We'd go round the corner and perhaps there'd be a couple of fellows fighting or drunk.
We'd say: ‘Bugger off — we'll give you five minutes.’
Chances are we'd run them in.
It all helped.’
But it could also operate the other way round.
A. T. You used to accumulate this time you worked over and try and get off the last four hours when nobody was about.
If you had a section with only five men, only one could get time off because two other men would have to share the beat.
Then you were given so much time to get back home again.
Collected up.
So you didn't get any benefit from locking someone up — it was discouragement if anything.
Constables were subject to contrary impulses.
Depending on the particular circumstances, the use of legal discretion was creative.
The unique features of the time and place structured the use of discretion.
Rebellion
Resistance could take several forms.
There was always the ultimate alternative.
When the going gets tough, the rough get going.
S. H. The worst part of the job is when you had to go round that beat at four o'clock in the morning and it's teeming with rain.
I've come and I've took my boots off and poured the bloody rain out.
I've seen fellows with nine or ten years' service, saying: ‘I'm leaving you.
I'm chucking the job in, though I've got no job to go to.’
I've seen one sergeant with fourteen years' service chuck it and go to Australia, saying: ‘I've had enough of this bloody job.’
The worst part of the job was going on the beat in winter.
It's not a pleasant thing to be walking up and down those side streets off Soho Square and those neighbourhoods on your own on a dark night in the winter.
It broke a lot of people.
It broke their nerves.
I can remember several policemen being reported missing at the police station where they were on duty.
I can remember at least three who disappeared and nipped home.
I remember one Welsh fellow up from the Valleys — he run home at night-time.
It broke his nerve.
Went home to Wales and he had the police uniform on.
That's where he made his mistake.
They sent up to bring him back.
Other resisters took the risk of long-term career damage, without having to pay the ultimate price.
P. A. I got called as a witness in a motoring case, and it came up when I was on nights and I had to get up and call in the solicitor.
They let me off at four in the  morning and I had to be in court by nine.
The case didn't come up and by two in the afternoon, they said it would probably be tomorrow.
So I rang up and told them in the office.
‘What about my duties?’
It lasted three days in court and I had to do night duties and then, finishing between 12 and 2 a.m., going on nights again, going off early, going to court.
The third day, I struck — said, ‘No, no more,’ to the office.
‘Shan't be doing no duty tonight.’
‘Why?’
‘Because I'm tired.
In fact, I'm exhausted.’
That's that.
I don't go on duty.
Knock comes to the door and there's this bobby.
‘We want to know what's happened to you?’
‘Tell them I'm not coming.’
So he goes back and I heard no more of it.
But it was a rotten experience.
I was seething.
Desperation might result in final defiance.
However, there was one further technique of resistance.
The Other Alternative
You could either buckle under the strains of the beat, find an avoidance tactic, or give up and head for the home town.
But for some beat constables, there was another possibility.
Whimsy might be an outlet.
A. T. I remember one night, one chap.
He was in the first Section I was in.
He came out from refreshments, and we were all bored to death, waiting to go round again, flings his cape round his shoulder, took his helmet off, and started dancing down the road, throwing flower petals about.
Later on, some of the policemen — I didn't see it, I heard about it because I read the reports of complaints.
A lot of people in those streets (they were very poor, but they were very proud) and on the steps leading up to the house, they'd have laid a little piece of lino, three pieces or two.
These fellows for fun would pinch one and put it on another step, and do this going all down the road.
This caused friction amongst the people — course everyone kept their mouth shut amongst the bobbies.
In fact, on one occasion, a very close friend of mine found this step with a piece of carpet on it.
So his mate with him said, ‘Let's change this.’
And they pulled this and it must have been leading right under the doorway through the house, and they pulled it right across the roadway, still sticking under the door.
That did cause a bit of friction, because the bosses used to try and find out who it was.
Colleagues who used unusual avoidance and resistance tactics achieved a certain folklore status with their colleagues.
P. H. Crystal sets were new.
Nobby Clarke instructed on the cat's whisker radio.
There was a ventilator in the wall of the office where he worked.
The crystal set could be pulled into a ventilator by pulleys to avoid the sergeant knowing he was listening when on duty in the station.
George used to sprinkle nuts on the floor to  warn himself of officers coming in.
Inspector comes in — up goes the radio to the ventilator out of sight.
There are many accounts, sometimes apocryphal, of how shop-floor resistance to management operates within authoritarian organizations.
Even in police work, with its severe sanctions for resisters, subversion was both necessary for survival as well as feasible, given the right knowledge of the rules of the game.
END OF THE BEAT SHIFT
In the police service there was no simple end to the day as there had been no simple beginning.
You couldn't just clock off after your beat.
A day that had begun with the parade affirmation had to terminate in the same style.
But even then you remained at the beck and call of the organization.
For example, in the 1920s there were no civilian domestics at the station-house.
Cleaning was the prerogative of the lowly beat officer.
T. B. There was a station-keeper and he was in there answering the calls.
He had a lot of power.
You had to hop to it — it was considered to be a privilege from the sergeant and you had to go in here and strip down, and scrub windows and that sort of thing.
It took a lot of mental pressure.
K. R. Whenever they had a raid on the Chinese gambling, they took them all in the cells and they all sent out for Chinese meals, and when they'd all gone to the Main Bridewell in the middle of the night —‘125, scrub out!’— and I had to take my tunic off and scrub out after the Chinese had been.
W. S. We'd got into Rose Hill station at the end of duty, and if one man didn't come in, they'd send a search out.
You were still kept on until he was found.
Then you had to sit there and the sergeant would say, ‘Fall in,’ and you'd fall into line, ‘Section correct, sir,’and he might be another ten minutes before he decided to say, ‘Dismiss!’and by then you'd lost an hour.
You never got it back, of course.
In the late 1930s the Liverpool Police brought in a new ‘discretionary movement’ in which constables made half-hour points, which gave them relative freedom on the beat.
The justification was to make police patrols more unpredictable to potential malefactors.
But its major effect was to make life slightly more tolerable for those at the sharp end of the beat system.
In Jeremy Bentham's Panopticon, the authorities utilized several key control structures.
Similarly, subservience of the beat constable was maintained by social isolation, by timekeeping, by surveillance, and by the specifics of detailed regulations and instructions on parade.
However, subversive survival strategies were possible.
As in the Victorian prisons and asylums, the retention of personal sanity required some deviant dodges.
But then appeared the formal disciplinary devices of the institution to counter such improvisations.
Discipline: More Sticks than Carrots
‘FOUND drunk in privy with prostitute.
Dismissed!’
The Watch Committee's dismissal of one Liverpool constable in 1843 illustrates the orthodox explanation of the rapid turnover of police officers in the early years, when a force such as the Metropolitan could lose one-third of its work-force annually.
Those Victorian forces had apparently enrolled too many inadequate individuals, susceptible to the kaleidoscopic temptations of street life.
Personal pathology, individual incompetence, were easy excuses for the inability of many officers to stay the course.
Constable failure not organisational failure was the cause.
The answers were more selective recruitment and yet more discipline.
But there is a rather different interpretation, one that was quite apparent in the city of Liverpool between the wars, for voluntary and involuntary resignations.
The strains of beat life were bad enough.
But the discipline that backed up that solitary duty was — even by the standards of the 1920s — extraordinarily harsh and pervasive.
There were some compensations.
Pay was better than that for the average working man, more substantial than the ten-bob dole which was the experience of many of their compatriots.
The pension scheme was remarkable for its day.
Promotion — and consequently more freedom from disciplinary restraint — was a further carrot.
Control of the beat officer through formal organizational sanctions had both negative and positive attributes.
THE PUBLIC IMAGE
For most city dwellers, there were two images of policing.
On one hand, there was the ubiquitous picture of the officer plodding the beat: a figure armed with omnipotent powers and, as such, to be deferred to or to be avoided.
Then there was the mass impression: the city's rituals and festivals — the visit of a monarch, the launch of a warship from the Mersey shipyards, or the personage of Her Majesty's Inspector annually reviewing the assembled ranks over tea and buns for the dignitaries of the Watch Committee.
There were occasions to admire the police en masse as they marched in serried ranks to patriotic tunes from the Police Band.
Displays of police horses, motor cycles, dogs, and dress marching were a dominant  image of policing as a uniformed institution in the city.
Police pageantry was a symbolic rite.
This second image reinforced the first.
Behind the solitary constable was a vast army of doppelgänger wheeling and cavorting in the city's Sefton Park, ready and available to reinforce the power of the patrol officer, a force to be reckoned with for those who might dispute the territory of the street.
Police on parade, in the absence of marches by a peacetime army, was both a major civic celebration and also a symbol of untrammelled power.
The police on parade dignified a pretty grubby calling.
There was a parade of the Liverpool City Force in Sefton Park on the occasion of the annual inspection.
The force mustered 1,209 strong, comprising 1,068 Constables, 98 Sergeants, 34 Inspectors, 7 Superintendents, and was commanded by Chief Constable Francis Caldwell, C.B.E., M.V.O., accompanied by Assistant Chief Constable Everett, O.B.E.
They paraded in three battalions.
There was also a squadron of 29 Mounted Police, 24 police cyclists, 5 motor cyclists, and 6 Airedale police dogs.
To the strains of the Police Band, the men marched past, first in column later in fours.
Their fine physique and smart appearance made a very favourable impression.
The mounted squadron subsequently executed several movements.
A number of policemen under Instructor Clinton gave a display of Swedish drill.
The movements were watched with keen interest by the guests of the Watch Committee.
Quite a garden party atmosphere prevailed, which was emphasised by the serving of tea and ices at small tables.
(Police Chronicle , 1921)
M. B. I remember when I was an inspector.
They were launching the Ark Royal .
An order came out from the Chief Constable: ‘The following inspectors (there were three of them — I was one) and sergeants and men will parade at such-and-such a yard at Birkenhead at eleven o'clock for the launching of the Ark Royal .
The yard is near Hamilton Street station.
They will be in best uniform, white gloves…’ and so on.
Sure enough, I went over there with the other inspectors and we said to the sergeants: ‘Fall in the men.’
There wasn't a single man who wasn't there all spruced up and well turned out at this awkward hour.
This was the type of thing we were proud of.
Membership gave one status, an accolade of civic success.
Pride in the uniform was real, tangible, and central to the display of personal worth.
M. B. In those days, the police were almost like an élite force because if you joined, people would say: ‘He's joined the police.
He's achieved something.’
We had silver plates on our helmets, silver buttons, whistles, chain.
They were not chromium-plated and they had to be cleaned regularly, every day.
They were cleaned until you could see your face in them and fellows were so keen that when they got a new tunic, they would cut all their new buttons off, and put their old buttons on that were beautifully shined.
Same with the helmet.
Then they brought out chromium-plated badges and buttons.
And it took you all your time  to get them decent again with a wet rag.
All the pride gone.
We had pride in our uniforms, pride in the way we kept them.
I used to work alongside a man who was very proud of his handcuffs.
This man's annual visit to the Police Court was eagerly looked forward to…a case of an unlicensed dog, or a chimney on fire…he was noted for his handcuffs; they were, in fact, thought to be the ‘finest’ in the country — they were silver-plated.
I knew yet another man who always possessed two pairs — one for everyday, and another pair were for formal occasions.
(Police Review , 1925)
The unarmed, stern-looking bobby proceeding at regulation pace down the street embodied the virtues of respectable Britain.
T. D. If the sergeant saw you with your hand at the back, he would come up to you: ‘What do you think the public will think about you?
Get your hands away from there and get them down by your side.’
Like the beat parade, from the public ceremonies to the appearance of the individual uniform, the public face of city policing was unblemished.
It embodied the power, majesty, and efficiency of the state in the finery of police uniform.
THE WARTS BEHIND THE PUBLIC FACE
There were, of course, one or two things that police officers kept to themselves, that the public never saw or heard, and that with the death of the Police Union there were no channels to articulate.
T. D. After being on morning duty [6 a.m. to 2 p.m.], we had to parade at 2.20 p.m. at Sefton Park.
Mr Hignet [the tobacco baron]was holding a fete for charity.
So we marched round with different bands, and at 8.45 p.m. we were told to escort the bands to various parts of the city.
One constable had the temerity to state that we had had nothing to eat since 9.30 a.m.
He was told that he would be reported for insubordination.
The superintendent was told and his excuse was he thought we were all on the Afternoon Section.
The constable was transferred to a division as far from home as possible.
We had finished a tour of night duty [10 p.m. to 6 a.m.]and a telephone message came to hold us back.
At 7.10 a.m. we were instructed to go home, change into day uniform and parade at Sefton park at 8.45 a.m., which left no time for any breakfast.
On arrival at Sefton Park, we were transported by bus to Church Street, as the late King and Queen would pass through on their way to open the Gladstone Dock.
Afterwards, we were taken by bus to the Essex Street bridewell for a free meal.
This consisted of a milk bottle filled with water to which had been added some lemon juice, and four rounds of Vienna bread, which should have contained beef, but it had run out.
So the bread was deposited in the slop bucket.
Thence to  the Dock Road and from there to East Prescot Street, as the Royal Family were staying with Lord Derby.
Then back to the corner of Blackmoor Drive and then we were told to parade at 10.45 p.m. for night duty.
Time off would be allowed providing the Police Service would permit it.
In other words, if you couldn't get it in the next three months, you could forget about it!
And woe betide anyone besmirsching  besmirsching the uniform for improper ends.
W. S. We had tunics with two pockets there and two pockets here, where kept our ‘fixings’.
We used to go on a tram-car and have a smoke, and a councillor was on there once, and noticed us having a smoke.
He complained, so they took those two pockets off us.
So we had tunics with just two pockets, one for a book and one for a whistle.
The uniform was the visible symbol, the tip of the iceberg, of a formidable body of sanctions.
It signified a disciplinary code of considerable imagination, a vast armoury of Chief Constable's powers, both petty and absolute.
H. P. I remember one time, the inspector coming round — we didn't always see eye-to-eye — telling me I hadn't polished my buttons.
In those days, we hadn't got chromium buttons — I had gone home soaked to the skin, after eight hours' rain, dried the stuff and was coming out next morning.
My buttons had been polished all right— I was keen on them.
I was keen on the uniform, being smart.
The inspector came along: ‘You haven't polished your buttons.
’ You had to take it from the inspector, you can't answer back.
Remember the old bachelor button?
When we wore braces, you'd get a card of them…in two parts…the top part and the underneath part [with]a stud [which]you had to put in your trousers.
You had to make a tiny hole to push it through — I've seen men reported for using them — making a hole in their uniform.
As in other aspects of police life, detailed regulations governed the minutiae of dress.
H. P. All the uniform was stamped at the time it was issued.
You had to wear them at certain times.
Old duty was worn for light duty and, for Sunday, you had your latest uniform — be out on Sunday with white gloves, and on special occasions.
You had them for quite a long while.
They were all stamped.
You might have to show the inspector the stamp to show that you were wearing the correct trousers — every now and then, you had to bring all your uniform in and all your uniform was an awful lot of uniform.
You'd have two capes and three uniforms.
You had an Instruction Book, all your various accoutrements at home.
You'd have to take them all in to be examined, then see if there was any fraying around the trousers and you hadn't reported it, for ordinary wear and tear had to be reported and then taken in for repair — you couldn't repair it yourself.
If you were in a bad accident or been into the slums with lice and things, you had  to report it and bring your uniform in.
It would either be destroyed or cleaned officially.
The public facade of the mass ceremony and the individual uniform concealed the blemishes, organizational and material, to which civilians were not privy but which bore heavily on the ordinary constable.
The Clockwork Man
The pettiness over uniform repairs epitomized the way control by the Chief pervaded the working — and the non-working — day.
Social control of the rank and file, in its formal disciplinary guise, had a multitude of possibilities.
An array of sanctions —‘fizzers’, ‘on the peg’— informal and formal, regulated the beat in an attempt to produce a display of robotic precision and efficiency.
W. R. You weren't allowed to talk to a girl in my time.
I've known myself disciplined because my mother spoke to me in Bold Street.
On another occasion, a woman cousin met me there and we stood talking, ‘Who was that woman you were talking to?’
And I got told off for it.
S. H. One night, I was on duty in town and my mate and I was in Renshaw Street and the Chief Constable came along in civvies and said: ‘Report yourself, gossiping on the beat.’
If you were talking to a prostitute on the beat, you'd get booked for gossiping — for idling your time.
But if you were locking up or cautioning, that was different — but you had to put it in your book that you had cautioned her.
If I was talking to you on the street and you had asked me where such-and-such a street was, that was all right.
If I was talking to you as my pal, I'd get done for idling my time.
D. A. I used to be on an adjoining beat in Cressington Park and I started at the park gates at one side of the road and there was a policeman on the other side of the road — you wouldn't cross the road to talk to him…you weren't allowed to talk to the public — that was gossiping, idling your time, failing to work your beat — three charges straight away and soon as the sergeant reported you.
Whatever happened to you, you were on a charge if you weren't at the point that the sergeant expected you.
But if you're looking down a back entry or something, you can't always be there.
M. B. On the beat, discipline was severe.
If people had been in a building after we had been round testing it and seen it secure, they'd come out and leave it open.
Quite a lot of PCs got into trouble for that sort of thing, ‘being reported for neglect of duty’, ‘failing to keep the premises secure’.
In many cases, whatever decision you made, you had much to lose, little to gain.
D. A. A friend of mine was posted to a beat in Allerton and one summer's  afternoon he saw a young lad — about fifteen years of age — getting into a car.
He took the hand-brake off and just moved it about thirty yards.
Then he got out of the car.
He caught him and it turned out it was the assistant chief constable's son.
He was in a terrible dilemma.
He didn't know whether to lock him up or what to do.
So he walked him round the beat until the sergeant found him.
The sergeant instructed him to take him into the police station and charge him with taking a vehicle without consent — the offence as complete by moving it thirty yards.
He was reported on a discipline charge for failing to arrest the boy at the time.
Instead of walking him round the beat, he should have taken him straight to the police station.
The boy was cautioned — never went before the court because of his father being the ACC and this fellow went before the Chief Constable and he had ten years' service at the time.
He lost the ten years' increments.
Went right back to the rank of probationer.
Fined £1 a week until he had done his penance.
Had to go back to the school — had to sit amongst the probationers, and then after the school, he was posted right from one side of the city to the other.
He appealed against the punishment to the Watch Committee, lost it, and resigned.
A terrible punishment.
To the charge of pettiness, the organization — as elsewhere — had a reply.
The Panopticon principle required an eventual acceptance of these justifications.
T. D. The discipline was tyranny but it wasn't bad for us — two policemen walking along the road together, talking about women or football like everybody else, and they can't keep their eyes for crime or for offences being committed under their noses.
A. M. Discipline was very tight.
In fact, it was a sort of petty tyranny.
But there was one thing about it — it made men of us.
It made us able to stand up on our own two feet, to sharpen us up in many respects.
But it was a little too much.
Survival in the force meant in part learning to accept as legitimate some of the City Police's more peculiar idiosyncrasies and arbitrary discipline.
‘You Mustn't Make a Mistake’
Like beat duty, on shift around the clock, discipline never let up.
It was a total environment.
It governed the minutiae of affairs, ready to strike wherever weakness showed up.
P. P. Sometimes, when we were going in at night, when it was wet, we would try and put a mac on and slip down to A Division parade room — hang the mac up quick and dive into your coat.
If you were caught, you'd be charged for being improperly dressed — you had to be in uniform.
I was late once, got there at ten instead of half past and was put on a discipline charge by the superintendent.
You  mustn't make a mistake — just like the army.
Some trivial thing — say if an  accident happened, three or four people injured in a car crash, pages of statements to take, and then a Report would come back; ‘Had the driver signed his driving licence?’
That was very easy to overlook.
Some superiors were more zealous than others to enforce the disciplinary code.
H. P. I've seen inspectors go round the police huts and examine the First Aid Kit.
When you used anything, you had to put it in the Book.
I've seen a bandage worth less than a penny and an inspector, he'd go in and find one missing.
If someone didn't own up to it, he'd get all of them who had used that particular hut over the previous month, trying to find who had used that bandage and not reported it.
P. E. A man dropped dead in front of me on the street and I took him to the mortuary and I got into trouble over it because I didn't search the body properly.
I forgot about the back pocket.
His people complained that he always carried a five pound note in his back pocket.
They sent one of the detectives around to the mortuary to search the body and they found the note in the back pocket.
I got ‘crimed’ for it, got into trouble for not searching it.
I got fined two classes [a class was half a crown]a week for twelve months, so it mounted up.
On Saturday, 15th May, an Acting Sergeant was in charge of an area near Muirhead Avenue, Liverpool…under him, there were on duty two Police Constables…between 11 p.m. and 11.30 p.m., observation was kept [on them]by a Chief Inspector and a Sergeant of the Liverpool Police Force.
As a result evidence…clearly showed that the two Constables had been idling and gossiping together at a place where one of them had no right to be…[and]that the Acting Sergeant, on his round of inspection, met these two Constables together, failed to note in his book, as was required in the regulations, the place where and the time where he met them, and to see that the Constables then noted in their books the time and place of his visit…
The two Constables…in a further neglect of duty went down a back entry, where they were caught smoking together, and later one of the Constables and the Acting Sergeant falsely concocted a story to disguise these infractions…
Constable I was charged with offences of disobedience to orders, neglect of duty, and smoking in uniform on duty…the light punishment of reduction in one class for six months, the deprivation of fifty-two shillings in pay.
Constable II received a fine of 40&shilling. and the loss of his additional good conduct increment under Police Regulations 58 and 61 of 2/6d. per week until such period of not less than one year, when he might again satisfy his superiors of his zeal, efficiency and truthfulness…
The Acting Sergeant was dismissed from the Police Force.
(Police Chronicle , 1925)
J. V. There used to be a Greek Church in Trinity Road and the bucks used to specialize in knocking the knobs off the railing.
The policeman's job was to count the knobs and report that they were all right in the morning.
Now if one was missing, there'd be a report; ‘Why didn't you do this?
Why didn't you lock someone up?’
That's the only time you met your Chiefs and that was always a snarling matter.
I was once put on a discipline charge because I had to cycle from here to Lark Lane police station on a very windy day and I got there at eleven
minutes to six.
For being four minutes late for duty, I was warned.
It was discipline, discipline.
On the Dock duty, too, temptations were easy, collaboration possible, but sanctions punitive, as a pot-pourri of traffic tumbled through the gate.
Risks were nevertheless taken.
K. M. I was on the Dingle Lane gate — Shell Mex place — and I'd been down there a few months.
I knew the people from the ship — the crew used to go out at night-time and some of them would come back merry.
Never any trouble with them.
One night they were coming through, a bit hilarious, and they said, ‘Have a drink’.
Normally, I wouldn't have one, but this time I did.
I don't know what the drink was — brandy or whisky — I had that much, I had it twice, so that the lads had to see me home because I was more or less drunk.
Got away with it because the other bobbies saw me home and signed off for me.
On East Queen's Dock, there was a very mild chap — bit timid for a policeman.
He knew the Customs in the East Queen's and if you wanted a drink, or anything like that, you would go in the locker and have a bit.
This chap came out and carried on with the beat.
But by that time, he was paralytic and stayed in the outside toilet underneath the overhead railway.
Had to take him home in a taxi and we had to book out for him.
He'd been going round the beat supping this over-proofed rum from the Customs.
K. M. When I used to work on the dockside, it was a hive of activity, all the horses and the steam-engines parked along the street.
It was the dockers who were stealing on the docks.
If they saw a case of apples or anything, they would break it open — didn't regard it stealing.
Sometimes a bale of cloth went and you wondered how it could get past the Dock gate.
P. C. Thomas Wheeler of Liverpool City Police was fined 40&shilling. by the Liverpool Stipendiary Magistrate on a charge of being unlawfully in possession of two pounds of rice and some oranges, value 1/6d.
Wheeler said he had been a member of the force for twelve and a half years and had been on duty on the Docks since last August.
On that duty he would get to know people pretty well.
The oranges were given to him by Mr. Singleton of Houghton's…he realised in Supt. Learmont's office that the people he received them from might not have the right to give them.
He realised that it was improper for Policemen to accept gifts.
(Police Chronicle , 1932
T. B. Everything on the Dock Estate was owned by the Docks and Harbour Board.
A feller Thom — at Langham Street Gate, there used to be a tremendous number of Ellerman boats coming in — oranges and so on— tremendous amount thrown away because they were bad.
Thom picked up two oranges from the gutter but someone saw him and they took him to Derby Street police station and he got the sack from the police.
P.C. Alexander Thom was sentenced to two months imprisonment by the Stipendiary Magistrate for stealing four oranges worth threepence from a shed at Liverpool Docks where  he was patrolling.
He pleaded guilty and said he was thirsty.
Mr Fred Pritchard a member of a firm of fruit merchants has written to the Council suggesting that members of the trade petition the Watch Committee to consider Thom's position with a full knowledge of the facts.
The handling of fruit on the docks, especially oranges — every case of which is opened to discover how many wasted oranges it contained — is a very happy-go-lucky procedure.
Buyers and their representatives will often throw away an orange or an apple or other fruit…it is the custom.
Many oranges, apparently sound, are thrown out on the quay and if everyone taking one or two of these oranges was arrested for theft, one Police Court would not be enough to deal with the cases…
Under Police Regulations, Thom's conviction will be followed by dismissal from the Force.
(Daily Courier , 1927)
It is not surprising that there is widespread protest against the sentence of two months' imprisonment…passed on the Liverpool Constable who admitted that he had taken four oranges, worth threepence, from a shed in the West Canada Dock…pilfering by the Police is a different matter from the same offence committed by a street urchin.
Even so, the ruin of his career and the disgrace of imprisonment seem, to most people, to be out of all proportion to the crime.
(Police Review , 1927)
T. B. You had to see what they were passing through and you had to have a chit and you had to time this chit and sign it and then you went to the hut and put it on the spike.
Of course, the result was, anybody watching you timed how long it took to go from the Dock gate to sign in and put it on the spike.
If you were more than a reasonable time, they would claim that you were failing to work your beat, or gossiping — things like that.
The Thom case was exceptional and gave rise to something of a public outcry.
It did Thom himself little good but it exacerbated the inarticulate anger of other officers at the pettiness of the regulations in the face of the array of temptations.
POLICE CRIME —‘WE WEREN'T ALL ANGELS’
There was of course‘real’ police crime — whether induced by the pressures of the beat and or by tempting opportunities.
Some charges were more heinous than others.
The Liverpool Stipendiary Magistrate dismissed summonses brought against a Liverpool Constable for selling tickets in an unauthorised lottery…the Constable had got into financial difficulties owing to a serious illness of his wife and the ill-health of his two children.
They had had medical attention since the beginning of the year and he did not know where to turn for a penny.
In order to raise money, he decided to raffle his motor-cycle combination.
Tickets were printed and he sold them to friends for 1&shilling. each…
The Constable had been in the Force since 1924 and had an excellent character [and]served in the trenches at the age of fifteen and a half.
(Police Review , 1926)
Sixteen men including three Liverpool Police officers were remanded on bail at Liverpool this week accused of conspiring to distribute tickets for the Irish sweepstake.
(Liverpool Daily Post , 1939)
James Shelton aged 25, and George Barnes, aged 23, two Liverpool constables, with a taxi-cab driver named Charles Wareing, were accused of breaking into the Co-operative Stores in Wavertree Road and stealing a safe containing £146.
(Liverpool Daily Post , 1925)
Henry Marston (25), a Constable with the Liverpool City Police, and Angus Gray (28), an ex-Constable, were remanded in custody in Liverpool…charged with breaking into Beaumont Street Post Office and stealing a safe and contents valued at £500.
They were further charged with stealing a motor-cycle combination on which they are said to have carried away the safe.
(Police Review , 1924)
Constable Mortimer Twamley, 29, Liverpool, was committed for trial on three accusations of stealing £13 in Treasury notes from William Riley, tobacconist…
Riley alleged that because of certain happenings he hung his jacket behind a door and fitted an electrical device and wires to a wallet in his pocket, connecting it with lights in his bedroom.
While in his bedroom, he saw the electric bulbs light up.
He rushed downstairs, examined the wallet and found £2 missing.
Twamley then came in from the backyard and when accused by Riley, he denied it, offering also to be searched.
(Police Review , 1931)
…the recent prosecution of three ex-Constables for grave offences of shopbreaking and garage-breaking of which they were found guilty at the last Assizes and sentenced to long-term imprisonment.
(Police Review , 1924)
Discretionary power of prosecution could also be used in deviant ways.
The formal rules could be used by the rank and file for their own personal advantage.
A shopkeeper who refused to sell constables cigarettes at a discount and complained of the illegal sale of similar goods to the public from their own trading organization, the Police Guild, could find himself summonsed by the same officers for employing children under age (which in turn gave rise to the banning of the Police Guild by the Watch Committee).
More serious crime was possible.
The well-worn cliché that the police are only a reflection of the society they serve, can be seen in a different light.
Villains as well as angels peopled the Liverpool City Police.
W. S. I operated from the Dog and Gun Police Station.
Pettyway comes along with me.
‘Look at the sky — there's a fire along there.’
So come to Home Farm.
When I get there — the whole place is going up and the farmer's in his pyjamas trying to save the rick.
Another fire breaks out in the West Derby area, and another one.
So the CID gets out to snoop around.
So the three of us are in a car — Pettyway and another feller.
Pettyway says: ‘Whoever's doing this wants their head seeing to.
’ Six o'clock — off we go to do the usual patrol.
CID comes up: ‘You can all relax, fellers — we've got him.’
‘You've got him — who was he?’
‘Pettyway.
’ Bobby who had been sitting by me.
It was him who had been doing it.
How they connected it — he was on his way home and there's a telephone box.
It's that box that tells the fire brigade that there's a fire.
He got three years.
Wearing a police uniform did not sanitize a working man from ungodly ways.
Few such  blemishes, given the secrecy of organizational practice, came to light.
When they did, they would normally meet exemplary retribution.
Laying the Blame
Because of the wide range of sanctions available to senior officers, men on the ground were in an extremely vulnerable situation.
The policy was generally to blame the individual, not the organization.
Immediate superiors were crucial in mediating the discipline by senior officers, and in the infliction of their own minor punishments.
Normally, harsh discipline was personalized as the idiosyncrasies of those superiors.
Blaming the organization for its pettiness had major costs.
Individual officers might come and go, but the organization was there for ever for the thirty-year man.
There was little benefit from carping about the organizational source of the disciplinary impedimenta.
The sergeant, the proverbial piggy-in-the-middle, was the ready scapegoat for both juniors and superiors.
D. A. You had sergeants in those days who were holy terrors.
If you failed to work your beat and the sergeant went looking for you and couldn't find you, you'd be reported and land before the chief constable.
You'd get fined a pound.
The discipline was very, very, severe.
Mind you, a lot of them had come from the army and from the navy — but I don't think that makes man's nature alter to that effect.
Although, if you take a sergeant-major or some corporals even — it's the nature of the man.
They seemed to take that kind of man to make him sergeant in the beginning after the Police Strike.
There was no Tom, Dick, or Harry business.
You had to address him as Sergeant: ‘All correct, Sergeant.’
He'd give you a visit and put it in his book and you'd do the same.
K. R. At Garston, there was a toilet on the main road and when we were on nights, and there was one officer walking along and I was on the other side — we daren't cross the road.
At about 2.30 a.m., he went into the lavatory and I would shout across at him.
The sergeant followed him in and found him smoking and put him on a discipline charge — idling his time.
That's the type of sergeant you got on the job — Creepers.
I was never a Creeper.
After I'd been in three years, I got married.
Then it was a frightful job because the sergeants were all the same.
They wanted to get on but that made me swear if I ever got made Sergeant, I would never treat a man the way I was treated.
Judgements on the sergeants varied according to one's own eventual rank.
T. B. You'd have sergeants who liked to drink and he'd have a constable in his section who knew where to get this drink, but normally amongst the sergeants, you were apart from the constables.
You carried the job.
The inspector was the inspector.
You wouldn't find fraternizing.
Sergeants were the backbone of the police.
The inspector was remote: ‘Yes, Sir, No, Sir’.
Not many sergeants saw much advantage in their position.
A further great grievance that exists in this force in the Division where I am is that the Section Sergeant dare not enter any Station while he is on duty unless he signs the main station book; yet the plain clothes P.C.s and Detective Constables, and even uniform P.C.s can go into the Station as often as they think and there is no order that any of them must sign in and out.
But if the Section Sergeant goes in for any necessary purpose, the Inspector comes in, he is reported and gets a severe reprimand from his superiors for idling his time in the Station.
When the plain clothes Constables, the Detectives, and even uniform Constables can spend their watch in the Station, the Section Sergeant who does all the work, and who is accountable to the Instruction Book, the backbone of the Force, dare not enter the Station during his hours of duty.
What red tape!
(Police Review , 1920)
M. B. If you were lucky you might just get told off by the superintendent or you might go up before the chief constable where you could be fined.
I know of one case — the chief constable was Wilson.
He came from a small force, Plymouth, and didn't realize that big forces were totally different.
I remember him telling one man that had been late three times in fifteen years that it was getting to be a habit: ‘You'd better look for your previous employment.’
And quite a lot of men were emptied off the job for very poor reasons — they had no consideration for the men themselves.
There was a large pool of unemployed in those days and it seemed to us that no sooner were you in than they were trying to get you off the job.
We had sergeants and inspectors jumping on us for the least little thing and very often trying to get us into trouble, whereas young fellows learning the job, what we needed was assistance.
T. D. We had a CC, Plymouth Bill we called him — and he had a force in Plymouth that wasn't as great in numbers as a division in Liverpool.
It went to his head and the superintendents were terrors and they could get rid of a man — give him the sack like slap on their wrist.
The higher the eventual rank, the more likely was blame to be similarly apportioned.
B. T. Some of the inspectors always appeared at the wrong time.
I remember when we used to do an evening patrol — 6 p.m. to 2 a.m. on Lime Street.
There was this particular inspector.
He always seemed to be picking on me.
I was pretty conscientious.
I was talking to this other lad across the road — we were due to go off duty at two and we were just hanging about before making our way down to the station — there was no relief for us on that shift.
Weatheralls had a shop there — mackintosh people — with a deep doorway.
I was standing there talking to him, and over on the other side of Lime Street, the station side, there was another mackintosh shop and they had ten shilling notes pasted in the window.
That was to show off their ten shilling macs.
One bright fellow decided to have one of these ten shillings.
So we saw this fellow go up to the window and look and then he went and got a stone from the kerb and ‘bang’ on the window.
By the time we were  across the road, he had the ten shilling note in his hand.
But as we were coming out of the doorway, running across there, sidling round the side was the inspector.
He must have known we were in the doorway.
Afterwards, he got me and asked what I was doing in the doorway with Symington.
I said, ‘We were watching the chap steal the ten bob note.’
‘You weren't talking were you?’
A bit tyrannical that part of it.
The same Inspector had me on another thing.
He had a pet theory that if you went flashing your torch about on night duty, any of the burglars would see that the light was going on.
Well, you had to flash it in the doorway, and they'd see it in any case.
But there was something that took my attention one night, on one of the shop windows, and I was flashing the torch on the window and he comes up.
He wanted to know why I was flashing the light.
I said I was flashing it to see if the window was all right.
So he says: ‘You weren't.
You were flashing it to look at the display in the window.’
‘No, I was checking the window.’
And he said: ‘Do you want to go forward on a charge on that?’
‘Oh, no’— so he ticked me off there and then instead.
Senior officers were so removed from the lowly constable that they were practically out of sight.
Rare ones were more flexible and tolerant.
P. S. The superintendent was like God.
They could transfer a man two miles away from his house.
There was a superintendent called Kinley.
When I was on the motor cycles, he used to collar me to take him home for lunch.
It was rather pathetic sometimes because he was upset at somebody going down on a discipline charge and getting the sack.
He used to tell me it was never intended.
When the sergeant visited you, he was supposed to sign your book — you had to keep up to date with everything in it.
If there's any alterations, they wanted to know why.
Jack Kinley told me about one case.
This feller said, ‘I didn't alter me beat book’, and chief constable said, ‘All right, we'll send it over to the Forensic Department.’
And this feller caved in then and admitted it.
B. T. Late for duty was another thing.
If you were a couple of minutes late, you had to go down and see the superintendent.
I was only ever late once and he was an old superintendent — Angus — he wasn't bad.
He said, ‘What went wrong?’
‘My alarm clock didn't go off.’
‘Well, next time get two alarm clocks.’
He wasn't bad at all making a joke of it.
Over time, constables assumed the same pathological spectacles through which they were seen by the organization.
The structure, the disciplinary rules, were immutable.
You couldn't budge them.
The City Force as an organization was too inflexible to oppose successfully.
You had to turn your complaints against the individuals who manned its higher echelons.
Blaming individuals for failings endemic to the organization was a necessary survival strategy.
You were often surprised that that same assumed frailty might result in a more human, more tolerant superior.
The Final Sanction: ‘On Your Way’
Punishments ranged from the formal reprimand to outright dismissal.
But there was often little distinction between them in the cause.
Sometimes there appeared to be justification enough — even if the manner of the dismissal left something to be desired.
S. H. There was a lot of us on reserve duty at St George's Hall, about forty or fifty of us, and one bloody bobby sat there with us and they sent for him.
It appears that this bloody bobby had been locked up two or three times.
They hadn't found out.
They sent for him and he never came back.
We learnt the next day he had had to hand in his uniform and get off the job as fast as he could.
But normally, dismissal seemed out of all proportion to the alleged fault.
I t could occur early in your service — or much later.
S. H. When you join the job, you're on two years’ probation.
I had a young fellow come up to me one day — he had eighteen months' service.
He had tears in his eyes.
He says, ‘I'm leaving, Frank.’
I says, ‘What's to do?’
He says, ‘The superintendent won't recommend me for being a policeman.’
He had to go immediately.
H. P. If your face didn't fit, they could get rid of you within twelve months.There was this bobby, a big chap over six feet, very dour, from the Hebrides — he'd only seen sheep.
He came on night duty.
There it was in the Chief Constable's Orders: ‘services dispensed with, under Regulation 11’.
He come to me and said, ‘What can I do now?’
Inspector comes up and says, ‘What are you doing here?’— McLeod, his name was.
‘Give me your book, whistle.’
(We didn't have warrant cards then.)
They took his accoutrements off him.
‘Go home.
Hand your uniform in tomorrow morning.’
That was finish, no redress.
His face just didn't fit.
In my opinion, they didn't give him a chance.
D. A. Discipline code was terrible.
A young feller rode on the front of a tram, which was the usual thing in those days, if you were signing off duty.
Everybody knew the tram drivers and used to hop on the front of the car up to the nearest point of the station and then jump off, and the superintendent was on the car and saw him getting on.
He got off with him and he knew he was going to the station to sign off and he asked him, ‘Did you pay your fare on the car?’
‘No sir, that's the usual thing.’
He did him on a discipline charge and he was sacked.
W. S. Poor old Fraser, he got the sack.
He married a girl who was with a firm who repaired old clothes.
He saw a bobby in trouble at Old Swan, got off the tram-car to help him, and he got his mac torn.
Made a claim for repairs — £3.
They checked with the firm and they said they didn't repair it, so he got the sack.
The implications of dismissal were severe.
The constable might recover his pension contributions — but that was all.
Probably a long way from his home town, he would suffer  from the same economic deprivation and social stigmatization experienced by the police strikers in 1919, without the latter's support and solidarity.
DEFENCES: FIGHTING BACK
Of course, not all punishments were taken lying down.
A formal, internal appeals procedure was eventually introduced in 1927 and, if that failed, as it invariably did, individual strategies could be developed — at a cost.
Having the right in the more serious cases to appeal over the head of the chief constable to the Watch Committee had little effect.
Local worthies rarely challenged the rectitude of the chief constable.
But the major flaw from the constable's point of view was the impossibility of putting a good case to a senior officer who was prosecutor, judge, and jury.
Even the rare successful defence might be at a price.
M. B. The Federation helped us but they hadn't any teeth.
You were allowed to be defended by a fellow officer who acted as ‘your friend’.
He would act on your behalf to the chief constable.
But that was as far as you could go and often he became in a rather dubious position himself through doing that sort of thing.
I remember one fellow Madden, who was very clever.
In fact, he would have made an ideal barrister — and he defended quite a lot of men who were indicted for various things — got them away because he was too cute for the superintendent who was dealing with the job.
Madden got shifted from that division — you only got shifted if you were in trouble — and he came to the same division as myself.
In fact, he was on the same traffic spot as myself and he told me, ‘They're after me.
They'll get me out.’
And I think they did.
Ironically, such tight rule-bound organizations contained their own innate weaknesses, which alert constables could spot.
T. D. One time we had an acting sergeant.
I'd been going round all morning and never seen him.
About half an hour before I was due to go off, he made my half-hour point.
But I'd disappeared because I'd a man shouting ‘fruit and vegetables’(in those days, you had to have your name and address on your cart).
I thought, ‘I'll go and see what's doing.
’ Now he wanted to know why I wasn't at the point.
So when I went inside the station, I told him where I was.
But I had made a mistake and not put the fellow's name and address in my book.
‘You should have done — don't do it again,’ he said.
‘I don't believe that there was a hand-cart.
While you were missing, I had to deal with a dog that had been run over.’
(That was a ruddy lie).
‘Don't do it again.’
I says to myself, ‘I'm not having this.’
The following morning, he was on again.
So I put everything in my book, such-and-such-a-thing, such-and-such-a-thing.
So I went on until just after refreshment time: Spoke to Mr so-and-so — lots of things in my book.
Then he says when I get back, ‘What's all this?’
‘You're not making me out to be a liar.’
‘Rub it out.’
‘Not rubbing anything out — you know as well as I do, you're not allowed to rub  anything out.’
‘Don't be like that.’
‘From now on, when you're acting sergeant, everything's going to go down in my book.
Once you doubt my word, that's it.
As with the pre-existing right to appeal to the Victorian Watch Committee, over the head of the chief officer (local worthies rarely asserted any independence from the chief), there was little chance of overturning the verdict.
The Federation representative could suffer unofficial penalties for any such assistance.
Instead, sanctions could sometimes be avoided by using the organization's rules against a superior —‘working to rule’ has a long and honourable tradition in labour history, especially where industrial action is prohibited.
REWARDS: THE CARROTS
All organizations work on a carrot-and-stick policy.
Punishment and rewards go hand in hand.
Police forces are no exception.
In the words of the chief constable some years after the post-Strike intake:'There is much more stability amongst the Constables due to rising years of service, too valuable to be risked.
The body of penal regulations was counterbalanced by some rewards.
The basic promise of the organization was pay.
Police earnings in the 1920s were substantial by comparison with most other occupations to which a working man could aspire.
Few jobs today offer pensioned retirement after thirty years.
Promotion was a further carrot, though like the former hedged round with qualifications and caveats.
Finally, there were occasional commendations, whether verbal or in the form of small sums of cash, from philanthropic organizations.
A Good Wage
Within the financial horizons of a working-class man after the Great War, police pay, including allowances, small increments, and pension, was both tempting and binding.
H. P. You put up with the discipline because of the unemployment.
In B Division, the discipline was about the worst in the force — the thing was that it was not a bad pay-packet plus there was the pension at the end — a big item.
We had to go ten years before we got our first increment of 2/6d.
It depended on whether your face fitted — it wasn't automatic.
At twelve years there was another 2/6d.
My first week's pay was £2.17/6d.
But the average pay was still below the police plus there was job security — there weren't a lot of jobs paying pensions then.
T. B. In those days, a bobby was a good catch for a woman — in a regular job and a good wage — average working man's wage was around a pound to thirty shillings.
During the greater part of the time, at the beginning, you had to put up with it because the alternative was ten bob a week unemployment.
A policeman's wage with ten years' service was on £4. 10&shilling plus his lodging allowance — you were well on the way to the top of the money league.
If you passed for Sergeant, you got two  ten-shilling special allowances, and when I got made Sergeant, I was on a bike allowance of seven shillings a week.
The pension was the ultimate, binding, financial carrot.
Once you had served a few years, you might come to detest the job, but you committed yourself to the future.
P. H. If you went at 25 years' service, you got half pension.
If you were getting £8, you'd go at £4.
When you'd done your thirty years, you'd go off at two-thirds pension.
I had no prospects, so I decided to do my thirty.
Besides, you always knew that there were three or four thousand willing to take your job on if you didn't like it.
A. M. You were tied down by your pension.
You had something that very few other people had and this to a large extent tied you down.
It didn't help when Westminster enforced successive cuts in pay as part of the public-services' sacrifice in relation to the national economic crisis of 1931 and 1932.
Constable Mooney joined the Force,
A fine upstanding man, of course;
Nor cared a jot as long he tripped
On his first day's duty how much he chipped.
The very first week upon his beat
And a dog almost cleared the street.
On the Super's report to the Chief was written
‘Constable Mooney was badly bitten.’
On Saturday night loud sounds of strife,
Drunken navvy ill-treating his wife.
Next day a Policeman's face all patched,
'Cos the woman turned round and Mooney is scratched.
But a disturbance down the road,
Down that way Mooney quickly strode,
Fierce, sharp tussle.
Handcuffs clicked,
But Mooney's shins severely kicked.
Runaway horses, bairns leaving school,
Bystanders breathe ‘The plucky old fool.’
And Mooney's grinning — but what's the joke,
As they help him away with his forearm broke.
Armed bandits.
High-powered car.
Telephone messages flung out far.
Mooney ne'er moans about his lot
As he lies in hospital next day, shot.
P.C. Mooney is still in the Force —
Not quite so upstanding now, of course—
A fine, old Policeman, still smiling, but
Would you believe it: his pay has been cut!
(Police Review , 1931)
There was some public criticism of police pay — and of perks such as the housing allowance, resentment that crystallized during that austerity period in the early 1930s.
Having seen the various statistics covering police forces throughout England, I find that the Liverpool Police Force costs more than any other…
The country is crying out for economy; why not an enquiry into the Liverpool Police Force?
(Liverpool Echo , 1931)
…the practice of paying allowances for housing and rent allowances, in the case of married members of the force.
Will city fathers, in the name of economy, explain why those practices should be maintained?
(Liverpool Echo , 1931)
Is the city over-policed?…
Manchester manages with one constable for every 524 inhabitants, in Liverpool a constable has only 467 to look after.
(Liverpool Daily Post , 1931)
There were criticisms over police costs that spread beyond the question of police pay:
it will be interesting to know what the Police Band costs, which the ratepayers never hear, and what did the rodeo, performed by the Mounted Section, cost the long-suffering ratepayers?
(Evening Express , 1931)
…city council proposal to disband the mounted police ‘being mainly ornamental rather than useful.’
(Liverpool Echo , 1932)
The vast majority of officers learned to grin and bear it.
As they grew older, pay might increase only gradually, but the pension carrot grew.
Especially in the early 1930s, notwithstanding the pay-cuts, police officers in the city had a job secure from redundancy — which was more than you could say for most of those they policed.
Similarly, promotion continued as a further inducement for some.
The Lure of Promotion
The promotion reward was like a game of snakes and ladders.
There were few opportunities to rise quickly.
If you caught a sponsor's eye (Liverpool had its own version of the Trenchard system of accelerated middle-class promotion), or, in the view of many officers, had the right ‘connections’, there were possibilities.
Some took the arduous climb, a square-by-square approach, passing the hurdles of Sergeant's and Inspector's examinations, serving time on a variety of specialist duties, and beat supervision.
EXCERPTS from the Liverpool Examination Papers, 1927
CONSTABLE TO SERGEANT
Time allowed, 1 hour.
Answer 6 questions only.
Define the following geographical terms, and give an example of each — Estuary, Straits, Volcano, Isthmus, Watershed.
Name the County Town of the following counties and the river each is drained by:— Norfolk, Hampshire, Buckinghamshire, Glamorganshire, Brecknockshire.
Name the different classes of crops in England.
Where do you generally find land suitable for the grazing of cattle?
Name five lakes in England and state where they are situated.
Where does each of the following towns obtain its water supply?:— Liverpool, Birkenhead, Manchester?
SERGEANT TO INSPECTOR
English and General Intelligence
Show by inflexion, each of the proper nouns as adjectives:— Spain, Ceylon, Portugal, Denmark, Switzerland.
Explain the meaning of the following by embodying each in a sentence:— Course, source, recourse, discourse, concourse.
Name five different fashions for men's civilian head-gear and give a brief description of each.
Snakes and Ladders
Careers progressed square by square and there were slippery patches too.
Examinations aside — there were many ways in which the unlucky, rather than the unwary, could slither down.
A. T. The worst part of the job was after passing the Sergeant's exam and waiting for twelve to thirteen years to get promoted — you'd have the Chief Constable's Orders come out and you'd see people who had passed years after you being promoted and you'd think that I'll do my thirty years like this.
M. B. I am quite candidly of the opinion that I would have left the police out of a feeling of resentment because I was overlooked time and time again for inferior men.
I say that with every degree of confidence.
I was just a stranger up here in Liverpool, coming from Scotland and I didn't have anybody backing me, which a lot of people do — somebody pulling strings for them.
I was overlooked repeatedly, to such an extent that I became completely disgusted.
It used to be said with a considerable amount of justification that you could get as far as Inspector on your own bat but after that ‘No’, you needed somebody pushing you — city councillor, anything.
I came across many, many instances of that sort of thing.
As an inspector, there was one particular PC that I detested because he was a dodger in my opinion and gutless, and when he put reports in, I  would repeatedly scrub across it: ‘No further action’.
Superintendent said to me one day, ‘You don't like this fellow very well.’
‘I do not.
I detest him.’
I threatened to put him on a discipline charge because whenever the drunks were turning out, you'd find him in the station writing some trivial bike without a light.
So the superintendent said: ‘You know who he is?
He's so-and-so's nephew.’
His aunt was a lady barrister and a member of the council, a JP.
So this individual, who I wouldn't have given three stripes across, eventually became a Chief Inspector.
That sort of thing used to happen to an enormous degree.
Such claims of sponsored promotion were obviously difficult to substantiate.
However, in the early 1920s there were evident short-cuts.
The expansion of the police administrative staff guaranteed a faster route to the top for those who were drafted in as clerks.
Chief Constable Caldwell is supposed to have never actually served on the beat — being recruited directly into the administrative apparatus and rising quickly within it.
Graduate entry with resultant opportunities for promotion was then — as now — an especially sore point.
M. B. I never forget being called by a superintendent, who said: ‘Sergeant Bullock, you're acting inspector over the weekend.
Sergeant so-and-so has just passed the Inspector's exams and I'd like you to take him with you.
Give him an idea of the inspector's duties.
’ So this particular sergeant who had been a PC when I had been an acting sergeant, sat alongside me.
We went along to the various stations.
He came with me.
He saw the work that I examined and dealt with, and on the Tuesday, I was saluting him as an inspector.
That's not an isolated incident.
I was dragged out of my bed one morning when I was in A Division, and at that time unless you passed your life-saving exams in the water, you couldn't be considered for promotion.
I got there — the message had come up via the landlady.
‘You've got to be at X Baths.’
I said: ‘Not me, I've passed all my exams,’ and off she went.
PC came back later on.
‘Bang, bang, bang’ on the door.
‘You've got to be there and you've got to sign this to show that you're aware of it.’
So when I got there, it's the swimming coach there and a uniformed inspector and a particular individual who came from Cambridge University (quite a few of them came into the force at that time — in 1932).
Inspector said: ‘The superintendent has spoken to me — you're the best life-saver in the division.
Now this individual has passed his exam and it is up to you to get him through.’
Sure enough, I dived in the water, swam up the other end, and he came after me.
He damned near drowned me.
He eventually let go of me and I had to go the bottom of the baths and bring him to the surface, take him to the side and get him breathing again, and I was considered a failure for that.
The man was to be got through this particular exam because he was from Cambridge.
In those days, I think the Home Office and the Foreign Office were full up and we were getting people from universities and some of them were pretty useless, heads full of all sorts of knowledge but no common sense.
I know another  one — a friend of mine said: ‘There's a young PC lodging with me and he's got all sorts of new ideas.
He's going to be a sergeant in five years, and inspector in seven, chief inspector in eight years — you'd better come and talk to him.’
So I went round.
Sure enough, he told me that's what they planned for him.
He was a la-di-dah Cambridge graduate.
He came to A Division and got himself into a lot of trouble through damn stupidity.
Head full of academic knowledge but nothing else — and before anybody could bat an eyelid, he applied to sit an exam in London, and the next thing he was in the Metropolitan Police.
And he did become a chief inspector in eight years.
Now they're shouting for recruits
To wear regulation boots;
To patrol the dirty streets on town beats
So that the Hendon ‘nobs’ can get the ‘cushy’jobs.
And snore till ten in the morning.
(Police Review , 1936)
M. B. It's all very well this business of collegiate training — you've haven't got the knowledge of working on the beat.
In the school, I was told in the First Aid that you could always tell a fractured femur (which happened with elderly women as a rule).
The foot is always turned out.
Within a very short time, I dealt with three fractured femurs in Church Street — I never saw one with a foot turned out.
It's the practical knowledge that is far more important than the academic.
Some years earlier, the Liverpool Watch Committee had tried unsuccessfully to ban police officers from membership of rival Protestant and Catholic quasi-political organizations.
Such old-boy networks were one way of jumping the promotion queue, of obtaining sponsorship.
A. T. I passed for Sergeant seventeen years before I got made up.
They had a very large number of Scots sergeants and they all seemed to be very close.
In fact, one chap, Jack Bruce the name was (he used to do traffic duty on Scotland Road.
He used to stand there playing his imaginary pipes.
His daughter was a champion at the Highland Fling).
Jack said to me, ‘Aren't you in the Bobby Burns Club?’
I said, ‘No.’
‘Well, come down and I'll introduce you and put you forward’— because he was something well-to-do there.
I thought that that was an opportunity to get promotion.
Now I'd always said to myself, ‘I'll never join the Masonic Lodge,’ and therefore I wouldn't join the Bobby Burns Club.
I might have suffered — seventeen years waiting for promotion, for some of them were made sergeants very soon.
The chances of promotion in Liverpool depend upon the candidate's relation to his Super —‘…matters have gone from bad to worse…
Today, service, seniority, and experience do not appear to be considered at all, your religion or creed appear to be an  important factor in regulating your progress in the Service…’
We deleted the paragraph in the letter in which particular reference is made to the form of religion specially favoured.
(Editorial,Police Review , 1932)
Accelerated promotions had first given rise to major complaints in the reorganization after the Police Strike, when many younger and inexperienced officers were made sergeants.
The bitterness left by the scheme for accelerated promotion for graduates left its mark.
There have been recurring attempts by the police service since World War II to develop alternative means of entry and promotion to the traditional progression from the ranks, which have always been met by by  by bitter reference to the schemes of the 1930s.
Narking as a Factor in Promotion
There was a stark personal conflict in the struggle for promotion.
Where there were more Indians than positions as Chiefs, when, for example, many constables had passed the Sergeant's exam, personal animosity could be severe.
A. T. With the strike having taken place, everyone was jockeying, everyone that had sat for Sergeant and passed their exams, the only way they could see to get promotion was to report another man.
A. M. Three policemen on the evening patrol — lots of publicans used to leave bottles of beer on the doorstep for policemen and one of these policemen, he liked his booze.
The other two were good as well— they'd both passed for Sergeant, stable, fine fellers.
And some sneaky feller who was in the promotion stakes as well, he found this out and passed the word on and they laid a trap for three fellers, one night after twelve.
Two of them disappeared without trace as fast as they could.
But the old bobby — he'd downed his pint of beer — he got taken before the chief constable and he got a serious fine, £1.
But the two acting sergeants got caught.
They never made Sergeant.
And two more likely fellers that you'd make Sergeant, I hadn't come across.
I see that you're mentioned in Orders,
That you've caught ‘Spike’ Smith and his mate,
I've heard that they're the midnight marauders,
Who've caused so much trouble of late.
A fairly good case — were you working
As laid down, correctly your beat?
Or were you, as usual, shirking
And resting your — well — er, flat feet?
You watched them!
Now tell me another,
I'll bet you'd ‘put up’ in a door,
And you heard ‘Spike’ Smith and the other
Before they had noticed your snore
Don't go — I don't mean to be nasty,
Hang on, I'm coming your way.
Your temper, old man's, getting hasty,
Don't take it like that, what I say.
Don't think for a minute I'm jealous.
How could I be jealous of you?
For you must admit I'm more zealous,
A far better policeman than you.
For I've no end of good cases,
I've had in ‘Knife’ Jones twice before,
I caught him with picklocks and braces,
Just breaking in ‘Lewis's’ Store.
I caught him by cute observation;
There's none that could not but agree
That anybody else in the station
Is half such a policeman as me.
I did not cry out for assistance,
I carried the ‘job’ through alone,
And ‘Knife’ did not offer any resistance:
He knew I could well hold my own.
Of course, you know, ‘Knife’ is a rough'n,
The roughest, I think, of the rough,
I daresay he'd heard I'm a tough'un,
He came along quiet enough —
Hang on, eh, which way are you walking?
Alright, it's your best way, I see,
And confidentially talking,
The Chief thinks the world about me.
I had a good case one December —
I think then you hadn't joined us
The snow was that deep, I remember,
Hold on mate, that isn't your bus,
I'm coming, don't push, wait a minute,
This tale on the way I can tell…
(Police Review , 1932)
A. T. The system then was, there was a number of sergeants who had been in the army.
There was a number of men who had passed for Sergeant's rank, and the only way they could get it was to report another policeman so they could go to the chief constable on a discipline charge.
P. S. You'd get a feller that was friendly with the bosses.
He'd tell over you and the next thing you know, you were on a fizzer form.
You'd get a case where there were two acting sergeants and one would want to get ahead of the other — he'd run the other down to the inspector.
Six feet in height, plus inches three,
With limbs as strong as any tree
To be a Policeman was his hope.
Spurred only by that insidious dope
‘Promotion’.
Snared in promotion's sinuous coil
He burned, too much, the midnight oil.
Result he cracked, and almost died
But in delirium still he cried —
‘Promotion’.
And thus he finished.
Broken nerves,
Marked ‘Unfit for further service’
— Plain Clothes for Life, they said goodbye,
No longer does that poor lad cry
‘Promotion’.
(Police Review , 1937)
Colleague solidarity counted for little when there was a chance for one of the few organizational carrots — that of promotion.
Apart from that possibility and the final pension, there were only a few other possibilities of organizational reward.
A PAT ON THE BACK
Beat work and manning the Dock gates produced few opportunities for praise.
Keeping the locals quiet on the street and patient watch on the gates, unlike Plain Clothes and CID work, offered no glamour and caught no superior's eye.
Valorous actions might sometimes result in a small award from a philanthropic organization, but generally received minimal recognition.
J. V. One night, I was on duty at the Herculaneum Dock when the high winds were blowing in November (half the windows in Grafton Street were blown in).
There was a stack of timber being unloaded from the Dock and the wind threw that all over the place.
On the west side, where we were, a lightship was being reconditioned.
It was about two or three in the morning.
She bust her moorings and she belted into the coal-tips, ready for loading.
We dashed along.
There were two dry docks and if she had veered over, she'd have gone into the oil storage area.
So I climbed aboard with a flashlight, trying to find a rope.
Eventually, I found a rope and threw it to my pal and they made it fast.
All the police knew of that — was what I put in my book — not a word of praise.
I did have three commendations over the thirty years — three ten bobs!
Public commendations and small gratuities were so minor in character, and so random in distribution, that they contributed little to the City Police's power of inducement.
Charles Peace, a Victorian villain, once commented that the dangerous constable was the one who ‘neglects his duty to go courting the servant, or nips up the entry to get a surreptitious drink.
You never know where you may meet up with him.’
However, you were always aware of the location of the conscientious, beat-grinding constable.
Discipline in the City Police had little to do with questions of efficiency.
Instead it had different functions.
Tradition, the military-style organization inherited from the New Police, was the one imperative for the Panopticon discipline.
In the aftermath of the Police Strike, senior officers were doubly concerned to prevent the kind of rank-and-file interaction that might lead to common cause against their superiors.
The disciplinary image was presented to a larger audience.
‘Peacekeeping’, that euphemism for controlling the city street, depended in part on fear.
Instilling trepidation by a mass display when the Inspector of Constabulary visited, like the uniform paraphernalia of the beat constable, saved on the use of physical force.
Such an imposition created its own problems.
Deviance, the rule-breaking activities of the beat constable, was often produced by that very authoritarianism.
Survival, remaining relatively human, required that officers find some relief through scrounges.
In turn, those strategies of survival justified further discipline, strictures rationalized by the organization as a result of the assumed individual pathology of the lower ranks.
It was the person that was fallible, not the organization.
The other side of control consisted almost entirely of the cash nexus — the economic benefits.
Wage, pension, and housing were important considerations for working men with a skill irrelevant to civilian occupations.
For many, aspiration to higher things through promotion was tied up with the idea of a larger wage-packet.
Such a concentration on the economic principle underlying the police occupation inevitably gave rise to backbiting and to justifiable criticisms of those who appeared to have obtained their rewards through subterfuges.
Carrots and sticks are relative.
Not merely donkeys chase after carrots, urged by a hefty stick, when the alternative is no job and no pension.
Despite the tedium and the alienation of beat work, the lack of praise, and the inexorable discipline, most officers lasted out their time.
A passive fatalism at the capriciousness and heavy-handedness of authority prevailed amongst the thirty-year men.
They imbibed of necessity the belief in order and stability and, inevitably and as was intended, projected the same values on to the street people.
Controlling the Street
A year ago in Liverpool, a boy was caught upon a Sunday evening in the act of stealing a handkerchief out of somebody's pocket and was arrested.
His father objected that the police had arrested him unlawfully, because the law lays it down that no-one is allowed to do on Sunday the work by which he earns a living, and the police were therefore not allowed to arrest anybody on a Sunday.
The judge agreed to this, but continued to question the youngster, who admitted to be a professional pickpocket.
He was fined five shillings because he had pursued his trade on a Sunday.
(Frederick Engels, ‘The Position of England’, in Articles on Britain )
‘This boy,’ says the Constable, ‘although he's repeatedly told to, won't move on…’
‘But where?’ cries the boy…
‘My instructions don't go to that,’ replies the Constable.
‘My instructions are that this boy is to move on.’
(Charles Dickens,Bleak House )
THERE is a curious idea, a remnant of Victorian broadsheet titillation, echoed today by the popular press and in the pontifications of chief police officers, that police work is about ‘crime-fighting’.
Patently this is nonsense.
Police work is only marginally involved in crime.
The blanket mandate of Victorian ‘preventive’ policing justified a multitude of duties.
Acting as a walking/talking A-Z, directing traffic, dealing with accident victims and domestic disputes are several of the myriad activities that absorb police personnel.
Few have anything to do with popular images of ‘crime’.
More importantly, historically the key feature of police work has been about maintaining a particular form of social order on the street.
From chasing street-corner kids to opening flood-drains, Victorian police work centred on the control of the street, independently of a recognizable image of criminality.
When Jack London described the ‘move-on’ confrontations that he experienced with the police in both the Metropolitan capital and in Chicago, he was documenting the normal encounter between the residents of the streets and the patrolling officer.
Between 1860 and 1930, some 5 per cent(often characterized by the common denominator of illiteracy) of the city's population appeared annually in court, almost entirely in relation to minor street incidents — from ‘suspected persons’ to the moral iniquity of riding a pedal cycle without lights.
Such judicial records, of course, do not enumerate the sundry street harassments such as that noted by one Liverpudlian in the 1920s: ‘Everyday, you'd see twenty or thirty men standing on street corners and sitting on doorsteps.
Then suddenly one of them would call out ‘Aye, aye, lads…here's the cops’ and they'd all move.
The police would walk in single file on the edge of the pavement and if they caught the men hanging around, they'd book them.’
As early as the thirteenth century, powers to control the street had been central to the police mandate.
In the first published street legislation, during the reign of Henry III, the new halberds were formally required to ‘keep in order the unruly’.
During the sixteenth century, a series of proclamations targeted the major object of early police work — the ‘suspectid person’ and ‘any maner of beggers or vacabond or eny evill disposed person’who were to be driven from the streets.
Being the wrong class, in the wrong place, at the wrong time — in a foreshadowing of later night-beat practices — meant trouble: ‘not any suspectid personne nor persons after nyne of the clocke shall not walke, but rest an kepe they theyr hoostes houssies, uppon payne of imprisonment’.
The early and continuing police function was to control particular social groups — rural migrants and the growing urban poor.
In the early eighteenth century, some sixty Watchmen were appointed to patrol the town with the major function of apprehending ‘all night-walkers and all disorderly persons’.
The commissioners' Instructions to the Watch in 1817 were similar: ‘You are to apprehend all night-walkers, rogues, vagabonds, and other disorderly persons, disturbing the public…you must be very circumspect…and not wantonly or inconsiderately apprehend persons of a different description.’
In the Instructions to the Night Watch, 1834, the priorities of police work in the city were reaffirmed: ‘…the good order of the streets, secondly, for the safety of the persons of the inhabitants and, thirdly, for the security of property’.
With the advent of the New Police in the city in 1836, new legislation reformulated old practices and the continuing target.
The Liverpool Improvement Act 1842, provided the legal mandate — the arrest of all ‘loose, idle, or disorderly persons’(Section 276) and stop-and-search powers on the River Mersey and on the city streets (Section 278).
The Instruction Book issued to new constables in 1878 turned legal power into street practice:
…watching vigilantly the movements of all suspicious persons who pass through his beat…
If it be at an untimely hour, or if they fail to assign a proper reason for being in a place, he is to arrest them…showing bad characters that they are known and watched by him…their habits will point them out without further ado…
For the purpose of seeing whether his suspicions are well-founded, he may…stop any person carrying goods which he suspects to have been stolen, he may also examine the person and detain him.
Successive Instruction Books reinforced the message.
Street control was the primary duty.
The passing of the Liverpool Corporation Act 1921 set the stage for  inter-war policing.
The ‘suss’ provision was spelt out (Section 314) and a municipal ‘frequenting’charge underpinned the stop-and-search power of the 1824 Vagrancy Act.
Together, by-laws governing every aspect of street life — from the suppression of nuisances to the licensing of pedlars, statutes on betting and gaming, prostitution, street obstruction, drunkenness, begging, and unlawful possession — equipped the Liverpool City Police with a vast array of legal authority.
Social control of the streets, not crime control, was the major historically derived police function when these officers were recruited through the Everton Police Training School.
A BATTERY OF LEGAL POWERS
For the new constable, the Instruction Book, with its sundry detail of by-laws and enabling statutes, was the bible that informed street practice.
Above all else, you knew THE LAW with all its tortuous semantics, its convoluted clauses — and hazards for clumsy implementation.
Some power was always available — if only through the mythical Ways and Means Act — although it might have to be handled with kid gloves.
Police powers were permissive in dealing with the lower classes.
English common law, in statute and in practice, allowed the dominant party to have his way normally without resort to violence or to dubious devices.
A. M. Everything we did, we could find justification for.
We could always find something in the law to help us.
You had to know your Instruction Book very well, because if you locked someone up and they got away with it, next day in court, there was a chance that you might be deemed excessive in your law and of course then you were on your own.
You may have locked someone up and made a mistake.
And of course some points of law are very involved.
For example, all through my service, I had in my mind the difference between ‘false pretences’ and ‘stealing by trick’.
If someone said, ‘just taking £5 off you,’ and said they ‘knew me son’and all that rigmarole and ‘so I gave them £5’, then your knowledge of the law came out immediately.
You say ‘false pretences’— there's no power to arrest unless you are on the spot and see it happen or you are in immediate pursuit.
Now ‘stealing by trick’, you've got all the powers that go under the Larceny Act.
You could lock anybody up that fell under that power — even if it happened a week ago.
They were a kind of enabling powers — you could set up circumstances that would fit either.
It was up to you to see that you were justified.
For example, somebody would go into a restaurant in Lime Street — we got quite a few of those.
They'd say, ‘I can't pay, I've got no money.
‘Well, the policeman, if he was any good at all, would say, ‘Well, did you get a bill?’
‘Yes, but I can't pay for it,’ the price of the meal.
‘I'll lock you up for stealing this.’
But if he had no bill and or didn't pick it up, you'd tell the proprietor that he must take his own proceedings — he's swindled you out of the price of a meal and it's a civil action.
Experience taught you how to exploit the law, while steering clear of its pitfalls when faced with high authority.
H. P. I remember a policeman arresting someone under the ‘being a suspected person/loitering with intent’ power — who sued him.
You'd see fellows in the middle of the night, especially if they were carrying something.
For example, we used to get a lot of people from the printers but you knew them.
But if you got somebody strange, you'd say, ‘Would you mind opening your case?’
Never any argument — well, there were arguments but you knew the answers to them.
A policeman had suspected them for loitering about, they wouldn't give a reasonable explanation or account of themselves.
Search them, take them inside, lock them up — be a ‘suspected person loitering with intent to carry out a felony’.
Until some clever solicitor come along and he puts a new interpretation of the Act: ‘What is a suspected person?’
Not that you suspect him because you don't like the look of him walking the streets — he's got to be a suspected person.
A common prostitute — you couldn't call any woman a common prostitute because they were on the game with some chap.
You had to be sure that she had convictions as a prostitute — first loitering and then prostitution and then finer points came up over suspected persons.
Then the Orders came out — they took action against the policeman over this and the police got into trouble.
But you've got to prove that they are a suspected person — they had to belong to a particular class of person to be classed as a suspected person.
Then you had got to have good grounds to believe that they were going to commit a felony.
But we got away with them.
You had to learn them off by heart.
The Court of Appeal…dismissed an appeal from two Liverpool police constables against the awarding of £15 each as damages to Edwin Ledwith and Christopher Crothers, on the grounds that they were wrongly arrested by the appellants.
Ledwith and Crothers were described as window cleaners, and it was alleged that while one of them was inside a telephone box and the other was outside, P. C.s Roberts and Pearce arrested them and took them to the Bridewell.
They were detained over two hours and eventually released.
The Policemen submitted that…under the Vagrancy Act and the Liverpool Corporation Act, 1921, enough suspicion was aroused in their minds by the actions of the two men to justify arrest.
Lord Justice Greer said the decision of the Court involved…an investigation into the history of the words ‘idle and disorderly persons’.
(Police Review , 1936)
The combination of three different ‘suss’ powers had awesome implications for the street dweller.
(A century earlier, one unfortunate individual had been imprisoned twelve times in a year — one month at a time — under the local Act.)
The powers were occasionally complicated to use and could sometimes penalize their user.
M. B. ‘Suss’ power was used quite a lot— but it fell into disfavour later on.
It was looked on as not advisable to deal with it under the Liverpool Corporation Act.
The record might come into it but it was largely their attitude.
If they were going  along trying to open shop doors, they could go in as a suspected person loitering but it wasn't looked upon very favourably by the courts.
To prove that you suspected that they were going to commit a crime isn't so easy.
Very hard to get the evidence of frequenting.
If you knew him to be a criminal, you suspected him of being up to no good.
You had to be very careful in those days.
If the courts did throw out a case that you'd dealt with, you stood a chance of being sued over it.
So you had to be pretty sure of your ground.
Unless the Watch Committee took a favourable view and said, ‘Yes, we'll back you,’ you were on your own and stood a chance of having to pay damages.
In London, it was different.
They had a fund for dealing with that sort of thing and that's why you saw many of those cases there.
The reserved judgement of Sir W. F. Taylor K. C.... in which a dock labourer claimed damages from P. S. Kerr and P. C. Neame, members of the Liverpool Force, for alleged assault and battery and wrongful arrest and false imprisonment.
£100 DAMAGES AGAINST CONSTABLE
The Judge found in favour of Sergt. Kerr…but for the plaintiff against P. C. Neame for wrongful arrest and false imprisonment, assessing the damages at £100 with costs…it was alleged the plaintiff was struck by both police officers and severely handled in the street and in the Bridewell, with the result that he received an injury to his right eye which necessitated its removal in hospital…
‘The arrest…‘concluded the judge, ‘has not been justified, and the plaintiff is entitled to succeed in this part of the case.
I exclude from the question of compensation the element of injury to the eye, which I feel was accidental and not due to any negligence.’
(Police Review , 1926)
A verdict was given against a Liverpool Constable by a jury…in a case in which Mrs Jane Roche, wife of a bookmaker, claimed damages from Sergt. John Borrows (who was dismissed for the malicious prosecution claim) and Constable Ernest David Laurie of the Liverpool Police…
Mr Patrick Roche, a licensed bookmaker carried on a credit betting business in Houghton Street.
On 6th August, when Mrs Roche was alone in the house, Constable Laurie entered, followed by Sergt. Borrows and three Constables.
A search warrant was read.
The police searched the house for two hours, and there betting slips were found.
They then searched Mrs Roche and, having found nothing, took her into custody, and conveyed her by tram to the Police Station, where she was released on bail.
The charge against her of having assisted in conducting a betting business at her house was dismissed by the Stipendiary Magistrate on 20th August.
DAMAGES FOR FALSE IMPRISONMENT
…
Constable Laurie gave evidence that on 5th August he entered at the back door of 149 Chatham Street, that he received from her 1/9d., and that she received from him a betting slip.
On 5th August, Mrs Roche was on her way to Liverpool from Scotland…
The jury…found that Constable Laurie was not actuated by malice or direct motive, but had actually been over-zealous; that he had no reasonable and probable ground for believing that Roche's house was used for betting, and that he did not honestly believe that he made bets with plaintiff.
(Police Chronicle , 1932)
For false imprisonment, Mrs Gertrude Anderson of Liverpool, has been awarded £200 damages against Det.
Sergt. Peter Woodhouse of the Liverpool Police…she told the  police that she did not think her husband was carrying out a strictly honest business.
Eventually she took some goods her husband had left at her lodgings to the Police Station.
As she was leaving work, she was taken to the Police Station, where without being cautioned, she was cross-examined by Sergt. Woodhouse.
She was kept in a cell from 2 p.m. until 8.30 p.m. when she was charged with unlawful possession of a pair of hairbrushes.
No evidence was offered against her and she was discharged after several remands.
(Police  Review  , 1932)
a special jury at Liverpool awarded Herbert Waring £25 against a Liverpool City Constable for assault and false imprisonment.
The Constable was walking along a busy thoroughfare when a crowd assembled owing to the breakdown of a motor car.
Waring was a member of the crowd and alleged that the Constable struck him, and when he refused his name and address, took him into custody on a charge of obstructing the traffic.
The next day Magistrates dismissed the informations against Waring.
(Police Review , 1923)
However, there were ways of avoiding court hazards while still underlining police power.
D. A. Cautions were used a lot.
They were always legal in the police force.
If he didn't want to go to court for a very minor offence, then you could caution him.
It wouldn't go on his criminal record.
It would be retained in police files but not in the criminal files — the superintendent would issue the caution.
Legal powers were reinforced by experience.
K. R. You might be in Park Lane and a fellow's walking towards you with a suitcase.
He might be a shopbreaker.
‘What's in your case?’
‘I've just come off the Isle of Man boat.’
‘What time did she dock?
Where did she dock?’
One or two questions to which you knew the answers and if you were satisfied: ‘Nice knowing you.
Bye.’
Law, however, legal procedure, could be tortuous.
In particular, there was a guy between police practice in the provinces and in the capital.
A. R. There was a vast difference in the provincial cities.
For instance, if a man came into the station and said, ‘The man next door has stolen a bottle of milk from my doorstep,’ in the Met., they would say: ‘This man has made an accusation.
He's entitled to have a hearing in court so that the matter can be dealt with.’
But here, we wouldn't do that.
If we found there was no basis in our opinion, we would scrub it.
In earlier years, kids trundling hoops or playing pitch-and-toss had been a target.
By the 1920s, it was street football.
T. D. The first time I saw a football was when a caseball hit a horse in the face, and the horse reared up.
So I did something.
Chased them, got one, took him in, and told him he would be summonsed for playing football in the street.
He was just cautioned by the superintendent.
If kids were playing football in the street, they had to accept your authority and get out of the way.
Ayers cites one such constable: ‘He was known as Hitler because of his moustache and being very cruel to kids playing football in the street.
It was nothing for him to take the ball off them and stick the knife in it to burst it.’
But in the folklore of Liverpool Police it was the ‘bucks’ who had always been the primary object of street powers.
P. E. ‘Bucks’ was the ordinary police talk for the working man or yobbo — the unruly kind of person that hung round street corners.
Young fellers about fourteen to twenty — hanging round the corners, making a noise, and upsetting the people in the houses.
There was Razor McGloshan's gang of bucks in Crown Street.
All the young men were bucks — a young buck in the old days used to be a gentleman.
Bucks and buckesses — below the par.
I only took the term up because it was general conversation in the police force.
You could assume that the bucks would present themselves for locking up.
Drunk and disorderly, playing football in the street — they were all bucks.
English law is commonly portrayed as adversarial, embodying a series of safeguards to prevent an accused from being wrongly convicted.
Innocence is presumed until guilt has been established by formal trial.
In real practice, law is very different for the majority of people, then and now, who appear before the Magistrates' Court.
(The old, more correct name,Police Court, is still emblazoned above the door of the city's main court-room.)
Being the wrong age, being in the wrong place at the wrong time, or being domiciled in a particular district reverse the assumptions of due process.
The suspect has little opportunity for demonstrating his or her innocence against any one of a medley of permissive street powers.
Although the courts might occasionally — usually for those with means — award damages against wrongful arrest and detention, the police in effect only arrested ‘guilty ‘people.
Street kids — and their elders, the Liverpool ‘bucks’— were of course inevitably guilty of whatever charge the patrolling constable thought appropriate.
DISCRETION
Street power was permissive.
The irony of police work is that the lowest of the low — the street constable, unlike in other ‘professional’ occupations, is the one who can exercise the maximum discretion at work.
He could always pick and choose over whom to arrest and on whom to give the Nelson touch.
T. D. You used your discretion all the time.
Not arrest if you didn't have to.
You'd see two fellows fighting in the street — you'd pull them up and send them on their way.
You'd see a drunk, and if he wasn't incapable, send him on his way.
You'd take in an incapable because if he fell in the roadway, he might get run over.
If he was incapable and vomiting and so on, you'd take him in for his own consideration.
If they were drunk and disorderly and so on, they only had themselves to blame.
You'd try to get rid of them, tell them to go away — until eventually you had to do something — couldn't ignore it.
A. T. You didn't have to lock drunks up.
I used to take them home on quite a number of occasions if I'd known that they lived in the immediate vicinity.
Take them home, get rid of them.
It's no criterion to arrest a man for being drunk.
You get no medals for that.
If a policeman felt like having a lock-up, he'd book them for obstruction.
No medals for having a lock-up if you were on nights.
You'd get off at six o'clock in the morning and you'd have to be in court at ten o'clock.
No gains at all from locking somebody up.
W. S. I've let plenty of people go.
I used to think, ‘What would you do if you were in his position?’
And if they were very poor, what satisfaction would you get from locking them up?
Two fellers fighting outside a pub, so grabbed them both.
They were older than me.
I was going to chase them.
Got their names and addresses.
One feller said he was from Great Homer Street.
Then we sent up to the Division —‘Will you check on this address?’— comes back, ‘Not known’.
No — I wouldn't take them in for fighting.
Discretion could also be tempered by an appreciation of the odds.
K. M. One time there was a big crowd in the street and two men fighting — about six-deep, the crowd.
I went in there, shouldered my way through the crowd.
This fight was going on in the middle of the road.
When I got on the edge of the road I said to them, ‘Who's winning?’
They were slogging away and pretty well worn-out.
So I went over and said, ‘That's all…break to your corners’— took it as a joke.
By that time, their wives had come out of the crowd and got hold of them, and were taking them away.
Law enforcement is often opposite to the requirements of peacekeeping.
Whatever the strictures from his commanders and from the virtuous, local middle class, and newspapers on enforcing the law, a constable with his wits about him recognized the expediency of a ‘live-and-let-live’ policy.
THE PRESSURE TO ARREST
Police forces have always had problems with measuring ‘efficiency’.
How do you measure the effectiveness of police work?
Inevitably, superior officers fall back on the ‘arrest rate’.
The more arrests on the street, independently of any concern with ‘keeping the peace’, the more efficient the police constable.
The Police Union, as always, articulated a pragmatic cynicism about the pressures for arrests.
Each policeman is supplied with a police court attendance card, on which is recorded the date of all attendances at police court in connection with charges or summonses, and each entry has to be initialled by the officer in charge of the station.
When the card is full, it is handed in to the station in exchange for a new one; the old card is kept for reference.
Innumerable cases have occurred in which young and zealous sub-divisional inspectors have used the police court attendance card of a constable as the only evidence worth having of the  constable's efficiency in the performance of his duty.
When the process of ‘waking things up a bit’ commences, reputations, and records of attendances at police court, are made and broken every day.
In one area, there was a wholesale slaughter of the innocents.
Policemen of twenty to twenty-five years' service were harassed from pillar to post in the hunt for improved returns of charges and summonses.
One after the other was called to report why he had not been to the police court for a long period, and threatened that if he did not do more work in the future he would lose pay.
Men were designated by superior officers as being lazy, inefficient, absolutely worthless, and whose only object in life was to go to the pay table on Wednesdays to receive their pay.
The following dialogue can be taken as representative of what frequently takes place:—
OFFICER.
I have sent for you this morning, Jones, because I find on looking up your record of attendances at police court that you have had neither a charge nor a summons during the last three years.
What explanation have you to give?
P.C. Well, Sir, I have always done my duty.
I have never had occasion to effect an arrest nor to summons any person.
OFFICER.
All rubbish!
What do you think you are paid for?
I never leave the station unless I witness some person or persons committing or about to commit some offences, minor or otherwise.
I could have summonses every day if I chose.
Do you mean to tell me that you never see any case of obstruction, street shouting, begging, carts and cycles with no lights, no offences against the motor car laws, or in other words, that everybody — men, women, and children — know the laws so well that they can avoid the many pit-falls?
You'll have to find another excuse.
P.C. Well, Sir, I have always endeavoured to keep my beat clean, and I have seen people committing perhaps but technical offences, but I have not thought them sufficiently serious to caution them.
I have cautioned a lot of people, and the caution always seems to be effective.
OFFICER.
In the future, every time you caution a person, enter the particulars in your notebook, and see he doesn't get a second caution, and also remember that it is not necessary to caution a person before summonsing or arresting him, as the case may be.
P.C. All right, Sir, but I always thought that it was more creditable to prevent crime and keep one's beat clean and free from nuisances or offences than to have charges or summonses of a trivial character.
I have always done my duty, as my record will show.
It is a clean record.
OFFICER.
Oh, yes!
You've got a clean record all right, but a man who never does anything never gets into trouble, so that's no argument.
P.C. Well, Sir, if I have neglected my duty in the past, why haven't my superior officers done their duty and made a defaulter of me.
I have never been a defaulter.
OFFICER.
You soon will be if I have any of your insolence.
Don't you dare to be insolent to me again.
Do you know you were on the verge of rank insubordination?
Go back to your duty, and remember what you're paid for.
Let us see the result on the Police Court attendance card, and when you do get a charge or a summons, I will send one of the young constables with you to show you the way to the Police Court, for I expect you have forgotten it.
Right turn, quick march!
One can imagine the feelings of a P.C. after such an interview, but worse still is the evil effect aimed at.
This particular P.C. may be a very strong-minded man and be determined to  withstand the pressure being brought upon him.
In course of time he finds that he is the pet antipathy of his superior officers, that he is made a butt for the amusement of other men on parade, and that if there is any unpleasant work or unpopular bear or point going vacant it falls to his lot to fill it.
His Sunday duties are arranged to his disadvantage, and the example of one or two others, is not, likely to be lost on his brother officers at the station.
(Bull's Eye , 1921)
Folk wisdom on policing recognizes the infinite possibilities in law enforcement.
Implementing every law on every occasion implies unlimited police resources.
But where constables under common law can be creative in their construction of nebulous charges — such as that of ‘obstruction’, there can be no end to the opportunities for street summonses and arrests.
The sane constable rapidly learnt to withstand the pressure from his seniors to work by the book.
Cutting Corners
Legal procedures were the preserve of the Instruction Book and of the advocates in court.
On the street, expediency and common sense taught a different style.
G. E. There's no question of cautioning — by saying, ‘I caution you and you have no need to say anything…’
You just say, ‘Come on’— speak to them in their own language and they'll understand you.
Somebody would give you a squeak as to who it was.
There was some street detritus which required more imagination than most.
Police folklore tells of one officer who, having found a dead body on the street at the end of his duty, shifted it on to the next beat.
Two days later, the body was still appearing on different beats.
T. B. Bloody pest was stray animals, stray dogs — people would come up and say they'd found a stray, and you'd have to take it off them, take their name and address.
You carried a cord around in your pocket and you'd take the dog to Wavertree Pinfold.
It got to be a bloody bind.
One day outside Aigburth Huts, waiting to go off at 3 p.m. on the afternoon shift, two of us on a bike job.
The lady came up — she was a member of the RSPCA — comes up with this dog on a piece of string.
Lucky Ted got it.
‘Right-ho’— and he knew the situation as well as I did.
‘What is your name, madam?’
Then a tram came down and off she trots.
Of course, as soon as her back is turned, we give the dog a kick and it shoots off.
The next day, there's an advert in the paper — that she'd found a black and white dog and handed it in to the police at Aigburth.
People enquired but there was no trace of it.
So there was a right hoo-ha.
Everybody was questioned about it.
I said to Ted: ‘We'll say that when she went for the tram, the dog run after her.’
So he writes it down and everybody writes bits about what's happened, and thus eventually a few questions were asked and reply came from the Super.
‘The matter is now closed.
The only one that seems to have used his sense in this situation was the dog.’
Not every incident on the street contained the potential for legal action.
The officer's historical role as a street cleaner occasionally required a measure of dexterity and imagination.
Instant Justice
In any case the law was often viewed as a last resort, a clumsy, time-consuming, bureaucratic impediment that hindered order-maintenance on the street.
Its procedures often seemed too specific to be worth the candle of locking someone up.
B. T. In those days, they had nowt to do on the Sunday night.
It used to be the girls’ parade.
They would all walk down Dale Street, down to the Pier Head, and all the girls would be out.
They'd get a bit cheeky sometimes and have to be checked.
Now and again, you'd get one start fighting.
You might give them a clip round the ear.
If you were too soft with them, they wouldn't move.
S. H. Patrolling up Prescot Road during the war, if I saw a light on, I used to shout, ‘Put that bloody light out,’ and if nobody put the light out, we used to let fly with a brick.
They come down then and says, ‘Who's broken my window?’ and I used to say: ‘Yes, I broke the bloody window — go in the station and tell them you wouldn't put the light out,’and they got a summons on top of it.
Arrest, too, could involve both formal and informal procedures.
There was a formal process for dealing with the arrested.
T. D. Drunk-in-charge would stand out — slumped in the car, head out and sick all over the car.
You could see yourself that he was drunk.
Took him to the station and routine happened — they had to call the bridewell surgeon and the drunk could call his own doctor, fixing bail and so on.
But situations were also encountered that had not been foreseen by the Instruction Book.
W. S. The Black Maria used to call at different stations at two in the morning and take the prisoners from there to Cheapside.
One night at Rose Hill, there was a feller kept making a bloody nuisance of himself — kept kicking the cell door.
Sergeant says, ‘Go and take his bloody shoes off.
’ Took his shoes off and Jock come with the Black Maria in the morning.
‘Put your shoes on!’
Put them on?
He wouldn't put them on.
Sergeant says, ‘Go down and bring Sweeney and two bloody big fellers.
’ I used to laugh at their antics.
It was a wet morning so they just took him to the corner and ran him to the corner of Richmond Row in his bare feet — brought him back —‘Put your shoes on!’
Where the law or the Instruction Book was hidebound, a little imagination was a useful supplement.
MOVING ON: LEGAL AND PHYSICAL COERCION
Few confrontations resulted in arrests.
Threat was usually sufficient in cowing the street people.
Most memories of both police and public were of ‘moving on’.
T. D. We were pretty heavy on individuals in the street.
We never allowed two or three to gather on the corner.
We just moved them on.
We used to chase them.
Some we chased but it was only a matter of chasing them out of the way.
H. P. You got plenty of violence when the pubs let out — but you were on your own.
The only times you were allowed to double up — that's two beats together — down Scotland Road, say, where two would be allowed together, until they'd cleared the street after the pubs had been let out.
Normally, when the pubs let out — pubs on every corner, just drinking dens, they used to let out and they'd all be full of drink just yapping and talking.
But we used to move them on immediately.
We didn't give them a chance to cause trouble.
If they started to cause trouble, we just asked them to move on and they appreciated it.
They accepted it.
You'd give them a quartet of an hour letting them say their good-nights — then you'd start moving them on, not aggressive.
They'd all see sense.
Sometimes, some of them would try and be clever and just step off the pavement.
They were never allowed to be naughty.
It was a good game between them and us.
We bore them no malice.
A. M. The worst part of the job was chasing fellers off the corners, a crowd of drunks, especially when you were the only policeman.
One of them might dare to do something but if you used your head — you learn in time — you'd be all right.
The stick and the fist backed up the array of legal powers.
T. B. By yourself normally on the beat but on Saturday night till midnight, you had to go in pairs, like in Gerrard Street, where they didn't like a bobby.
It would cause a fight if you went up there.
We had fellows who had come straight out of the First World War, afraid of nothing.
One fellow called Birtles, who worked with me — he never looked at you straight, a fisherman from Grimsby.
I used to come up Chisenhall Street on my beat and I could tell when Birtles turned the corner.
The fellows went like that off the corners — never asked to move.
They just knew.
Folk memory, rumour, and first-hand experience combined to warn the street people that obduracy in the face of police pressure offered little profit.
‘The State’ on the Street
Moving on was a ritual, rarely leading to either conflict or arrest.
It was important in that it signified the gulf between the police and the policed.
Police practices brought an appreciation of the omnibus power of the ‘state’ home to the nooks and crannies of the  cobbled streets of the English city.
The rite of the move-on constantly reaffirmed relative social status.
A. M. ‘Bucks’ were always chased when a policeman came along.
In fact, they were so well drilled that when I went to C Division — Essex Street — you'd wait on the corner of a back street and there'd be a crowd of fellers there and within no time, before you could get near them, they'd all have disappeared.
But the older men — forty and upwards — they got off the side walk and paced up and down the road — deferential.
They were afraid in that some time or another, some of the fellers on the corner had been locked up for obstruction.
I'd walk up to the corner of Mill Street — a very scruffy street, and there was a gang of fellers standing on the corner and some of them were sitting on the pub sill and others standing around.
There was a bobby on the beat facing me, waiting for me to come to him, and when I got there, the lads are still sitting there.
So I said, ‘Come with me.
I walked up to these fellers, a few paces, and just stood in front of them, looked at them — they knew what was wanted —‘Clear off!’
It was a ritual acknowledged by both sides.
Pat Ayers quotes one of those same street people: ‘Just say you were standing on the corner, now if you had seen a policeman coming over the bridge…you automatically moved.
You didn't wait for him to come down.
He'd say to you ‘Move’.
And you just walked through the street and he'd carry on by.
And by the time he got to the next corner, we'd be back on the corner.'
T. D. There were always twenty or thirty or so bucks hanging around the corner on Nichols Street, and if they saw you coming, they'd all move.
It was no use snarling at them.
They'd just move without it.
Authority was not to be challenged; the personal status of the constable as well as the symbolic power of the state was not to be affronted.
P. P. I used to go down a street and perhaps a week previously I had locked that fellow up and I used to walk past him and if they said anything to me I'd say, ‘Shut up and get inside.’
Or as long as they said nothing, I'd say nothing; or if they started talking, I'd say, ‘Listen, inside you or get about your business.’
Course if they started cutting up rough, then I'd cut up rough but as long as they didn't interfere with me, I didn't interfere with them.’
But rituals, of their nature, lead to boredom, and minor rebellion by the beat constable.
A. T. I used to go round and there'd be crowds of people standing at the corners by the pub, leaning against it.
If I got a new beat, I'd go round the beat and say, ‘Get to the kerb!’ and they'd move to the kerb reluctantly.
As soon as I had gone they were back.
So I got fed up with this.
So I used to say to each crowd: ‘Look, when you see me or see my inspector, move to the kerb and stay there.
What you do after I've gone, I couldn't care less.’
That was how I used to treat them.
I didn't use to curse or swear at them.
They used to do that: the chief inspector walking  down on a Saturday morning in full regalia and one of these fellows would nod and they'd always walk to the corner, and the Chief wouldn't say anything about it because they were on the corner and not causing any obstruction.
Justifications for the move-ons, too, had become ritualized.
The Victorian Watch Committee had soon learnt that its mail-bag consisted mainly of complaints about kids and their elders ‘doing nothing’ on the street.
Working-class leisure offended the susceptibilities of their betters.
B. T. We had to make sure — it was the strictness on our part — that gangs weren't allowed to gather on the corner.
There was always complaints coming in from the people who lived in the area about the gangs making a noise on the corner.
So you just got rid of them.
What actually happened was that they would disappear before you got there.
They might come back after you had gone.
But they wouldn't stand there.
If they did, if one was half-drunk, it always ended up with him being pitched in — becoming disorderly and arrested.
Moving on was a prophylactic, a social cleansing function, keeping one's beat clean.
K. R. I've moved on people sleeping rough — perhaps take him a hundred yards from the shop wherever he was —‘On your way.
’ If they were drunk and disorderly and so on, they only had themselves to blame.
You'd try to get rid of them, tell them to go away — until eventually you had to do something — couldn't ignore it.
A. M. Drunks could be a messy business.
A lot were passive.
‘Come on, you're being locked up.’
‘I'm not drunk.’
You might get a real bad one and then you had a rough time but mostly they gave way and very often, if you got a drunk, another policeman saw you were having some difficulty.
He'd help.
I've locked up as many as two to three in one evening — not all that common.
Perhaps one a week when you are on afternoons.
Main reason for locking up drunks was keeping the streets clean.
A lot of these drunks were stopping women — thinking that any woman on Lime Street was a prostitute.
That in the main was true but not always of course.
A drunk, if he's a man of any physique at all, is ready to pick a fight with anyone — bump into people and so on — and with policemen then, it was a matter of pride —‘Drunk on your beat — look at that man loafing on your beat.’
Occasionally, inhibitions released by drink or instant rebellion against the ritual of subservience would flare into sudden challenge to the constable's authority.
A. M. I went into Lime Street one night at ten o'clock and found a crowd of lads on the corner of Skelhorne Street coming out of the pub.
I said to them, ‘Come along.
Move along, please.
’ They all looked at me and suddenly, horror struck me: the two or three policemen normally along there had disappeared — had taken a prisoner along to the station — and there wasn't another policeman within half a mile.
I just stood there solid as a rock and this feller looked at me as if to say, ‘For two pins…’
But then the older men in the crowd persuaded them to move along.
B. A. I've had a few scuffles — all the men have.
But if it was a case of ‘I'm going to get you’ your dignity wouldn't allow you to let them get the better of you.
You'd manage somehow.
But if he got away, that was just too bad for you.
P. H. I've been on the street when helmets have gone flying.
But out motto was: ‘Get your man.
’ Didn't matter if he was guilty or innocent, if you wanted him you got him.
Many a time a fellow would get away with a caution.
I never went looking for trouble — it normally came to me.’
In any case, for the locals, a fight with a copper could provide a welcome break in the street corner tedium.
K. R. I've been in tough houses — they wouldn't come out to help us but they'd form a ring and let you fight — they wouldn't just all join in to back somebody up.
Cleaning the beat meant fitting each new situation into past patterns, trying to handle them according to traditional recipes.
Each encounter might be new but there were adaptable, tried, and trusted tactics, an array of legal and police craft tools.
CONTROLLING KIDS ON THE STREET
Children were the normal target of street policing.
In a historically sanctified relationship, street kids and the police were in casual, intermittent, hostile confrontation.
As an object of street policing, they posed special problems.
There was considerable pressure for actions against them from a sanctimonious middle class, some of whose members held extraordinary delusions.
The due process of law could be a bit of an ass when you arrested someone under age.
the Rev. Eric Treacy of Edge Hill, Liverpool, strongly criticised the Juvenile Court system and urged that the Police should carry canes.
Advocating a greater use of the birch he said ‘Young offenders are leaving the juvenile courts laughing at the Magistrates and the Police.
I think Policemen should carry small canes, which I think would probably be very effective.
We must face the problem of flabby parentage.
(Police Review , 1937)
One of the many ways in which grown-ups take a mean advantage of the innocence of childhood is by creating bogies as aids to authority.
Among the bogies foolishly trotted out for this purpose is the imaginary policeman…
Not long ago we reported a case where a child died of fright caused by the approach of a Police officer in Uniform.
(Police Review , 1937)
Can't the Watch Committee…rid the police of the hooligan element…gangs of young and hefty idlers squat on the pavement or lurk in subways to annoy passers-by, to play tricks on defenceless shop assistants, or to gamble in the face of the public.
(Liverpool Echo , 1919)
The time has gone when a poor ragged child would take to flight at the sight of a policeman.
(Police Chronicle , 1920)
A. T. Kids used to jeer and pull their tongues out.
Occasionally, you'd come  across a child, mostly down by the canal.
I got one down there once for some reason.
I asked him what his name was and he said, ‘Tommy Jones’ or something, and I said, ‘Who lives next door?’and he gave me another name, and I said, ‘Oh, no she doesn't.
’ He said, ‘She does’‘All right, I'll take you home.
’ And I walked all the way up Great Homer Street.
But he didn't live at that address and eventually he took me to his own home.
What I used to do with a youngster was to knock at the door and his mother would say, ‘Oh, God, what have you done?’
I'd say, ‘Is his father in?’
‘Yes, sir.
‘Can I see him a minute?’
I'd tell the father what he'd done and what I brought him home for.
I'd say, ‘Can leave it to you to deal with him? ''Yes’— he'd give him a clip round the earhole.
You always took children home and let the parents deal with them.
Normal to call you ‘Sir’— very respectful the parents.
W. R. The kids were all scared of bobbies in those days.
We wouldn't let them meet on the corners because the people in the houses on the corners always used to complain of the row that they made — used to chase them.
W. P. With kids, I used to carry my gloves in my hand and without any fingers in, and I used to catch them with the gloves if they were cheeky, and if they got cheekier still, I used to take them home for a belt.
Not much you could charge them with.
You couldn't say, ‘He made faces at me and swore at me.’
Mind you, then a child was responsible at seven years of age.
P. E. When we were at Old Swan and had to go to Fairfield, we used to pass the end of one of the little streets there.
The kids used to be standing there one time — well, we hit them a few times with the cape and it had a bottle in it.
They didn't stand there any longer.
Or we cuffed them under their chin — and after about half a dozen times, they never stopped there again.
They hopped it.
There was some ambivalence about kids.
Beats varying by social class might mean a different perception.
Or memory might take on a rose-coloured tinge — as with one officer who had commonly thumped prostitutes:
S. H. The kids — many a time you would go about with a dozen bloody sweets in your pocket.
When the mothers were taking the kids across the road, you had to hold the traffic up.
I used to go with half a ton of sweets in my back pocket.
I used to say to the wife: ‘Look at this bloody lot.
If I don't take them, I'll offend the bloody kiddies.’
It was possible to have a rather different relationship with kids.
For thirty years a charity, financed in part from police pay, had helped supplement the clothing of the city poor.
P. H. Police Aided Clothing Association — chipped in a few bob from your wages.
You'd be walking the beat and you'd see some kid with his backside hanging out of his trousers.
Call him over.
Get his address.
Take him home.
‘Form  150’— went through channels and then rubber-stamped and approved.
Take the kid to the big stores and they'd be rigged out from top to bottom — all stamped PACA.
W. S. When we were on nights, we used to give two hours free, seven to nine, with collecting boxes.
When you were on days, you had a bunch of forms.
You could get stopped by women, saying: ‘Can I have the police clothes?’
You would mark down how many children she had and her circumstances.
Then she would be sent for.
In the parade room were all the clothes, and the mothers were stripping all the kids naked and fitting them out — the place stunk with corduroy trousers.
Larking about in the street reflected the relative freedom that a world without walls gave the children of the city's urban poor.
It was a partial escape from the cramped authority of the home.
Street autonomy might readily be restricted by the patrolling constable.
A feud would often develop in which the uniformed officer was ‘taunted from a safe distance with nicknames and insults such as‘beetlecrusher’, ‘narker’, or ‘copper-copper wax-ass’ In turn, the police officer came to view all kids as trouble — to be chased.
The ritual of insult-chase-insult-chase was a characteristic of the life of Liverpool street kids from the onset of the New Police to the present day.
The palliative of the PACA was given more importance as a piece of social engineering than its reception by the street kids warranted.
RESPECT OR FEAR?
Social order on the street had the characteristics of a truce, a lull in which warring parties tacitly held back from strife.
It was a fragile relationship, interpreted in contrary ways by different constables.
To some, street tranquillity signified popularity, deference, and respect, a ‘thank you’ for the service practices of the patrol officer.
Another might recognize that genuflection as one of fear.
T. D. There was no abuse from children.
None at all.
I think children had a considerable amount of respect for the police in those days.
They either called you ‘officer’ or ‘sir’.
The women particularly addressed you as ‘sir’.
W. S. Did seven years down Scotland Road.
You got respect.
You got abuse from a drunk — well, you dealt with him depending on how far he went before you decided to lock him up.
But you did get respect from people.
You used to help them, if you could.
Next to nothing in the way of violence.
The worst place was Great Homer Street.
There was a pub on every corner and policemen who drank knew every one round the division.
Few fights — occasionally, you'd get a man who'd been gashed in the face with a bottle, that had been drunk in the bar and you'd be called in and you'd take him to hospital.
Ritualized obedience, and the constable's streetwise judgement, could in any case often limit if not prevent street conflict.
At the end of the day, there was no ambivalence about the key to the officer's authority.
J. V. The police weren't popular around the Bogs in Garston, when I was being shown around there with Jim Bealey, when a brick came flying over.
If there'd been any more trouble, we would just have drawn our staffs and knocked all hell out of them.
B. A. One time, when I was coming down Commercial Road, there was a crowd gathered at the bottom of Regent Street — you accepted the fact that you had to deal with it — and this crowd had been watching a couple fighting.
I had my cape over my shoulder and a milk bottle.
They co-operated by going off to fight somewhere else.
In the cameos of street life, certain characters appeared larger than life, as the source of ritualized conflict.
Mary Jane Worty appears in several accounts as a ‘street character’, an individual who summed up in her behaviour all the contradictoriness of street life, deference combined with challenge.
M. B. There were all sorts of people in the old Chinatown area.
We often got into trouble with foreign seamen that came there and they started making up to the Chinamen's wives.
In consequence, trouble started, and arrests were made for drunkenness and there was one woman there, she was a very big woman, at least six foot or more, and she wore a man's jersey and a man's cap.
If there was any trouble where a young policeman was concerned, she would get going with a whistle and summon assistance.
She was always on our side.
A great big strong woman.
There was another woman — Mary Jane Worty.
She was a barrow woman and these barrow women were as strong as horses.
They were out selling fruit or whatever and they were immensely strong women.
Mary Worty had a habit of getting drunk and then getting into fights and her face was criss-crossed with cuts and she would get in the window of her bedroom, start giving the history of people all the way down and then they'd all get out in crowds.
They'd be throwing bottles and stones at her.
Somebody would come rushing down to the station: ‘Mary Worty's out.’
And the Sergeant would come ‘You, you, and you — up the street — right away.’
So up we'd go and we'd have to keep the crowd back and the object was to wait for Mary to come out for some more beer which was the pub across the road, and when she did, grab her.
It usually took four policemen to control her.
She put one policeman in hospital.
She had a daughter, Rosemary Worty, who looked up to me because I locked her up one night.
(Very often this happens to those people.
They come into contact, and they accept you as one of themselves, even as a friend, though you've locked them up.)
Years later, when I was an inspector, a horrible apparition — she was a prostitute — stopped me.
This person stepped out in front of me and she said, ‘You don't remember me, do you, sir?’
So I said ‘No.’
‘I'm Rosemary Worty’— so much to my horror!
I said, ‘How's your mother?’
‘Oh, she's gone away from Upper Pitt Street.
She's not well at all.
She misses all her old friends.’
And she had battered half of them.
On one particular occasion, when I left the force, I went to the Magistrate's Clerk's Department.
I was talking to a woman and she was saying that young people weren't the same in her day.
She said, ‘I was born in Upper Pitt Street and I remember the hard times we had.’
So I said, ‘I was a PC in that area.’
‘Do you remember Mary Jane Worty?’
‘I certainly do!’
‘Well, I remember one day, there was an awful row and a crowd gathered and Mary Jane Worty said: ‘I'll come down as long as that young PC there takes me into Argyle Street Bridewell.’
She came down and this young PC walked her into the bridewell.’
I said, ‘I'll tell you something.
I was that young PC.’
She came with me for no reason at all, whereas it would have taken quite a few other PCs to shift her.
I had a similar experience in the Byrom Street.
There was another woman who was a real fighter and she came in with me as quietly as can be — perhaps because I looked so young.
Given the major schisms within the lower class of the street — encompassing both the collective solidarity of a community in relation to outsiders and the entrepreneurship by which individuals ensured their personal survival, and the schisms of age and gender — police relations with that public were inevitably confusing and paradoxical.
Within the minutiae of the constable's experience, policing the street daily met consent and at the other pole, antagonism.
THE STICK AND THE FIST
But there could be more serious explosions.
Apparently random violence in certain streets enlivened the working day — but sometimes left physical scars.
Or, more expected, there might be a scuffle during an arrest.
S. H. Used the truncheon many a time, especially on Lime Street.
Used to hit them on the arm, never on the head.
Take the strength out their arm.
Always used to draw my truncheon if I went into a place where I thought there was a burglar but never actually used it to hit them.
You'd use your hands in a scuffle outside a pub.
What I used to do was to get hold of them behind their hand.
They'd be on their back in no time.
One day to the ‘Old Bug and Glue-Pot’ I hurried,
By request of the potman who was looking most worried.
A man who refused to pay for his beer,
Was drunk, and so I told him to ‘clear.’
‘Do you know who I am?
I'm Basher Brown,
I could eat men like you for a dud half-a-crown.’
My ju-jitsu training was needed already,
Yet my knees appeared to be rather unsteady.
How it all happened I now don't quite know,
Except that my nose stopped a terrible blow;
Several more in the ribs, and a thump on the jaw —
Then I peaceful slept on that public house floor.
(Police Review , 1933)
W. S. Rose Hill Police Station on a Saturday night was packed with prisoners.
All our stuff was hard stuff, fighting and drunks.
We had an old inspector, a Manx man, he used to laugh when he saw them coming in with the blood pouring down their heads, fighting and everything.
I got told to take care of a young Scotch bobby, not far from my own home.
‘Will you take Mowat with you, Jock?
There's a feller putting through a plate glass window in a pub in Crosshall Street.’
I says, ‘We can't have that — we'll have to get the feller.
’ We get hold of him, got him to Byrom Street.
The usual crowd come.
Getting near Richmond Row going up to Rose Hill Police Station, and a big feller comes to Mowat's side appealing to him to let his mate go.
So I whispered to Mowat to collar the other feller.
Bloody good job he didn't though — James Molloy, a ship's fireman.
We get up and Molloy gets hold of Mowat again and Mowat swings round battering him right across the road.
Could he fight, Mowat!
Flattens Molloy and lays him out.
Mowat isn't half going for him.
Somebody runs out of the crowd and hits Mowat on the back of the neck.
Mowat goes mad then.
As soon as Molloy saw that, he got Mowat and split his nose.
Mowat goes mad, loses his cap.
I blow my whistle.
He's got Molloy there on the ground.
He didn't half go into him with his stick.
Fellers come running, bobbies come running and it was a right old dust-up.
That was the only time I'd seen a stick being used.
It was all due to that person running out of the crowd.
It seems likely the use of violence by police officers is much understated in this account.
There is some evidence that the history of policing in England and Wales contains much more resort to the stick and fist than is recognized in the orthodox accounts.
The stick, in particular, backed up by the practical invisibility of the night beat, was a useful device to save on unpaid overtime.
The inducements for the Victorian police officer to use that strategy were not that different from those of night-beat patrolling between the wars.
The policeman could employ a good deal of violence on his beat to avoid the need for tiresome court appearances.
After an eight hour [night]patrol, it was only to be expected that the policeman would prefer resting to hanging around the courts waiting to bring petty offenders to book.
A simple push might suffice to move on a street seller or a drunk.
A degree of violence might also be sufficient to control certain types of behaviour for which conviction was difficult or unlikely.
The stick itself (Emsley, ‘Police Violence’, 129), was a last resort.
You never used it where a fist would do or a belt would do.
But there were occasions.
W. S. I tried to avoid using the stick.
Ran up against it once.
We had a bit of a rough do.
I was on Fontenoy Street.
Coming down was Tony Butcher — he was a good boxer.
He and his brother sold ice-cream.
‘Do you want an ice-cream, Jock?’
So I got down an entry, eating it.
When I come out, there's a gang on the corner of  Scotland Road.
They took to their heels and ran up the road.
So people looked at me and I ran after them.
Turned on me.
Had to draw the stick — it was the only way to save myself.
Or there could be a spontaneous mass eruption.
K. R. There was one occasion when we took about ten in.
There was an Argentine sailing ship in the river and the sailors came ashore, and then made their way to a dance-hall in Great George Street, where our Liverpool lads were foxtrotting and waltzing.
The Argentinian sailors taught our girls to do the tango and South American dances.
The Liverpool lads got the brush-off and were annoyed.
Went up there the following day and they came back armed with all sorts of things — knives and cudgels — and they went up there and a real fight developed.
I'm 200 yards away on my beat.
When I call in at the station, the sergeant says, ‘Great George Street — riot on’.
I'd only got half way and I heard the row going on, so I cut across and met them.
They were being chased downwards.
There was I alone by myself.
The Liverpool lads were chasing the sailors downhill.
One of the sailors hit me with a piece of gun cable, heavy, wire-armoured cable with a knot on one end.
He hit me round the back and the knot on the chest.
I was gasping for breath.
By then, bobbies were coming from everywhere — and we filled the bridewell with sailors.
Charged with ‘riotous and tumultuous assembling to the terror of His Majesty's subjects’.
Chief Inspector of CID took charge and charged them all and then diplomacy came in and they went to court, discharged, back on the ship, and away.
Then there were occasions that could be predicted long in advance.
The annual rituals of Orange and Hibernian celebrations were of course occasions when clashes were inevitable.
T. D. Orange Lodges had their processions — be an occasional explosion when someone tried to dodge between you and they decided that once the procession started, nobody must cross the bows.
S. S. The only bit of crowd trouble we had was the Catholics on the north side of the division and the Orangemen on the south side; when the 12th of July was approaching there used to be a bit of trouble.
They used to meet in Bold Street and stone each other.
We just chased them off.
Then there was trouble in Netherfield Road, round where the Orange bands were.
There'd been some trouble up there between the Catholics and the Protestants and we were ordered to put a line across the road and were ordered to take out our truncheons.
on the night of March 3rd, he [Detective Sergeant Kelly]and another officer named Bardely saw Underhill pushing a hand-cart on Duke Street, Liverpool.
Underhill stopped in front of a lock-up on Dale Street, opened the door and then began carrying out large cardboard cartons which he placed on the hand-cart…
Bardely intercepted him before he had gone many yards…
Underhill whipped out a jemmy from his pocket and began  striking left and right.
‘We closed with him and the jemmy having been knocked away, he started fighting and kicking.
In a struggle on the ground, my raincoat was torn from top to bottom and Bardely exclaimed ‘He's biting my little finger off.’
I got my hand on his jaw and forced it open.
Underhill then turned on me and bit me on the back of the hand.
A man in the crowd that was watching, kicked Underhill on the head and this caused him to release his hold.
(News of the World , 1931)
It wasn't always the humble constable who resorted to the fist or stick.
W. S. We had a chap with us called Bob Freeborough, a Super.
— family were all boxers.
He used to go along Great Homer Street and used to get the fellers lined up — challenge anybody.
‘If you beat me, you can go.
If you don't you're right away into Rose Hill Station.’
Some officers, used to patrolling the ‘bobby-bashing streets’, were much more prone to start with the truncheon.
It was taken for granted that where the ‘bucks’ predominated, the stick was the first resort, and the law an afterthought.
T. B. Some fellows had a hell of a time, in the rough quarter.
But they don't mind.
Round the Docks and St Anne's Street, batting dockers and labourers.
There was some people in Reading Street off Lambeth Road.
There's a public house on the corner called the Lighthouse.
Next to it, there's a street, Regent Street, with balconies.
Sergeant and I used to go up there every night.
There was always a free fight in one house or another.
We used to get mixed up with the fight.
Throw them down the bloody banisters and then lock them up.
Hill Street used to be a problem, with bucks and bobby-beating.
Used to waylay the bobbies in Hill Street.
They'd think nothing of going into them.
Essex Street was a tough quarter because you had bobby-beaters there.
Indeed, some senior officers taught the new recruits to use the stick in a manner appropriate for the bucks.
G. E. Policemen in those days, particularly like me who had been away to sea, were a bit rough.
We didn't carry batons for ornaments.
We used them.
You had to do it.
I remember when after a few months in uniform duty, walking the beat, I was on West End Road, next to the Olympic Theatre, where there had been a building site and there was Collins World Fair there.
A great place for young fellers to go after they come out of the pub and there was always trouble there.
There'd be fighting amongst themselves.
There'd be twenty or thirty fellers fighting in the grounds.
Well, you don't argue with a drunken man when he's fighting — baton, ‘Clonk!’
I used to teach the young coppers afterwards.
They were afraid to hit a man on the skull.
You should hit him on the head, see some blood running — wouldn't stun him at all.
The old coppers who I knew — they used to hit hard enough to stun them, as hard as a butcher hits a cow before he kills it.
I knew about that and they hit them, they'd go down and stay down.
Mind you, it meant that the bridewell sergeant had to make sure that the surgeon was on duty  to sew their heads up, a few stitches, 'cos you had to sew their heads up.
You had to split the skull.
It was rough but people were used to that type of thing.
standing terrified by the door, I saw an officer lean forward on his horse and hit a neighbour with his truncheon above the eyes, heard the blow like the thump of wood on a swede turnip.
The man ran crouching, hands on his face, into a wall and collapsed.
My mother grabbed me, screamed after the charging police, fled into the shop and slammed the door.
For half a lifetime afterwards the same man stayed amongst us, but did little work after.
Something about him seemed absent ‘They knocked him silly’, old people said, in the dockers' strike.’
(R. Roberts,The Classic Slum , 94)
T. B. I was at Lawrence Road, and on Saturday night, there used to be bedlam outside the Pavilion Theatre and there were fights between drunks.
It was the Irish Protestants and Catholics — they used to knock hell out of each other.
You had to be careful around that part of the world.
There was like big tenement places.
There would be all sorts of things rattling down on you — railings and chamber pots and lavatory pots.
They'd turn on you together.
So a sergeant named Jimmy Barlow — he took us all down.
We lined up across the street and he said: ‘You keep in line and if you knock anyone down, leave him and keep going.’
Line with the rest, and if there's anybody on the floor, you step over them.
Don't give them a thump.
Stay together!’
And we walked down clubbing right and left, and we cleared the streets and those that fell to the floor were carried off by those who had hidden behind when we went past.
That happened a few times.
Nobody seems to remember them now.
For some, the fist was an alternative to the stick, especially where a conflict with a buck had taken on the form of a personal feud.
W. S. We had a bobby, Basil Rose, afraid of nothing.
He says, ‘I'll fix bloody Sweeney.’
He does the worst thing he could have done.
He sees Sweeney in broad daylight in a pub on Gerrard Street, ‘I want you out here, Sweeney.’
All the tram-cars and traffic was held up while Basil battered him all over Byrom Street.
Put him in hospital for two months.
But Basil got summonsed for wounding — an inspector in a tram-car had seen it and went and gave evidence against him.
Basil got the sack and next we heard Basil was trying to capture Rommel with Lord Lovatt's son.
I think he got killed at El Alamein.
Basil Rose, a Constable in the Liverpool Police, was indicted to the Quarter Session for unlawful wounding.
Rose, giving evidence, said Sweeney had been refused a drink at three pubs and left a fourth.
When he told him he would be arrested for being drunk, Sweeney butted him in his left eye and brought his knee up to his groin.
They both fell to the ground and Sweeney kicked and struggled.
There was a hostile crowd and to save himself and prevent Sweeney from escaping, Rose hit him twice with his baton.
He also struck him when Sweeney tried to escape on the way to the Bridewell.
Rose was found guilty of common assault and fined £10.
(Police Review , 1937)
Occasionally, the constable could enjoy the privileges of a spectator.
The Sweeney family sometimes played a folk-devil role.
W. S. They terrorized Scotland Road.
In Scotland Place, there was an ice-cream shop called Capaldi's and Tony Butcher was there with his girlfriend on a Saturday night.
Sweeney came in and assaulted him.
Tony Butcher says: ‘I'll see you in Linehall Street.
’ We get tipped off.
‘Right, what time's the big occasion?’
So three of us went around.
I was smoking a pipe, sat down on a doorstep.
Sweeney and Tony Butcher came in — all the crowd was there.
We were on the doorsteps, the bobbies having a smoke.
They came up and fought for half an hour till they was both flat on their backs, on the waste land there.
Then we all packed up.
It was good fun, that.
In a rough-house, there were some constables who, even their colleagues recognized, could go over the top.
W. S. Saturday nights, there were battles everywhere.
We had a mobile reserve at St Anne's Street.
They had a blue van, and ropes, and lamps — six policemen and a sergeant — did for a week in turn.
We got a call to a pub — near the Dock Road.
There was a big Irish bobby, and the sergeant in the station said: ‘Watch that fellow!
You're unlucky to get with him.
He's brutal — Birtles.’
We came to the pub.
We all piled out at the back.
Birtles gets there before me and it was like a hurricane sweeping through, ‘Thwack, bash!’
They're lying on the floor and there's blood everywhere, broken glass.
He dropped a fellow at the bat of an eyelid.
Hickson alleged that while in the police station where he had been taken by P.C. Torney on a charge of having stolen 10&shilling from the pocket of his clothes in a cubicle at the Corporation Swimming Baths, the constable gave him a violent blow to the eye, and followed this up by two blows to the body…he was subsequently acquitted on this charge.
P.C. Torney claimed that Hickson's story was fabrication, and said the youth was prancing around the room at the police station, boxing and boasting of his prowess as a boxer…as a result of the boisterous behaviour, he caught his eye on a window-ledge.
(Liverpool Daily Post , 1936)
K. M. On one occasion, there was a chap — not been long on the job — ex-Artilleryman.
He was getting on a bit, transferred in to the Mounted.
Used to call him ‘Major’.
One time we were on some stunt on the airfield and the people were encroaching on the ground and we were told to push them back.
Walked towards them and they started to go back, flock away.
This chap, Major, when he heard the order, he got his big staff out — our staffs were about three foot long — and he was going along waving his staff about, and laying into people.
A couple of us went over to him and said, ‘Put that flaming thing away.’
He thought he was doing right.
We'd have cracked somebody's head if we'd used them.
Violence against bucks, male and female, could always be rationalized.
S. H. I was in Lime Street one night, and a prostitute came along there.
I said to  her: ‘I saw you talking to that fellow, and I'd warned you.’
Do you know what she did?
She stepped right in my face.
I looked around and I hit her such a bloody fourpenny one that I knocked her flying.
She went on the ground and I picked her up and a couple of fellows came along, saying, ‘Do you want any help, officer?’
I says, ‘Just give us a hand to this Box.’
I locked her up for soliciting, disorderly behaviour, and assault.
She says to the sergeant, ‘Look at my face.
’ I says, ‘Tell the sergeant what you've done to me.
You dirty so-and-so, you stepped right in my face.’
Sergeant says to her, ‘If I'd been there, I'd have done the same.’
Successful tests of bullet-proof shields have been carried out by members of the Liverpool City Police Force…policemen armed with these, faced with equanimity revolver bullets fired by colleagues.
Two men, each carrying a heavy shield on his left arm, rushed as storm troops at the supposed criminal gunmen, firing themselves through a slit in the shield.
Eye protections are provided in the shield, and tearbombs are added ammunition.
(Police Chronicle , 1928)
Documenting such violence in police-public relations through the medium of oral history is especially difficult.
On one hand, experiences of the beat could differ greatly.
An officer who spent his career patrolling a middle-class suburb would only in extreme circumstances be involved in a physical encounter.
Conversely, in the inner city, the use of the stick could be a regular practice.
However, the picture is confused further.
On no other topic were these former officers of the Liverpool City so reticent.
A few took pride in their resort to stick and fist.
Most, however, felt that such practices were not topics to be made available for public scrutiny.
Similarly, the information they provided on the question of bribery was open to some reservations.
‘BEWARE OF THE MAN WITH THE BOTTLE’
You were not likely to get rich from policing the street.
Inducements from the public were rare.
Surviving on the social margins did not allow much surplus to use as a bribe.
There might be the very occasional gift for a personal service, but the bottle of beer from a few householders and especially from the publicans was the only obvious economic transaction, and was rarely ennobled as a ‘payment’ for services rendered.
D. A. Never had any gifts.
I did all my service round Garston.
There was never any call for inducements because there was really nothing for people to break the law with.
They had nothing.
People on the parish only got ten shillings a week to live on and I often used to wonder how those who got drunk could afford it.
K. M. Bribes weren't what you might call rife.
Bottle of beer's not a bribe.
It was the custom — a given thing.
Nobody's ever offered me a bribe.
The pint of beer on the doorstep was the only perk that there was — you didn't find anything else.
No question of hand-outs.
It didn't happen because there was too much at stake.
H. P. Some people would get a bottle of beer — we'd had a lot of fellows come  out of the army and they were fond of their drink and there's no doubt that they could get it.
They knew the licensees.
They weren't angels, none of them.
You had certain of them that knew where you could slip in — you could slip in for a smoke and a cup of tea, so long as you weren't caught.
The sergeant was chasing you round and if they came round and saw you coming out of a shop, you had to have a good explanation.
M. B. No official bribes.
People you'd been helping might offer you something.
For instance, if you're on a traffic junction outside a railway station like Lime Street, you won't be there five minutes before you're approached by some hotelier saying, it would be worth your while to send them up to his hotel.
Or, for instance, the floating roadway where traffic was going down on the barges to go across the river, it would be well worth any particular company to have a word with the officer on the floating roadway to let their vehicles through first.
But no gifts to any great extent.
You might get ten bob or so — not very much.
I don't think I had a Christmas present all my blessed life.
All sorts of people held their hands out to me but I don't think I ever got anything.
One fellow gave me ten bob once — he was a tram-driver.
I was called to a house and there was a man in agony.
I was on my way home again as usual.
He had tripped on a gas-lid in the road and fractured his patella so his wife was busy bandaging him up.
She made an awful job of it — ten times worse.
I took this bandage off and put a cold compress on, making a proper patella dressing, got the ambulance and got him off to hospital, and put in a Report about this broken gas-lid.
Two months later this tram-driver stopped me: ‘I want to see you for a minute.
Come to my house.’
So I went round after I had finished.
He and his wife were there.
He said: ‘I owe you a lot for that.
I'm employed by the Corporation so I couldn't sue the Corporation.
But your Report that it was a gas-lid — I was able to go ahead with it and I got compensation.’
His wife says, ‘Go on — tell him what you got.’
‘I got a £100’— which was quite a lot then.
He gave me a ten bob note and a bag of tomatoes.
But that's the only thing that I ever remember getting.
A publican had to make sure that the gift was not too obvious.
S. H. Offered cash many a time.
I'd say: ‘Push your bloody money in your pocket.
I don't want it.’
I had a fellow come rushing out to me, point duty outside Legs o' Man pub one night, when I was directing traffic, puts a bottle of beer down by the side of me.
I says, ‘I'll give you two bloody minutes to take that bottle away.’
He bloody soon took it away.
It would have been a problem for me if the bloody sergeant had come along and seen me drinking beer or seen that bottle beside me.
He might have thought I'd had one previous.
If they said, ‘Officer, there's a quid to square it’.
I'd say: ‘You'll square nothing with me.
I do my bloody duty.’
But the perk — the bottle of beer — was a payment in kind.
It might not induce a particular  favour from a police constable but then, as now, it ensured a level of co-operation.
It was in the publican's interest to keep the constable sweet, to help with rowdy customers.
W. S. Irish was tough.
On a Saturday night, there used to be at the bottom of Scotland Road — Byrom Street — all the Irishmen.
They used to come over for the spud-picking and go to Ormskirk and live in a bothy and would come to Scotland Place because there were so many wakes.
There may be ten of us on Scotland Place on a Saturday night when the Morning Star got chucked out and the licensee was a feller called Pat McEwen (he had a marine store dealer's in Chaucer Street and took that pub).
We had ten bobbies in five pairs waiting for them coming out.
I've seen thirty men with their coats off fighting — getting on the trams and dragged off.
Then you'd see old Pat McEwen's wife looking out for you.
You'd go to the back of the pub and sit down.
‘What will you have, Jock?’
‘I'll have a jar,’ and it was real good.
In accepting the unofficial payment, the hierarchy had to be respected.
H. P. We used to keep an eye on pubs where the sergeant and the constable used to do a month at a time, visiting the cinemas, theatres, and public houses, licensed places, and do some pubs, night after night — just checking things, and at five past ten, you'd be right in checking they were keeping to closing time.
We'd clear them out for the licensee if he was having trouble.
Licensees would offer you drink after drink if you wanted — lot of them did.
If I said ‘No’ as a sergeant, the constable wouldn't get a drink; but if I said ‘No’as a constable, the sergeant would have it.
T. B. There were some bright lads on the job — boozing a great deal.
All your licensed premises on your area had to be checked at least once a week (in uniform) and the sergeant would pick you up and take you visiting these various posts, and I used to take a glass of beer.
You'd go through to the back place and as soon as the licensee saw you, there's two pints.
I'd only drink half a pint, so I was in great demand — the sergeant would have the rest.
Same when you visited the cinemas and dance-halls, watching the dancing.
They were licensed premises.
T. D. We cleared a little thing up — back end of a wedding.
You'd look at the sergeant and if he O. K. d it, you'd have one but if he didn't, you bloody wouldn't.’
The ex-CID officer was more reticent about the perks of the job, more willing to see those offers as the practice in other forces.
G. E. I was offered money many a time.
I only pinched one feller for bribery because he was a nasty feller.
One thing about it, I don't recall any CID man in my recollection, while I was serving, ever falling for taking money off.
In London, there was a lot of it going on.
You used to have to go to London to the Old Bailey, giving evidence and anything like that.
I used to go out with the London detectives, and these Cockney fellers down in London, they'd take money off  anyone.
It opened my eyes when I first went there.
I was at the Old Bailey, spent about two weeks there — I had the London detective with me.
I was staying in the police house — they had several police station-houses for CID men staying, instead of going to a hotel.
These young London detectives would come out with us for a meal, after we'd finished the court-work, go down to several famous pubs, and order several drinks.
You'd always put a ten bob note in.
They'd come back with change for a pound, knowing he was a London detective.
That was regular, speaking from experience.
Didn't happen any town that I knew of except London and I can understand why they did it in London — very expensive place for a young detective to make a shape — cost too much money keeping in front of your job there.
In Victorian days, the Watch Committee regularly placed adverts in the local newspapers in early December: ‘Shopkeepers are advised not to give Christmas Boxes to police officers.’
T. D. Christmas Boxes? there used to be a read-out at the parade before Christmas period — the Chief Constable himself would come down and say: ‘Be warned — beware of the man with the bottle’.
For the poor, there was rarely anything tangible to offer in a transaction.
For some of the street entrepreneurs such as the bookie or brothel-keeper, the shopkeeper or publican, there were some minor ways of keeping the police sweet — rarely anything that could be dignified with the name bribe.
The police authorities might look askance at the bottle of beer but to the constables it was seen as a legitimate reward for a little extra service.
FROM SERVICE TO DEFERENCE
This gift relationship related directly to the form of class relations in the city.
In general, the gifts came from the shopkeeper or publican class.
But further up the social scale, unrewarded deference was often required, often with the constable being treated as simply another flunkey in uniform, an attitude that might provoke a retaliatory reaction.
S. H. We were treated with a considerable amount of respect by the middle class.
Very rarely you would come across a person that seemed to think that you were beneath them and ought to do as they said.
It did happen at times but they were usually people who fancied their power, such as city councillors.
The factory owners and shopkeepers would come and have a chat with you.
There was a fellow came up to me in Lime Street and said: ‘Hey, get me a taxi.
I'm a ratepayer.
I pay for the likes of you.’
I said: ‘Get away, you pay rates do you?
I pay rates.
Let me tell you something, mister.
I'm paid to keep you in your place.
That's what I'm walking the streets for.’
I got hold of him by the scruff of the neck and took him along to the police box and rang up for the wagon.
He says, ‘What's this?’
I says, ‘Here's your taxi.’
I took him round to Cheapside and booked him for being drunk and disorderly.
Some reticence was necessary in dealing with the middle classes — you were never quite sure what influence might be brought to bear behind the scenes.
D. A. I was on a school-crossing duty for disabled children and I held up my hand for a motor cyclist to stop and he rode right past me.
I called him to stop and said, ‘I've got to test your brakes.’
I found that the front brake was inefficient owing to lack of adjustment.
I said, ‘I've got to summons you for driving amongst children.’
So he went before the court and pleaded ‘Not Guilty’.
I gave my evidence — he adjusted the brakes in my presence after I found them inefficient.
So the magistrate said to him: ‘You heard what the officer said.
Do you agree with that?’
‘Oh yes.’
And I couldn't believe my ears —‘Case dismissed.’
The only thing I could put it down to was his father was a big Mason and he was Freemason on the Bench.
Strangely enough, that young man was killed on the same motor bike within three months of that — killed within two or three hundred yards of the same spot.
Such accounts often contained a moralizing vengeance — as if , occasionally, there was some supreme being able to impose a natural justice.
There were some rare contacts with an elite that transcended the urban class relationships.
J. V. Lord Derby — he was Lord-Lieutenant — made ceremonial trips into town from Croxteth Hall, every Christmas.
Each constable at every junction of the street corners down, used to be given a game bird.
No traffic lights then — these men used to give him right of way.
But there were intimacies at the opposite end of the social scale — in which a barrow girl might fancy a young police constable, or a socially mobile ‘buck’ might seek advice from the local fount of authority and knowledge.
T. D. People were scared of you — didn't matter whether you were a big man or a small man.
It was the uniform.
They were brought up to respect us and to go to a policeman when they were in trouble.
I remember one feller that came in — a respectable buck, a docker.
Comes to corner of the street for a breath of fresh air.
His hair was all tousled, a scarf round his neck, touching his braces.
This fellow Dickerly says to me, ‘Can you give me a bit of advice, officer?’
‘Depends what it is.’
‘My son has just passed his exams to go to St Francis Xavier.
What would you do if you were me?
Let him go or pass it by?’
‘Entirely up to you — if he goes there, it will cost you a heck of a lot of money.
He'll want certain clothes, certain books.
He'll want a push-bike like everybody else.
He'll want togs for football or cricket.
It's up to you to weigh the situation up as to whether you can stand it.’
About twelve months later, I was walking around the Dingle and saw this chap coming down the road, brand new suit and all the rest of it, with his wife and kid.
Stopped me and told me he'd let him go to St Francis Xavier's.
He says: ‘I can manage — course I can't live down there where I was.
I'm a respectable man now.’
A. T. You always got respect from the people on the ground.
They'd come and  ask you for advice and you'd tell them and help them all you could.
I hadn't been in the force very long and my sergeant met me and said, ‘That chimney's smoking.’
I said, ‘I'm going off duty soon.
’ He said, ‘Go and do them.
’ So this was an order and so I had to and a young woman opened the door — about eighteen years.
I said, ‘Do you occupy this house?’
‘No, it's my grandmother's.’
‘Do you know that your chimney's on fire?’
‘Yes.’
‘Well, I'm sorry but the sergeant's out there and I'll have to report you.’
So I took the name and address and so eventually a summons came through for this old lady.
So I served it.
Lo and behold, when I got to court, this old lady was there and I felt so ashamed and so sorry for her.
I said, ‘How are you going to get home, love?’
‘Oh, I'll go on the tram.’
I says, ‘Come on, I'll pay your fine.’
And I paid the first fine that I ever did.
I never paid another one.
But for that old lady, I had been ordered to do her for the fire.
M. B. Even in the ‘bobby-bashing’ neighbourhoods, they were friendly towards you.
This street — I patrolled it at night.
I remember walking down there at night and I had a cough.
This old lady came out and said about the cough — she gave me a dose of cough medicine.
They called me ‘baby-face’ when they were annoyed, but generally they treated me with respect.
You had authority in those days.
You made people move on and they went.
W. S. Great Homer Street — it was the busiest place in the country.
You could have walked on their heads on Saturday.
The butchers would open at one in the morning.
The girls used to come out with the barrows and the people with the shops used to complain.
Liz Edmunds — they were fruit people — she was a nice kid.
She had her eye on me.
I used to put my cape on the railings.
When you went for your cape, it would be full of apples and pears.
They were real good.
Attitudes to the police historically have been documented thoroughly in the revisionist accounts of policing.
This Liverpool evidence — the patronizing condescension and occasional bullying by the middle classes and the supplicant individual contact from the occasional member of the lower stratum — is congruent with the overall profile of class relationships to the police in Britain.
FROM DEFERENCE TO CONFRONTATION (AND BACK)
Street encounters — both between the lower classes and the police and amongst the former — embodied all the elements of contrariness produced by a culture of desperation and survival.
A combination of poverty, street recreation and entrepreneurship, the delights of beverages such as‘red biddy’, collective solidarity, and individual dispute entailed a spasmodic relationship which veered from passivity and deference, on the one hand, to violent assault, on the other.
But the ultimate common denominator was a realistic trepidation in the face (at least) of the all-powerful police.
M. B. The Scotland Road area had a name for violence to a certain extent — drunkenness you know — not a lot.
Trouble was mainly due to poverty.
Only one in a thousand had bathrooms in their houses.
The people round there drank red biddy and that sort of thing.
It was like methylated spirits.
It was a wine that they paid about a penny or twopence a glass for.
They would drink that in some of these pubs and, of course, as soon as they got out in the fresh air, it hit them and they were away.
The men used to go paralytic and put windows in.
We would have to deal with it then.
You got the women, the ‘shawlies’ we called them, drinking this and then they would come out fighting drunk.
If you locked up one of these shawlies, as you were coming away from the Main Bridewell, you would usually find a deputation of shawlies coming running down the road.
‘Where is she, sir?
Can we come and bail her our?’
They'd do that.
They helped themselves.
The poor helped the poor.
K. R. I saw a fellow having an epileptic fit and I got down to hold him while he kicked out.
Let him kick it out as long as he didn't injure himself.
I was just holding him down and I got a hammering from the locals.
They thought I was having a fight with him.
It wasn't me molesting them.
It was them molesting me.
It was a natural thing for them to do so I didn't take any action — told them in no uncertain terms that this man was ill and he eventually came to and everyone was happy then.
At the end of the day, there was no love lost between the street people and the representatives of an all-powerful State.
T. D. The ordinary working-man and his kith and kin, unless he was in trouble, he didn't want to know you.
But if you did something underhand, they'd shout about it.
I had a smoke and somebody would shout: ‘Hey — copper's smoking.’
General feeling was ‘once a policeman, never a man’.
Policing the street was the bedrock of urban policing.
On that terrain, the patrol constable gradually learnt the tricks of the trade — the verbal tricks to diffuse confrontations, and when to use the ultimate omnibus body of legal weapons, backed up by the stick and the fist.
In using those techniques, the essential purpose was one of social control.
Moving-on, on the surface, was a pointless ritual.
Its latent function was to ensure that the lower classes fitted in with the designs of their betters.
They were to be confined to a moral order that suited the exhortations of the urban middle class.
Police regulation — of which law enforcement was only a tool — was about confining the ‘troublesome’ poor to their quarters and ensuring that their nefarious characteristics were not contagious.
Policing was an urban prophylactic.
In that process, individual police experiences might differ — the Instruction Book and the stick in one hand, the bottle of beer and the barrow girl's apple in the other.
Only with the more entrepreneurial activities of the lower class — from bookmaking to thieving — did the gospel of urban moralizing combine with an economic imperative.