

Introduction to Small Mammal Taphonomy
At many fossil sites there are great accumulations of small mammals.
These can tell us a great deal about past environments and climate during the time of their accumulation, but there are many ways by which small mammal accumulations occur in the natural world.
It is necessary to gain some understanding of the processes of accumulation before the significance of the small mammal faunas can be understood.
Some of these processes will be documented in order to interpret the fauna from a British cave site which has been the subject of intensive study for the last ten years.
This site fills a gap in northern European prehistory during part of the middle Pleistocene about 350 000 years ago.
The fossil site
The cave site is exposed in a limestone quarry on the southern flanks of the Mendip Hills in Somerset, England at between 213 and 244 m OD (Fig. 1.1).
The Mendip Hills stretch east–west as a flat-topped plateau to the south of Bristol, and the area is well known for having many caves cut into the limestone.
The cave infill at Westbury-sub-Mendip was uncovered during quarrying in 1969 when bones were found in the quarry workings and shown to local experts.
As quarrying proceeded, an oblique section of a large cavern was gradually uncovered, and the infill sediments were found to be richly fossiliferous.
The significance of the site in terms of faunal diversity, time span covered and complexity became clear in the course of preliminary work (Heal, 1970; Stanton, 1973; Bishop, 1974, 1982).
The cave was formed some time during the early part of the Pleistocene, over one million years ago, and it became filled with sediment during the middle Pleistocene approximately 350 to 400 thousand years ago.
The cave infill consists of cave breccias, generally unsorted and uncemented accumulations of silt and rock.
These consist of mixtures of rocks and soil from the surface outside the cave and breakdown products from the limestone walls and roof inside the cave.
Contained within the breccias are the fossilized bones of many animals that lived in this part of Britain during the middle Pleistocene, and we will be describing the way in which the fossil bones of the smaller animals came to be deposited.
The deposits have been divided into two groups: at the bottom of the sequence are the basal waterlain sands and gravels, and these contain strongly rounded fossils derived probably from earlier surface sediments.
Above these is an intermediate breakdown zone resting on the sands and related to a major roof collapse, followed by several bedded sequences of breccias in which most of the fossils occur.
The work presented here is concerned entirely with the bone beds in the breccias, which are identified as part of the Calcareous Member of the Westbury Formation (the other member being the Siliceous Member encompassing the basal sands and gravels).
The question is not so much with the identity of the species of animal found in the cave but how their bones came to be preserved in the cave in the first place.
More specifically, how did the small mammals, what ever they are, come to arrive at their final resting place in the cave, what processes can be recognized as having brought this about, and how have these processes affected the types of animal represented.
This is known as the study of the context in which fossils occur and is quite distinct from the identification or taxonomy of fossil species, which will be described in a separate book.
Fig. 1.1 Location map showing the Mendip Hills south of the Bristol Channel and the location of the Westbury-sub-Mendip cave site on the south west edge of the Mendips.
The study of small mammal fossils
Fossils provide one of our most direct links with the prehistoric past.
They tell us what our world was like during the long periods of time before recorded history, and the collection and investigation of fossils is therefore of importance to anyone interested in our prehistory.
The small mammals constitute a particular part of the fossil record, usually identified as a group consisting of mammals less than 5 kg in weight.
The rodents and insectivores are the two most important orders of small mammals, for bats are rarely preserved in association with other small mammals, either fossil or modern.
Lagomorphs such as rabbits and hares are also included here as small mammals.
Other small animals such as birds and amphibians may be associated with the small mammal assemblages, and these are considered briefly in their place.
Small mammal faunas in the fossil record provide one of the principal methods of interpreting the ecology or habitat existing at the time the fossils were preserved.
The small mammals living today in many different habitats and climatic zones have been described, so that the associations between faunal types and ecology are well documented (Southern, 1954; Walker, 1964; Glue, 1967; Hanney, 1975; Andrews, Groves & Horne, 1975; Corbet & Southern, 1977; Brain, 1981; Yalden, 1985; Avery, 1986).
Woodland faunas, for instance, are distinct from grassland faunas, and tropical faunas distinct from temperate faunas, and when these and more precise distinctions are made it is possible to correlate and even define ecological zones by their small mammal faunas.
The relationship between fossil assemblages and ecology is usually not such a simple one, however, for the composition of fossil faunas may differ greatly from the living communities from which they were drawn.
This is because there are many processes involved in fossilization that may change the composition of the fauna at numerous stages of its preservation.
For example, predators are important causes of mortality of small mammals, and they may accumulate large assemblages of small mammal remains, but their prey reflects the particular needs and hunting behaviour of the predator rather than being representative of any one habitat.
A fossil assemblage accumulated by a predator thus may not represent any single mammal community from any one habitat.
At later stages of preservation, the predator assemblages may be further biased by water transport or weathering, so that the end result can be most confusing to the would-be palaeoecologist.
Some examples of small mammals: from top, mole (Talpa europea ), rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus ), common shrew (Sorex araneus ), field mole (Microtus agrestis ), unstriped grass mouse (Arvicanthis niloticus ), hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus ).
To try and sort out these problems, it is necessary to investigate the context in which fossils are found.
This is covered roughly by the subjects of microstratigraphy and taphonomy.
Taphonomy is the study of all processes affecting bones as they become changed from being parts of living animals to being preserved as fossils.
It has been extensively investigated for large mammals (Brain, 1958, 1974, 1981; Voorhies, 1969; Sutcliff, 1970; Behrensmeyer, 1975; Klein, 1975; Hill, 1975; Shipman, 1977, 1983a; Behrensmeyer & Hill, 1980; Binford, 1981), but little work has been done on small mammals.
Microstratigraphy is the study of the sediments in which the bones occur; to the extent that the bones are themselves modified by sedimentary processes, it is an integral part of the taphonomic process, but when the bones come from a completely separate source from the sediments there may be little interaction.
In this event, the stratigraphy may indicate one environment, say, for example, a lake environment, and the fossils may indicate another, for example a terrestrial habitat of some kind from which bones have been transported to be preserved in the lake.
It is important to distinguish the influences of both, as both may introduce particular sets of biases into the fossil assemblage.
An outline scheme documenting known taphonomic processes and microstratigraphy is shown in Fig. 1.2 (Andrews & Cook, 1985).
This is a flow chart that progresses from top left directly downwards to bottom left tracing the stages that bones pass through: from living animals to dead animals; to bone accumulations resulting from the decay of the dead animals; to burial and fossilization of these bone accumulations; and finally to their collection and storage in some museum collection.
If it were all as simple as this, and if all fossil bones passed through these stages without modification, this book could finish right here, but unfortunately it is not so.
There are a series of modifications which are shown on the right hand side of Fig. 1.2, and each will now be discussed briefly in turn, following the order of the flow chart.
Burial of a mouse by sexton beetles,Microphorus species.
At the top the beetles have discovered the dead mouse; they bury it by tunnelling beneath it and removing the earth from below so that it drops down into the excavation; at the bottom as the mouse sinks down into the earth the beetles roll it into a ball ready for the reception of their eggs.
Redrawing from Milne & Milne 1976.
Modifications by cause of death
In the simplest of all cases, when an animal dies from natural causes such as old age, starvation or disease, there will be no modification resulting from cause of death.
It leaves a fully intact and unmodified skeleton at its place of death.
This is probably a comparatively rare occurrence for small mammals, but it certainly does occur.
Carcases left uneaten attract sexton beetles which bury them extremely quickly and may even move them short distances (Milne & Milne, 1976).
The beetles burrow under the dead animals, removing the earth from below so that the animals sink down into the soil, where they are rolled into balls for the reception of the beetles' eggs and developing larvae.
Stages in the formation and modification of small mammal bone assemblages.
Formation stages are shown on the left, progressing from living animals at the top to museum collections of fossil bones at the bottom.
Modifications that can occur at the various formation stages are shown on the right.
Perhaps more commonly, animals may become trapped, for instance in a pitfall trap in a cave or in naturally occurring holes.
Natural pitfalls appear to provide excellent sampling mechanisms for small mammals.
The species present in pits depend in part on the ground cover immediately surrounding them and partly on various aspects of the life history and activity patterns of the different species.
For instance older animals are less likely to fall in than younger animals (Andrzejewski & Rajska, 1972), suggesting an element of experience is involved.
The bank vole shows an interesting contrast between this trend and the opposite one during trapping that the likelihood of capture increases with age using live traps.
Species of shrews that have poor eyesight and rely on established pathways to find their way about their territory often fall victim to pits that open up in their vicinity, running straight in without seeing them.
This is particularly true if the ground cover is open immediately around the pit, and in this case, species that inhabit thick ground cover (such as the bank vole) are less likely to fall in (Armitage, 1985).
Species with good jumping ability are more able to get out of pits than are species that cannot jump (Rackham, 1982).
Comparisons of species represented in pitfall traps and artificial traps show that the former provide a better sample of small mammals in an area.
For example, out of 13 species of small mammal caught in an area of California, pitfall traps caught 6, 9, 8, and 7 species under differing experimental conditions compared with 2 species caught by live traps and another 2 species caught by breakback traps (Williams & Brown, 1983).
In another series of investigations of artificial pits and wells, Armitage (1985) has shown that as many as 50–60 individuals can be trapped over relatively short periods.
These results show how common it is for small mammals to become trapped in pitfalls, and although there is some selection in species trapped, depending on local circumstances, the degree of bias is less than might be expected.
There is no direct evidence of natural traps from the cave at Westbury, but their potential significance must be remembered.
Other forms of natural mortality of small mammals occur when burrowing rodents may be trapped in their burrows by flood water.
Klein (1975a) has described fossilized carnivore burrows from South Africa, and fossilized rodent burrows are known for hamsters (Szafer, 1957) and pocket mice (Voorhies, 1974), but in general such discoveries are rare.
This may be because burrowing forms tend to be rare in areas of frequent flooding, even when common in the surrounding country (Sheppe & Osborne, 1971; Andrews et al .,
1975).
Burrowing species are obviously at a disadvantage in such situations, although some species are able to escape by swimming.
Whole families of small mammals may die  in their nest if buried by some natural process such as a landslide, or the young may die if the adults are killed before their offspring can fend for themselves.
Other examples of unmodified death assemblages occur as a result of catastrophic mortality, for instance mass deaths due to drowning or hibernation/aestivation deaths.
There are many recorded instances of mass deaths of lemmings after a phase of population expansion, when they have apparently become subjected to some form of social stress that leads to their attempting to migrate across  impassable barriers (Elton, 1942).
Hibernation deaths are probably common, although in most cases they probably result in isolated carcases well apart from each other.
Mass mortality of amphibians has been observed in Draycott cave in Somerset (Table 1.1), where the remains of many hundreds of individuals are preserved in a clay deposit that is normally wet all year.
A section through Draycott cave is shown in Fig. 4.2, and the main concentration of amphibian bones occurs at the deepest part of the entrance chamber of the cave where it seems to be permanently wet.
Hibernation mortality may also account for some considerable part of cave bear mortality in European cave sites (Kurten, 1958).
Bone assemblages may build up in such cases because of the favoured use of particular parts of the cave for year after year, and similar large accumulations of bat skeletons may also build up beneath favoured roosting sites in caves or hollow trees.
In all these cases, the bone accumulations resulting from burial, pitfalls, burrow deaths and hibernation/aestivation deaths are distinguished by their limitation to one or a few species but with all parts of the skeleton represented unbroken and well preserved.
Bone accumulations such as these are usually self-evident, and while they indicate which animals were present in an area, their limitation to a few species restricts their usefulness for ecological interpretation.
They will not be discussed further in this book.
Predation
One of the major causes of mortality in small mammals is predation.
Depending on relative proportions of predator and prey, as well as several other variables, predators may have a limiting effect on small mammal numbers (Pearson, 1964; Southern & Lowe, 1982).
For the purposes of this book, predators of small mammals are divided into three categories: mammalian predators, diurnal birds of prey, and nocturnal owls.
For the sake of completeness, mention will also be made of reptilian predators.
The mammalian predators include foxes and other canids, polecats and other mustelids, cats and other felids, and a group not present in Britain, the viverrids which include mongooses and genets.
Most mammalian predators are effective hunters of small mammals, hunting mostly at night, and they produce the greatest modifications to the bones of their prey because they use their shearing teeth to break up their prey before ingestion.
There are also a few recorded instances of non-predators eating small animals on an opportunistic basis, for example giraffe (Evans, 1970; Western, 1971) and red deer (Furness 1988).
The diurnal birds of prey include the falcons, buzzards, eagles and harriers.
All of these hunt by day, and at certain times of the year they may take large numbers of small mammal prey.
They eat all but the smallest prey by tearing the carcases apart before ingestion, holding the body of the prey in their talons and tearing small parts away with their hooked beaks.
This also produces a high measure of breakage of the bones of their prey, although not as great as that of mammalian predators.
Barn owl with prey, eagle (above right) and mammalian carnivore (below right).
Drawings by Maurice Wilson.
Table 1.1 Location of caves and other sites mentioned in text
Owls as a group hunt by night, although some species hunt by day as well, particularly in the early morning and late evening.
They usually swallow their prey whole, sometimes removing the head first (but swallowing that as well).
Small sized prey is always treated this way, but larger prey (large in relation to the size of the owl) may be broken up before ingestion in the same way as for diurnal raptors, with comparable levels of breakage.
In general, however, bone breakage is less in owl bone assemblages than in those of other predator species.
Many other birds produce small bone accumulations, and some of these are also considered briefly here.
Bone has been found in pellets of magpies, skuas, vultures and condors, and bone has also been reported in heron pellets (Hibbert-Ware, 1940).
It is reported that no bones survive the digestive processes of snakes (Bellairs, 1970).
Crocodiles digest all the mineral matter in bones, leaving the soft organic residues that decay rapidly after being voided by the crocodile.
The teeth of prey animals are also demineralized, and tooth enamel may be entirely removed by digestion, leaving just the dentine cores of the teeth (Fisher, 1981).
Exactly how this is achieved is not clear, for experiments using 10 per cent HCI show that although the mineral content of the bones and dentine is removed, leaving the bones with a soft rubbery texture, there is usually some enamel still left on the teeth.
Crocodiles eat smaller prey animals whole but break up larger animals with a violent twisting movement.
They may also cache animals underwater for future use (Johnson, 1973).
Because predation is the most important modifying agent operating during the accumulation of small mammal remains, its effects will be discussed in detail later in the book.
The predator species studied here are described in the Appendix.
Predation will be discussed in detail in Chapter 2, and the modifications by which predators may be identified will be described in Chapter 3.
Modifications shortly after death
Superimposed on the primary modifications outlined above are secondary modifications that occur soon after death but are themselves unrelated to cause of death (Fig. 1.2).
A ubiquitous process that starts immediately after death is of course decay, which in small mammals progresses very quickly.
Alternatively, small mammal carcases may be scavenged, and at any stage after death the bones may be modified by the trampling action of larger animals.
These processes will be described in detail in the following sections so that comparisons can be made with the effects of predation described in Chapters 2 and 3.
Decay
In studies of small mammal decay, it has been found that in hot climates the soft parts decay and the carcase  is reduced to bone and sinew within 6–8 days (Korth, 1979).
The bones disarticulate into separate elements within 12 days.
In cooler climates of northern Europe, the decomposition of vole carcases takes 10–40 days depending on temperature and invertebrate activity (Nabaglo, 1973).
The main agent of decay is insect activity, and carcases lying in water take much longer to break down (Dodson, 1973) because they are less accessible to insects.
During this time, they may be carried considerable distances if they are in flowing water.
Ongoing experiments in Wales corroborate these results, although with animals like moles, which have tough and durable skins, the periods involved are longer by over half.
Decay leaves little modification on the bone.
Long term insect action may produce modifications similar to that produced by wood-boring insects on dead wood (Behrensmeyer, 1978; Thorne & Kimsey, 1983), but this does not seem to be common.
It is claimed that after decay of the soft tissues, small mammal bone does not survive exposure for long on the ground, becoming soft and disintegrating within one year (Voorhies, 1969).
Scavenging
Whole or partially eaten carcases are usually quickly disposed of by scavengers if left exposed.
Many of the predators mentioned in the previous section function equally well as scavengers (Hewson, 1981), and the modifications they produce are the same as if they had been the primary predators.
Needless to say, this gives rise to considerable confusion, for it is not possible to distinguish the results of scavenging from predation on the bone modifications alone.
This is a serious problem, for the circumstances under which bones are accumulated by predators are very different from those for scavengers.
Attempts have been made to distinguish predation from scavenging (Binford, 1981; Bunn, 1982; Shipman, 1983b, 1986), but this work has been based entirely on analysis of large mammals (Behrensmeyer, 1987).
A number of small mammal carcases, including shrews, microtines and mice, were exposed in sheltered conditions  in Wales after having been trapped and killed.
Carcases in the open air were usually removed and eaten within two days by a member of the local population of buzzards, cats, foxes, polecats and weasels, leaving no trace.
Some carcases that were protected from scavenging by these larger birds and animals were found to have been scavenged by shrews, with the soft parts being eaten and the bones extensively gnawed and broken.
Corbett (pers. comm., 1988) has also recorded scavenging of freshly dead voles by other voles.
The effects of this on the bones is of some interest for   comparison with the effects of gnawing of larger bone by larger predators (for example, see Bonnichsen, 1973; Sutcliffe, 1970; Hill, 1975, 1976; Binford, 1981; Haynes, 1980, 1983), for there is direct correspondence between, for instance hyaena gnawing on large antelope bones, wolf gnawing on smaller bovid bones, fox gnawing on small bovids and lagomorphs and shrew gnawing on rodent bones.
Fig. 1.3 SEM micrographs of rodent bones gnawed by shrews.
These specimens were trapped inside a confined roof space in a house in Wales and eaten while still in the trap.
The area in which the traps were placed was totally protected from any outside agency except scavenging by other small mammals.
A. vole mandible with gnaw marks on the body of the mandible (×8); B. other half of the same mandible with the posterior part destroyed (×9); C. proximal femur with the head and shaft extensively gnawed (×19); D. femur head enlarged (×45); E. proximal end of humerus with the head destroyed by gnawing and individual gnaw marks visible on the inner surface of the bone (×30) F.  enlargement of the individual gnaw marks, which are approximately 20 microns in breadth (×188).
The bones illustrated here are from a vole carcase and are extensively scored with tooth marks (Fig. 1.3 A-C).
The backs of the mandibles and all parts of the skull have been destroyed, but no damage is present on any of the teeth.
The postcrania are also heavily scored with tooth marks, some present as deep sinuous grooves and some as multiple striated flattened grooves (Fig. 1.3 C-F).
Articular ends of limb bones have been partly eaten away, resulting in local damage very different from the corrosive effects of digestion, and processes such as the olecranon process of the ulna or the medial epicondyle of the humerus are often totally destroyed.
Where this has happened, highly characteristic gnaw marks are visible along the exposed broken surfaces, often penetrating deep into the inner surface of the shafts (Fig. 1.3 E, F).
Deer mandible chewed by small rodents showing the elongated and parallel sided double grooves characteristic of rodent gnawing.
Along the inferior border of the mandible may be seen the roseate shaped groups of grooves that occur when the rodent anchors its lower jaw on one side of the mandible and pivots against this with its upper jaw to produce a series of grooves converging downwards to a single point.
Below is a drawing of the African porcupine, a larger rodent that collects and extensively chews bone.
There are some scavengers that do not hunt and rarely consume meat.
Porcupines have been shown to accumulate bone, and since they often live in caves they produce bone accumulations inside caves (Maguire et al .,
1980; Brain, 1981).
The bones that porcupines carry to their lairs have been shown to accurately reflect the medium to large mammal fauna present in the region (Brain, 1981), but small mammal bone is not represented.
Since the main function of bone collecting by porcupines seems to keep their incisors in good condition rather than as food, it does not seem likely that small mammal bone could serve any useful purpose from the porcupine's point of view.
Smaller rodents also chew bone for much the same reason, as well as for its calcium or phosphate content, and like porcupines they seem to prefer older bone rather than completely fresh bone.
They do not, however, collect bone, and they mostly gnaw larger pieces of bone rather than small mammal bone.
Another example that can loosely be referred to as scavenging is bone collecting by harvester ants (Shipman & Walker, 1980).
A multiple entry harvester ant nest situated on the Athi Plains in Kenya yielded 1167 small mammal bones concentrated outside the tunnel entrances (see p. 8).
This activity produces a pattern of bone distribution similar to that of scat assemblages (Andrews & Evans, 1983); in both cases the bones come from animals less than 120 g body weight.
Six species are represented in the ant assemblage, of which 75 per cent consists of two rodent species,Leggada minutoides and Thamnomys dolichurus .
This compares with only three species in the predator assemblage, with 66 per cent consisting of a single species.
The larger rodents in both regions are represented by only a single individual in the ant assemblage probably because their bones are too heavy for the ants to carry.
This size limitation means that harvester ant assemblages are not good indicators of the local mammalian fauna.
Trampling
Another source of modification to bone that begins soon after death is dispersal and breakage by trampling.
There are virtually no records of the effects of natural trampling on small mammals because their bones are so fragile they are easily destroyed.
The effects of trampling on large mammalian bone have been described in some detail (Andrews & Cook, 1985; Behrensmeyer et al .,
1986).
Surface modifications include scratches, scrapes, gouges and cuts, some of which are similar to cut marks made by humans using stone implements.
Trampling also causes dispersal of the bone (Andrews & Cook, 1985).
The effects of trampling by large mammals on pellets can be destructive, especially if the pellets are fresh or wet.
The substrate on which the pellets are resting is important, and pellets on soft soil could be pushed into the soil rather than being crushed.
Under constantly damp conditions pellets decay very rapidly (see next section), within a few weeks in the case of tawny owl and eagle owl pellets, although rather longer in some species like the barn owl.
The activities of moth larvae feeding on the fur or feathers binding the pellets together result in their breakdown even in dry conditions, although it may take several years for pellets to completely disintegrate.
Pellets from species like barn owls are more compact and resistant to breakdown than those from other species, and pellet consistency also depends in large part on the food residues that go into it.
For example, a diet consisting mainly of invertebrate prey produces  compact but granular pellets, mammalian prey produces cohesive pellets bound together by skin and fur, and bird prey produces loose large pellets because of the feathers.
Pellet structure must therefore be seen as an extremely variable character, and one that it would be difficult to quantify in any meaningful way.
Comparison of the bone assemblages of a mammalian carnivore (Otocyon megalotis) on the left and harvester ants (Messor barbarus) on the right (Andrews & Evans, 1983; Shipman & Walker, 1980).
Bone frequencies are shown in both cases by contours, with the contours at 50 bone intervals in the case of the carnivore, and at 10 bones per cm2 in the case of the harvester ant.
Intact carnivore scats which are the sources of the bones are marked by x in the carnivore assemblage, and the ants' tunnel entrances are likewise marked by x.
Both plans are drawn to the same scale.
To test the effects of trampling by large animals on pellets, a simple experiment was devised.
Single pellets were put into a plastic bag and stepped on once by the experimenter (weight 72 kg).
This had the effect of breaking down the structure of the pellets, and repetition caused the complete destruction of the pellet.
This experiment was repeated for different pellets from the same sample when fresh (wet) and when dry.
After a single trample event, it was observed that the structure of fresh tawny owl pellets broke down, no longer protecting the bones inside them.
The same was found to apply to pellets in waterlogged or permanently wet conditions.
On the other hand, dry pellets were stronger and afforded some protection to the bones, although even in these cases skulls were broken by the single trampling event, with the only recognizable pieces left being fragments of zygomatic bone and maxilla.
The ascending ramus and incisor alveolus of the mandible were also broken after one event, with the subsequent separation of the incisor from the mandible.
The scapula and pelvis were broken, but they may have been broken already in the pellet.
The major postcranial bones and smaller bones such as the vertebrae, foot bones and ribs all remained intact after six trampling events, even though the pellet completely disintegrated.
The jaws were unrecognizable by this stage, and all the teeth were exposed as isolated teeth.
This is a pattern that has some similarities to the breakage produced by predators, due mainly to the abundance of isolated teeth, but the absence of mandibles and the good preservation of the major limb bones are points of difference.
Bone and pellets preserved at an owl's nest site are often exposed to trampling by the owls themselves.
Pellets regurgitated at the nest site may be stepped on and broken up.
Barn owls nesting in a small cave in Somerset (see opposite) produced a bone assemblage of 5161 bones from 113 prey individuals (see p. 96 and Fig. 4.1).
These were partly protected by the nest structure (from an old jackdaws nest) and partly exposed to trampling on the floor of the cave.
The latter show consistently lower degrees of completeness  (Table 1.2) for all skeletal elements.
Another example of this was seen at the nest of a pair of European eagle owls, which are large birds weighing up to 4 kg.
In the central area of the nest site a great heap of bones and fragmentary remains of pellets had accumulated from the break up of the pellets.
These had been broken up by the owls, and a collection of 1128 bones representing 27 individuals was compared with the bone numbers from intact pellets at the same nest site.
The bones from the pellets were protected by the structure of the pellets.
Numbers of mandibles are high in both samples, but the relative proportions of maxillae are much less in the trampled sample, 24 per cent instead of 64 per cent(Append.
Table 12).
By contrast, the percentages of isolated teeth are higher in the trampled sample, and in the case of the incisors is greater than 100 per cent, indicating loss of jaws from the sample (see Chapter 3), in this case almost entirely maxillae (Table 1.2).
The effects of trampling on mammal bones in a small chamber in Wookey Hole (Table 1.1).
A barn owl was nesting on a ledge on the side of the chamber in an old jackdaw's nest and on the right is a bone sample from this position with the bones being protected by the nest debris itself.
On the left is a sample about 1 m distant on the cave floor where it has been subjected to trampling by the owls and other small animals.
Table 1.2 Comparison of two pellet collections from nest sites of barn owls in England and European eagle owls in Sweden:(1) bones extracted from intact pellets or those otherwise protected from trampling;(2) bones from decomposed pellets at the nest site: completeness of skeletal elements
The most dramatic difference seen in the trampled assemblages is the absence of skulls.
This parallels the trampling experiment described above where the skulls were the first element to be broken.
Most of the major postcranial elements from the assemblages are more broken than the pellet bones.
In Table 1.2 it can be seen that the femur and humerus in particular are less complete, with dramatic increases in proximal femora and distal humeri in the  trampled material.
There is no great difference in the relative proportions of distal limb elements to proximal ones, nor in postcrania to crania (discounting the excess of isolated teeth in the nest sample).
Reconstruction of typical nesting locality of the European eagle owl (Bubo bubo) in Sweden.
The nesting platform would be littered with pellets and bones from decayed pellets.
The pattern that emerges from these results on trampling is one of breakage of skulls, jaws and postcrania leading to complete absence of skulls, reduction in numbers of maxillae, considerable loss of teeth from the jaws leading to large numbers of isolated teeth, considerable breakage of larger postcranial elements and some degree of loss, but no loss or breakage of smaller elements.
There is no difference in the level of corrosion of the teeth or postcrania.
Modifications before/during burial
What happens further to small mammal bone before it is buried and fossilized depends in part on what happened to it at earlier stages in the transition from living animal to fossil (Fig. 1.2).
The manner of death of small mammals, and the immediate post-mortem circumstances of their remains, will determine to a large extent whether they are left in exposed or protected conditions.
The protection afforded by pellets has already been mentioned, and bone that is left in pellets or scats is protected from many modifying agents for as long as the pellets and scats remain intact.
Prey buried or cached by predators under the surface of the ground is likewise protected, as are bones falling into or carried into caves.
There are, however, a number of situations that produce further modification of the surface of the bone at this third stage of bone modification (Fig. 1.2), and it is common for bones to be modified by one or more of these processes.
Brief accounts will be given here of bone left on the surface of the ground and the effects of transport.
Weathering
Bone lying out on the surface of the ground is subject to a number of processes.
If it is lying in the open, free of vegetation, it may become weathered (Behrensmeyer, 1978) but a more likely outcome for small mammal bone is that it will either be stepped on and broken beyond recognition or simply be blown away by wind.
If protected in some way, either by vegetation or by falling into holes in the ground, small mammal bones quickly become buried and protected in this way from weathering.
Behrensmeyer (1978: 153) defines weathering as encompassing physical and chemical agents operating both on the surface and within the soil zone, but in the present work these two factors are kept separate.
Weathering here refers only to the physical agents of sun, wind, rain and temperature change, and the effects of burial in soils (breakage and corrosion) will be discussed separately below.
In order to form an estimate of the effects of weathering on small mammal bones, pellets from a barn owl collection from Stratton, Dorset (see Append.
Table 1) were exposed to weathering early in 1979.
The exposure site was in mid Wales at an altitude of 346 m where the climate is habitually wet and windy (Andrews, in preparation).
One set of 10 pellets was left on a dry ledge against a south facing wall, and after two years there had been some erosion of the surfaces of the pellets but the pellets were still largely intact.
This apparently arose because of the dryness of the site chosen; an equivalent set left on the ground in much damper conditions disintegrated so quickly that no trace of them or their contents remained after 10 months.
The bones remaining within the intact pellets were found to be protected from weathering and after two years the pellets were taken apart by hand and the bones from them exposed again.
They were protected from trampling or from modification from any source other than weathering, and some protection was provided against wind, but despite this most of the bones have been blown away.
The severe gales in January 1983 were particularly devastating.
Some of the bones were removed for SEM examination after periods of 18, 29, 36, 48 and 55 months, and after examination and photography they were immediately re-exposed (Table 1.3).
After the initial two years exposure of the pellets, the bones were indistinguishable from those from the main pellet collection.
The degree of modification of the bones in both cases can be described as minimal, in common with other barn owl pellet accumulations, and there were no modifications from weathering.
After the additional 18 months exposure of the isolated bones, the skulls and mandibles were still intact, but where any sutures were exposed to the weather they had started to open out.
This is shown here (Fig. 1.4B) for the premaxillary suture, which is in the process of opening but has not yet proceeded far enough to destroy the integrity of the skull.
The bone shows very fine splitting along the lines of orientation of the collagen fibres (Fig. 1.4A) and slight erosion of the pits and canals, but these are only visible under high magnification and cannot be seen by the naked eye.
Most of the incisors remained intact, but one pair of upper incisors had been  broken (Fig. 1.4A).
The molars showed fine chipping of the enamel edges (Fig. 1.4E) and some splitting of the dentine, which also penetrates into the enamel (Fig. 1.4C, D).
This is probably due to differential contraction of enamel and dentine.
The same phenomenon is also seen in the incisors (Fig. 1.4F), which also show very fine localized corrosion (Fig. 1.4G, H).
The degree of damage by chipping and splitting of the teeth is already greater, of its kind, than has been observed in the predator assemblages (see Chapter 3), and since it is combined with absence of breakage of the skulls and mandibles it would seem to present a different pattern of modification from the pellet assemblages.
Table 1.3 Weathering stages in small mammal bone compared with large mammal bone (from Behrensmeyer 1978).
Small mammal bone exposed in wet temperate climate, large mammal bone in tropical climate
Very much the same combination is seen in the modification of the postcranial skeleton.
All the bones remain intact, but slight splitting has occurred, for instance on the femur (Fig. 1.4I, J) and tibia (Fig. 1.4K, L).
The splitting on the shaft of the tibia again follows the collagen fibre orientations, but that on the head of the femur seems more likely to be structural on a larger scale due to the rounded shape of the femur head.
In addition to the splitting there has occurred some penetration of very thin plates of bone such as occur on the scapula (Fig. 1.4N) and some breakage of the borders of such bone (the scapula illustrated here was not modified in any way before it was exposed for weathering).
This stage appears to be equivalent to stage 1 weathering described by Behrensmeyer (1978).
Additional exposure to weathering accentuated all these features.
The premaxillary suture illustrated in figure 1.4 is shown after 29 months weathering in Fig. 1.5A, and separation along the suture is almost complete.
In fact one half of the premaxilla detached itself shortly after it was photographed and before it was re-exposed.
The splitting and penetration of the bone of the skull was slightly more advanced than shown earlier, but the difference is not great enough to be worth illustrating and is still equivalent to stage 1 weathering (Behrensmeyer, 1978).
The breakage of the teeth has produced two distinct types of damage: the splitting described earlier has progressed to cut whole sections of the teeth away from the rest (Fig. 1.5C, D), so that the crowns of the teeth are split longitudinally, and this produces split molars (Fig. 1.5C) as defined in Table 3.10.
This splitting has occurred on 24.4 per cent of the teeth, which is a higher percentage than has been found in any of the pellet assemblages (Table 3.10).
The other type of damage is chipping of the salient angles of microtine teeth, where whole corners of the tooth are broken away (Fig. 1.5D).
This is also similar to the type of damage defined on Table 3.10, and in this case 16.3 per cent of the teeth are damaged in this way.
Modification of the postcrania appears to be little advanced after 29 months weathering compared with 18 months.
The femur head splitting is similar (Fig. 1.5F); a humerus not shown earlier shows some penetration along the epiphysis (Fig. 1.5G, H); and weathering of the limb bone shafts is still restricted to fine splitting following the orientation of the collagen (Fig. 1.5E).
None of the bones are broken as a result of weathering, not even the skull, and the degree of modification seems surprisingly restricted.
After 36 month's weathering, the bones of the skull were found to be little altered beyond the condition described above.
Most of the skulls and mandibles were still as complete as they left the pellet, with little loss of basal and occipital bone and slight breakage of the tip of the ascending ramus of the mandible.
The teeth also were found to be similar to the condition described after 29 months weathering: for a sample of 31 teeth, 25.8 per cent were split (Fig. 1.6A, B) and 9.7 per cent were chipped (Fig. 1.6E); 34.8 per cent of the incisors were broken.
Molar loss from the maxilla was 14 per cent, based on 5 skulls and 2 half maxillae, and incisor loss was 8 per cent .
None of these figures is very different from the earlier stages of weathering, and it would seem that even after more than three years of exposure to weathering, the damage and/or loss of bone is still very small.
Fig. 1.4.
Weathered bone: exposed for 18 months.
The bones are derived from barn owl pellets and have been totally protected from any modifying agent other than the owl (which produces minimal effects) and weathering.
A. vole premaxilla showing breakage of incisors (×15); B. sutural separation between premaxilla and maxilla (×15); C. occlusal cracking of vole molars (×15); D. enlargement of cracking, which appears to start in the dentine and then causes separation of the inner enamel surface (×75); E. slight chipping of enamel edge (×225); F. longitudinal splitting of incisor enamel (×15); G. slight modification of enamel surface of the incisor enamel (same specimen as F.)(×75); H. enlargement of enamel modification, showing it to be caused by splitting and flaking rather than etching (×375); I. femur head showing slight cracking (×26); J. enlargement of cracking (×75); K. splitting and cracking of tibia shaft (×38); L. enlargement of tibia (×75); M. splitting and depression of immature long bone shaft (15); N. enlargement of same (×60).
Fig. 1.5 (overleaf) Weathered bone: exposed for 29 months.
Same sample as shown in Fig. 1.4, but some of the bones are different.
A. sutural separation further advanced than that seen in Fig. 1.4B (×12); B. advanced splitting of occlusal surface of vole molar (×19); C.  enlargement of same (×112); D. chipping of vole molar after initial splitting (×38); E. splitting of femur shaft (×300); F. cracking of femur head (×34); G. splitting of epiphysis of head of humerus (×30); H. enlargement of same (×75).
The greatest difference in the 36 month weathered bone is in the surface alteration of both bones and teeth.
The surfaces of incisor enamel are split and show incipient flaking (Fig. 1.6C), and bone surfaces are similarly split (Fig. 1.6H-J).
The degree of splitting of the bone suggests equivalence to Behrensmeyer's stage 2 weathering, but the degree of flaking is less: some flaking occurs, spreading out from breaks and splits in the bone, but it is not as well developed as seen in large mammal bone at weathering stage 2 (Behrensmeyer, 1978).
It is unclear at this stage if direct comparison can be made with Behrensmeyer's weathering categories, applied as they are to large mammal weathering in tropical climates, but as a provisional estimate these changes will be attributed to her stage 2.
After 48–55 months of weathering, the bones of the skull and mandible were still little altered.
Fragile protuberances like zygomatic processes and ascending rami were found to be broken, but most bones were still intact.
Splitting and flaking of the bone was almost unchanged.
Some of the bones had started to develop algal growth in the prevailing damp conditions, although resting on a dry substrate, and this has obscured the surface of the bones to a certain extent (Fig. 1.
7).
The bones are still exposed at the time of writing this (November, 1988) and they should provide additional data as time progresses.
At present the pattern of weathering in small mammals is compared to that of large mammals (Table 1.3), with stage 1 weathering reached in 18 to 29 months (plus 24 months in the pellet) in the prevailing wet climate of central Wales, and stage 2 weathering still progressing after 36 to 48 months (again with the addition of 24 months in the pellet).
The modifications to small mammal bone produced by weathering are different from those described by Behrensmeyer (1978) for large mammals (summarized in Table 1.3), but they are readily distinguishable from other types of modification produced by trampling, by soil corrosion and attrition or by digestion.
Fig. 1.6 (p. 15) Weathered bone: exposed for 36 months.
A. premaxilla of adult vole showing splitting and breakage of the incisors (×11); B. enlargement of the tips of the incisors (×38); C. further enlargement showing the mesial borders of the broken right incisor (on the left) and of the cracked left incisor (on the right), both showing advanced splitting and flaking of the surface enamel (cf Fig. 1.4H)(×112); D. occlusal surface of vole molar (×75); E. enlargement of portion of the tooth to show very extensive chipping of both enamel and dentine surfaces (×188); F. lower incisor in mandible (×22); G. extensive splitting and flaking of mandibular ramus of vole mandible (×20); H. extensive splitting and flaking of inferior angle of the mandible (×52).
Fig. 1.7 Weathered bone: exposed for 55 months.
Top, mandible with destruction of the ascending ramus and abundant algal growth along the inferior border of the mandible; middle right, premaxilla with decay and splitting of bone and splitting of incisors; middle left, a second premaxilla with more advanced decay leading to destruction of the bone surface; bottom left, the same specimen showing loss of alveolar bone; bottom right, palate showing loss of angles of teeth, chipping and breakage of the molars.
The scale bars are 5mm.
Transport
Both trampling and weathering have produced modifications to the bone assemblages studied, but neither has brought about large scale breakage of bone.
Most of the breakage induced by trampling has been seen to be limited to the skull and mandible, with less breakage of the postcrania, while the breakage due to weathering is more limited still.
Clearly, however, post-depositional breakage does occur, because the bones from fossil assemblages obviously accumulated by predators are consistently found to be more broken than the predator assemblages described here.
Transport of bone before or after burial is probably responsible for much of this breakage, but this is a factor that is  hard to evaluate for small mammal assemblages because of the difficulties in keeping track of the small bones.
In order to assess the nature of the damage done to bone by transport, particularly in cave environments, two approaches have been adopted.
The first was to trace small mammal bone in modern cave environments, to examine the extent to which it is transported and what effect this has on the breakage and preservation of the bone assemblages.
Difficulties were encountered both in finding small mammal bone to work on in caves, and in identifying, with sufficient precision, the processes acting on the bone.
As a result of these difficulties, the second approach was adopted of breaking bone in an artificial environment that simulated the stresses it may have been subjected to under natural conditions.
In the present section, the second of these will be described, and the preservation of small mammal bone in recent caves will be discussed in Chapter 4.
It has been shown that decomposition of small mammal carcases proceeds rapidly, and the bones are then subject to environmental stresses (Dodson, 1973; Korth, 1979).
Bones in pellets are protected for some time (see discussions on this in the sections on trampling and weathering, above), but in wet conditions or in water the pellets disintegrate and the bones they contain are dispersed (Korth, 1979).
Korth, for instance, showed that within 20 metres of the point of origin, pellets dropped into a small stream start to lose some of their bone, by 80 metres the pellets start to break up, and by 200 metres all the bone is lost.
The bone evidently continued to be washed down by the stream, and it has been shown (Dodson, 1973) that small animal bone is dispersed readily by flowing water.
Dodson calculated the sequence of dispersal of bones from a mouse and a frog, finding many similarities with the transport categories first described by Voorhies (1969).
Bones with large ratios of surface area to weight, such as vertebrae, intact skulls, pelves and scapulae, were moved more readily than more compact bones such as mandibular bodies and parts of the major limb bones.
What ever the bone type, however, Dodson found that very low water velocities were sufficient to move small mammal bones.
Examples of the effects of water movement can be given for two predator assemblages which have been altered by water transport (Andrews & Evans, 1983).
The movement of the bones is consistent with that reported by Dodson (1973) and Voorhies (1969).
A bat-eared fox in Kenya deposited its scats on the top of a low hill with a shallow gully running down its eastern side (see plan on p. 8).
The bones released from the scats as they decayed were washed down this gully, and this resulted in the separation of two distinct bone assemblages: the one remaining at the top of the hill consisted of about 60 per cent dental and jaw fragments while the one washing down the hill consisted of more than 70 per cent vertebrae.
The distance separating the two assemblages was less than 2 metres, but the down-slope assemblage was 5 to 10 times richer in terms of numbers of specimens, with less than 200 specimens on top of the hill compared with over 1000 down-slope (Andrews & Evans, 1983).
The other predator assemblage was accumulated by a white-tailed mongoose, and the bones from decomposed scats were also washed into shallow gullies (see p. 42).
Areas of trapped sediment within these gullies were screened and the bones recovered, but the original position of the scats could not be determined (Andrews & Evans, 1983), although from the nature of the scat site they could not have been more than 20 metres away.
The samples contained the following bone assemblage:
4 upper and lower jaws, very broken (50 per cent)
4 isolated teeth (12.5 per cent)
5 limb bones (mostly distal humeri and proximal femora)(21 per cent)
4 acetabula and glenoids (50 per cent)
2 podials and metapodials/phalanges (1.2 per cent)
16 vertebrae (22 per cent)
The relative abundances are shown in brackets after each bone type for comparison with the proportions obtained from the intact scats, which are given in Append.
Table 13. (see also Append.
Table 10) Sample sizes are small (35 bones compared with 2135 from the scats), but it would appear that the numbers and proportions of isolated teeth and jaws are low compared with the numbers of vertebrae and pelves/scapulae.
This is a similar result to that from the bat-eared fox assemblage and again indicates that the lighter bones with relatively large surface areas are more subject to transport than denser bone.
Braided river deposits showing high energy environment leading to bone breakage and many sand bars and gravel lenses where bones may become deposited.
Drawing by Peter Whybrow.
Bone transport causes problems for palaeoecological reconstruction, for the larger the catchment area for a fossil assemblage the greater the possibilities of mixture of habitat and the less precise is the interpretation of the palaeoecology.
Shotwell (1955) attempted to distinguish between bones from different sources by devising an index of completeness of preservation, by which species represented by most complete remains must have been transported shorter distances and therefore have come from communities close by, while species with less well preserved remains must have come from more distant communities.
Voorhies (1969) suggested that much of this difference is due to body size differences and that differences in sorting of bone by ease of transportation might give an indication of distance travelled.
This is supported by Dodson's (1973) work, although he concluded that so little water movement was needed to transport small animal bone that in fact transported assemblages are little use for palaeoecological reconstruction.
The variations of skeletal representation found by Wolff (1973) are also attributed by him to hydrodynamic sorting as a result of water transport.
He found isolated teeth to be the most abundant element in transported fossil assemblages, with elements that were either long and thin (e.g. phalanges) or broad and flat (e.g. pelves, scapulae) less well represented.
Few limb bones were complete, but distal humeri and tibiae, proximal ulnae and fragmentary mandibles were most common after isolated teeth.
Wolff also found some interesting differences between taxa based on the relative sizes of the individual bones, with, for instance, the incisors of one rodent species less well represented because they were relatively large, and the fragile second incisors of lagomorphs also less well represented.
It is clear from this discussion that transport of small mammal bone does indeed produce high levels of breakage, and that transported assemblages are difficult to interpret palaeoecologically.
In order to measure the effects of water transport more precisely, Korth (1979) simulated stream action by artificial attrition in a rotary tumbler, mixed with a fine quartz matrix (grain size 2–4 mm in diameter) and water, for a total of 80 hours.
The earliest evidence of modification was seen to be disarticulation of the skull bones and loss of teeth from the jaws (particularly of unrooted microtine teeth).
This was followed by perforation of the thin bone of the skull and mandible, and of such bones as the pelvis and scapula, and then by attrition of the edges of the teeth, but not breakage.
The major limb bones also showed signs of erosion, particularly of prominent ridges and crests, but breakage did not occur until very advanced stages of abrasion when the bone was worn right through across a prominence, and this only occurred after the bones were extensively rounded.
The smaller bones from the feet showed no clear signs of alteration.
At first sight, the lack of breakage of the bones described by Korth (1979) is surprising, for small mammal bones are very fragile, especially if they have already passed through the digestive system of a predator, as had some of his study bones.
In a similar experiment, a greater variety of clast sizes has been used to test bone abrasion.
For this experiment, small mammal bones were extracted from a tawny owl assemblage from Cornwall, England.
The bones were mixed with sediment and tumbled in a rotary tumbler in three stages.
Firstly, three fine grades of sediment were used: silt and clay (particle size less than 63 μ), coarse sand (particle size 500 to 1000 μ) and gravel (particle size 2–4 mm).
Secondly, a coarse angular pebbly gravel was used, with 222 g of sediment averaging 8 mm clast size.
This is considerably larger than the particle size used by Korth (1979), but since even they had little effect on the small mammal bone, two large clasts were added as a third stage, weighing 368 g between them.
Skulls and mandibles used in the experiment were all classed as complete (see Figs. 3.11–3.12 for definition).
No breakage of any kind was observed with the three fine sediment types, but after 192 hours a slight degree of rounding of the bones had occurred.
After 300 hours rounding was pronounced for all three grades.
With the 8 mm clast sizes, exposed edges of bone began to become chipped within the first hour of abrasion and some loss of molars occurred (Fig. 1.10A), but once the weaker bone had been removed no further breakage occurred.
Bone loss on the mandible proceeded at a rate of 2 mm per hour, resulting in erosion of the inferior border and loss of the incisor (Fig. 1.8h).
One additional hour's tumbling with the two large clasts reduced the skulls (Fig. 1.8a-g) and the mandibles (Fig. 1.8j-k) to fragments.
Fig. 1.8 Cranial elements remaining after tumbling experiment.
(a)–(b) maxillary fragments;(c)—(d) zygomatic fragments;(e)—(g) alveolar fragments;(h)—(j) rodent mandibular fragments;(i)—(k) insectivore mandibular fragments.
Isolated teeth were little damaged by any of the sediment types.
Slight rounding of the ends of roots and crowns  occurred after 300 hours with the coarse sand and gravel.
With the 8 mm clasts, slight chipping resulted after 4 hours, mainly of the roots of the incisors.
A greater degree of chipping was observed after 90 minutes with the large clasts.
One upper incisor and one lower disintegrated, all had damage to their root, and two were split longitudinally: 11 out of 13 incisors were recovered.
Of the vole molars, 2 out of 18 split longitudinally, 12 disappeared without trace, and only 4 were left intact.
No chipping was observed, and it would seem that damage mainly occurs through splitting of the crowns which leads to their disintegration and loss from the sample.
Few of the postcrania were completely intact before the experiment began, but whether intact or broken, there was little additional breakage produced by the finer grades of sediment.
Rounding of broken ends was produced within 60 hours and became pronounced after 192 hours.
With the 8 mm clasts, some abrasion of the femur heads, and the separation of tibia and fibula occurred, but after one additional hour with the large clasts, articular ends were broken, leaving an assemblage of broken ends and shafts: articular ends — Fig. 1.9b, h, i, n, t; and shaft fragments — Fig. 1.9c, o, u.
Finally, after 90 minutes tumbling with the large clasts, the postcrania fragmented still further: four out of five femora remained as chipped proximal ends (Fig. 1.9d-f,1.10C); one proximal end and two shafts of tibiae (Fig. 1.9j-1); four out of five humeri remained as two distal ends (Fig. 1.10H), one proximal and one shaft (Fig. 1.9 r, s); and all four ulnae remained, one still intact and the others represented by a proximal end and two shafts (Fig. 1.9 v, w).
Ribs were broken up and mostly lost, vertebrae had all their processes removed and three out of nine lost, pelves were reduced to the region of the acetabulum and one damaged beyond recognition, and five out of twelve phalanges and metapodials remained.
The broken ends of the postcranial shafts were all angular, with no evidence of rounding (Fig. 1.10 E-H).
Fig. 1.9 Postcranial elements remaining after tumbling experiment.
(a)—(f) femur fragments;(g)—(l) tibia fragments;(m)—(s) humerus fragments;(t)—(w) ulna fragments.
The nature of the breakage is largely controlled by the structural properties of the bones concerned, and it is not considered that this experiment has provided any new information on breakage (see, for instance, Korth 1979).
What is interesting, however, is the importance of clast size in the breakage of bone, and clearly in a cave environment, where limestone clasts are abundant, angular and often very large, small mammal bones are likely to fragment very quickly indeed, in a matter of minutes rather than hours.
Modifications after burial
After burial, bones are protected from the worst effects of weathering, but they may still be subjected to corrosion by soil or sediment.
This may take the form of acid etching in highly acid soils, root marks and corrosion produced by plant roots, corrosion caused by organic acids, and a form of corrosion apparently associated with high humidity in soils and caves.
These will be briefly described in order to differentiate the modifications from those produced by digestion by predators.
Fig. 1.10 (overleaf) SEM micrographs of some of the elements from the tumbling experiment.
A. insectivore mandible (×20); B. broken tip of ascending ramus of insectivore mandible (×75); C. femur head with impact damage on edge of articular surface with a crack extending from it (×75); D. abraded edge of greater trochanter (×38); E. femur and pelvis (×11); F. broken end of femur shaft with little evidence of rounding (×75); G. broken end of pelvis with crack extending down from uneven break but little evidence of rounding (×75); H. two distal humerus fragments (×12).
Several examples of soil corrosion are shown in Fig. 1.11.
Advanced root etching is shown in Fig. 1.11A, where the root marks are so extensive and overlapping that the individual marks are hard to distinguish and the whole bone appears to have been chemically corroded (which of course it has).
Careful examination, however, enables the original root marks to be seen, having dissolved the bone to form channels conforming to the shape of the roots (Fig. 1.12).
Decay of the surface of the bone may be seen in Fig. 1.11B, which is a bone preserved under slightly acid water (pH 5.1).
There is a combination of physical abrasion and surface breakdown resulting in large scale penetration of the bone, as seen in the root etching but lacking the root-pattern of the first example.
Fig. 1.11C shows a similar result, but this time arising from exposure to organic acids from the urine of hyaenas which have broken down most of the surface of the bone: a small area of cortex can be seen in the midpoint of the shaft.
Finally, Fig. 1.11D shows a bone exposed to acid ground water (pH 3.5) in a sphagnum bog on Dartmoor: acid etching has penetrated the bone along open pores and enlarged them to give a sieve-like appearance.
A number of experiments on bone modification in soil have been initiated, but they have only been running for five years and so far there is no good evidence of any change.
Bones in organic rich soil appear to be altering more than bones in well drained sandy soil, but it is too early to attach any significance to this apparent change.
Some bones from an Iron age pit at Maiden castle (Table 1.1) which show interesting evidence of pedogenic or soil-induced modification are illustrated in Fig. 1.13.
The bones come from the remains of small mammals apparently    trapped in a pitfall cut into chalk, and there has been extensive alteration on both the enamel and the bone, with surface flaking on the vole molars (Fig. 1.13 A, B) and incisors (Fig. 1.13 C, D).
The same type of modification is seen on shrews (it will be seen in Chapter 3 that evidence of digestion occurs earlier on vole teeth than on mice or shrews), and flaking and penetration of limb bones is also common (Fig. 1.13 G-H).
The main criterion by which all these forms of pedogenic modification may be distinguished is that they affect all parts of the bones and teeth more or less equally, so that the whole of the surface is altered, not just small parts of it.
It will be seen in Chapter 3 that this is very different from the distribution patterns of corrosion produced by digestion.
Fig 1.1 Four bones showing corrosion as a result of physical processes.
A. human bone from Turkey buried in alkaline soil with scrub oak vegetation, showing extensive root marks that have coalesced to give an appearance of surface corrosion; B. sheep bone from stream (pH 5.4) in Wales showing the result of long term immersion in water, with breakdown of the surface structure of the bone and formation of large scale pitting; C. bovid bone from Tanzania which was buried in the floor of a hyaena den and subjected to trampling and decay from urine and organic acids, destructuring the surface leaving large scale pits and occasional islands of unaltered surface bone; D. horse bone from Sphagnum bog in Dartmoor (pH 3.5) showing acid etching of the bone producing pitting following and enlarging original structures in the bone.
Fig. 1.12 Root marks on bone: Recent cow rib from Draycott, Somerset; the cow died in 1977 and was excavated 8 years later, and the vegetation around the bone was exclusively nettles (breadth of root impressions is approximately 300 microns); the root marks are shown in three increasing magnifications from top to bottom: A ×12; B ×15, C ×75.
In addition to corrosion, there is also the likelihood of breakage of bones buried in sediment or soil.
Under permanently wet conditions, small mammal bone becomes soft and easily broken, and it has been found that small mammal bones preserved in wet caves become extensively broken, whereas in dry caves they are better preserved, but other factors may also modify such an assemblage.
Rock fall and trampling in the narrow confines of a cave are two major factors.
This will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 4.
Modifications by exposure
The three final stages of modification in Fig. 1.2 will only be briefly mentioned here.
Transport of fossil bone after fossilization is probably not uncommon, and the nature of the breakage that occurs at this stage is highly characteristic.
Fresh bone breaks with a jagged, spiral type of break depending on the nature of the bone rather than the breakage agent.
This will be described in more detail in Chapter 3 on bone modifications produced by predators.
Dry bone, on the other hand breaks with an uneven although still slightly jagged break but lacking the spiral element of fresh bone.
Fossil bone is different from both in that it breaks like the solid mineral substance it has become, with straight transverse breaks across the shafts of limb bones.
Very often the fossil bones may be broken in place by slight earth movements but with the pieces of bone still lined up with each other, only to fall apart during later transport or during excavation.
Fig. 1.13 (right) Small mammal bones from Iron age pits at Maiden Castle, Dorset.
A. rooted vole molar showing chipping of edges and pitting and flaking of the enamel surface (×25); B. enlargement of same (×45); C. tip of lower incisor showing chipping of edges of enamel and pitting and flaking of the enamel surface (×20); D. enlargement of same (×75); E. shrew mandible showing pitting of bone surface near the alveolar border and flaking of the enamel surface of the teeth (×40); F.  enlargement of the anterior tooth (×165); G. shaft of limb bone showing pitting and flaking of the surface (×12); H.  enlargement of same (×112).
Modifications by collecting
This can be an important source of modification, depending on the sophistication of technique used during the excavation.
Some damage is always done, no matter how careful the technique, and the recovery of small mammal assemblages nearly always depends on some form of screening which can be moderately destructive.
Gentle washing with 500 μ screens usually recovers all sites of small mammal   bone with a minimum of breakage, but where the bones are already broken in situ some modification is inevitable.
We have been able to demonstrate this at Westbury, for the bones from the rodent earth (unit 15/8: see Chapter 6), where careful excavation with dental picks revealed complete bones with constituent parts in position but separated from each other by narrow cracks.
A vole mandible is illustrated here showing the incisor, three molars and the body of the mandible all in position, but immersion in water caused the teeth to separate from the mandible and the bone of the mandible itself to break up into minute fragments.
The ensuing sample, therefore, consisted of three molars, one incisor and some unidentifiable pieces of bone, which is what would have been produced by screening.
Vole mandible from Westbury deposits showing the results of in situ break down of the bone.
Along the bottom of the mandible the incisor is broken into three fragments; the body of the mandible is broken into one main piece and a large number of smaller fragments; and the molars at the top are ready to fall out and the posterior molar has almost disintegrated.
Summary
1
The investigations of the small mammal faunas from Westbury cave have been undertaken with a view to interpreting their palaeoecology.
The Westbury sediments are middle Pleistocene in age with numerous small mammal faunas in different parts of the breccia sequences.
Small mammals are here defined as less than 5 kg in weight.
2
The interpretation of palaeoecology is rendered difficult because the composition of fossil faunas may differ radically from the communities from which they were derived.
3
Two kinds of evidence may indicate the probable source of the fossil faunas: a. microstratigraphy of the sediments; b. taphonomy of the small mammal bone.
4
Microstratigraphy provides information on the environment of deposition of the sediments, where they came from and how they were deposited.
5
Taphonomy considers post-mortem modifications of the bones in order to make inferences about the modifying agents during the transition of the bones from being parts of living animals to becoming fossils.
6
The first stage of taphonomic modification is at the death of the small mammals.
Death by disease, old age, or accident all produce selective but unmodified death assemblages.
Predation produces death assemblages that are both highly selective following the prey preferences of the predator, and modified, depending on how the predator kills and eats its prey.
Potential modifications include loss of bone, breakage of bone, and digested bone surfaces.
7
The second stage of taphonomic modification takes account of what happens to the small mammal carcases shortly after death.
Decay sets in if soft tissues remain, and the bones may be dispersed by wind, water or trampling; or the carcases may be scavenged by predators, with results indistinguishable from the primary effects of predation.
8
The third stage of taphonomic modification merges with the second, with further dispersal of the bones resulting in breakage and attrition.
If the bones remain on the surface of the ground for a long time, weathering may occur resulting in splitting and cracking of the bone and incipient flaking.
9
The fourth stage of taphonomic modification occurs after burial of the small mammal bone in soil, sediment or in caves.
In all cases, the bones are protected from weathering, but there may be further breakage or attrition if secondary transport or trampling occurs, and there may be surface corrosion of the bone in acid (or highly alkaline) conditions.
10
Three final stages of taphonomic modification are mentioned briefly.
They occur during fossilization, with loss of the organic component of bone and its replacement by minerals; the possible transport of bone after fossilization and its subsequent exposure to weathering; and the various biases and modifications introduced by incomplete excavation and inadequate preservation and storage of specimens in museums.
11
Many of these taphonomic factors produce easily recognizable modifications.
Only those acting at the second and third stages have been described in the present chapter, but the most important agents for small mammal bone accumulations are those operating at the first stage of taphonomic modification.
Predation is both the most important cause of death in small mammal faunas and the cause of their greatest modification, and this will be the subject of the following two chapters.
Predators and Predation
Predation is a major cause of small mammal mortality.
Even more than this, from the palaeontological point of view it is the major cause of small mammal bone accumulations, particularly in caves.
Because predators always eat selectively, accumulations of their prey reflect the predators' tastes rather than being a potentially accurate reflection of the living fauna from which they were derived.
All small mammal concentrations in the fossil record must be regarded as potential predator assemblages, and the activities of predators must be investigated in order to allow for the predator biases inevitably present in the faunas.
The comparative sample of predator assemblages investigated is described briefly here, at greater length in the Appendix, and summarized in Table 2.1.
Effects of predation
The relationship between predator and prey is complex, and the effects of predation on small mammal populations vary.
Cyclic fluctuations in population numbers occur in many species of small mammal, and the exact role predation plays in the rise and fall of population numbers is not yet agreed upon (Southern, 1979).
Cyclic fluctuations in vole populations have been variously interpreted as the result of intrinsic or extrinsic factors by different workers.
Chitty (1960) has suggested a set of behavioral changes by which population numbers might be controlled by intrinsic changes within the populations themselves, producing a sort of genetic polymorphism (Krebs & Myers, 1974).
First of all there is a phase of population increase, where mortality is low and adult body size is up to 50 per cent larger than normal; the resulting high density promotes dispersal, shortens the breeding season, and delays sexual maturity in juveniles; and this is followed by a phase of decline, which may be rapid or spaced over one to two years, and during which mortality is high and adult size decreases.
Lack of food or predation are not held to have any effects on this cycle at any stage (Chitty, 1960).
In contrast to this, extrinsic factors like food supply and predation are held by other workers to control the population cycles.
In tundra habitats, it has been shown that lemmings can eat up to 50 per cent of available vegetation and destroy a lot more during peak years, and as a result of lack of food the rate of decline of lemming populations can be as rapid as the rate of increase (Batzli, 1975).
On the other hand, the proportions of vegetation destroyed in temperate habitats are much less, and this does not seem to be a limiting factor in these areas.
Predation varies in its effects: when populations are at their peak, only about 5 per cent of small mammals are predated, while this can increase up to 50–88 per cent of the standing crop at low population levels (Pearson, 1964; Southern & Lowe, 1982).
Predators appear to take similar numbers of small mammals whatever their population level, so that the effect on population numbers is proportionately greater when numbers are low (MacLean, Fitzgerald & Pitelka, 1974).
The conclusion on predators is therefore that they have minimal effects on small mammal populations when numbers are high, that they have no braking effect when numbers are increasing, that they may have some effect when numbers are declining, but their major effect is when numbers are low, when they may also delay the recovery phase of the population cycle (Southern, 1979).
Table 2. 1 Summary of pellet and scat collections analysed
Predators as collectors of bone
There is good evidence that many kinds of predators accumulate the bones of their prey.
This can arise from predators carrying their prey to favoured eating places, storing excess food supplies in caches, and from deposition of pellets or scats with indigestible prey remains contained inside them.
There is evidence that some of the larger predators have favoured eating places, for example under trees in hot climates (Haynes, 1982; Behrensmeyer, 1987).
This has not yet been found to apply to smaller predators of small mammals.
Caching of food, on the other hand, does occur, and records of 70 or 80 prey individuals being stored in one place have been described for different predator species (Quick, 1951; Parovshchikov, 1963; Chesemore, 1975; MacDonald, 1976).
These caches usually consist of single prey species, and if the predator does not return for them the resulting bone assemblage should consist of more or less complete skeletons from one or a limited number of species.
Many birds of prey regurgitate pellets which contain the indigestible remains of their prey, including much of the bone.
These pellets may accumulate in great concentrations if they are deposited from regular nest or roost sites (Southern, 1954; Lockie, 1955; Dare, 1961; Simms, 1961; McNally, 1964; Dean, 1973; Glue, 1971,1977; Glue & Hammond, 1974).
Both owls and diurnal birds of prey regurgitate pellets in this way, with owl pellets containing up to 40 50 per cent bone (Duke et al .
1975).
The pellets of diurnal predators contain less bone, often no more than 5–10 per cent, and this is apparently because of the much greater efficiency of their digestive processes (see below).
Pellet formation takes place in the stomach, and it comes about because the small size of the pyloric opening connecting the stomach to the rest of the digestive tract and its high placement prevent the passage of larger particles into the intestines (Reed & Reed, 1928; Grimm & Whitehouse, 1963).
Any residues not digested in the stomach must therefore be ejected back through the oesophagus, and to prevent damage that might be caused by sharp ends of bones the process of pellet formation is such as to enclose the bones in the undigested skin and hair from the prey animals.
A range of pellets from owls (top) and diurnal birds of prey (bottom).
Bones are also present in the scats or faeces of mammalian carnivores.
(Southern & Watson, 1941; Anderson, 1954; Lockie, 1959,1961; Day, 1968; Carpenter, 1970; Poole, 1970; Mellet, 1974; Rood, 1975; Stuart, 1977; Watson, 1976; MacDonald, 1980; Lloyd, 1980; Andrews & Evans, 1983; Kowalski, 1988).
The degree of concentration of bones from such accumulations of prey depends on the habits of the predator more than the habits of the prey animals.
The nature and modifications of the prey assemblages also may differ for similar reasons.
Many mammalian carnivores use latrines, such as badgers amongst the mustelids and genets amongst the viverrids (Kruuk, 1978; Bearder & Randall, 1978, Delibes et al .
1989), and other carnivores use their scats to mark their home ranges.
Coyote and fox scat concentrations are used for this purpose, and it is quite common to find mustelid scats from weasels or martens deposited along walls or roads which mark the edge of individual ranges (Lockie, 1966; MacDonald, 1979).
Scats may be accumulated outside den entrances (Poole, 1970), and a very large assemblage of polecat scats has been collected from an area less than two metres square outside a den in Rhosgogh Bog in mid-Wales.
Some species of bat also predate small mammals.
Morris (1974) records a small mammal assemblage in an inaccessible lava blister cave that was probably accumulated by the false vampire bat, which is a bat about 50 g in weight known to feed on rodents, fish and frogs.
They eat their prey at their roosts, littering the cave floor with the broken up remains of their meals.
Predator territory size
As accumulators of small mammal remains, predators introduce a bias into their prey assemblages related to the nature and extent of their territories and hunting areas.
It is sometimes claimed that predator assemblages are of little use in palaeoecological interpretation because of this bias, and because they take prey from areas far removed from the place where the prey remains are deposited by the predator.
There are two aspects of this that have to be considered: the relation between territory size, hunting areas and group sizes in predators; and how these are related to the diversity of prey taken by different predators.
Put very simply, available prey diversity depends on the size and complexity of the habitat in the predator's territory, but of itself territory size is of limited significance.
The main determinant of territory size in predators is the resource dispersal in the territory, the distribution of the productive areas that supply most of the food for the predators' hunting area.
The greater the dispersal of resource areas the larger the territory, but the extent of the resource areas themselves may not vary greatly (Macdonald, 1983).
For example, under differing degrees of habitat richness, two predators of the same species may have widely differing territory sizes if the resource areas are widely separated or not.
Where the resource areas are widely dispersed, the territory is large, and where the territory is small, the same number or extent of resource areas are closer together, so that in both cases the predator gets its food from similar sized hunting areas  but from quite different territory sizes.
Moreover, the degree of richness of the productive areas does not affect the territory size, but rather controls the numbers of predators that can use it, thus controlling group size in social predators (Macdonald, 1983).
Both large and small territories may sustain similar numbers of predators if the productivity of the resource areas within their territories is similar.
In this sense the territory size of predators is irrelevant to palaeoecological reconstruction because it merely reflects resource dispersal and not resource richness.
The relationship of small mammal diversity, as reflected in prey diversity, to habitat richness is of greater significance in this respect, and this will be considered in more detail below in connection with species representation of small mammals in prey assemblages.
Antiquity of predators
Many of the predator species that are known to accumulate bones in their pellets or scats are of considerable antiquity.
Fossil owls are known from the Eocene, and some living genera have been identified in Miocene or even Oligocene deposits (Brodkorb, 1971; Walker, in Burton, 1973).
Two species are known from the Westbury fauna, the short-eared owl and the little owl, and many species of owl and diurnal birds of prey are recorded from the late Pleistocene of Britain, including snowy owls and European eagle owls (Harrison, 1987).
There is direct evidence of owls in some of the French caves, where pictures of owls are included among the other animal drawings.
A selection of these is shown here, with undoubted snowy owls from the Magdelenian of Le Portel (Breuil & Jeannel, 1955), top left, and the Aurignacian of Grotte des Trois Freres (Breuil, 1959), middle left.
A selection of owls from Ti-N-Terirt in Morocco (Lhote, 1970) includes the obvious outline of an eagle owl, top right and bottom left, and the ones with the closed face shield probably represent barn owls, although apparently the artist got confused and combined the ear tufts of the eagle owl with the facial disc of the barn owl on some of the bottom pictures.
Both species occur in the region today.
Prehistoric drawings of owls from sites in France and North Africa: snowy owls top left and middle left; European eagle owls top right and bottom left; and barn owls bottom right: see text.
The mammalian carnivores are also of some antiquity.
Viverrids and mustelids are known from the Oligocene, and the former are a dominant part of the carnivore fauna from early Miocene deposits in East Africa (Savage, 1965; Andrews et al .,
1979).
Canids and felids also date from this time (Savage, 1965), but like hyaenids they do not become common until the middle Miocene.
At Westbury, the canids are represented by a small wolf, which almost certainly included small mammals in its diet, but the felids present are large and could not have been important as accumulators of small mammals.
Mustelids very like modern stoats and weasels are the most common carnivores at Westbury (apart from the cave bear which was probably only partly carnivorous anyway) and they could have contributed to the small mammal faunas at Westbury.
Predators as prey
It must be questioned whether the presence of any particular species of predator in a fossiliferous deposit provides an indication that that predator accumulated the bones in the same deposit.
This is an assumption often made by palaeontologists, but presence of a predator species in a fossil assemblage is no proof that it was the one that accumulated the assemblage.
To take some modern analogies, when a lion has made a kill and left the remains to the vultures, it is not likely or necessary to find a lion bone or tooth with the kill in order to identify the predator.
Similarly, with a pellet accumulation, the identity of the owl or bird of prey is revealed by the size and shape of the pellets and their location, and it is not necessary to find any of its bones in order to identify the predator.
In fact it must be considered that predators kill and eat other predators (Mikkola, 1976).
Eagle owls kill many other species of owl and diurnal raptor, including such species as tawny and long-eared owls and buzzards, as well as small carnivores (Olsson, 1979); snowy owls kill short-eared owls (Levin et al .,
1977); tawny owls kill kestrels (Carlyon-Britton, 1928; Yalden, 1985); and some of the larger diurnal raptors such as buzzards occasionally kill owls (Christie, 1931; Barnard, 1981).
Mammalian carnivores will also kill birds of prey if they can catch them at night on the nest or roost, and many of the smaller carnivores are themselves taken by larger owls or eagles, although not without danger to themselves.
The differences in daily activity pattern give predators an advantage at different times, so that diurnal raptors have the advantage during the day, and nocturnal species the advantage during the night.
If it is possible to generalize from this at all, it is that presence of predator remains in a fossil assemblage gives no indication of method of origin of the assemblage, even if it can be shown to be accumulated by a predator.
It could even be said that the predator in the assemblage is the least likely one to have been involved in its accumulation.
Prey assemblages
There are several aspects of the faunal assemblages accumulated by predators that may be considered in identifying them as prey assemblages.
Firstly, there may be remains of the pellets or scats.
Secondly, the size distribution of the prey animals may give an indication of the size of the predator.
Thirdly, the species composition of the prey animals may be characteristic of particular predator types.
And finally, the modifications of the bones of the prey.animals might also be predator-specific.
Pellet or scat remains
Pellets are occasionally preserved in the fossil record (Tobien, 1977).
They are found more frequently in recent archaeological assemblages, for instance from Neolithic deposits in Orkney (Armour-Chelu, 1988) and Bronze age deposits in the Somerset Levels (Girling, 1977), but usually the pellets break down so quickly that they are not preserved.
Some carnivore scats have been reported from the Plio-Pleistocene deposits of East Turkana in Kenya, and analysis of one of these scats has yielded three species of mammal, two reptiles and one bird (Jacobs, 1985).
The carnivore was probably a medium to small canid such as the jackal (see also Horowitz & Goldberg, 1989).
Fossil carnivore scat from East Turkana Kenya with bone exposed at the surface by acid etching (Jacobs 1985).
Photograph by Louis Jacobs.
Prey size
There is generally a size bias in all predator assemblages and a predictable size equivalence between predator and prey.
The nature of this relationship is far from simple.
This is because of differences in hunting behaviour and also because predator reaction to prey availability varies considerably.
Because of the risk of injury and the need to kill prey quickly, predators usually predate animals smaller than themselves.
The most efficient predators may take animals as large as or larger than themselves, but this is usually as a result of communal hunting, for example amongst the mammalian carnivores.
Owls nearly always take prey smaller than themselves without dismembering them.
The same is generally true of diurnal raptors, although they can also take larger animals because with their stronger beaks and talons they are able to overpower and kill larger and more powerful prey, and they may on occasion hunt cooperatively (Bednarz, 1988).
These differences produce corresponding differences in the bone assemblages produced by owls and diurnal raptors.
Less bone is ingested by diurnal raptors, because some of it is left with the uneaten carcase after soft parts have been stripped off, whereas more of the bone is eaten by owls.
The bone is also more extensively broken by the diurnal species during feeding, and it is less broken by owls.
These differences are reflected in the pellets, with owl pellets containing more bone which is less broken and raptor pellets less bone which is more broken, but there is an important size element here which complicates the issue.
The bones of a small rodent species eaten by a small owl are more likely to be broken than the bones of the same rodent species eaten by a larger owl, even though in both cases the rodent may have been swallowed whole.
Bones from larger prey species that have been eaten by large owls are also likely to be broken, in contrast to the bones of the smaller species that may be present in the same pellet.
Similarly for the diurnal raptors, bones of small prey species (small relative to the body size of the predator) are less broken than those from larger prey species.
Some predators, such as tawny owls, eagle owls and buzzards change their diet in response to changes in prey availability (Southern, 1954).
As a result, these species take the greatest variety of prey size of any of the predators investigated here.
The response to prey size has been compared for a set of four barn owl pellet samples from England and South Africa (Fig. 2.1).
The barn owl preys on the most abundant small mammal species available, and it can adapt to different sized prey depending on availability.
Prey sizes in the barn owl pellet samples from South Africa show greater diversity and range than the ones from England (Fig. 2.1), and this reflects the greater size diversity of the South African rodent population as well as the larger size of the South African subspecies of the barn owl.
The size spectrum of tawny owl prey is similar to that of the two British samples of barn owl, so that the size variation of the prey within a wide ranging predator like the barn owl is greater than the prey size variation between it and other predators.
On the other hand, species like long-eared owls have different prey size spectra even when occupying the same geographical regions as barn owls or tawny owls.
It may be concluded from this that prey size can be used as no more than an approximation to predator type, and size spectra are certainly not predator-specific.
Prey availability
There are many sources of variation in prey availability affecting the diets of predators.
Seasonal prey variation is common in many predator diets.
Some northern temperate  birds of prey and owls switch from rodents during the winter to insects and birds during the summer, because of the difficulty in locating the rodents in the thick summer vegetation.
In the winter, when the vegetation dies down, the rodents are more vulnerable to predation and are taken more frequently (Southern, 1954).
Sudden changes in behaviour patterns of prey species also produce seasonal changes in predation; for example when young moles are dispersing from their nests they travel on the surface rather than beneath the ground, and they are then heavily predated.
Changes may also occur from year to year in response to cycles in rodent populations.
The population fluctuations of voles and lemmings are well known, but other species also have population variations which affect predators, for instance the harvest mouse/long-eared owl association in Hungary (Schmidt, 1968).
There is evidence of individual learned behaviour patterns, such as for instance barn owls which roost in caves and which predate bat roosts in the same caves.
Bats are not commonly taken by owls, especially not rhinolophid bats (Krzanowski, 1973), so this behaviour is all the more exceptional.
Buzzards are predators of rabbits in England, but over much of their range in Europe, even where rabbits are available, they eat mainly small mammals (Pinowski & Ryszkowski, 1963; Tubbs, 1974).
Fig. 2.1 Comparison of mandibular lengths of four barn owl prey assemblages.
Above the horizontal axis are two English barn owl assemblages from Barton Turf and Stratton (see Append.
Table 1); below the axis are two samples from South Africa, from the caves at Makapansgat and Boomplaas.
Mandibular lengths along the horizontal axis are divided into arbitrary size classes, and the frequency of rodent and insectivore mandibles in each size class are plotted against the vertical scale.
The peaks in the two English samples represent shrews and voles, while the greater size diversity from South Africa is produced by the greater diversity of insectivores and murid and cricetid rodents present in the South African environment.
The dominant prey size in the South African samples is smaller than in the English samples, but larger prey is also taken, so that size variation is much greater in the South African samples.
Prey availability is a direct function of the size of the hunting territory of the predator.
Species that depend on small numbers of prey species either require large hunting ranges (Nilsson, 1984) or have to be nomadic, migrating in search of prey.
More sedentary species take a wider variety of prey, and this affects the size spectrum of their prey, as discussed above.
Habitat use also varies, with some species like the long-eared owl living and nesting in woodland (Southern, 1954) but doing most of its hunting over open country (Yalden, 1985).
There are instances of change in diet related to habitat: tawny owls living in wooded areas eat more moles and fewer birds, whereas in more open areas they eat more voles and birds (Southern, 1954).
There are many other instances of dietary variations to be found in the literature, as well as extensive overlap in diet (Brown, 1976; Mikkola, 1983; Yalden, 1985).
Without going into any further detail it can be concluded that prey composition must be used cautiously in any attempt to identify predators by their prey assemblages.
If this is true of modern predators and their assemblages, it is even more the case for the fossil record, where information on seasonality, population cycles and so on are not available.
Species representation in prey assemblages
It will be clear from the discussion in the previous two sections on prey size and availability that the species content of prey assemblages cannot be considered diagnostic of any particular predator.
Predators take what they can get, and if a preferred food species is not available they will turn to another.
This is true to a certain extent of even the most specialist feeders amongst the owls like the great grey owl or the short-eared owl, while most other species adapt their dietary requirements to a wide range of seasonal, climatic, regional and ecological variants.
Thus it cannot be expected that a consideration of the species present in an assemblage will identify the predator responsible for bringing it together even for large sample sizes (Mason & Macdonald, 1980).
There is a quite separate consideration relating to species composition of prey assemblages, and this is the extent to which it can be considered diagnostic of the habitats from which the assemblage has been derived.
This is an important consideration when attempting to interpret palaeoecology from the composition of fossil faunas that are derived from predator activity, and it has been treated in some detail in the appendix, where comparative data for a number of the predator species has been summarized.
These data compare predator assemblages with trapping data from the same habitat over which the predator was known to hunt, and comparisons can also be made between different species of predator that live and hunt in the same locality.
The data are too few to come to any definite conclusions, but what is available will be referred to briefly here, and reference should be made to the appendix for the background detail.
One of the main differences between predator assemblages and those accumulated by other means results from the activity pattern of the predator.
Strictly nocturnal predators like the eagle owls can entirely miss a common rodent species if that species is diurnal, and in these cases the prey assemblage has an unbalanced species composition compared with the small mammal community actually present.
For example, the diurnal grass mouse, Arvicanthis niloticus is not present in the eagle owl assemblages from  the Serengeti (Append.
Table 4) even though it is the most common rodent of the region (Append.
Table 5, and Misonne & Verschuren, 1966; Andrews, 1983).
Similarly, the largely diurnal species Rhabdomys pumilio is not predated by barn owls (Perrin, 1982), although overall barn owls take a more diverse sample of small mammals than was obtained from trapping (see Append.
Fig. 3).
A similar explanation has been given for imbalances in the rodent fauna from the Pliocene at Laetoli, Tanzania (Denys, 1985,1986).
Unstriped grass mouse (Arvicanthis niloticus)
Another difference that strongly affects the species composition of.
predator assemblages relates to habitat.
Even when trap lines are laid down along the hunting paths of a relatively specialized predator like the barn owl, there may be considerable differences in species proportions represented in the two assemblages.
Commensal species like the house mouse and rat from dwellings slightly removed from the trap lines may be present in the owl assemblage but absent from the traps because of the larger range of the owl.
Other species from one particular microhabitat in the region may be over-represented in the predator assemblage if it is a favoured hunting area or under-represented if it is not (see Append.
Fig. 3).
For example, the vole Clethrionomys glareolus is under-represented in buzzard pellet assemblages because it favours microhabitats with thick vegetation while the buzzard concentrates on the more open parts of the environment (Append.
Fig. 10).
This species may also be under-represented in trap assemblages if the traps are set even short distances from thick vegetation, for it so rarely ventures into the open.
(Prey size is an obvious limiting factor in making comparisons with field data from trapping.
The buzzard diet shown in Append.
Fig. 10 includes large proportions of rabbits and birds, neither of which were part of the comparative fauna obtained by trapping, so that the two samples appear very dissimilar.
There are also known differences in the trappability of mammal species, with some species being readily caught in traps and others not, so that the comparative samples obtained by trapping are no more representative than are the predator assemblages.)
There is also the factor of species preferences by predators.
These might in part be related to habitat, although the extent to which this is true is far from clear.
The great grey owl, for instance, favours voles generally and Microtus agrestis in particular .
Other species of vole may be taken in smaller numbers even where the trapping data suggest that the other species are in fact more common (Append.
Fig. 6).
The problem here is with the microhabitat preferences of this vole compared with that of the other species, particularly Clethrionomys, present in the habitat.
The latter usually restricts its activities to areas of thicker vegetation, whereas Microtus agrestis favours more open areas, so that even if it is less common overall in the habitat it is more susceptible to predation by the owl and is taken more frequently.
It is not clear which of these factors is more important in these cases.
Of all the information available on species composition of predator diets, the most useful for the palaeontologist is that relating solely to species diversity.
The main criteria here are numbers of species in the assemblage (taxonomic richness), evenness of spread of the species (equitability), and the converse, the degree of dominance of the most common species.
Taxonomic richness in predator assemblages is always less than habitat richness because of predator selectivity, so that the numbers of species in a predator assemblage can never be greater than were actually present.
Interpreting taxonomic richness thus comes down to identifying the ways by which diversity has been decreased.
Equitability depends on two things, the original equitability of the small mammal fauna and the degree of predator selectivity.
Predators may select prey in order of abundance, as does the barn owl, for instance, in which case they preserve the original pattern of equitability, or they may select less abundant prey preferentially, as do most mustelids, in which case they change it.
In either case, the same degree of dominance of a small mammal assemblage by one or a few species may be achieved, but by different means.
Comparisons of prey assemblages of predators hunting over the same area (Append.
Table 3 and Append.
Fig. 9) show changes in species equitability between opportunistic predators like the tawny owl on the one hand and more specialist feeders on the other.
Tawny owls eat more or less equal quantities of many different prey types, whereas long-eared owls are vole and bird specialists, short-eared owls are mainly vole specialists, and barn owls are vole and shrew specialists.
The tawny owl produces the most representative prey assemblage from its habitat, including rare species, but the barn owl preserves the original community equitability more closely by concentrating on the more common species at the expense of missing the rare species.
It has been shown that different habitats have highly characteristic patterns of species diversity (Fleming, 1973; Krebs, 1978; Andrews, Lord & Evans, 1979; Avery, 1982).
Habitats with extreme climates and little vegetation have small mammal faunas with low species richness and low equitability, but these are also the characteristics of the prey assemblages of some predators, particularly, for instance, short-eared owls and great grey owls.
Confusion between the sources of faunal diversity could easily lead to mistakes in interpreting its meaning.
It is true, however, that there is an approximate correlation between the feeding behaviour of predators and the habitat they occupy.
The most selective feeders, as we have seen already, either have large hunting areas or are nomadic, but these are also the species that live in the most hostile environments.
They produce small mammal assemblages of low diversity and low equitability, but they also hunt in regions that have the same characteristics, so there is no discrepancy between the predator assemblage and the original faunal composition.
An even more potent example is the European eagle owl, which in forested regions produces prey assemblages of high diversity, reflecting the faunal composition in these regions, but in the collections from Qatar, where the same species lives in near-desert conditions, its prey assemblages are dominated to very large extent by a single species, which is also the most common large rodent in that part of the desert.
Bone modifications
All predators modify the bones of their prey to a certain extent.
The nature of these modifications are described here, and their distribution and extent will be documented in Chapter 3.
BONE LOSS.
Many previous studies of bone loss have concentrated on the representation of skeletal elements and their loss from bone samples derived from predator scats or pellets.
Good examples of this approach may be seen in Dodson & Wexlar (1979), Korth (1979) and Andrews & Evans (1983).
These authors have shown that while patterns are different for different predators, all predators produce some bone loss from the expected sample.
The average relative abundances of all skeletal elements for three species of owl were found to be as follows: great horned owl, 51.5 per cent; barn owl, 62.7 per cent ; and screech owl, 46.5 per cent (Dodson & Wexlar, 1979).
For these species, therefore, about half of the bones expected to be present, based on the numbers of prey animals consumed over a measured period, were recovered from the pellets.
As this work was done under carefully controlled conditions it must be concluded that the missing 40–50 per cent of bones were totally destroyed by the owls.
Moreover, for the same three species of owls, 45 rodents eaten by the great horned owl yielded a calculated MNI (minimum numbers of individuals based on counts of the most frequent skeletal element) of only 37; 24 rodents eaten by the barn owl yielded 17 for MNI; and 14 rodents eaten by the screech owl yielded an MNI of 12.
In all cases, some individuals were lost during digestion, and there was clearly differential destruction of bone.
Prey loss is greater when the predator individuals are immature, because of higher degrees of digestion (see below), but it is also greater when the prey species themselves are immature (Lowe, 1980).
Percentage loss of prey from tawny owl pellets was found to be greater in summer than in winter (Lowe, 1980), and this could relate both to the greater numbers of immature rodents taken as prey, the bones of which are less mineralized and therefore easier to digest (Lowe, 1980), and to the likelihood of the birds producing the pellets being themselves immature In the case of the great horned owl it has been found that the stomach pH in immature birds is lower than that of adults (Grimm & Whitehouse, 1963) and there is therefore greater destruction of bone and loss of prey.
An even greater degree of bone loss has been demonstrated for the kestrel (Yalden & Yalden, 1985).
Of 213 prey animals eaten, only 56 could be identified in the pellets, again examined under carefully controlled conditions.
Bird prey completely disappeared, and laboratory mice were found to be more greatly affected than were wood mice.
Yalden & Yalden were able to calculate correction factors which could take this differential loss into account, but clearly this could give rise to problems in interpreting predator assemblages.
Partly arising from this, and partly because of the lack of difference found between many predator species, the crude measure of skeletal element proportions is not diagnostic, although it can still provide an approximation of the overall structure of the bone assemblage.
BONE BREAKAGE.
One of the reasons why owl pellet analysis is so useful a tool for ecologists is the good preservation and lack of breakage of most of the bones.
Lack of breakage, however, only characterizes some of the owl assemblages, but there has been little published on this subject.
Korth (1979) illustrated the breakage resulting from coyote predation, comparing it with physical abrasion, but he did not document the breakage in any systematic way.
He found that coyotes produced irregular breaks with angular edges, and overall 60 to 80 per cent of the bones in coyote scats were not broken.
He also made the observation that the smaller bones were less frequently broken, but gave no supporting evidence.
Dodson & Wexlar (1979) provided better documentation in their comparison between the bones from different owl pellet assemblages.
Breakage of the major postcrania, for instance, was found to vary between 28–38 per cent for the great horned owl, 0–11 per cent for the barn owl, and 53–83 per cent for the screech owl.
Comparable figures for these three species for mandibular breakage were 62, 9 and 71 per cent(Dodson & Wexlar, 1979).
These are big differences, and if confirmed would indicate that bone breakage could be a powerful tool in distinguishing between predator assemblages.
Bones from single pellets from the great grey owl (Strix nebulosa)(above) and kestrel (Falco tinnunculus)(below).
Bone breakage was analysed in rather greater detail by Andrews & Evans (1983).
They recorded breakage on the major postcranial elements by dividing the bones into segments — proximal, distal, and midshaft — and recorded the proportions of bones present in each.
This analysis was applied to a series of mammalian carnivores, with considerable differences emerging between them.
The red fox, for instance was found to produce the greatest degree of breakage, with no humeri or femora being preserved intact and the former represented by 83 per cent distal ends and the latter by 62 per cent proximal ends.
In contrast, the viverrids produced less breakage, with the humerus, for instance, being represented by 43 per cent complete bones and only 44 per cent distal ends.
It was concluded that mammalian carnivores produce greater degrees of breakage generally than do avian raptors, and there are sufficient differences between them to enable identification of the predator on breakage pattern alone at least to family level.
An even more detailed breakage analysis has been published (Hoffman, 1988) calculating percentage frequencies of proximal, distal and midshaft elements.
Bone fragments were recorded to the nearest 25 per cent of the original unbroken element or part thereof, and this enabled distinctions to be drawn between some of the seven predator species compared.
In the present work, the form of analysis described by Andrews & Evans (1983) has been used.
In addition, a series of indices have been developed for demonstrating breakage in the skull and mandible, recognizing several stages of breakage of the bones and loss of the teeth from the jaws.
These will be explained in the next chapter.
BONE DIGESTION.
Several studies on digestion of bone by captive owls and diurnal birds of prey have been published.
These recognize a number of factors affecting digestion of the bones of animal prey.
To begin with, it must be remembered that in avian predators, all digestion takes place in the stomach, whereas in mammalian carnivores digestion continues in the intestines as the food passes through the system.
Digestion can therefore be expected to be greater in mammalian predators, and so it has been found here.
Korth (1979) and Andrews & Evans (1983) attributed the rounding of broken ends of bones to digestion, although Mellet (1974) considered that the rounding was the result of chewing, and in an experiment on digestion of fish bones, Jones (1968) found evidence of polishing of rounded ends caused by digestion in pig, dog and humans.
Mellet recognized no evidence of digestion in his carnivore assemblages, but results presented here show digestion in mammalian predators to be very great.
The effects of digestion on small mammal skeletons are most diagnostic on the teeth.
Tooth enamel is the most highly mineralized part of the skeleton, and it is therefore the first part to be affected by acidity in the predator's stomach.
Tooth dentine and bone is less affected.
The effects of digestion are usually superficial, modifying the surfaces of the bones and teeth and only penetrating the surfaces in extreme cases.
The effect of digestive enzymes is uncertain at present: no discernible modification is apparent using standard light microscopes and scanning electron microscopes, but there is a suggestion that the chemical composition of the bone may be altered by digestion (Dauphin et al., 1988), and this could be species-specific, leading to the identification of predators by their chemical signature on the bones of their prey.
The level of acidity in predators varies from species to species.
The basal pH in the stomachs of owls is commonly in the range of 2.2 to 2.5, whereas that of falcons and eagles is 1.3 to 1.8.
This difference in pH results in a six-fold difference in hydrogen ion concentration (Duke et al .,
1975).
Partly as a result of this, it has been found that digestion in falcons causes greater modification of bones than has been found in owl prey assemblages (Yalden & Yalden, 1985).
This was observed empirically by Mayhew (1977) who compared bones from the pellets of three species of owl and two species of diurnal raptor.
Mayhew found that the bones from the pellets of the common buzzard and kestrel had been partly dissolved away, with broken ends of limb bones eroded to pointed ends, and he found similar types of modification in some fossil bones from middle Pleistocene deposits at West Runton (Norfolk).
His three criteria for identifying the modifications as chemical erosion as opposed to physical abrasion were that the damage was localized and not evenly spread over the whole surface of the bones, there was greater erosion of the tips of the teeth with some teeth not damaged at all, and  discoloration spread into the re-entrant angles of the vole teeth.
Three vole molars in the pellet of the common buzzard.
The teeth are still in position relative to one another, but the mandibular bone has almost all been digested (one fragment remains, detached at the bottom of the teeth) and the teeth themselves are heavily digested.
Unfortunately, most of the early studies on owl digestion have been carried out on species that do little damage to the bones of their prey.
Mayhew (1977) examined pellets from barn owls, long-eared owls and short-eared owls, all of which have been found do little damage (see Chapter 3).
This had the effect of making the differences between owl and diurnal raptor digestion appear greater than it really is, and it seemed to confirm earlier reports of minimal effects of digestion in owls (Reed & Reed, 1928; Duke et al .,
1975).
On the other hand, it has already been shown that the tawny owl produces higher levels of modification than other species (Raczynski & Ruprecht, 1974; Lowe, 1980), so that caution is needed before generalizing too far on what owls do or do not do.
Table 2.2 Barn owl samples: nest site versus roost site.
Modifications as follows–
Breakage is defined by the criteria laid down in figure 3.2.
Complete bones may or may not include the epiphyses and are defined as any bones that include major parts of proximal and distal ends as well as the shaft.
%  postcrania /crania: postcrania include 10 elements, two each of femora, tibiae, humeri, radii and ulnae; crania include 16 elements, two each of mandibles and maxillae and 12 molars; the expected ratio is therefore 10:16, so that to correct for this departure from I the actual postcranial values from the fossil samples are multiplied by 16 and the cranial values by 10, and these corrected values are shown here.
% fem + hum/mand + max: numbers of femora plus humeri and of mandibles plus maxillae are derived from the appendix.
This index compares equal numbers of elements, and it gives a better postcranial/cranial comparison than the preceding index unless there has been preferential destruction of the jaws.
% tib + rad/fem + hum: numbers of tibiae and radii and of humeri and femora are derived from the appendix.
This measures any preferential loss of distal limb elements.
Skull breakage: % complete: this compares the number of complete skulls (defined as in figure 3.11) with the total number of maxillae (divided by two to allow for the fact that there are two maxillae per skull).
The total number of maxillae present in the samples are given in the appendix.
% max. with zygomatic: the numbers of maxillae with part of the zygomatic process remaining compared with the total number of maxillae in the sample (given in the appendix).
% max. molar loss: numbers of empty alveolar spaces in the maxillae compared with the numbers of molars that should be present, which is given by the empty alveolar spaces plus the teeth still present in the maxillae.
% max. incisor loss: numbers of maxillae without incisors compared with the total numbers of maxillae (given in the appendix).
Mandible breakage: % complete: this compares the number of complete half mandibles (defined as in figure 3.12) with the total number of half mandibles in the sample (given in the appendix).
% inferior border broken: numbers of mandibles with the inferior border damaged (defined as in figure 3.12) compared with the total numbers of mandibles in the sample (given in the appendix).
% mand molar loss: numbers of empty alveolar spaces in the mandibles compared with the numbers of teeth that should be present, which is given by empty alveolar spaces plus molars still present.
% mand incisor loss: numbers of mandibles without incisors compared with total numbers of mandibles.
% isolated molars: the numbers of isolated molars in the sample (given in the appendix) compared with the numbers of empty alveolar spaces in the mandibles and maxillae from which the molars must have come.
% isolated incisors: as for molars.
% molars broken in situ: the numbers of molars in the mandibles and maxillae that are broken compared with the total number of molars present in the laws.
% incisors broken in situ: as for molars.
% isolated molars broken: the numbers of isolated molars that are broken compared with the total numbers of isolated molars in the sample (given in appendix).
% isolated incisors broken: as for molars.
% molars digested in situ: the numbers of molars in the mandibles and maxillae that show some evidence of digestive corrosion compared with the total numbers of teeth present in the jaws.
% isolated molars digested: the numbers of isolated molars that show some evidence of digestive corrosion compared with the total number of isolated molars in the sample (given in appendix).
% incisors digested in situ: as for molars.
% isolated incisors digested: as for molars.
% femur heads digested: the numbers of femur heads present in the sample that show some evidence of digestive corrosion compared with the total numbers of femur heads in the sample.
There are other variations to be considered as well.
After a predator has finished a meal, its level of stomach acidity decreases (Duke et al .,
1975).
For example, the pH in the stomach of a great horned owl was 2.2 before a meal and increased to 2.4 half an hour after eating, with further  increases to 2.7 two hours after the meal and 3.0 four hours afterwards.
By the time the meal is fully digested and the pellet ready for regurgitation, pH levels are at a maximum (Grimm & Whitehouse, 1963).
Corresponding figures for two species of buzzard (Buteo) were 1.6 to 1.8 before the meal, 3.3 half an hour after, 2.1 to 2.8 two hours after, and 3.0 four hours after the meal.
It seems very probable (although not yet experimentally demonstrated) that pH levels in a hungry owl will be lower than in one that is still digesting its previous meal.
In many instances, pellet formation is stimulated by the availability of the next meal (Chitty, 1938), with the previous meal being regurgitated  even if not fully digested in order to leave room for the next and in this case it seems likely that the initial level of pH would be higher than normal.
Both the previous meal, which was regurgitated prematurely, and the next, which starts with the advantage of high pH, would therefore be less exposed to the effects of stomach acids and the bone accordingly less strongly modified.
Conversely, it has also been shown that in the absence of another meal, the previous one may be kept in the stomach for more than twice as long as usual (Chitty, 1938), presumably with a gradual increase in stomach acidity, and the bones in this instance are likely to be strongly modified or even totally destroyed.
Moreover, not all the bones from a single carcase may be regurgitated in the same pellet, for in a study on tawny owl digestion using marked carcases, Lowe (1980) showed that some bones may be retained for 24 to 48 hours while others from the same animal were regurgitated earlier.
Since these variations can occur within a single species, and even within a single individual, it is clear that good samples are necessary before attempting to distinguish patterns.
Proteolytic activity (protein breakdown) also decreases in predators after eating (Duke et al .,
1975).
This is expressed as concentration of tyrosine, and it occurs by dilution of the gastric juices by the food.
The digestive enzymes, however, do not appear to be the main agents producing bone modification, and it is the level of acidity combined with the length of time the food is in the stomach that are the main determining factors.
Another complicating factor (Raczynski & Ruprecht, 1974) is that immature predators digest prey more thoroughly than do adults.
They recorded 51 per cent loss of bones for the prey of juvenile owls as opposed to 37 per cent for adults.
Since this is almost as great as the differences these authors found between the three species (tawny owls — 51 per cent bone loss; long-eared owls — 46 per cent; and barn owls — 34 per cent ), some consideration must be given to this problem.
Unfortunately, apart from the papers quoted above, little has been done to distinguish immature from adult digestive processes.
The two samples of European eagle owl mentioned in Chapter 1 (Table 1.2) show little difference between what is clearly a fledgling pellet collection and one from the adults.
The collection from the nest was made within a few days of the fledglings leaving the nest, and the broken up and trampled remains of pellets and bones from the nest can be mostly attributed to the regurgitated pellets of the fledglings.
The intact pellets collected from varying distances from the nest, however, could only have been left by the adults.
Levels of digestion on the teeth from these two samples are similar, but proportions of teeth affected differ slightly.
Higher proportions of teeth from the nest assemblage show evidence of digestion: 33 per cent of the molars compared with 20 per cent from the pellets of the adults and 62 per cent of the incisors compared with 54 per cent from the pellets of the adults.
Similarly, 47 per cent of the postcrania showed signs of digestion in the nest assemblage compared with 40 per cent in the adult pellets.
These differences seem insignificant.
A second comparison has been made for the barn owl.
The barn owl is often considered to produce no modifications to its prey, but this has found not to be the case.
Table 2.2 compares the bone assemblages from pellet collections from two nest sites at Salthouse, Norfolk, and Wookey Hole Upper Chamber (see Table 1.1) with roost site samples listed in detail in Append.
Table 1.1.
No consistent difference was found in the representation of skeletal elements, but bone breakage and digestion are considerably greater in the nest assemblages (Table 2.2), which were accumulated almost entirely by the immature fledglings.
The breakage caused by the adult birds in the four roost site assemblages is only 1–3 per cent for four of the postcranial elements compared with 1–22 per cent for the nest site assemblages (mean = 11.7 per cent).
Skull and mandible breakage is also higher in the fledglings' pellets: 22–25 per cent in the pellets from the adults compared with 31–72 per cent for the fledglings.
Digestion of teeth is zero in the pellets of the adult birds, and ranges from 3 26 per cent for fledglings, with postcranial digestion also higher.
These data will be discussed further in Chapters 3 and 4 in the descriptions of the bone modifications produced by predators.
Survey of predators
The final part of this chapter will be devoted to a brief summary of predator species.
Detailed explanatory notes for each species are given at the end of the book in the Appendix, covering such topics as distribution of the predator species, their habitats, hunting methods and food preferences and a summary of their diet and how it may be biased.
Some of this information is summarized in the present chapter, and emphasis is placed here on the sources of the pellet/scat samples and their specific points of interest.
Barn owl (Tyto alba).
Owls
Owls are probably the major contributors to fossil bone assemblages.
This is certainly true, as it will be seen, of the Westbury small mammal faunas, but it also applies to numerous other sites.
Ten species of owls covered by 26 pellet samples have been examined, and the sizes of the bone assemblages from these is given in Table 2.3.
Some of the owl species are covered by more than one pellet collection so as to provide an estimate of within species variation, but in some cases the sample is restricted to single pellet collections.
Where more than two pellet samples are available, for instance for barn owls and tawny owls, the within species similarities observed in bone breakage and digestion are greater than the differences from other species, and this  indicates that single pellet collections probably are representative of the species.
Table 2.3 Summary of bone assemblages from owls (mammals only)
The best represented species, and the most prolific of pellet producers, is the barn owl.
This is a small mammal specialist taking a wide range of rodents and insectivores.
It has a world wide distribution, and the collections analysed here come from South Africa, Kenya, Israel and England.
The South African collections come from caves in the Transvaal (Makapansgat) and from the Cape (Boomplaas).
In both cases, the owls were roosting in the cave.
There are many recorded cases of barn owls living in caves (Levinson, 1982), and one case has been described of seven active roosts in a single cave in South Africa (Levinson, 1982).
The collection from Kenya came from owls roosting in an old well at the ruined town of Gedi, an old Arab town now being reclaimed by coastal forest, and the owls were roosting on ledges where stone has fallen from the walls of the well.
The Israeli collection also came from a cave, but three of the four British collections are from open sites, in a hollow tree (Stratton), an old house (Salthouse) and from beneath a tree (Barton Turf).
All are roost sites except Salthouse, where there was a nest and the pellets collected came mainly from the nestlings.
The eighth collection came from a small cave which is part of the Wookey Hole cave complex in Somerset.
For details of the collecting sites, and for an account of barn owl biology, see Appendix.
Snowy owl (Nyctea scandiaca) adult and juvenile.
Drawing by Maurice Wilson.
In contrast to the barn owl, the snowy owl is represented by only a single pellet sample.
This comes from several Snow roost sites on Bathurst Island in northern Canada but  despite not being a homogeneous collection the pellets were all very similar and their contents showed great consistency of preservation.
There is good reason to believe, therefore, that this one sample is probably representative for the species, at least in this area.
The snowy owl inhabits the circum-polar tundra region, feeding on the most common rodent, which is usually one of the species of lemming (see Table 2.3 and the Appendix for details of snowy owl biology).
There are few caves in this part of the world today, and there is no record of snowy owls entering them at any time.
During the Pleistocene, however, things might have been different: as the ice sheets moved further south they brought tundra conditions to latitudes as far south as Spain, and the resulting climate and environment at these lower latitudes would have been unlike anything known today because of differences in rainfall and solar incidence.
The snowy owl evidently moved south with the ice sheets, as indicated by its presence in cave art in the French caves already mentioned.
In these circumstances, it might well have modified its present adaptation to ground dwelling and nesting to something more appropriate to the more complex tundra environments that then existed.
This might have included cave dwelling, although there is no way of knowing.
Long-eared owl (Asio otus).
Drawing by Maurice Wilson.
Two long-eared owl pellet samples have been analysed here (Table 2.
3, and see Appendix).
These come from northern Scotland near Inverness, and from southern England at Prestwick Carr, both from woodland sites.
The pellets accumulated beneath trees used for roosting.
In general this owl has been considered to be a woodland species preying on woodland rodents and birds (Southern, 1954).
More recent evidence suggests, however, that while it lives in woodland it actually hunts over nearby open areas (Glue & Hammond, 1974; Yalden, 1985).
There is no record of its occupying caves at any time, but it must always be remembered that a woodland species in cave country could drop its pellets from the tree in which it is roosting to fall into or near cave openings, so that even without entering a cave the pellets of such a predator could accumulate inside the cave (see p. 96).
Two short-eared owl pellet samples have also been analysed here (Table 2.3, and see Appendix).
They come from moorland sites in south west Scotland in Galloway, and central Wales near the village of Rhulen.
In Britain this is a ground nesting bird of the open country, and there is no record of it entering caves, but like the snowy owl it could have altered its behaviour during colder stages of the Pleistocene.
Spotted eagle owl (Bubo africanus).
Large mammal prey remains from pellets of Verreaux eagle owl (Bubo lacteus), distal limb elements of small antelopes.
The eagle owls are represented by three species.
Three pellet samples have been studied for Verreaux eagle owl, all from the Serengeti region of Tanzania.
The owls were living in short grass plains and the pellets were collected from kopjes, which are small hills rising over the plains, or along the cliff edges of Olduvai gorge.
This is a large species of eagle owl, hunting the large gerbil that lives on the short grass plains of Serengeti.
This gerbil is strictly nocturnal in  contrast to some of the more common rodents, and as a result it suffers more predation by the owls than do the others.
One of the pellet samples included spines and the skull of a hedgehog, showing that this predator can manage to kill and eat even well protected prey animals.
Verreaux eagle owl is also an occasional predator of small antelopes.
One of the pellet samples contained several small ungulate bones, probably from the bush duiker, and these are shown here with evidence of digestion, the surfaces of the bone broken and corroded by the digestive action of the owl.
The other African eagle owl pellet sample comes from the spotted eagle owl.
This was collected from beneath a tree in the fringing woodland of Lake Baringo in Kenya while the owl itself sat tight in the tree above.
Most of the pellets were already broken up, and it was the bone assemblage accumulating in the soil that was collected.
The spotted eagle owl is usually more an inhabitant of open country than is the Verreaux eagle owl, but it has been recorded nesting at the bottom of a 9 m shaft in a cave, well into the twilight zone (Brain, 1981).
European eagle owl (Bubo bubo).
The European eagle owl is represented by three collections (Table 2.3).
Two collections were made in Sweden, a pellet collection consisting of undamaged pellets from a pair of adult birds, and the nest debris of their nest from which the single fledgling had just flown.
The European eagle owl inhabits woodland habitats from northern boreal forests to the Mediterranean evergreen broad-leaved woodlands, although it tends to hunt over more open country within this range of habitats — see Appendix for details of its biology.
It nests on the ground or in caves or cliff edges.
It takes a wide range of prey, and its prey assemblages are taxonomically diverse and have high equitability.
It may predate larger animals as well as small mammals, with records of prey as large as juvenile foxes and roe deer.
Larger species are usually stripped of their flesh, so that bones and feathers are not ingested.
The third collection came from one of the southern subspecies of European eagle owl, which is smaller and lighter in colour than the northern populations.
The single small pellet collection came from the desert in Qatar (Table 2.3), and the analysis of bones from this desert variety shows remarkable similarity to the bone assemblage from Sweden despite the great difference in species composition and diversity of the prey.
Great grey owl (Strix nebulosa).
The great grey owl is represented by a single small collection from Finland.
It is a large species of owl that preys exclusively on small rodents, mainly voles — see Table 2.3 and the Appendix.
It is one of the most specialized feeders amongst the owls in contrast to the closely related tawny owl, which is one of the least specialized species.
Four tawny owl pellet samples have been collected — two from England (Tornewton and Kirkby) and one each from Wales and Scotland.
The Welsh sample is from a partly wooded valley, the upper slopes of which are inhabited by short-eared owls.
The tawny owl does not usually produce large concentrations of pellets because of its habit of using different trees each day for roosting, and so all of these samples are either from scattered locations or were collected over considerable periods of time.
The sample from Tornewton came from the cave of that name (Sutcliffe & Zeuner, 1962), and the owl was roosting in an overhead tree and dropping its pellets in through the top of the cave (see p. 96).
Tawny owl (Strix aluco).
Finally, to end this brief review of the major owl species, one sample from the little owl was also analysed (Table 2.3), but the bone in the pellets was extensively damaged.
This seems to be because of the small size of the owl in relation to its prey, so that it cannot swallow the prey whole but  tears it up as do the diurnal raptors (see Appendix for details of little owl biology).
Little owl (Athene noctua).
Drawing by Maurice Wilson.
Diurnal birds of prey
In contrast to the owls, the significance of diurnal birds of prey as accumulators of bone has received little attention.
Mayhew (1977) has attempted to remedy this, and he was able to show that the bone assemblages produced by kestrels differ greatly from those produced by barn owls.
His results are fully corroborated here (see Chapter 3), but owls also modify the bones of their prey to some extent.
There are no absolute differences between the two groups, the differences being mainly in degree.
For most diurnal raptors it was difficult to obtain large enough samples, not through any shortage of pellet collections but because they contained so little bone.
This is apparent from the bone counts listed for diurnal raptor samples in Table 2.4.
Table 2.4 Summary of bone assemblages from diurnal birds of prey (mammals only)
Kestrel (Falco tinnunculus).
The kestrel is one of the most common and widespread of the smaller diurnal raptors.
Four pellet samples have been analysed for this species, two from England and one each from Wales and Scotland (see Table 2.4 and the Appendix).
Additional samples from the United Arab Emirates (Jebel Barakah) and Kenya were collected, but no bone was found in the pellets from Kenya, which consisted entirely of invertebrate remains, and the pellet sample from UAE has not been analysed separately (see Append Table 8).
The sample from Wales came from the same locality as the short-eared owl and tawny owl pellet samples, and the kestrel was hunting over much the same area as these species.
Four seasonally collected samples have been combined into a single sample for purposes of analysis.
Both English samples came from Somerset in the vicinity of  Westbury-sub-Mendip, one from a patch of woodland and one from the bottom of a cliff on which the kestrel was roosting.
The kestrel is an adaptable predator, and even in Europe it is known to take large quantities of insects and earthworms (Brown, 1976; Yalden & Warburton, 1979).
When eating small mammals, it frequently strips and eats the soft parts from the carcase discarding the skin and bones, and it sometimes accomplishes this in a most peculiar fashion.
It penetrates the carcase of its prey at one end, usually the head end, and it may actually leave the skin intact while progressively eating through the insides of the animal.
The outcome of this is that the more or less intact skin of the prey animal is turned inside out, forming a tube with the fur on the inside and inner surface of the skin, stripped of all its flesh, on the outside.
Prey remains from beneath a kestrel nest at Aberdyfi, Wales.
On the left is a mole carcase turned inside out with many of the bones still attached to the inverted skin; in the middle, partial remains of mole (top left) and vole (bottom left) treated in the same way, and bird remains to the right; and on the right two kestrel pellets.
Peregrine (Falco peregrinus).
Peregrines were investigated less intensively than kestrels because of their known preference for birds as opposed to mammalian prey.
Three samples of pellets were examined, from Scotland, Wales and Ireland, the Welsh sample again coming from the Rhulen valleys where the other predator samples came from (Table 2.4 and Appendix).
The numbers of pellets containing mammalian bone were small, but where present the bone was similar to that from kestrel pellets.
Peregrines usually pluck the feathers and strip the flesh off their bird prey, and the nest area of a peregrine may be littered with the discarded remains of its prey.
Two pellet samples were obtained for the hen harrier from Orkney (Table 2.4).
This is a major predator of small mammals in Europe (Brown, 1976), although today it has a limited distribution.
A single pellet sample for the red kite, which also has a limited distribution, was investigated from Tregaron bog in Central Wales.
The diet of the red kite seems to consist largely of carrion and some birds.
Very few small mammal bones were present in the pellets of this species.
In contrast, the common buzzard has a wide and increasing distribution in Europe, and its present success must be due in large part to the adaptability of its diet.
In Europe it is a major predator of small mammals (Brown, 1976) but in Britain its diet includes many rabbits and birds (Tubbs, 1974).
The samples analysed here are all from the area around Rhulen in Wales (Table 2.4), and they include both pellets and the debris from in and around a nest.
There were several partial carcases in the nest consisting of articulated legs of mammals and wings and limbs of birds.
A single mole carcase was found in the nest, but otherwise the small mammal remains were all found inside the pellets.
Another sample from the New Forest in England contained only bird remains.
Among the diurnal raptors, the various species of eagle appear to be the most important predators of larger animals.
Hen harrier (Circus cyaneus).
Common buzzard Buteo buteo and its prey remains consisting of crow and rabbit bones.
Some breakage of bone has occurred, with the distal end of a rabbit femur at top right and breakage of rabbit mandibles at bottom left; and perforations of thin bone is also evident (middle right).
The remains from three species have been analysed (see Table 2.4).
The first is the crowned eagle from the Kibale Forest, Uganda.
This is a large monkey-eating species of tropical forests (Praed & Grant, 1962), but in more open country it takes small antelopes and hyraxes.
Because it nests repeatedly in the same tree a considerable litter of skulls and bones accumulates beneath its nest.
The limb bones collected were unbroken (Append.
Table 9), but the scapulae were characteristically broken along the vertebral border.
The same kind of damage has been described for the golden eagle feeding on roe deer (Ratcliffe & Rowe, 1979): when it penetrates the carcase through the shoulder region, it breaks through the scapula so as to extract the soft internal organs.
Eagles may nest in small caves given the opportunity, for example the golden eagle nesting in Ossoms Eyrie cave, where fox, roe deer, ravens and black grouse have been recovered (Bramwell, Yalden & Yalden, 1987).
Crowned eagle (Stephanoaetus coronatus).
Bonelli's eagle is a small eagle widespread but uncommon in the deserts of the Gulf States and Saudi Arabia.
A small bone assemblage was collected below a nest in a small cave part way up a low cliff in Qatar.
The bones consist of lagomorph remains for the most part with a few small lizards and rodents.
The distribution of skeletal elements is shown in Append.
Table 9.
Eight monkey scapulae from beneath a crowned eagle nest in Kibale forest, Uganda.
The vertebral border of the scapula is broken in every case, some more than others, probably as a result of entry into the body cavity by the eagle to extract the heart and lungs.
Finally, a number of collections of pellets and/or prey remains from other diurnal raptors have been made (Table 2.1).
These include remains from beneath an osprey's nest in Sweden, where the pellets were small and contained no bone but the ground was littered with the defleshed remains  of many fish.
Several pellets from a gyrfalcon from Iceland were found to consist entirely of bird remains very extensively broken and some of the bones surprisingly large.
This species is known to prey almost exclusively on birds (Brown, 1976).
A collection of pellets from the arctic skua from the Canadian arctic were also investigated, and they were found to contain the broken but not digested remains of lemmings.
A pair of metapodials from a white headed vulture from Zimbabwe (Table 2.1) show heavy digestion, as do the rodent bones from a captive South American condor four pellets of which contained the heavily digested remains of rodents.
And finally, several collections of pellets from corvids and gulls, which sometimes eat small mammals, were investigated, but in general these were found not to contain small mammal bones.
In the one case where small mammals were present, they were found not to be greatly modified.
Pair of metapodials from the nest of the white headed vulture (Aegypius occipitalis).
The bone is heavily digested after breakage, with the digestion being heaviest at the broken ends of the shafts on the right.
Mammalian predators
The third group of predators to be considered here are the mammalian predators.
Much has been written on the larger species of mammalian predator and their importance as bone accumulators, but little has been done on predators of small mammals.
Hyaenas have been shown to accumulate large mammal bones at their dens (Sutcliffe, 1970; Hill, 1975, 1984; Horowitz & Smith, 1988), leopards were probably involved in the accumulation of large mammal bones in the South African cave sites (Brain, 1981), and wolves and lions can accumulate large mammal remains by carrying prey to preferred eating places (Haynes, 1982).
None of these larger predators are significant accumulators of small mammal bone, but many species of small mammalian predator have been shown to accumulate small mammal remains in their scats (Andrews & Evans, 1983, and references therein).
Two species of viverrid were investigated (Table 2.5).
Viverrids are generalist carnivore/omnivores with simple tooth morphology more adapted for crushing than for slicing.
The white-tailed mongoose is a common nocturnal viverrid of the southern half of Africa (Kingdon, 1977), and a sample of scats and bones from decayed scats has been analysed from Meswa in western Kenya (Andrews & Evans, 1983).
The scats were deposited on a rocky outcrop approximately 16 x 11 m.
The other viverrid sample is from a South African species of genet (Tables 2.1 and 2.5).
A very large number of scats was collected from an artificial salt lick, which the genet was using as a latrine.
Viverrids frequently use their scats as territorial markers so that concentrations such as these are common.
Additional scat samples were obtained from captive mongooses and genets in London Zoo in order to compare the degrees of digestion, but the samples from the captive animals have not been used in the statistical comparisons.
Table 2.5 Summary of mammalian predators
Four canid species were investigated (Table 2.5).
The family has a distribution covering most parts of the world and shows great uniformity of anatomy.
They are generalist carnivores adapted for both the crushing and slicing of food.
The smallest species considered here is the bat-eared fox, a mainly insectivorous animal with relatively weak jaws.
A collection of scats was made from a small hillock outside its den at Lainyamok, near Lake Magadi, Kenya (Andrews & Evans, 1983).
The distribution of bones from  this sample is illustrated in Chapter 1 (p. 8).
Scat collections from two larger species of fox have been analysed, two assemblages from the red fox in England and one from the arctic fox in Canada (Table 2.5).
Two scat collections have also been made from the coyote in the Bighorn Basin, Wyoming, USA.
In all these cases, the scats were concentrated in small groups on prominent features and evidently used as territorial markers.
No concentration of scats was found, although they are recorded in the literature (Camenzind, 1978).
The white-tailed mongoose (Ichneumia albicauda).
The distribution of scats and bones from the marking area of this species is shown from Meswa in western Kenya.
Contours are at 50 cm intervals, scats are individually numbered and areas of bone concentration are shown by numbered squares.
Only one species of mustelid was found to provide a sample of small mammal bones from scat collections, although several other species were investigated.
The smaller species of mustelid, although they prey on small mammals, eat little of the bone, and they frequently catch and eat prey larger than themselves.
One sample of bones was obtained from a collection of pine marten scats (Table 2.5).
Other samples of scats from otters and mink were found to contain mainly fish and amphibians, while from stoats and polecats almost no recognizable prey remains were obtained.
They contained bone, but it was so broken that it could not be identified, and there was no cranial or dental material, so that apparently the heads of their prey had not been eaten.
Felids produce the greatest amount of damage, so great that it has not been possible to obtain any bone samples large enough to quantify.
Small samples have been obtained from a feral cat hunting at Rhulen in Wales and from a captive margay in London Zoo.
In a recent account of these groups of mammalian predator Andrews & Evans (1983) concluded that the damage to the bone of their small mammal prey was so severe that except in rare and easily recognizable cases they could not be significant agents in the accumulation of small mammal remains.
This degree of modification comes about partly because of the greater degree of digestion in mammalian carnivores compared with the regurgitated remains from avian predators, and partly because of their use of teeth to break up prey before digestion.
It proved possible to distinguish between bone assemblages produced by the different families of carnivore but more difficult to distinguish within families (Andrews & Evans, 1983).
The information from that paper is summarized in Table 2.6.
Damage is greatest in the prey of canids, and this was the only group that consistently left tooth marks on the bones of its prey.
Damage was also very great in the mustelid samples, but in the one good sample from the pine marten the bones were less modified than in the canid samples, and it is not known at present which pattern is more typical of mustelids.
Some digestion was found on the bone from all the  carnivore scat collections, and the most distinctive feature of this was the rounding of the broken ends of limb bones.
Broken limb bone shaft digested by coyote showing rounding of the broken edges.
Summary of predators
1
Predation is a major cause of small mammal mortality.
2
Predation has greatest impact on small mammal populations when they are low or in decline and less impact when populations are increasing.
3
Predators are important accumulators of small mammal bone at all times.
4
Predator species have a long evolutionary history, and it is inferred that they have been as important in the past as  accumulators of small mammal bone as they are today.
5
The amount of bone present in assemblages of prey, and the species representation, vary from predator to predator but are always biased with respect to the community from which they came.
The important issue is how to identify the predator and hence the probable bias.
6
The bone in predator assemblages is often well preserved but has also been modified to varying extents.
7
In order to identify predator activity in the past from the characteristics of their prey assemblages, a number of aspects of small mammal faunas have been investigated:
a
the presence of the predator species itself in an assemblage is not considered significant or necessary as a means to identifying the origin of the assemblage;
b
remains of pellets or scats are often diagnostic, but they are rarely present in fossil assemblages;
c
predator size is related to prey size in complex relationships involving hunting behaviour of the predator and prey availability;
d
prey availability varies with seasonal and annual cycles of climate, habitat and prey populations, but predator adaptability and ability to learn may offset the impact of these cycles;
e
there is a relationship between type of hunting behaviour of the predator and the diversity of its prey assemblage: opportunistic predators hunt a wide variety of habitats and produce high prey species diversities (high in heterogeneity, or number of species, and high in equitability, or evenness of distribution of species); and selective predators hunt a more limited habitat range (often requiring a nomadic life style) and produce low prey species diversities;
f
opportunistic predators are good samplers of local small mammal communities, but they may alter the proportions of the species;
g
selective predators often take prey in proportion to its presence in the community, so that the dominant prey species is also the most abundant species in the community, but less common small mammal species may be unrepresented in the predator's prey assemblage;
h
any type of predator will still produce a biased prey assemblage because of differences in activity patterns between predator and prey;
i
because of these variations in predator/prey relationships, neither the size of the prey nor the species preyed upon are diagnostic of any single predator species.
8
The failure of ecological aspects of small mammal faunas to predict predator species leads to the consideration of modifications to the bones making up the faunal assemblage.
Several categories of bone modification have been considered:
(a)
degree of bone loss in prey assemblages varies in a well defined way between certain predators, but with little difference between others;
(b)
bone breakage in prey assemblages is also diagnostic of certain predators but not of others;
(c)
in both these instances, the degree of modification varies within a single species of predator according to the relative sizes of predator and prey, the maturity of either predator or prey, and the state of hunger of the predator;
(d)
bone digestion in prey assemblages is the most diagnostic feature by which predators may be identified from the bones of their prey, although here too it is not possible to distinguish all predator species.
Degree of digestion also varies between predators according to their state of hunger and their maturity.
9
The predators that have provided pellet and scat samples to this study are described briefly and an account given of the localities where the samples were obtained.
10
Ten species of owl are represented by 27 pellet samples providing small mammal samples large enough for analysis.
11
Two species of diurnal raptor are represented by 10 pellet samples providing small mammal samples large enough for analysis, and in addition a further seven raptors were also investigated, providing 12 pellet samples not large enough for analysis.
12
Additional pellet samples were obtained from single species of vulture, condor, crow and gull, but none provided large enough small mammal samples for analysis.
13
Seven species of mammalian carnivore are represented  by 9 scat samples providing small mammal samples large enough for analysis, and a further six species were also investigated.
14
Both for the nocturnal owls and the diurnal raptors the sample of predator species has been designed to encompass as wide a range as possible for body weight and pellet size.
Pellet sizes are summarized in Append.
Table 14, and body weights are given in Append.
Table 15.
At its simplest level, the larger the body size of the predator, the larger will be its potential prey, but the relationship between predator and prey is very much more complicated than this.
15
A summary of the main feeding categories recognized for the predators is given in Append.
Table 16.
Dietary preferences of the predators are closely linked with the preferred hunting habitats of the different species, and these in turn are related to the way in which the predators hunt.
A summary of hunting methods is given in Append.
Table 17 for the predators described here.
16
A summary of predator habitats and prey selection is given in Table 2.7.
This attempts to identify the salient points in this section and to relate the predator biases to the habitats occupied by the predators.
Table 2.6 Summary of bone alteration for mammalian predators
Table 2.7 Summary of predator habitats and prey selection
Modifications of Small Mammal Bones in Predator Assemblages
The first two chapters have given an outline of the sources of taphonomic modifications to bones.
This was treated in general terms in Chapter 1 and with specific regard to predation in Chapter 2.
Following on from this the types of modifications that are produced by recent predators will now be described.
This will form the basis for the subsequent interpretation of the fossil faunas from Westbury-sub-Mendip.
The analyses are limited by a number of constraints.
Some of these relate to the inevitable limits on time and space, but a more important limitation is that of the fossils themselves.
In most fossil deposits, the later stages of modification depicted in Fig. 1.2 assume greater importance.
Burial and fossilization changes are often so extensive as to obscure the primary modifications which must be identified in order to understand the mechanisms of accumulation of the bones.
Some of the types of modification that are most useful in distinguishing prey assemblages of living predators are obscured by these later modifications, and consequently some of these potentially useful modification categories have been omitted from consideration.
The following sections describe a series of recent small mammal assemblages accumulated by known predators under known conditions.
The main emphasis is directed at owl pellet assemblages, because these have been found by experience to be the most relevant to the Westbury faunas, and all ten of the owl species listed in Tables 2.1 and 2.3 are considered in detail here.
They are compared with two of the diurnal raptors listed in Tables 2.1 and 2.4 and seven mammalian carnivores (Tables 2.1 and 2.5).
None of the other species listed in Table 2.1 have been found to be significant accumulators of bone.
The work previously published by Andrews & Evans (1983) on mammalian carnivores is expanded here for comparison with the avian predators, and the conclusion of these authors that small mammalian carnivores are not significant  contributors to the fossil record is sustained by the more detailed work.
The descriptions begin with the analysis of skeletal element proportions, that is the numbers and percentages of the different parts of the skeleton of the prey animals eaten by the predators.
This is followed by a consideration of bone breakage using a number of indices developed for this purpose.
Finally, the effects of digestion on the small mammal collections and the differences observed between different predators are described.
Most of this work has been done using a standard binocular light microscope with variable ×8 to ×40 magnification, but extensive use has also been made of the scanning electron microscope.
The microscope used was the ISI60A at the British Museum (Natural History), which is fitted with an environmental chamber.
This produces a back scattered electron image at comparatively low vacuum (about 10 -2 torr) without the necessity for coating the specimens (Taylor, 1986).
The large size of the chamber, which permits the introduction of several specimens at one time, and the reduction in preparation time by removing the need to coat specimens has made it possible to scan much larger numbers of specimens than would normally be possible.
Skeletal element proportions
The differing proportions by which the various elements of the prey skeletons are represented in a predator assemblage are frequently used to distinguish between different predator types (for example, Korth, 1979; Dodson & Wexlar, 1979, Andrews & Evans, 1983).
The numbers of the skeletal elements are usually expressed as proportions of the numbers that would be expected to be present for a given number of prey individuals, which is usually the minimum number of individuals (MNI).
This proportion is called the relative abundance, and it can be expressed as follows:
where R i = the relative abundance of element i
N i = the number of element i in the sample
MNI = the minimum number of individuals
E i = the number of element i in the prey skeleton
The predators considered in this chapter generally consume most or all of the bodies of their prey.
As a result, the MNI should approximate to the number of prey eaten.
The minimum number of prey items in the predator assemblages is based on the highest number of any single element in the assemblage, but it is not possible without direct experimental observation to extrapolate back from this to what the predator actually ate (Yalden, 1985).
For the predators considered here, the MNI is an underestimate of the predator's diet because some animals disappear without trace during digestion, some species more than others.
It has been shown earlier (p. 31) that up to half the bones of their prey are destroyed by even the least destructive owl species, as the MNI is reduced by up to one third.
To a certain extent these differences are common to all predators, and so may be ignored, because the reason for attempting the analysis of predator assemblages in the first place is to determine differences between them.
An alternative method, and one that is nearly as good, is to express the distribution of skeletal elements against the total number of bones in the sample.
This results in exaggerated abundances of such elements as ribs, vertebrae and finger bones, all of which occur in higher numbers in the mammalian skeleton than do skulls, mandibles and major limb bones.
Provided this is taken into account, the differences between comparable samples are as readily discernible as when relative abundance is used.
The major advantage of this method is that it does not depend on the calculation of MNI, which at best is an unreliable estimate of the true numbers of individuals in a sample.
Both methods have been used here, principally the first, but some interesting comparisons have been made with the second.
Skeletal element proportions based on total numbers of bones have been used as the basis for Fig. 3.1 comparing two kestrel samples with four barn owl samples.
The two sets differ considerably in overall pattern, and the difference is statistically significant (X2 = 9.61, probability = 0.95).
The     barn owl distributions are close to the natural occurrence of bone in the mammalian skeleton, although the number of skull fragments has been augmented by breakage, and the numbers of phalanges and metapodials are fewer than would be expected.
The kestrel assemblages, on the other hand, have higher peaks for mandibles, skull fragments and teeth, more variation in the proportions of major limb elements (in the centre of the figure), and lower proportions of ribs, vertebrae, phalanges and metapodials.
This indicates greater degrees of loss or alteration of the bone in the kestrel assemblages.
Fig. 3.1 (left) Skeletal element proportions expressed as proportions of numbers of bones in the sample, comparing four samples of barn owl prey assemblages with two of kestrel.
The similarity within species contrasts with differences between the kestrel and barn owl assemblages.
The four barn owl assemblages are the same as in Fig. 2.1, i.e. they come from separate continents, and the two kestrel samples come from Bleadney and Somerdale Keynsham (see Append.
Table 9).
For identification of elements, see Figs. 3.2 and 3.4.
Fig. 3.2 (below) Skeletal element proportions expressed as proportions of the expected numbers for each element based on the minimum numbers of individuals (MNI).
If there were no loss of skeletal elements at all the expected line would cross horizontally at 100% and then dip sharply to zero for the isolated molars (M) and incisors (1), which would all still be retained in the jaws.
There is an approximation to this for all of these samples, but clearly there has been considerable bone loss from even the most complete bone assemblages.
There has also been preferential loss of the small foot bones: phalanges (phal) and metapodials (met).
The other skeletal elements displayed are mandible (mand), maxilla (max), scapula (scap), humerus (hum), radius (rad), ulna, pelvis (pelv), femur (fem), tibia (tib) and vertebrae (vert).
The owl species are identified on the figure, but for details of the samples, see Appendix.
The barn owl and kestrel samples examined here were drawn from widely different parts of their global range.
The differences in prey species eaten (shown in Fig. 2.1), do not alter the pattern of skeletal element proportions observed (Fig. 3.1), with the within-species variation remaining small in comparison.
Correlation coefficients for skeletal element proportions between the two South African samples are r = 0.899, and the two English samples, r = 0.925, but the comparisons between the two regions have only slightly lower correlations overall (r = 0.742–0.946).
These values contrast with correlations between the barn owl and kestrel samples of r = 0.189–0.355.
The barn owl samples also correlate highly with the long-eared owl sample (Table 3.1).
It would appear from this that the bone assemblages derived from the long-eared owl and barn owl (and other species, see below) are but little altered by the predator, whereas the kestrel assemblages are more greatly altered.
Fig. 3.3 Skeletal element proportions, as for Fig. 3.2.
The African eagle owl samples include two for Verreaux eagle owl (Serengeti and Olduvai) and one for the spotted eagle owl (Baringo).
The European eagle owl sample distinguishes between nest material from broken down and trampled pellets and bones extracted from intact pellets.
For identification of elements, see Fig. 3.2, and for details of the samples, see Appendix.
Table 3.1 Correlation coefficients of skeletal elements
Relative abundance data for bone assemblages from 19 species of predator are shown in Fig. 3.2–3.4, and these data are summarized in Append.
Tables 12–13.
The norm against which relative abundance is measured is 100 per cent for skulls, mandibles and all postcranial elements; and 0 per cent for isolated teeth.
In other words, if the prey skeletons were perfectly preserved there would be no losses from the cranial and postcranial skeleton, and there would  be no isolated teeth because they would all still be in place in the jaws.
It can be seen in Fig. 3.2 that the barn owl assemblages approximate to this condition, but all elements are considerably less than 100 per cent.
There is  preferential loss of some elements, particularly the more distal parts of the four limbs.
This is an identical result to the one just described (Fig. 3.1) for the maximum bone count, but it provides additional information that there is considerable bone loss more or less evenly spread across the mammalian skeleton (except for the phalanges and metapodials).
Fig. 3.4 Skeletal element proportions of bone assemblages from diurnal raptors and mammalian carnivores, as for Fig. 3.2.
For identification of elements, see Fig. 3.2, and for details of the samples, see Appendix.
The average relative abundances (that is the means of the relative abundances for all skeletal elements except for the isolated teeth) vary from 30.2 to 71.2 per cent for the seven barn owl samples (Table 2.3).
In other words, between one third and two thirds of the prey bone has been lost from the samples.
Checks have been made that this bone was not missed during laboratory processing of the pellet samples, and there is little chance of bones being detached from pellets before collection because of the compact nature of barn owl pellets.
Since all available records show that barn owls swallow small animal prey whole, the bone loss apparent in these figures must be the result of digestion.
This conclusion directly contradicts many assertions in the literature (Glue, 1971; Avery, 1977; Mayhew, 1977) that there is no loss of bone during digestion of prey by barn owls.
The same or greater loss of bone has been found in all the predator assemblages examined here.
The barn owl pattern is approached very closely by those of long-eared owls, short-eared owls and snowy owls (Fig. 3.2).
It is also similar to the pattern of one of the African eagle owls, Verreaux eagle owl,(Fig. 3.3).
All show the same pattern of generally high proportions of cranial and postcranial elements and low proportions of isolated teeth.
These five species constitute what may be called the typical owl pattern, and even though it encompasses a fair degree of variability it is consistent enough for departures from it to be instantly recognizable.
The spotted eagle owl assemblage from Lake Baringo has lower proportions of postcrania compared with Verreaux eagle owl on the same figure (Fig. 3.3), but it still has the low proportions of isolated teeth seen in the typical owls.
The European eagle owl bone assemblage is similar in this (Fig. 3.3), but it also shows in more marked fashion the zig-zag pattern seen when the more robust skeletal elements like mandibles, humeri and femora are preferentially preserved (Andrews & Evans, 1983).
This implies a degree of bone destruction great enough to destroy the weaker elements but not enough to destroy the stronger ones.
This pattern is present also in the tawny owl and little owl assemblages (Fig. 3.3), and the numbers of isolated teeth are also greater, indicating increasing bone destruction of the jaws.
The average relative abundances for these species ranges from 28.9 to 45.3, with intermediate values for the species of eagle owl.
Within the owls, therefore, there is a progression from minimal (although still considerable) loss of bone in the barn owl and other species, to destruction of the weaker postcranial elements in the eagle owls, and finally to destruction of both postcranial elements and jaws in the tawny and little owls.
A more extreme development of this pattern is seen in the kestrel, peregrine and buzzard prey assemblages.
All are diurnal raptors, and their skeletal element proportions have five distinct peaks corresponding to the mandible, humerus, ulna, femur-tibia, and isolated teeth.
Relative abundances of other elements are low, resulting in low mean relative abundances, varying between 17.0 and 44.0 per cent(Table 2.3).
The extreme nature of the damage seen in the diurnal raptors is matched to a considerable degree in some of the owls, and both approach the degree of damage done by mammalian carnivores (Fig. 3.4), which  have the added advantage of crushing teeth by which they break up their prey before ingestion (Andrews & Evans, 1983).
At this level of analysis it is not possible to distinguish adequately between a diurnal raptor, some of the owls, or mammalian carnivores, and a rather more detailed form of analysis becomes necessary.
Table 3.2 Relative proportions of postcranial elements: summary of data given in the Appendix
Postcranial-cranial proportions
In , the numbers of postcrania approximate to the numbers of cranial elements in most of the predator bone assemblages.If there were no damage to the bones there should be exact correspondence between the numbers of major limb bone elements like humerus and femur and numbers of mandibles and maxillae, and departure from this can arise from preferential damage to or selection against either group.
Two indices have been used here to compare preservation of postcrania to crania.
The first is shown in column 6 of Table 3.2, which compares the numbers of proximal limb elements (femur and humerus) with numbers of mandibles and maxillae.
The second compares the number of all major postcranial elements, the femur, tibia, humerus, radius and ulna, with not just the mandible and maxilla but the isolated molars as well.
The reason for this will become clear when the fossil faunas are examined, for post-depositional breakage of the upper and lower jaws often removes any evidence of the jaws themselves so that only the teeth are left to provide an indication of the former numbers of jaws, and this index attempts to take this into account.
It produces some odd effects, however, for strict equivalence between postcranial and cranial elements is only reached when all the jaws are broken and the molars released.
The barn owl, long-eared owl, European eagle owl and great grey owl prey assemblages all have similar numbers of postcranial and cranial elements (Fig. 3.5).
The short-eared owl assemblages have a slightly higher than expected proportion of postcrania, and the snowy owl, red fox, mongoose and coyote all have very much higher values, perhaps the result of decapitation of prey and loss of the skull.
The species assemblages of Verreaux and spotted eagle owls, tawny owl, kestrel and hen harrier have a deficiency of postcrania, perhaps due to preferential destruction of these elements.
The prey assemblages of the other mammalian predators have low values, probably because of the destruction of bone through chewing.
In both cases, the low proportions of postcrania are found in assemblages from the same predator species seen earlier to have low skeletal element representation.
Fig. 3.5 Comparison of postcranial/cranial proportions in different predator assemblages.
The proportions of femora and humeri against mandibles and maxillae on the vertical axis are taken from column 6 of Table 3.2, and the average relative abundances are listed in Tables 2.3–2.5.
Numbers and letters as follows: 1 barn owl, 2 snowy owl, 3 long-eared owl, 4 short-eared owl, 5 Verreaux eagle owl, 6 spotted eagle owl, 7 European eagle owl, 8 great grey owl, 9 tawny owl, 10 little owl, 11 kestrel, 12 hen harrier, a arctic fox, b bat-eared fox, c coyote, f red fox, g small-spotted genet, m white tailed mongoose, p pine marten.
Distal element loss
A feature of many predator assemblages is the preferential destruction or loss of the more distal parts of the limbs.
This has been seen in Fig. 3.2 to 3.4, and is most extreme for the bones of the feet, for which proportions are usually less than half those of the major limb elements.
There may be a collecting bias against the foot bones, however, because they are small and easily overlooked, and so a comparison has been made here between the proximal and distal limb elements, the former being the femur and humerus, and the latter represented by the tibia and radius (values for ulna are very similar).
These are compared in column 7 of Table 3.2 and plotted against average relative abundances in Fig. 3.6.
Most of the owl assemblages show only slight loss of the distal elements, but the short-eared owl and great grey owl produce greater loss, the little owl, kestrel and hen harrier greater still, and the spotted eagle owl by far the greatest.
The reason for the last value is not clear, although since the spotted eagle owl also has the lowest value for average relative abundance, and since there is a positive relationship between them, the loss of distal elements would appear to be the main cause of reduced overall relative abundance.
The mammalian carnivore assemblages all show considerable loss of distal elements, usually as great as or greater than any of the avian predators (Table 3.2).
Fig. 3.6 Scatter of individual pellet samples comparing the distal/proximal limb proportions (column 7 of Table 3.2) with the average relative abundance (Tables 2.3–2.5).
Numbers and letters as follows: 1 barn owl, 2 snowy owl, 3 long-eared owl, 4 short-eared owl, 5 Verreaux eagle owl, 6 spotted eagle owl, 7 European eagle owl, 8 great grey owl, 9 tawny owl, 10 little owl, 11 kestrel, 12 hen harrier, a arctic fox, b bat-eared fox, c coyote, f red fox, g small-spotted genet, m white tailed mongoose, p pine marten.
Breakage
Many of the species of owl swallow their prey whole and so there is minimal breakage of postcranial elements.
This contrasts with small mammalian carnivores, which usually chew their prey, and with the diurnal birds of prey, which tear their prey apart.
A simple measure of breakage can thus be expected to differentiate these major groups of predator.
This is attempted in this section, but it should be remembered that small mammal bone is extremely fragile and easily broken by agencies quite apart from the predator.
As a result, fossil bone accumulations are usually so much more fragmentary than undamaged pellet assemblages that it is difficult to compare them.
Breakage of postcrania
For comparison between prey assemblages, a set of breakage classes for postcranial bones has been developed (Andrews & Evans, 1983).
These breakage classes are defined in Fig. 3.7.
The major limb bones are divided into proximal, shaft and distal segments, with a fourth category for complete bones.
Completeness in this context means having most of both proximal and distal ends together with the shaft; breakage at the epiphyses is not counted, and damage to  the greater trochanter of the femur or to part of the distal articulation of the humerus does not disqualify bones from being classified as complete.
Bone proportions divided in this way are shown in Table 3.3.
Where more than one sample has been used, mean values are shown here, although there are within-species differences.
For instance, the mean value for complete humeri for the kestrel assemblages is 44 per cent , and the range of values over three samples is 33–47 per cent .
For many of the owl species the variation is less, for example the barn owl sample range is 95–100 per cent, with a mean of 99 per cent , and similar levels of difference hold for the other bones and parts of bones.
Fig. 3. 7 Schematic outlines of humerus, ulna, femur and tibia (from left to right) showing the breakage divisions used in this work and detailed in Table 3.3.
Bones are counted as complete if they include significant portions of all three segments.
Proximal and distal ends may include up to half the length of the shaft without any separate count being made for the shaft.
Articular ends broken at the epiphyses are only counted if they exceed the number of ends lacking articular surfaces.
This can be demonstrated by correlations within and between the samples from some of the predator species (Table 3.4).
Within species correlations are high: barn owl, r = 0.913 to 0.987; long-eared owl, r = 0.898; and kestrel, r = 0.501.
Some of the between species correlations are just as high, that between barn owls and long-eared owls ranging from 0.877 to 0.987, and this illustrates very well the similarity in pattern between these and other owl species which have low levels of breakage.
The tawny owl and kestrel, on the other hand, differ greatly, as do other species of diurnal raptor, with low correlation coefficients between them and the owls.
Some of the main conclusions from Table 3.3 are summarized in Fig. 3.8 and 3.9.
Fig. 3.8 shows the percentage abundance of complete bones for the humerus plotted against the femur.
At the top right of the figure, which shows the highest level of completeness, there is a cluster of owl assemblages containing the same species that made up the typical owl pattern designated in the previous section: barn owl, long-eared owl, short-eared owl, great grey owl and Verreaux eagle owl.
The snowy owl, which was part of this group in the skeletal elements analysis, is slightly removed from it in Fig. 3.
8, although still the closest species.
The European eagle owl is close to the snowy owl, showing that the bones of its prey remain relatively intact.
In all the remaining predator assemblages the prey bones are generally less than half complete.
Table 3.3 Breakage of major skeletal elements (%)
Similar trends are apparent in the plots of proximal against distal limb elements in Fig. 3.9.
The distal humerus and proximal tibia and femur are preferentially preserved in the  predator assemblages where the greatest breakage overall occurs, while the species that do little damage to the bone cluster near the origin.
The kestrel and tawny owl assemblages are distinguished in these analyses as being the most divergent.
The sample size for the little owl is small and the variable results for this species can probably be attributed to this.
The most extreme of these predator species are comparable with the breakage caused by the small mammalian carnivores (Andrews & Evans, 1983), with some degree of overlap with the carnivores like mongooses and genets that do least amount of damage.
Table 3.4 Coefficients of correlation of breakage analysis between samples from  Makapansget , Boomplaas, Stratton and Barton Turf (Table 2.3); Bleadney and Somerdale (Table 2.4); and Prestwick Carr and Hindshill (Table 2.3).
Fig. 3.8 Relative completeness of the humerus and femur compared.
The number of complete bones is expressed as a percentage of the total number of that bone.
Numbers and letters as follows: 1 barn owl, 2 snowy owl, 3 long-eared owl, 4 short-eared owl, 5 Verreaux eagle owl, 6 spotted eagle owl, 7 European eagle owl, 8 great grey owl, 9 tawny owl, 10 little owl, 11 kestrel, 12 hen harrier, a arctic fox, b bat-eared fox, c coyote, f red fox, g small-spotted genet, m white tailed mongoose, p pine marten.
There can be said to be at least three groups of predator assemblage distinguishable by this form of analysis.
Firstly there are the typical owls, which have highest skeletal element representation and which break bones least.
Secondly, there are the intermediate owls, such as tawny owl and spotted eagle owl, which have an uneven skeletal element representation and moderate degrees of breakage.
The diurnal raptors and small mammalian carnivores form a third and most extreme group (Fig. 3.10).
Fig. 3.9 Proportions of proximal against distal ends of limb bones.
The horizontal axis has the most frequently preserved part of the bone, namely the distal humerus and proximal femur.
Numbers and letters as follows: 1 barn owl, 2 snowy owl, 3 long-eared owl, 4 short-eared owl, 5 Verreaux eagle owl, 6 spotted eagle owl, 7 European eagle owl, 8 great grey owl, 9 tawny owl, 10 little owl, 11 kestrel, 12 hen harrier, a arctic fox, b bat-eared fox, c coyote, f red fox, g small-spotted genet, m white tailed mongoose, p pine marten.
Fig. 3.10 Proportions of proximal and distal ends of all major limb bones compared with the proportions of shafts.
The shaft numbers from Table 3.3 include humerus and femur shafts plus distal ulna and distal tibia.
Numbers and letters as follows: 1 barn owl, 2 snowy owl, 3 long-eared owl, 4 short-eared owl, 5 Verreaux eagle owl, 6 spotted eagle owl, 7 European eagle owl, 8 great grey owl, 9 tawny owl, 10 little owl, 11 kestrel, 12 hen harrier, a arctic fox, b bat-eared fox, c coyote, f red fox, g small-spotted genet, m white tailed mongoose, p pine marten.
Breakage of skulls
The skulls of small mammal prey are rarely completely intact, for one of the commonest ways of killing such prey is by breaking the neck and the back of the skull (see Appendix).
In almost all predator assemblages, therefore, the back of the skull at least is broken, and that is accepted as the norm.
A complete skull is therefore defined here as one preserving intact the maxilla and frontal bones and at least half of the cranial vault (Fig. 3.11).
One of the main departures from this sense of completeness is the detachment of the maxilla from the rest of the skull, and as an indicator of this first stage of breakage, the numbers of isolated maxillae present in the bone assemblage are compared with the numbers of skulls.
The proportions of isolated maxillae to maxillae present in the skulls (columns 4 and 5 of Table 3.5) distinguish four groups of predator assemblage.
Firstly are those with little damage to the skull, where the ratio of isolated to associated maxillae is less that 0.5 (column 5) or the percentage of maxillae in skulls (per cent completeness) is more then 70 per cent(column 4).
Secondly, there are those with a moderate amount of damage, such as short-eared owl, spotted eagle owl and European eagle owl, where the percentage completeness is 15 to 40 per cent.
Thirdly are those where nearly all the skulls of their prey are broken, including the little owl, kestrel and hen harrier.
Fourthly, the mammalian carnivores are all alike in producing assemblages with no complete skulls at all.
The other species of predator examined (see Tables 2.3 and 2.4) but not included in Table 3.5 all produce degrees of breakage so great that the skulls are essentially unrecognizable.
Fig. 3.11 Categories of skull breakage.
A. and B. are both counted as complete, with zygomatic region intact; C. is a broken skull with zygomatic intact; and D. is a maxilla fragment lacking the zygomatic process.
Numbers of maxillae are counted as half maxillae, so that two are present in categories A to C but only one in category D. All maxillary numbers in the tables of skeletal elements refer to half maxillae.
Breakage of maxillae
The zygomatic process may be preserved on the maxilla long after the maxilla has been detached from the rest of the skull, but it does not survive more intensive alteration by the predator.
In column 7 of Table 3.5, the numbers of maxillae retaining zygomatic processes are expressed as percentages of the total numbers of maxillae in the bone assemblages.
As would be expected, the predator species preserving the more intact skulls also preserve the highest frequencies of zygomatic process.
The tawny owl assemblages are intermediate for this character, and although it has not been quantified, it is notable that the skulls present in tawny owl pellets are less complete than those in barn owl or some of the other species listed in Table 3.5, having only the front part of the vault preserved.
The spotted eagle owl and European eagle owl assemblages again have more damage than other species, and the kestrel and hen harrier, together with the short-eared owl and some of the   mammalian carnivores, are more extreme still.
The little owl pine marten and the Arctic and red fox assemblages are the most extreme, with none of the maxillae retaining even a vestige of the zygomatic process.
It is interesting that the short-eared owl assemblages, which do not have such extreme degrees of skull breakage, have the lowest percentage of zygomatic preservation of all owl assemblages: both the skulls and isolated maxillae of the prey individuals are ‘rounded off’ in the pellets of this species, with all projecting processes destroyed.
Maxillary tooth loss
Further break up of the maxillae can best be documented by examining the extent to which teeth have been lost from the maxillae.
The incisors are lost first, with the break up of the anterior part of the premaxilla, and then the molars are lost as the alveolar border becomes damaged.
Incisor loss can be considered for all rodents regardless of taxonomic group, but there are differences in molar loss between voles, lemmings and some cricetids (Otomyinae) which often have unrooted teeth, and murids and other cricetids, which have rooted teeth.
Insectivores group with the latter.
Percentage incisor loss is shown in Table 3.6, column 6, with similar results to breakage values just described (Table 3.5).
All predator assemblages are characterized by some degree of incisor loss from the maxillae, but it is low (20–40 per cent) for some of the owls, particularly barn owls, snowy owls and long-eared owls.
Intermediate values are seen for tawny owls and great grey owls (50–60 per cent), and high values for the owls that also showed greatest damage to the maxilla, the short-eared owl, spotted eagle owl and European eagle owl (80–90 per cent ).
It is again most extreme for kestrels and hen harriers and for the mammalian predators (Table 3.6).
Molar loss is harder to interpret because the different taxonomic groups of prey species have to be taken into account in the analysis (Table 3.6).
The general pattern is the same, but there are a number of anomalies.
Snowy owl assemblages have relatively higher rates of molar loss than barn owl and long-eared owl assemblages, and this almost certainly reflects their dominance by lemmings, the teeth of which are loosely held in the jaws.
The Verreaux eagle owl samples contain some otomyine cricetids, with shallow rooted and easily lost teeth, so that the percentage molar loss for this species also is high.
The tawny owl sample contains a lot of murids compared with other owls, and for this species the percentage molar loss is unexpectedly low because the murid teeth do not fall out of the maxilla so easily.
Molar loss in the kestrel and hen harrier samples and the mammalian carnivores are all lower than expected, although still high, but the most extreme molar loss is seen in the little owl and short-eared owl assemblages.
Table 3.7 Breakage of the rodent mandible.
Numbers of half mandibles that are either complete, or with damage to their ascending rami.
Columns 1–3 are mutually exclusive, but any of these border of the mandible (column 4.)
N is the number of pellets.
Breakage of mandibles
The mandible is commonly preserved in predator assemblages, and its variations in shape and structure provide information on a variety of alteration processes.
In many of the predator assemblages described here, the mandibles of small mammal prey species are frequently intact, here defined as having all the bone of the mandibular body and ramus present for each half mandible, but lacking some or all of the teeth (Fig. 3.12).
The numbers of complete mandibles in the various pellet assemblages are given in Table 3.7, column 1 and Fig 3.13.
The coronoid process (Fig. 3.14  A, B and F) and the angle of the mandible (Fig. 3.14 D) are the first to be broken.
The whole of the top of the ramus may be broken (Fig. 3.14 E) or completely missing (Fig. 3.14 G-H).
The frequencies of these breakage types are shown in columns 2 and 3 in Table 3.7.
One other type of breakage is enumerated in Table 3.7, damage to the incisor alveolus along the inferior border of the mandibular body.
The bone is very thin at this point, so that damage to the bone, and subsequent loss of the incisor, occurs to some degree in all of the predator assemblages (Fig. 3.14 F, G-H).
Fig. 3.12 Categories of mandible breakage.
A. complete; B. broken ascending ramus; C. ascending ramus missing; D. ascending ramus missing and inferior border broken.
All mandibular numbers in the tables refer to half mandibles, as for maxillae.
Fig. 3.13 Percentage completeness of mandibles from recent owl prey assemblages.
A. Percentages of complete mandibles (Table 3.7 column 6) plotted against percentages of complete skulls (Table 3.5 column 4); B. Percentages of mandibles with ascending ramus missing (Table 3. 7 column 7) plotted against percentages of maxillae with zygomatic process broken and missing (Table 3.5 column 7 reciprocal); C. percentage incisor loss from mandibles (Table 3.8 column 6) plotted against incisor loss from maxillae (Table 3.6 column 6).
Numbers and letters as follows: 1 barn owl, 2 snowy owl, 3 long-eared owl, 4 short-eared owl, 5 Verreaux eagle owl, 6 spotted eagle owl, 7 European eagle owl, 8 great grey owl, 9 tawny owl, 10 little owl, 11 kestrel, 12 hen harrier, a arctic fox, b bat-eared fox, c coyote, f red fox, g small-spotted genet, m white tailed mongoose, p pine marten.
The breakage of the mandible differentiates at least four groups of predator.
The main group is characterized by low proportions of alteration, and this includes many of the same species that produce little alteration of the skull and maxilla, namely barn owl, long-eared owl, Verreaux eagle owl, and great grey owl: see Table 3.7.
A second group is at the opposite extreme of breakage, with no mandibles intact, and this includes the mammalian carnivores, the little owl and most of the diurnal raptors not included in the main analysis (not included because the damage is so great that hardly any recognizable bone is left in the pellets: see Table 2.1).
Less extreme damage is produced by the spotted eagle owl, the diurnal raptors kestrel and hen harrier, and less extreme still and intermediate in alteration, are the short-eared owl, European eagle owl, and the tawny owl.
These groups are shown in a comparison of mandibular and maxillary breakage in Fig. 3.13.
In Fig. 3.13A, the percentage completeness of the mandible and maxilla is  similar in rank order, and, surprisingly, the maxilla is only slightly less complete than the mandible, with approximately equal proportions of both.
The snowy owl and tawny owl assemblages diverge most greatly from this, with fewer complete mandibles than maxillae.
In both these species this is because the mandibular processes are frequently broken, but with no other damage except to these vulnerable processes.
The degree of alteration of the mandibles is therefore not as great as is suggested by these figures.
This can be seen in Fig. 3.13B, where the proportions of mandibles with the ascending ramus totally destroyed are plotted against maxillary damage, and this groups both the tawny owl and snowy owl with the other predator species producing less alteration.
When the breakage of the inferior border of the mandible is considered (Table 3.7, column 8), tawny owls and snowy owls again appear intermediate.
The diurnal birds of prey and the mammalian predators consistently have the highest rates of mandibular and maxillary breakage.
Mandibular tooth loss
One other measure of mandibular damage is tooth loss from the mandible.
As for the upper jaws, percentage incisor loss appears to be a more sensitive indicator of breakage than molar loss.
Molar loss is confused by taxonomic differences in the prey, but incisor loss appears to be equivalent for all rodent species analysed here.
The grouping of the predator species in terms of incisor loss is almost exactly the same as other indicators of mandibular damage, and the main difference is that the snowy owl, which produced slightly ambivalent results for mandibular breakage, has low proportions of incisor loss (Table 3.8).
These results are compared in Fig. 3.13C, where it is apparent that incisor loss occurs more readily from premaxillae than from mandibles, but the rank order in which loss occurs is similar.
The grouping of predator species is the same as in Fig. 3.13A, B.
The breakage of mandibles of species other than rodents has not been documented in any detail.
With a few exceptions, insectivores are much less commonly represented in pellet assemblages, and lagomorphs even less so, and it has proved impossible to obtain large enough samples of these species to provide numerical data.
Mandibles of lagomorphs are almost never found in pellets of the species investigated here, even in the largest eagle owl pellets, presumably because lagomorph skulls are too large to be swallowed whole, but fragments of skull and jaw are present in mammalian scats.
Soricid mandibles (and skulls) are more common, and because of the differences in mandibular anatomy, they break in a different way from rodent mandibles: the ascending ramus is composed of thickened bars of bone, with thinner bone in between, and it is these thinner areas that are broken initially, producing holes in the ramus (Fig. 3.14 I-J) while leaving the processes intact.
This is followed by the successive removal of the ascending ramus, leaving just the mandibular body (Fig. 3.14 K-N).
Lacking the thin alveolar bone associated with rodent incisors, the inferior border of the mandible is rarely broken, but the anterior end of the mandible carrying the large procumbent incisors may be broken and most of the mandible destroyed (Fig. 3.14 L).
The categories of breakage produced by different predators are similar to those for rodent mandibles just described, and so they do not need to be separately documented here.
Table 3.8 Tooth loss from the rodent mandible.
N is the number of pellet samples.
Molar loss is the number of places in the mandible where a tooth should be present but is not; and molars expected is the total number of teeth that should be present in the available sample of mandibles (mostly this is 3 per mandible).
Incisors loss is similarly derived
Fig. 3.14 SEM micrographs of the mandible.
A. mandible from barn owl assemblage with intact ascending ramus (×10); B. mandible from long-eared owl assemblage with broken ascending ramus (×8); C. mandible from short-eared owl  assemblage with cracked ascending ramus and missing coronoid process (×9); D. same with inferior angle broken (×19); E. mandible from Verreaux eagle owl assemblage with broken ascending ramus (×9); F. mandible from tawny owl assemblage with broken coronoid process and the beginning of damage to the inferior border (×6); G. mandible from little owl assemblage with missing ascending ramus and broken inferior border exposing the incisor (×6); H. mandible from tawny owl assemblage with extensive damage to ramus and inferior border (×9); 1.
shrew mandible from tawny owl assemblage showing perforation of the ascending ramus but no damage to the bar-like structure that supports it (×10); J. enlargement of the same (×38); K. advanced breakage of a shrew mandible from red kite assemblage leaving just the supporting structures of the ascending ramus (×9); L. partial loss of ascending ramus of a shrew mandible from a little owl assemblage (×8); M. mole mandible from red kite assemblage (×8); N. shrew mandible from small-spotted genet assemblage (×8).
Loss of isolated teeth
An index of loss of mandibles and maxillae from the predator assemblages is given by the numbers of isolated teeth in the assemblages compared with the empty alveolar spaces in the known samples of upper and lower jaws (which is given by the figures in column 1, Table 3.6 for molar loss, and column 4 in the same table for incisor loss): see Table 3.9.
There should be approximate equivalence of numbers so long as there has been no preferential loss of either jaws or teeth, and the expected percentage values should be in the region of 100 per cent.
A deficit of isolated teeth may indicate preferential loss of teeth, but in most cases it is more likely to be due to sampling error, by the failure to extract all the teeth from the pellets.
Teeth are more easily overlooked in the thick debris of the pellets than are the mandibles and maxillae and so may be under-represented solely for this reason.
On the other hand, an excess of isolated teeth is all the more unlikely to be due to sampling error, and so excess is considered to be significant and to indicate preferential destruction of mandibles and maxillae.
In other words, if the destructive forces operating on the bone assemblages are so great as to destroy some of the mandibles and maxillae, but not great enough to destroy the teeth, the ensuing sample can be expected to contain an excess of isolated teeth over the numbers expected from the numbers of jaws.
The possibility of sampling error still exists, however, due to small sample size, and the presence of an excess may be concealed by loss of teeth during collection, so that consistency of pattern must be considered.
Collecting bias seems to be greater for molars than for incisors, not surprising when it is considered that incisors are easier to locate in the pellets than are molars, and so an excess of incisors may be combined with a deficit of molars where there is collecting bias.
The results of the analysis in Table 3.9 show that several species have consistent deficits of isolated teeth in their prey assemblages.
These are the barn owl, long-eared owl, and all the Eagle owls, and these deficits are considered to be the result of sampling error.
This is because some samples from these predator species have near equivalence in numbers, and all the individual pellet samples have either this near equivalence or a deficit of both incisors and molars.
The snowy owl assemblage has a deficit for the molars of their prey but an excess for the incisors, but this is considered to be an inconsistency due to small sample size for the incisors.
For all these species, therefore, it is assumed that there has been no preferential loss of jaws or teeth and that the numbers would be equivalent except for sampling errors.
The great grey owl assemblage has a deficit of isolated molars but an excess of incisors, and this may be considered significant.
The short-eared owl assemblage shows a similar discrepancy, and this is due to just one of the pellet samples having an excess of incisors, the incisors of the other sample and the molars of both samples being in deficit.
Because of this, the apparent incisor excess shown in Table 3.9 for the short-eared owl assemblage is not considered significant.
The mammalian predator assemblages mostly show a similar pattern of excess of incisors and deficit of molars, indicating for all of these species some loss of jaws.
Table 3.9 Comparison of numbers of isolated teeth in pellet samples with numbers missing from mandibles and maxillae.
N is the number of pellet samples.
There remain to be considered the three species for which there is an apparent excess of isolated teeth.
The little owl excess is based on a very small sample size, but since it is observed for both incisors and molars it may be significant.
The tawny owl samples have an excess only in the incisors, but two considerations apply here.
One is that all three tawny owl pellet samples show the same pattern, with the range of incisor excess for the three samples being 126–136 per cent.
The other is that the molar numbers are so low that some sort of sampling bias is strongly indicated against the molars.
It is considered, therefore, that the excess of isolated incisors is real and can be attributed to preferential destruction of upper and lower jaws.
Finally, the kestrel has large excesses of isolated teeth for both incisors and molars, and all three samples show a similar pattern, although with a greater range of variation than was seen in the tawny owl: incisor excess range of 110–172 per cent.
For this species also, therefore, preferential destruction of upper and lower jaws is indicated.
Two assemblages differ from this pattern in having deficits of both molars and incisors over the numbers of teeth lost from the jaws (Table 3.9).
These are the arctic fox and hen harrier assemblages, and there are three factors that suggest this deficit may be significant.
One is that it applies to both molars and incisors; secondly, a check of the pellet debris failed to reveal any additional isolated teeth; and thirdly, the teeth that are present show an advanced state of degradation due to digestive corrosion (see below).
All these suggest that there has been some degree of real tooth loss in these predator assemblages due to digestion, and since this loss is also accompanied by loss of bone, it is considered that this is the most extreme degree of breakage in these comparisons.
Table 3.10 Molar breakage of in situ molars (in mandibles and maxillae) and of isolated molars.
Breakage of in situ molars covers any type of break.
but the breakage of isolated molars is divided between chipping, where single cusps or ends of salient angles of the tooth are broken, and splitting, where the break runs vertically through the crown, separating off a whole section of cusp and root or a whole lobe of a microtine tooth.
N is the number of pellet samples.
Fig. 3.15 (overleaf) SEM micrographs of molar breakage.
A. vole molar from magpie assemblage showing slight chipping of occlusal edge (×38); B. lemming molar from arctic fox assemblage with extensive chipping and some longitudinal splitting (×25); C. rooted vole molar from coyote assemblage with extensive edge chipping along the occlusal surface (×11); D. vole molar from red fox assemblage with single large chip removed from alveolar end of tooth (×30); E. vole molar from red fox assemblage with chipping along the occlusal edge followed by digestion of the broken surfaces (×56); F.  enlargement of the same modification from coyote assemblage (×75); G. cracking of a cricetid molar from bat-eared fox assemblage (×26); H. enlargement of the same from Verreaux eagle owl assemblage (×52).
Breakage of teeth
These conclusions are further substantiated when the breakage of molars and incisors is considered (Tables 3.10 and 3.11).
In the pellets or scats of many of the predators the teeth are either not broken at all or have only suffered minor damage, and these are for the most part the same species for which little damage to the jaws is evident.
Slight chipping of the corners of vole molars (Fig. 3.15 A, C) and the breakage of corners of the salient angles (Fig. 3.15B, D) are the most    common form of breakage.
These are both included under column 5 of Table 3.10, but another common form of breakage is when the crown splits longitudinally.
This is listed separately under column 6, but this distinction is not made for the in situ teeth.
It is a type of breakage that applies equally to murid teeth and to cricetids (Fig. 3.15 G-H).
The breakage is sometimes associated with digestion (Fig. 3. 15 E- F).
Fig. 3.16 SEM micrographs of incisor breakage.
A. transverse cracking of incisor from tawny owl assemblage (×30); B. breakage and digestion of end of incisor from peregrine assemblage (×38); C. transverse breakage across the dentine and displaced breakage of the enamel of incisor from margay assemblage (×9); D. longitudinal splitting and partial separation of enamel from dentine of an incisor from common buzzard assemblage (×19); E. enlargement of same (×56); F. slight separation of enamel from dentine in incisor from tawny owl assemblage (×7); G. cracking of dentine in heavily digested incisor from hen harrier assemblage (×19).
Table 3. 11 Incisor breakage in situ and isolated incisors.
N is the number of pellet samples.
On the incisors, the breakage pattern is more simple.
Cracks across the crowns occur quite commonly (Fig. 3.16A), but they have not been counted as breaks unless there is actual separation of the two pieces.
Breaks across the ends are the most common form of breakage (Fig. 3.16C), with some longitudinal splitting taking place in the assemblages showing extreme breakage such as in buzzard and mammalian carnivore assemblages (Fig. 3.16 D-E).
There is minimal breakage of the teeth in assemblages of the typical owls.
Three species of owl produce slightly higher levels of breakage of the teeth of their prey, mainly of isolated teeth rather than those preserved in the jaws, and these will be seen below to be the same species that produce the greatest degrees of digestion, namely the European eagle owl, tawny owl and little owl.
The kestrel and hen harrier produce similar levels of breakage (7–11 per cent: Table 3.11) and the mammalian carnivores very much higher, with up to 65 per cent of the molars broken and up to 88 per cent of the incisors.
There is practically no overlap between avian and mammalian predators, so that a high degree of tooth breakage strongly indicates carnivore action (but see below).
Moreover, of the two types of molar breakage recognized here, splitting of the crowns occurs more commonly in the prey assemblages of mammalian carnivores, especially mongoose and pine marten (Table 3.10).
Breakage is nearly always associated with digestion in these assemblages, and it would appear that breakage occurs soon after ingestion, with lines of weakness thus exposed being attacked by digestive fluids.
Digestion
One of the drawbacks to using any of the breakage data described so far is that later depositional agencies produce additional breakage, and it is difficult to distinguish between them.
A relatively unbroken predator assemblage, such as is produced by the barn owl or snowy owl, can be broken to such an extent by later-acting agencies like weathering, trampling or sediment compression, that it becomes indistinguishable from heavily altered assemblages such as those of tawny owls or kestrels.
Only in cases where these additional agencies are unimportant, or where they can be identified with some degree of certainty, will the breakage data be useful in analysing fossil bone assemblages.
It has been found, however, that the corrosive effects of digestion on bones and teeth in the predator's stomach are not duplicated by any other alteration process and so may be used to identify bone assemblages derived from predators.
Moreover, as the predators examined here show marked differences in the extent and distribution of digestion of their prey bone, it is possible to identify species-specific patterns of modification that are unaffected by any subsequent form of alteration.
These are based on both the degree of digestion and on the proportions of teeth and bones affected, and using these patterns it is sometimes possible to identify predator species when they are unknown.
Molar digestion
Frequencies of molar digestion in small mammal prey assemblages are given in Table 3.12.
The distinction is made between molars in place in mandibles or maxillae, and isolated molars.
The final column of Table 3.12 also shows the summed results for both in situ and isolated molars; this was done because post-depositional loss of teeth from the jaws increases the numbers of isolated teeth in fossil samples, which would include both the teeth already isolated in the pellet and the ones that were still in jaws in the pellet but became separated later.
As a result, the proportions of digested teeth declines as post-depositional breakage increases because the isolated teeth are usually more frequently digested than are the in situ teeth (compare Table 3.12 columns 4 and 6).
The barn owl bone assemblages have minimal digestion of the molars (Table 3.12).
Over 1500 teeth were examined from pellet samples of adult birds from South Africa, Kenya and England, and none were found to be either digested or broken.
Juvenile birds are known to produce higher levels of digestion than the adults (Lowe, 1980), and a collection of pellets from one nest site showed that 7 per cent of the molars were digested (Table 2.2).
Most of these were isolated teeth, although the sample size for isolated teeth was small.
By contrast to the barn owl, all the other species of owl showed some degree of digestion of the molars of their prey, even when clearly coming from adult birds only.
The barn owl is placed in the lowest category of modification by digestion.
The categories are based both on degree of digestion of the molars and on the frequencies of teeth affected.
Variation in prey type also has to be considered, for there is differential digestion of such groups as voles, mice and shrews.
On microtine molars the digestion in category 1 predators is restricted mainly to the occlusal corners of the salient angles of the teeth and does not penetrate below the alveolar margins.
Also it does not usually penetrate through the enamel and into the dentine, so that the corners of the teeth are rounded and the salient angles flattened.
This is illustrated in Fig. 3.17, with digestion very slight in the long-eared owl sample (Fig. 3.17 C, D) and slightly more advanced in the short-eared owl sample (Fig. 3.17 F, G).
Note also that the proportions of vole teeth affected by digestion are slightly higher in the short-eared owl: 2–4 per cent overall compared with less than 2 per cent for the other category 1 species (see Table 3.12).
Murid and cricetid teeth have the enamel smoothed and flattened but usually not penetrated by the digestion: because murid teeth are more rounded than microtine molars, and lack the prominent ridges (salient angles) of the latter, the effects of digestion are harder to identify (Fig. 3.17 E).
No evidence of digestion has been found on any insectivore teeth in the assemblages of the category 1 species (Fig. 3.17 H).
The four owl species, barn owl, long-eared owl, short-eared owl, and Verreaux eagle owl, are grouped in category 1 (Table 3.14) which is characterized by consistently low enamel digestion on the molars of microtines and other rodents, both in degree and in numbers of teeth affected, with no alteration on insectivore teeth.
Table 3.12 Molar digestion of in situ and isolated molars.
N is the number of pellet samples.
Fig. 3.17 SEM micrographs of molar corrosion produced by digestion: category 1.
A. vole molar from barn owl assemblage with no evidence of digestion (×14); B. enlargement of another specimen from the same barn owl assemblage with slight surface digestion of the salient angles (×38); C. vole molar from long-eared owl assemblage showing rounding of the occlusal edges of the salient angles but no penetration of the enamel (×38); D. enlargement of same (×150); E. murid molar from barn owl assemblage showing slight surface digestion of the enamel (×22); F. vole molar from short-eared owl assemblage showing extensive superficial digestion along all the salient angles, producing an uneven surface but no penetration of the enamel (×25); G.  enlargement of same (×110); H. shrew molar from barn owl assemblage, undigested (×36).
The second category of molar digestion includes teeth from prey assemblages of three owl species that produce similar degrees of digestion to the category 1 species but with slightly higher frequencies (Table 3.12).
The three species are the snowy owl, spotted eagle owl, and the great grey owl.
They are not illustrated here, because the nature and extent of digestion are the same as illustrated for the first category.
More frequent and more extensive damage is evident on all the subsequent categories.
Category 3 contains the European eagle owl and tawny owl.
The molars of microtine prey from these species have strongly rounded corners and deeply penetrated salient angles, with the enamel entirely removed from these projecting angles and the dentine exposed.
An early stage of this process, on teeth still protected by the mandible, is shown in Fig. 3.18 A, while more advanced stages are shown in Fig. 3.18 B-F.
The enamel has been removed along the entire length of the salient angles, leaving a smooth edge in some cases and a surprisingly uneven edge in others.
The latter is probably due to early stages of digestion of the dentine, with penetration between the enamel and dentine so as to produce the uneven edge to the enamel.
This is shown in detail in Fig. 3.18 F, and in this and Fig. 3.181 and L surface pitting of the enamel can also be seen.
Similar patterns of digestion are present on rooted and unrooted vole teeth in category 3, and there is also extensive digestion on insectivore teeth (Fig. 3.18 J-L).
The digestion of murid teeth is also much greater in the category 3 predators, although because of the more rounded nature of the tooth the pattern of damage is different.
A murid tooth from the eagle owl assemblage is shown in Fig. 3.18 G, where it can be seen that the enamel is heavily pitted on its surface, and partly removed along the edge of the wear facet, but nowhere is it completely penetrated (Fig. 3.18 I).
Similar damage is seen on insectivore teeth (Fig. 3.18 J), and in this case the digestion is greatest along the exposed edge of the enamel-dentine junction, progressing up into the crown of the tooth.
The surface of the enamel is also pitted as in the rodent teeth (Fig. 3.18 L).
The numbers of teeth digested in the European eagle owl and tawny owl assemblages are much higher than in the categories 1–2 species (Table 3.12).
The isolated teeth are considerably more digested than the in situ molars, both in terms of frequency and degree, but the pattern is the same in both, and combining them in a single sample gives a digestion index varying from 18–22 per cent for the means and 15–62 per cent for the total range of all samples.
Still more extreme damage is seen in the category 4 species, little owl, kestrel and peregrine.
These produce higher frequencies of digestion, with more than half the teeth in their prey assemblages suffering damage (Table 3.12), but the degree of digestion is not as great as seen in the species of category 5.
The type of digestion is in fact very similar to that described for category 3 (Fig. 3.19): on microtines the salient angles are completely denuded of enamel (Fig. 3.19 A, B), and corners of the occlusal and root angles are rounded (Fig. 3.19 C-E), and the dentine has early stages of digestion, all similar in nature but more extreme than category 3 digestion (compare Fig. 3.18 and 3.19).
Murids and shrews likewise show similar but more extreme digestion, with more of the enamel removed, particularly in the shrews (Fig. 3.19 G-H).
The surface pitting of the enamel is similar, and the dentine has not been removed or digested to any great extent.
The final category, category 5, includes the diurnal raptors, the hen harrier, buzzard and red kite.
The damage done by these species is so great that only rarely do they produce enough identifiable remains for them to be countable.
So little bone and teeth remain in buzzard and red kite pellets after digestion, even though prey is known to have been ingested whole, that usable samples are not produced.
All the teeth that have been extracted from the pellets of these two species have been digested, and so the proportion is probably close to 100 per cent.
It is less than this in the teeth from hen harrier pellets, less in fact than for the kestrel, but the type of digestion is similar.
On microtine molars, the damage to the enamel again extends along the salient angles (Fig. 3.20 A), but there is considerable digestion of the dentine which undermines the enamel shell and causes it to collapse inwards (Fig. 3.20 B) along the length of the salient angles.
This produces a characteristic curled appearance on the enamel edges.
The upper and lower corners of the crown are also more cut away and rounded (Fig. 3.0 A-C, E).
Insectivore molars from category 5 predator assemblages are even more dramatically digested.
The enamel may be largely removed, leaving islands of cracked and scored enamel (Fig. 3.20 D, H), or it may be entirely missing and the dentine hollowed out and etched so that only the bare outlines of the teeth remain (Fig. 3.20 F, G).
The extent of this digestion makes it difficult even to identify the prey animals, and the teeth are so fragile that any disturbance of these specimens during transport or burial would be likely to destroy them completely.
For this reason it would appear likely that bones modified as greatly as these would be uncommon in the fossil record, and the predators that produce them unlikely to be important contributors to fossil bone assemblages.
Digestion of the molars by mammalian predators varies considerably.
All species produce some signs of digestion, but the extent can vary greatly within the species as well as between species.
On unbroken vole teeth, the digestion produced by mammalian predators is similar to that produced by categories 3 to 5 predators described above, but when the teeth are broken initially there is an appearance of greater distortion (Fig. 3.21 B).
Molars from mustelid assemblages belong to category 5 in terms of degree of damage (Fig. 3.21 A-C), but category 3 or 4 in terms of proportions of teeth digested (only 29 per cent for all mustelids         combined — see Table 3.12).
Canid assemblages have generally high levels of digestion of the molars both in terms of degree and numbers affected (Fig. 3.21 F-I), and they fit well with category 5, but the small African canid, the bat-eared fox fits category 3 in all respects (Fig. 3.21 G-H).
On the other hand, felids digest the molars of their prey so effectively that they are extreme members of category 5 or even could be put into another category, 6, on their own (Fig. 3. 21D-E).
Viverrids conform to the conditions of molar digestion described for category 3 (Fig. 3.21 J-N).
Fig. 3.18 SEM micrographs of molar corrosion produced by digestion: category 3.
A. vole molars with light digestion from European eagle owl assemblage (×13); B. vole molar from the same eagle owl assemblage with digestion exposing the dentine along the lengths of the salient angles of the teeth (×28); C. enlargement of same (×188); D. rooted vole molar from tawny owl assemblage with digestion exposing dentine along salient angles (×25); E. enlargement of same (×33); F. enlargement of same: there has been no loss of dentine (×57); G. murid molar from European eagle owl assemblage showing extensive superficial digestion (×20); H. enlargement of same (×27); 1.
enlargement of same showing destruction of much of the surface of the enamel (×94); J. shrew premolars from tawny owl assemblage showing digestion from the base of the teeth along the enamel-dentine junction (×10); K. enlargement of same (×40); L. enlargement of edge of digested enamel showing the stepped transition from surface etched enamel at top left to dentine at bottom middle-right (×188).
Fig. 3.19 (overleaf) SEM micrographs of molar corrosion produced by digestion: category 4.
A. vole molar from little owl assemblage showing penetration of enamel along the salient angles and some destruction of dentine (×15); B. enlargement of same (×112); C. advanced rounding of vole molar from peregrine assemblage (×112); D. advanced rounding of vole molar from kestrel assemblage (×47); E. enlargement of same (×112); F. enlargement of same, showing etching of dentine and partial collapse of right enamel edge (×300); G. shrew molars from little owl assemblage with enamel removed from base (×9); H. enlargement of same (×75).
Fig. 3.20 (overleaf) SEM micrographs of molar corrosion produced by digestion: category 5.
A. three vole molars from common buzzard assemblage showing dentine exposure and digestion along the salient angles with collapse of the enamel along the edges of the salient angles (×10); B. enlargement of left hand specimen showing gap left between enamel and digested dentine (×75); C. enlargement of right hand specimen showing extreme rounding (×56); D. shrew molar from red kite assemblage, with digestion of most of enamel (×75); E. vole molars in place in mandible, showing extreme rounding of occlusal surfaces (×17); F. mole mandible from red kite assemblage with the enamel totally digested and the teeth remaining as dentine pegs (×7); G. enlargement of same (×37); H. shrew molar from hen harrier assemblage showing digestion of most of the enamel (×65).
Fig. 3.21 SEM micrographs of molar corrosion produced by digestion: mammalian carnivores.
A. vole molar from mustelid assemblage, either stoat or polecat (×18); B. enlargement of same (×56); C. same specimen showing collapse of enamel into digested dentine core (×38); D. murid molar digested by margay (×13); E. enlargement of same (×142); F. shrew molars with superficial digestion from bat-eared fox assemblage (×20); G. enlargement of same (×112); H. vole molar with extensive superficial digestion from red fox assemblage (×24); 1.
detail of same (×112); J. murid molar from white tailed mongoose assemblage showing cracking but little digestion (×8); K. enlargement of same (×188); L. shrew anterior teeth from small-spotted genet assemblage (×19); M. enlargement of same (×140); N. enlargement of molar with enamel nearly all removed by digestion (×35).
Incisor digestion
Incisor digestion complements the evidence of molar digestion, but there are interesting differences.
In one way it is more limited, in that it is restricted to rodents, but in another it is less limited because rodent incisors are less variable between rodent taxonomic groups than are the molars.
Murid, cricetid and microtine molars are structurally different from each other, but their incisors are more similar and appear to alter in a similar way when subjected to digestive corrosion.
This section will therefore be limited to rodents only, and there will be no reference to taxonomic differences.
Levels of breakage of rodent incisors are generally low in the predator assemblages, but the incidence of digestion is higher than seen for the molars.
It is also higher on in situ upper incisors than on the lower ones (Table 3.13 columns 3 and 6), and on isolated teeth than on in situ ones.
In order to cover this range of variation, the figures in table 3.13 are broken down into mandibular incisor digestion (columns 13), maxillary incisor digestion (columns 4–6), isolated incisor digestion (columns 7–10), and all these combined in columns 11 to 13.
The greater incidence of digestion on maxillary incisors can be attributed to the greater breakage of the maxillae.
The indices of skull breakage (Table 3.5), and tooth loss (Tables 3.6 and 3.8), show that the damage to the skull, and in particular the percentage incisor loss, is usually at least twice as great in maxillae as opposed to mandibles.
These differences correspond closely to the increased digestion of the upper teeth.
In contrast to this, the digestion of upper and lower isolated incisors follows no set pattern.
There is often little difference between them (Table 3.13 columns 9 and 10), despite the fact that the incidence of in situ digestion is greater in the upper incisors.
Once separated from the jaws they appear equally likely to be digested, so that there is approximate equivalence between the samples.
The greater degree of digestion of the isolated teeth is due to their greater exposure to digestion while still in the predator's stomach (as suggested earlier for the molars).
The numbers of teeth involved are often quite small, and where there is a major discrepancy between the digestion of the upper and lower teeth in columns 9 and 10 of Table 3.13, reference to the actual numbers involved show them to be very small indeed, sometimes no more than one (columns 7 and 8).
It is therefore considered that the isolated incisors are approximately equally digested, and departure from this can be ascribed to sample error due to small sample size.
Looking now at the actual differences in digestion between the different predator species, they can be divided into a number of categories as was done for the molars.
Category 1 again contains the barn owl and short-eared owl but joined this time by the snowy owl.
Digestion is not frequent (5–13 per cent), but it may be distributed over the whole enamel surface, where it appears as slight to moderate pitting (Fig. 3.22 D, E).
Heavier digestion may expose the underlying prism structure of the enamel (Fig. 3.22 E on a lower incisor or Fig. 3.23 D on an upper).
Occasionally more heavy digestion occurs at the tips of the incisors (Fig. 3.22 B, C), where the enamel is totally removed.
The dentine may be slightly digested, producing a wavy outline (Fig. 3.23 C).
Table 3.13 Incisor digestion of in situ and isolated incisors.
N is the number of pellet samples.
Category 2 includes the long-eared owl, Verreaux eagle owl, and the great grey owl, with total digestion percentages  of 20–30 per cent, and this is considerably higher than the category 1 species.
It is also restricted to the tips of the incisors, where it is usually heavier than on the category 1 samples.
This concentration of digestion at the incisor tips is highly characteristic of the prey assemblages of the category 2 species (Fig. 3.22 F-I), and must be linked with heavier digestion combined with the high retention rate of the incisors in the jaws (Tables 3.6 and 3.8), most of the digestion occurring while the incisors are still in place in the jaws (Fig. 3.22 H): in the long-eared owl samples, four times as many in situ incisors are digested as isolated incisors and three times as many for Verreaux eagle owl (data from Table 3.13).
No other species assemblages have such a disproportion, and for the most part the numbers of digested in situ incisors are either the same as or much less than the numbers of isolated incisors.
The great grey owl, which is included in category 2 on the basis of similarity of digestion frequency, has a distribution of the digestion more similar to that of category 1 species.
Digestion occurs in approximately equal numbers at the tips of the incisors and along their lengths, 32 per cent at the tips only, 36 per cent at both the tips and along the lengths of the incisors, and 32 per cent along the lengths only and not at the tips.
It only differs from the category 1 species in the greater frequency of  occurrence of digestion.
The third category of incisor digestion is one in which extensive enamel digestion occurs over the whole incisor (Fig. 3.22 J-K, and Fig. 3.23 H-I).
The spotted eagle owl, European eagle owl, tawny owl and little owl fit into this category.
Digestion of the incisors from these predator assemblages occurs on both enamel and dentine, producing a wavy surface on the latter (Fig. 3.23 I) and reducing the enamel to small islands on the surface of the dentine.
Sometimes the enamel is almost entirely eaten away, and the dentine can take on an appearance similar to the effects of weathering (Fig. 3.23 H).
This group has approximately equal numbers and proportions of isolated and in situ incisors that are digested.
Two further categories of incisor digestion can be recognized here, covering all the diurnal raptors.
Category 4 includes the kestrel and peregrine, while category 5 has the buzzard and hen harrier.
The type and nature of digestion is similar in both, but the frequency of digestion is higher in the latter, with every single tooth being digested (Table 3.13).
Damage is extensive on both the dentine and the enamel, some teeth having all of the enamel removed, leaving a narrow and eroded dentine core, while others also have much of the dentine removed so that the edges of the dentine, or of the enamel if it still remains, collapses in on itself (Fig. 3.22 O).
Where enamel remains on these teeth it is restricted to small islands separated by areas of dentine.
The digestion of incisors from mammalian carnivore prey assemblages is more extreme than that of the molars.
Mustelids are intermediate between categories 2 and 3 (Table 3.13), with only 24 per cent of the incisors digested but the degree of digestion is heavier than seen for most category 2 predators (Fig. 3.24 G).
No evidence was seen of restriction of digestion to the tips of the incisors.
Canid assemblages have a greater degree of digestion (Fig. 3.24 A-E), with high percentages of digested teeth and heavy digestion.
This characterizes the prey assemblages of the three larger species of canid studied, but the bat-eared fox has only 19 per cent of the incisors in its prey assemblages lightly digested, the lowest of any of the mammals and making it equivalent to categories 1 or 2.
The viverrid assemblages are also intermediate in some respects, with 34 to 40 per cent of the incisors showing digestion, which is usually light (Fig. 3.24 F).
This places them intermediate between categories 2 and 3.
The five categories of incisor and molar digestion are summarized for the avian predators in Table 3.14.
This lists the type of damage and the species that exhibit it, and the correspondence between incisor and molar digestion is illustrated in Fig. 3.25.
Incisor digestion is almost always greater than molar digestion, so that most points fall above the equal proportion line (Fig. 3.25), but they show a high level of correlation (r = 0.848).
Table 3.14 Summary of digestion on molars and incisors
Fig. 3.22 (overleaf) SEM micrographs of incisor corrosion produced by digestion: lower incisors.
A. undigested incisor from barn owl assemblage (×18); B. enamel digested from tip of incisor from snowy owl assemblage (×18); C. detail of same (×38); D. surface etching of tip of incisor from short-eared owl assemblage (×14); E. detail of same (×188); F. enamel removed from tip of incisor of Verreaux eagle owl assemblage by digestion (×11); G. detail of enamel edge of same (×38); H. heavy digestion on incisor from tawny owl assemblage (×14); I. detail of enamel at tip of incisor of same (×32); l. digestion along length of incisor from little owl assemblage (×11); K. detail of same (×262); L. heavy digestion of incisor from kestrel assemblage, showing the breakdown of tissue along length of the tooth and complete digestion of the enamel (×38); M. nearly complete removal of enamel along length of incisor from kestrel assemblage (×8); N. detail of island of enamel remaining on same (×38); O. destructuring of incisor from common buzzard assemblage with collapse of dentine and removal of most of the enamel (×8); P. detail of same (×52).
Fig. 3.23 SEM micrographs of incisor corrosion produced by digestion: upper incisors.
A. undigested incisor from barn owl assemblage (×10); B. incisor from short-eared owl assemblage with superficial digestion along its entire length (×11); C. detail of superficial digestion caused by short-eared owl (×75); D. detail of same with the prism structure of the enamel apparent (×375); E. incisor in premaxilla from long-eared owl assemblage with tip digestion of the enamel (×30); F. detail of same (×85); G. isolated incisor from long-eared owl assemblage with tip digestion of the enamel (×15); H. digestion and splitting of incisor from European eagle owl assemblage (×56); I. digestion of enamel and dentine from tawny owl assemblage producing an uneven surface on both (×11); J. enamel removal from middle of incisor from kestrel assemblage (×13); K. detail of digested enamel edge (×375); L. heavy digestion of enamel and dentine from hen harrier assemblage (×18).