

Flexibility
Most people, despite protestations to the contrary, stick to a fairly narrow band of behaviours.
This is entirely understandable since repeating familiar, and previously sufficiently successful, behaviour patterns is far easier than constantly modifying your behaviour to suit differing circumstances.
An argument frequently advanced for being consistent is that it is fairer on other people, they know what to expect and ‘where they stand’.
The alternative argument has it that since people and situations differ you are better equipped to deal with them if you have a wide repertoire of behaviours to draw on.
Oscillating between wild extremes of behaviour is interesting, but ill-advised and unnecessary.
On the other hand being sufficiently flexible to make small adjustments to your behaviour, providing the chosen mode is appropriate, is likely to be effective.
Everyone is able to choose how to behave in a given set of circumstances, although many people operate on the assumption that they cannot choose and never give the alternatives a moment's thought.
You can choose, for example, whether to:
talk or listen
question or answer
look at the person or look away
be positive or negative
be friendly or formal
laugh or cry,
and so on.
These are all significantly different ways of behaving and they are open to everyone.
Varying your behaviour is fine, with two important provisos:
1
You need to be consistent within a single interaction.
Chopping and changing your behaviour within a short space of time is likely to confuse and be unhelpful.
2
You need to be open about the way you have chosen to behave.
Just a simple explanation will do, such as‘I've thought about this and decided that I'd better shut up and do most of the listening’.
It is rare for such declarations to be made — but that is usually because people haven't given any thought as to how best to behave and therefore have nothing to declare.
Games
Games, in the special psychological sense in which the word is used in transactional analysis (see page 167), are closely allied to strokes and discounts (see pages 156 and 55).
A game is basically a manoeuvre that people indulge in to get the strokes they need and/or to be in a position to discount others.
A game always has at least one loser.
Games are condemned in TA as damaging to authentic relationships between people, time-wasting and unproductive.
Games are played by either the Parent or Child ego-states (see page 56) and are outside the awareness of the Adult.
This means that on the surface the transactions may appear complementary but below the surface the rules of the particular game provide a hidden agenda (see page 85).
The hidden agenda is called an ulterior transaction and is represented diagrammatically by dotted lines rather than the solid ones used to illustrate complementary and crossed transactions (see page 58).
On the following page are some examples of games played from the Child ego-state.
On the surface transactions appear to involve an employee asking with his Adult for suggestions from his manager.
And the manager, in turn, appears to be replying with ideas from his Adult.
There is, however, a second, or hidden, psychological level of communication occurring.
At this level the subordinate is saying ‘I'm helpless to solve my own problems so I need a wise   person (Parent) like you to solve them for me.’
The manager, in turn, responds on the psychological level with: ‘Yes I recognize my wisdom and will be happy to give you advice.’
But then in the 3rd and 5th parts of the transaction, the employee rejects the advice that he appeared to be asking for.
If we look only at the surface of this transaction, it won't make sense to us.
It appears contradictory that someone should ask for advice and then reject it.
If, however, we look at the hidden psychological level, we can begin to see that the basic purpose of the transaction was to reject advice rather than to receive it.
By rejecting the manager's ideas the subordinate is able ‘to prove’ his superiority over the boss in an underhanded or crooked way.
Thus the subordinate finishes up feeling good and gives himself a stroke, the manager loses and collects a discount for his pains.
This particular game is called ‘Yes, but…’ and is played from the Child ego-state.
Other games played out of the Child ego-state are:
Kick me
The person repeatedly sets up situations so that they are caught and, figuratively, kicked as though a Kick Me sign were pinned on their back.
The feelings he or she gets when ‘kicked’ are comfortingly familiar and better than being ignored.
See what you made me do?
An example of this would be a secretary who angrily snatches a piece of paper from the typewriter while shooting a glance at the manager who is standing too near for comfort.
The crooked pay-off is that the secretary feels blameless and discounts the innocent manager.
Love me no matter what I do
Players of this game put out one ‘bait’ after another hoping that someone will tell them to stop it.
When they do, they turn on the person and accuse him or her of being old-fashioned and not accepting them as they are.
Harried executive
Played by people who keep so busy with minute details that they always seem harassed.
At first people respond to this sympathetically and avoid asking the person to do more.
Eventually the player is likely to lose out, however, by getting a reputation for being disorganized.
In addition to the games played by the Child there are some played from the Parent ego-state.
The ingredients are exactly the same — the game is essentially a crooked manoeuvre to get or give strokes and/or discounts.
Here is an example: This is a trapping game called ‘Now I've Got You’.
The manager attempts to catch the subordinate making a mistake and this ‘justifies’ a discount.
Discounts might be a sacking, disciplinary action, withholding a promotion or rise, writing a critical letter and so on.
Other games played out of the Parent ego-state are:
Blemish
This is played from the Critical Parent where someone is apparently praising a job well done but spoils the effect by pointing out a relatively insignificant imperfection.
Pedantic people are prone to do this with minor typing errors or spelling mistakes.
I'm only trying to help you
This is played from the Nurturing Parent.
In this game someone offers help even though it hasn't been requested.
After they have put themselves out to help, the other person makes it clear that help wasn't wanted.
The helper departs feeling ‘put down’ and badly done by.
Games always result in a win-lose outcome where someone comes out on top but at the other person's expense.
The loser is likely to be tempted into playing a return game on some future occasion in a bid to square the match.
This ‘tit for tat’ competition wastes time, saps energy and sours relationships.
How can we recognize when a game is being played?
Here are some of the usual indicators.
Ask yourself:
Has this same pattern of events happened with this person before?
(People have favourite games that are repetitious).
Are the verbal and non-verbal messages in this person's behaviour consistent?
(Non-verbal aspects are harder to control so they are often a ‘window’ on the ulterior transaction).
Is what I'd expected to happen actually happening?
(If it isn't, you are probably in a game).
Do I feel bad, exploited, put down?
Or, do I feel triumphant, the winner?
(Games inevitably result in these feelings).
When you spot a game for what it is how can you stop it?
Here are some useful ways:
Go back to your Adult and try to hook the other person's Adult.
(The Adult ego-state does not play games).
Confront the game by finding some way to express the unexpectedness of the behaviour.
Ignore the game and find some way of refusing to produce the complementary behaviour.
(It takes two to play a game).
If you fail to recognize a game until it's too late what can you do to reduce the damage and learn from the experience?
If you are the victim of a game refuse to take on the bad feeling it leaves you with.
(See Preventing unwanted feelings on page 138).
After a game, whether you were the winner or loser, use your Adult to ask yourself ‘How did it start?’
‘Did the game come from my Parent or Child?’
‘What can I do to prevent its repetition?’
For other concepts from Transactional analysis see Ego-states , page 56,Strokes , page 156,Discounts , page 55,OKness , page 123.
Genuineness
Genuineness is a judgement people make based, as it must be, on the way you behave.
People are likely to conclude that you are genuine if you do some or all of the following things:
Ensure that your non-verbal behaviour matches what you are saying.
For example, it isn't considered genuine to say ‘How nice to see you’ whilst rummaging through the contents of your in-tray.
Openly admit to your own fallibility.
Share your objectives with people.
Share your feelings with people.
Whilst you might use these behaviours and through them create an impression of being genuine, it will, of course, quickly be destroyed unless you do what you say you will do.
If for some reason it subsequently becomes obvious that you can't do what you said  you'd do, then the genuine thing to do is to contact the person before the deadline expires, admit your difficulty and negotiate a new deadline.
Going round in circles
Meetings are infamous for getting stuck and going round in circles.
In behavioural terms this usually occurs when people participating in the meeting get locked into an information loop.
The loop goes like this:
Person A Asks a question of clarification
Person B Provides clarification
Person C Provides clarification of the clarification
Person D Adds some further information
Person E Asks a question to elicit more information
Person D Provides more information
Person C Adds some further information
Person A Asks a question of clarification
Person B Provides clarification
and so on!
Both information and clarification are essential in all meetings, indeed they are the essence of any communication between people.
The problem of going round in circles is caused by a surplus of information and explanation, and a deficit of ideas and reactions to those ideas.
The peril of getting caught in an information loop is made plain if we look at the following facts.
Whenever you ask a question of clarification or ask for information nine times out of ten clarification or information is forthcoming.
Whenever you give clarification or provide information four times out of ten someone else will follow you by doing the same and three times out of ten someone else will follow you by asking for more.
This means that seven times out of ten the provision of clarification or information results in more of the same or requests for more.
On average in a meeting, seeking clarification and giving clarification amount to 44 per cent of all the spoken behaviours.
On average in a meeting there are two answers to every question (the actual figures are 15 per cent for seeking clarification and 29 per cent for giving clarification).
It is easy to see, therefore, how going round in circles is not a vicious circle, but a circle nonetheless.
The reason why people prolong the information loop is because it is a relatively ‘safe’ way to pass the time.
Exchanging information is not as risky as sticking your neck out by suggesting an idea, so people tend to prolong information-swopping and postpone idea-having.
The answer is to recognize that the conversation has got stuck in a circle and to take an initiative to break it.
The most obvious initiatives are to seek an idea from someone or to put an idea yourself (see Seeking ideas on page 152 and Idea-having on page 86).
Groups
Groups, like the people that comprise them, come in different shapes and sizes.
A group is a collection of individual people who come together to achieve some purpose.
A group is a lesser thing than a team, which performs at a higher level of cohesion than a mere group needs to (see Teams on page 161).
Generally speaking, the more a group exceeds seven people the more cumbersome it becomes.
This is because each individual brings a different mix of strengths and weaknesses, experiences and perceptions.
On the one hand this provides an excellent opportunity for the group to tap into a wide diversity of views.
On the other hand it makes it difficult to reach genuine agreement on anything at all.
Sometimes agreement is apparent rather than real because of the tendency to conform and fall in with majority opinion.
This results in the faint-hearted acquiescing (see Acquiescence on page 1).
Because of the difficulties of getting it all together, the chairperson or co-ordinator has a key part to play (see Chairing meetings on page 28).
Unfortunately, most groups cannot boast a chairperson or co-ordinator who is up to the job.
The most frequent reason is  that the chairperson gets too involved in the task and doesn't do enough to manage the process.
To comprehend fully the distinction between task and process it is necessary to appreciate the evolutionary stages that groups go through:
Stage 1 The chaotic stage
Groups of people who are thrown together and given a task to tackle tend to underestimate the complexities of getting a group to cohere.
This is especially true if the group starts from scratch with no designated roles or previous experience of working together.
A group in the chaotic stage tries to overcome uncertainty and ambiguity by flinging itself headlong into the task in hand without giving enough, if any, attention to the process.
The noticeable characteristics of a group in the chaotic stage are:
No time is given to setting clear objectives that everyone subscribes to.
The group assumes that everyone knows what the objectives are.
Inadequate time is given to planning how to tackle the task.
If a leader is appointed, no thought is given to clarifying the leader's role; it is likely that the appointed leader will try to impose his or her authority on a group which will not consent.
Ideas will be voiced but not listened to and developed; or rejected because the level of interrupting and overspeaking will be inefficiently high.
The success of the group will be patchy; sometimes, despite the chaos, it will get by; sometimes it will fail.
Whatever the outcome, the tendency to rationalize, ie for people to claim that they did achieve what they set out to, is high.
Stage 3 — The formal stage
Eventually a group will react against the chaotic stage by tightening up and becoming more formal.
It is very likely to over-react, however, and introduce formal procedures that swing the pendulum too far the other way.
The most noticeable characteristics of a group in the formal stage are:
There will be rigid, step by step, procedures for agreeing  objectives and plans.
Typically a group might have a system of going round the table, letting everyone have their say.
It might also instigate a system of writing up the objective in large letters for all to see.
The need for strong leadership is frequently emphasized.
In a formal group this means ensuring that people stick to the procedures, don't argue, don't interrupt one another and so on.
Strong leadership is seen as the solution to the problems of the chaotic stage.
If the group fails, the leader is criticized for not being strong enough!
Different people in the group will be given specific roles such as time keeper, secretary; and there will be explicit rules of behaviour such as only speaking through the chair, considering one idea at a time, recapping frequently from the secretary's minutes and so on.
The success of the group will improve if the time limits are sufficiently elastic to allow extra time for all the formalities.
Stage 3 — the skilful stage
Gradually a group outlives the formal stage and begins to ‘take liberties’ with its own procedures without slipping back into chaos.
Sometimes a group rebels against the rigidity of the formal stage too early and oscillates between the chaotic and formal stages.
Sometimes a group gets stuck in the formal stage, convinced that formality and rules are the only antidote to chaos.
The breakthrough to the skilful stage usually occurs when the group realizes that some part of its formal procedures is inappropriate to the particular task in hand.
It therefore cuts some corners and, in so doing, discovers that it can cope.
The most noticeable characteristics of a group in the skilful stage, ie a team, are:
All procedures for objective setting, planning, time keeping or whatever are agreed in the light of the task to be done and the situation.
The procedures are therefore flexible rather than rigid.
The leader is less directive and more participative.
Indeed, in a skilful team that has ‘got it together’, the role of leader is relatively redundant.
A leader may just be needed occasionally as a ‘long stop’.
A formal-stage group is leader-dependent whereas a skilful-stage team is leader-independent.
Team members, in whatever role, share equal responsibility for the success of the team.
The atmosphere in the team is trusting and co-operative.
The team is more successful in achieving challenging objectives.
One of the interesting discoveries about this evolutionary process is that a team operating at the skilful stage gets there via the formal stage.
Just as only a caterpillar can become a butterfly, the formal stage seems a necessary developmental step to the skilful stage.
The skills acquired from rigid planning are different in degree but not in kind from the skills required for flexible planning.
So the formal stage is an essential step in the learning process.
It is the equivalent of learning to walk before you can run.
The secret of success is, therefore, to get a group into the formal stage as fast as possible.
Once there, performance needs to be maintained by regular reviews (see page 147).
If the group
has sufficiently challenging tasks to tackle,
has a reasonably constant core of members,
is due to meet frequently (say, at least weekly),
then it may be appropriate for it to progress to operating at the skilful stage.
For more on this, see Teams on page 161.
Guilt
Guilt is an unwanted feeling that frequently spills over into behaviour.
Fortunately guilt is a preventable feeling but it is vital to read the section on Preventing unwanted feelings (on page 138) before reading the remainder of this section because what follows assumes you have understood the two options involved.
Unproductive guilt hinders your behaviour in a variety of ways.
All or some of the following might apply to you:
You waste time in the present lamenting over something that happened in the past.
You say yes when you wanted to say no.
You are a ‘soft touch’ and take the line of least resistance (ie ‘tip’someone even though you didn't want to, buy something you don't really want).
You have an over-developed sense of duty and ‘shoulds, oughts and musts’ from the past compel you to serve other people/ become a do-gooder.
You don't fully savour happy/frivolous moments because of a gnawing feeling that you ought to be doing something more worthwhile.
You inflict your self-reproaches on people close to you.
Your guilt is always triggered by some external event or happening.
Typical examples might be when:
reminded of mistakes you made in the past — the sight/presence of someone you wronged in the past.
someone close to you subjects you to emotional blackmail/puts pressure on you (ie ‘It'll be your fault if I drop dead with a heart attack.’
‘How can you treat me like this after all I have sacrificed for you?’
‘All my friends are allowed to.’).
someone accuses you of embarrassing/boring/upsetting them (‘Now see what you've made me do.’).
you do something you consider wrong or contrary to your self-imposed standards (ie letting someone down, pilfering, having an extra-marital affair, forgetting someone's birthday, being out at work when the children come home from school).
you are rebuked by an ‘authority figure’(‘You should not/ought not/must not do so and so.’).
Clearly, ideas for changing the events that trigger your guilt feelings will depend on the exact circumstances, but here are some thought-starters that might help you to arrive at a feasible plan:
Keep a guilt diary.
When does it happen?
Doing what?
With whom?
Plan to avoid or minimize your exposure to guilt-provoking situations.
The moment you are reminded of a past mistake say out loud ‘That is past.
I'll be careful not to repeat that mistake in the future.’
When you consider you have wronged someone admit it and apologize.
This cleans the slate making it less likely that you will  feel guilty or succumb to any future pressure or emotional blackmail.
Write out your own personal ten commandments in the back of your diary (revise it each year) so that you are clear what your standards are.
Check back whenever you are tempted to do something contrary to your commandments.
Avoid people who pepper their conversation with ‘shoulds, oughts and musts’.
Rather than modify anything to do with the external events that trigger your guilt you might decide to go for option 2 and identify the thoughts or beliefs that herald your guilt feelings and examine them for possible replacements.
Typical thoughts for feelings of guilt are:
I ought not to have done that.
They are right — I deserve to feel ashamed of myself.
Oh dear!
I have upset them (as opposed to they are upset).
I should not be doing this.
It is all my fault.
It is wrong to enjoy myself.
And, finally, here are some thought-starters on ways of replacing unrealistic thoughts and beliefs that provoke feelings of guilt so that they become more realistic and less likely to hinder your behaviour:
The past is past and there is nothing I can do to change it.
Nothing can make me feel guilty.
I choose whether to feel guilty or not.
Feeling guilty does not make me a better person.
They are upset/annoyed/embarrassed but that is their choice.
I've got just three choices:
1
to stay and feel guilty
2
to stay and enjoy it
3
to get up and go
One is daft, so shall I do two or three?
I have a right to say no.
Habits
There are good habits and bad habits but the main point about them is that they are all behaviour patterns which have been so thoroughly learned that they are done automatically without any conscious effort.
In fact if you concentrate attention on a habit it often causes the habitual behaviour pattern to break down.
(Try thinking about your finger movements when you play a well-known tune on a keyboard — you make more mistakes than if you let your fingers do the thinking.)
Habitual behaviour patterns are, therefore, useful because they can be carried out effortlessly and free us to concentrate our energies on other things.
The difficulty with habits is that they are difficult to change.
Breaking a habit, be it over-eating, over-drinking, biting your nails or jumping to conclusions, is a tall order.
The key to success is to:
Identify precisely when you indulge in the habit and what ingredients are present in the situation that triggers it.
Then see what you can do to change the circumstances of the situation.
So if, for example, you always smoke a cigarette when you have a cup of coffee, avoid drinking coffee.
Replace the habit with something else rather than leaving a void.
Clearly the replacement needs to be something desirable and/or less harmful than the original habit you are seeking to break.
So, for example, it would be better to stick your head out of the window and take in six large gulps of air instead of smoking a cigarette than to cut out smoking and put nothing in its place.
Reward yourself each time you succeed in breaking the habit.
This acts as positive reinforcement.
The rewards could be quick and simple such as reading the newspaper for five minutes, or having a quick chat on the phone with a friend.
These three actions are vastly superior to breaking a habit by will-power alone.
Will-power is where you stop a habit without changing the situation (ie you still drink coffee), or replacing the habit with another activity or rewarding yourself.
Not surprisingly  will-power has a poor track record when it comes to permanently breaking entrenched behaviour patterns.
(For more on behaviour change see Behaviour modification on page 16.)
Helpful behaviour
To some extent what constitutes a helpful and what constitutes an unhelpful behaviour is in the eye of the beholder (see Customer satisfaction on page 46).
However, there are certain behaviours that more often than not are considered helpful and therefore tend to engender favourable reactions in the people you have dealings with.
This applies whoever they are — senior to you, junior to you, same level as you, customers, acquaintances, friends, neighbours, relatives and members of your immediate family.
Here is a list of 19 helpful behaviours that have been carefully researched.
Lean forward with hands open, arms uncrossed and legs uncrossed
Look at the other person for approximately 60 per cent of the time
When listening, nod and make ‘I'm listening’ noises such as‘um’, ‘yes’, ‘really’
Smile
Sit beside the other person or if this isn't possible, at a 90 degree angle to them
Use the other person's name early on in the transaction
Ask the other person open questions
Summarize back to the other person what you think they have said
Say things that refer back to what the other person has said
Show empathy by saying you understand how the other person feels and can see things from their point of view
When in agreement with the other person, openly say so and say why
Build on the other person's ideas
Be non-judgemental towards the other person
If you have to disagree with the other person, give the reason first then say you disagree
Admit it when you don't know the answer or have made a mistake 
Openly explain what you are doing, or intending to do, for the other person
Be genuine, with visual and verbal behaviours telling the same story
Whenever possible, touch the other person
Give the other person something, even if it is only a name card, or piece of paper with notes on it.
Hidden agendas
A hidden agenda is where someone's behaviour is determined by a motive which is undeclared and being deliberately concealed.
A good example is where someone may question you about a situation ostensibly to become clearer about the facts.
Unbeknown to you the real motive is to question you in order to undermine your position.
Another famous one is where someone may come to you with a problem ostensibly to enlist your help in solving it.
In fact they are out to prove that their problem is insoluble and that you couldn't help them.
These are both rather ominous examples of hidden agendas, because the reason for being secretive is because the real motive is essentially manipulative.
Sometimes there is a hidden agenda which is more innocent where, for example, someone may question you about something in order to establish your credibility or in order to weigh you up.
Hidden agendas, precisely because they are under cover, are often difficult to detect.
It usually dawns on you slowly that all is not as it would appear on the surface.
The best antidote against hidden agendas is to insist on clarifying and agreeing a clear objective (see Objectives on page 119) before proceeding.
Even this may still leave some hidden agendas lurking beneath the surface.
The answer then is openly to confront the issue as soon as your suspicions are aroused.
For further advice on tactics for avoiding hidden agendas or surfacing them, see Games on page 71.
Humour
Humour can be an excellent behaviour for easing tensions and breaking the ice between people.
However, to achieve these objectives it needs to be:
situational humour, ie funny within the context of the situation people are in at the time so that people can relate to it through a common, shared experience
non-threatening, ie the humour is not at someone else's expense and does not ridicule anyone except yourself
non-offensive to the people present, ie not sexist or racist or shockingly ‘blue’
spontaneous.
If you succumb to the temptation to tell contrived jokes, ration yourself to two per day.
This is because joke after joke is tedious and people quickly reach saturation point.
Idea-having
There are two distinct phases in having an idea.
First you have to think of it and secondly you have to say it.
Unfortunately, there are many people who think of ideas but, for various reasons, don't voice them.
Often they fear ridicule or a rebuttal.
At other times they lack the skills of assertion (see Assertiveness on page 8) and sometimes the gestation period is too long and the moment has passed.
Producing off-the-top-of-the-head ideas (see Creative thinking on page 41) is particularly difficult for many people, especially those who feel vulnerable unless they have had time to prepare their idea carefully before offering it.
An idea is a possible course of action.
if, for example you said ‘It's 11 o'clock.
Let's have a break for coffee’, that would be an idea.
If, however, you said ‘It's 11 o'clock’, that would not be an idea.
It would only he a piece of information.
If you said ‘It's 11 o'clock.
People often have a cup of coffee at this time’, that would not be an idea either because it doesn't contain a sufficiently explicit course of action.
Admittedly the action is heavily implied and most  people would take the hint but the point is that, strictly speaking ideas have to be explicit.
Innuendos and hints do not count.
There are two different ways to voice an idea.
You can propose it or suggest it.
Proposed ideas are always statements such as‘It's 11 o'clock.
We will break for coffee.’
Suggestions are always questions such as‘It's 11 o'clock, shall we break for coffee?’
Remarkably this subtle difference in the way an idea is put makes a significant difference to the response.
The facts are that if you propose an idea, four times out of ten someone will take issue with it by pointing out snags and difficulties (see Difficulty stating on page 52).
If, on the other hand, you suggest an idea, four times out of ten someone will agree with it.
The actual figures are:
These data clearly indicate that ‘suggesting’, the more involving way of idea-having, is far more likely to win support.
Despite this, most people persist in proposing their ideas at least twice as often as they suggest them!
If you aren't very good at thinking of ideas, try using other people's ideas as a springboard for your own.
You can do this in a couple of ways.
Whenever someone voices an idea, ie a possible course of action, analyse it by asking yourself ‘What is wrong with that?’
When you have thought of a snag either:
think of an alternative idea that overcomes the snag or
think of an addition to the other person's idea that improves it and overcomes the snag you have identified.
The latter alternative is preferable since it is more likely to be seen as constructive and thus win support (see Building on page 25).
However, both tactics are ways of using other people's ideas as a stimulus for producing ideas yourself.
Idea-having is the best antidote to the common problem of going round in circles (see Going round in circles on page 76).
Inadequacy
Inadequacy is an unwanted feeling that frequently spills over into behaviour.
Fortunately inadequacy is a preventable feeling but it is vital to read the section on Preventing unwanted feelings (on page 138) before reading the remainder of this section because what follows assumes you have understood the two options involved.
Unproductive feelings of inadequacy hinder your behaviour in a variety of ways.
All or some of the following might apply to you:
You crave constant approval/support/reassurance.
You are non-assertive (ie hold back from giving your opinions, modify your stance to gain approval, agree with other people even when you don't).
You are over-polite/over-apologetic/over-subservient.
You constantly discount yourself: ‘My opinion may not be worth much but…’
‘I'm no good at this.’
‘I'm sure you'll find fault with this.’
You become embarrassed when people compliment you: ‘Oh it was nothing really’.
You never go out on a limb and try something new or different.
You don't stand up straight, look people in the eye, shake hands firmly or leave decisively when it's time to go.
You always think of the clever remark you could have made afterwards when it's too late.
Your feelings of inadequacy are always triggered by some external event or happening.
Typical examples might be when:
in the presence of people you regard as better looking/cleverer/ more accomplished than you
you encounter someone who is good at something you are poor  at but aspire to (ie flirting, dancing, doing crossword puzzles, playing a musical instrument, telling jokes, playing sports, doing the Rubik cube in 38 seconds)
you lose an intellectual argument because you weren't fast enough on your feet
you fail (ie a test, exam, to get a job you applied for, to get the partner you wanted)
you are abroad and can't speak the language
you read the Guinness Book of Records or watch ‘Mastermind’ on TV or can't do your children's homework or lose at ‘Trivial Pursuit’.
Clearly, ideas for changing the events that trigger your feelings of inadequacy will depend on the exact circumstances, but here are some thought-starters that might help you to arrive at a feasible plan:
Avoid people who you think are better looking/cleverer/more accomplished than you.
Choose an obscure subject/hobby and become a world authority on it.
Learn a party piece and practise it till you can do it perfectly (ie a series of jokes, a juggling/conjuring trick, a puzzle that no-one can ever solve).
Select one topical current affairs issue each week and swot up on it from newspapers and magazines.
It is even more impressive if you can memorize some relevant statistics/figures.
Take yourself in hand.
Get fit, get slim, practise standing up straight with your hands behind your back (a sign of confidence).
Force yourself to compliment/congratulate other people on their appearance/accomplishments.
This gets you to concentrate on them rather than yourself and you'll discover that even the most famous people value your compliments.
Rather than modify anything to do with the external events that trigger your inadequacy, you might decide to go for option 2 and identify the thoughts or beliefs that herald your feelings of inadequacy and examine them for possible replacements.
Typical thoughts for feelings of inadequacy are:
I'm stupid/ugly/no good/a failure.
I look silly.
They are better than me.
They can't possibly find me interesting.
They are bound to expose my inadequacy.
I need their approval.
And, finally, here are some thought-starters on ways of replacing unrealistic thoughts and beliefs that provoke feelings of inadequacy so that they become more realistic and less likely to hinder your behaviour:
There are plenty of things I can do really well.
Even if they think I'm silly, I'm not.
They are better than me at some things.
I am better than them at other things.
If they don't find me interesting that's their loss.
I decide whether to feel inadequate or not.
As far as I am concerned no-one in the world is more important than me.
Influencing
Influencing is what behaviour is all about.
Whenever you are interacting with someone you are to a greater or lesser extent trying to influence them.
You might be trying to do this via their thoughts, beliefs, attitudes, feelings or by directly attempting to influence their behaviour.
As you might expect, some behaviours are more influential than others but all behaviours have a direct impact on other people.
This is because all behaviours, spoken and unspoken, are overt and manifest.
For details of the impact of non-verbal behaviours see page 116.
For details of the impact of verbal behaviours see page 170.
For further advice on how to be influential see Persuasiveness on page 128.
Inhibition
Inhibition is an unwanted feeling that frequently spills over into behaviour.
Fortunately inhibition is a preventable feeling but it is  vital to read the section on Preventing unwanted feelings (on page 138) before reading the remainder of this section because what follows assumes you have understood the two options involved.
Unproductive feelings of inhibition hinder your behaviour in a variety of ways.
All or some of the following might apply to you:
You are cautious/play it safe/hold back/don't experiment for fear of making a mistake/failing/looking stupid.
You stick to the tried and true, never going at risk and trying something new/different.
You resist change (ie travel the same way to work, read the same newspaper, wear the same sort of clothes, have fixed routines/habits, stick to familiar foods, stick to the same circle of friends).
You can't be spontaneous or produce off-the-top-of-the-head ideas.
You are unable to suspend judgement and dismiss/criticize activities you have never tried (ie yoga, jogging, skiing, hang-gliding).
You turn down invitations to anything off-beat.
You can't look someone in the eye and say ‘I love you’.
Your feelings of inhibition are always triggered by some external event or happening.
Typical examples might be when:
you are a newcomer to a group
you have to speak before a group
you are in strange, unfamiliar surroundings/meeting strangers
you meet people who are better looking/more accomplished than you
someone invites you to a party or to try something new/different
you feel exposed/that you might make a fool of yourself in front of others
you realize you hold substantially different views to anyone else present
getting undressed in front of someone else.
Clearly, ideas for changing the events that trigger your feelings of inhibition will depend on the exact circumstances, but here are some thought-starters that might help you to arrive at a feasible plan:
Keep an inhibition log noting precisely what events inhibit you, then plan to avoid them.
When you are a newcomer to a group take a friend you know well along with you.
Prepare some opening gambits/topics you can use when first meeting strangers.
Draw up a list of 20 things you have never done that are silly but don't cost much money and work your way down the list by doing one each day (eg leave your car in the garage and hitch a lift, turn the daily newspaper into papier mâché, go to the shops wearing a funny hat, shake hands with the next 10 people you meet).
Make friends with someone who finds it easy to be spontaneous.
Tag along with them, do what they do.
Force yourself to initiate a conversation lasting at least five minutes with a stranger every other day.
Brief people close to you to cajole you into doing things and not to take no for an answer.
Go to an event where you will be ‘forced’ to join in (ie a barn dance with a persuasive caller, an evening at a bowling alley, a table-tennis competition).
Rather than modify anything to do with the external events that trigger your inhibition you might decide to go for option 2 and identify the thoughts or beliefs that herald your inhibition and examine them for possible replacements.
Typical thoughts for feelings of inhibition are:
I'll look stupid.
I'm not sure what is going to happen.
I may not like it.
Will they approve of me?
They'll see my faults and then they won't like me any more.
I know I won't be any good at this — they'll just laugh at me.
And, finally, here are some thought-starters on ways of replacing unrealistic thoughts and beliefs that provoke feelings of inhibition so that they become more realistic and less likely to hinder your behaviour:
I may make a mess of this but that doesn't mean I'm stupid.
Everyone makes mistakes.
I may not like this, but I won't know unless I try it first.
I don't need their approval.
If they can't accept me as I am, good riddance.
It's nice to amuse people.
If I do this what is the worst thing that could happen to me?
Nothing can make me feel inhibited — I decide whether to feel inhibited or not.
Oh, what the hell…nothing ventured, nothing gained!
Instincts
Instincts are behaviours that you don't have to learn.
They are reflexes built into the system from the word go.
New-born babies don't have to learn to breathe, cry or suck and there are many other examples of similar ‘survival’ reflexes.
An obvious difference between human beings and other animals is the relatively small number of behaviours that are instinctive to humans and the vast number of behaviours that are acquired through a process of learning.
With animals it tends to be the other way round: more instinctive behaviour patterns and relatively less to learn.
The interesting question when it comes to human behaviour is how much to attribute to inheritance, both in the form of instincts and in predispositions to behave in certain ways, and how much to learning.
This is known as the nature nurture controversy.
After 80 years of argument and counter argument there is no conclusive answer to the question nor is there ever likely to be one.
For practical purposes it is probably safe to assume something like a 50/50 split and this is probably putting inherited factors too high.
Even if we assume a 50/50 split that means a lot of our behaviour is learned and pliable.
Thus we can, if we choose, unlearn and relearn ways of behaving rather than assuming it is something totally rigid and fixed.
For further discussion on this see Personality on page 127 and Learning from experience on page 100.
Integrity
See Openness on pages 126–127 
Interpersonal skills
Interpersonal skills are behaviours, used face-to-face, that succeed in helping progress towards a useful outcome.
That's a bit of a mouthful so let's separate the ingredients and examine them more carefully.
Behaviours (see page 13) are everything you say and do.
They are important because they are so immediately apparent to everyone you come face-to-face with and therefore have a direct effect on other people.
Face-to-Face (see page 61) covers a whole multitude of different interactions between people.
It might be an informal chat with someone or it might be a formal meeting with a group of people.
The point is that it is only during face-to-face encounters that your behaviour is totally evident.
During ‘phone calls, by contrast, only what you say counts.
Written communications are different because whilst what you write represents your behaviour even though you are not present, it isn't happening ‘in flight’ as do face-to-face behaviours.
A useful outcome is the third ingredient, for what would be the point of skills that led you to a useless outcome?
The proof of the pudding is in the eating, and the proof of people skills is that they make it as likely as possible that we achieve our objectives with people.
The trick is to get all three ingredients to come together in a smooth and easy symmetry.
Face-to-face situations provide the context, objectives spell out the desirable end and behaviours are the means.
There are just six fundamental interpersonal skills which give us a process that is equally applicable in ill situations.
This is preferable to having a ‘shopping list’ of skills where the items on the list will inevitably vary in importance depending upon the situation.
If, for example, you are discussing how to solve a problem with a person who has more experience than you, then listening would be high on your list.
If, on the other hand, you knew much more about what had to be done to solve the problem than the other person, then communicating clearly and testing the other person's understanding would be higher priorities.
We avoid this ‘it all depends’ qualification if we have a few fundamental skills that apply in all situations.
They are:
1
Analysing the situation
2
Establishing a realistic objective
3
Selecting appropriate ways of behaving
4
Controlling our behaviour
5
Shaping other people's behaviour
6
Monitoring our own and others' behaviour.
The first three skills are essentially about thinking, the last three are about doing.
It is the combination of both that is vital, for there is no point in thinking without doing, nor in doing without thinking.
Notice also how these skills provide us with a timeless wisdom, applicable to all people-situations anywhere.
Analysing the situation helps us to detect the circumstances that need to be heeded when setting an objective that is realistic.
The objective, in turn, provides a backcloth against which to make choices about how best to behave.
Each thinking skill cascades into the next and the three combined help us to be aware of the situation and to have worked out what to do about it.
By consciously controlling our behaviour we are more likely to do things that need to be done to achieve the objective.
In so doing we influence other people's behaviour in the only way possible — via our own behaviour.
And all the while we monitor to keep tabs on what is happening and to get the feedback we need to make in-flight adjustments.
There is no doubt that improving your interpersonal skills by extending your repertoire of behaviours is not easy.
As with the acquisition of any skill it requires conscious effort as each skill is practised to the point where it becomes effortless (see Skilful behaviour on page 155).
Since an investment of time and effort is required it is important to be sure that it will all be worthwhile.
Some of the advantages of improved interpersonal skills are that you will be better at:
quickly assessing and understanding face-to-face situations.
You will thus benefit from fewer misunderstandings
setting specific and realistic objectives for face-to-face encounters with people.
You will thus benefit from being clear in what you are aiming at and successfully achieving it more often than not 
choosing and using behaviours that complement the circumstances and are appropriate to the objective.
You will thus benefit by having an easier, and pleasanter, interaction en route to achieving your objective
being aware of other people's behaviour and influencing it.
You will thus benefit from being able to use your own behaviour as a powerful influence.
These are just some of the potential benefits of enhanced interpersonal skills.
Of course, you will have already acquired some people skills through an ad hoc process of learning from experience.
There will undoubtedly be things you already do well, that no longer require any conscious effort on your part.
The problem is that, quite understandably, we all tend to stick to the tried and true and therefore repeat over and over again the same skills.
In effect, therefore, we stop acquiring any new skills and this may mean we risk having too narrow a repertoire of skills to equip us adequately for the variety of people-situations we are likely to encounter.
For further details on how to enhance your interpersonal skills see the following sections (preferably in this order):Face-to-face situations , page 61,Objectives , page 119,Categories of behaviour , page 26,Verbal behaviour , page 170,Non-verbal behaviour , page 116.
Interpersonal behaviour
See Observing behaviour on pages 122 — 123
Interviewing
Interviewing is a special face to face encounter which comes in a number of different guises.
There are selection interviews, exit interviews, disciplinary interviews, as well as interviews to discover people's opinions on everything from products to politics.
Whatever the type of interview the basic purpose is always the same: to elicit information from the interviewee.
The key skills of interviewers are all included in different sections of this book.
They are:
Being clear on your objectives (see Objectives on page 119).
Planning your behaviour (see Planning behaviour on page 131).
Establishing rapport (see Rapport on page 144).
Asking questions (see Asking questions on page 8).
Summarizing (see Summarizing on page 159).
One of the hazards of interviewing is succumbing to the temptation of jumping to a conclusion too quickly, based perhaps on a hastily formed first impression (see First impressions on page 69).
It helps to counteract this tendency if you have a clear list of criteria against which to view the person and/or the information the interview renders.
Jealousy
Jealousy is an unwanted feeling that frequently spills over into behaviour.
Fortunately jealousy is a preventable feeling but it is vital to read the section on Preventing unwanted feelings (on page 138) before reading the remainder of this section because what follows assumes you have understood the two options involved.
Unproductive feelings of jealousy hinder your behaviour in a variety of ways.
All or some of the following might apply to you:
You sulk/maintain a stony silence.
You become vicious/spiteful/sarcastic/violent.
You become suspicious/distrustful/watchful/keep checking up/ relentlessly supervise.
You seek to maintain control over people important to you (ie you restrict their freedom, lay down rigid rules, issue ultimatums, become possessive/unreasonable).
You become hostile/competitive towards real or imagined rivals.
You constantly seek reassurance: ‘You do love me don't you?’
‘You will never leave me will you?’
You threaten to commit suicide.
Your jealousy is always triggered by some external event or happening.
Typical examples might be when:
your partner talks with old friends about things you don't know about
someone you know (friend, neighbour, colleague) succeeds at something you aspire to
your partner tells you about the good times he/she had before meeting you
your partner talks about his/her work or an interest that you can't understand or join in
everyone clusters appreciatively round your partner at a party and ignores you
your partner flirts with/has an affair with someone else
you lose control over your partner (ie they insist on pursuing a time-consuming interest that excludes you, they go off and do their own thing).
Clearly, ideas for changing the events that trigger your jealousy will depend on the exact circumstances, but here are some thought-starters that might help you to arrive at a feasible plan:
Choose friends/partners who aren't as accomplished as you are.
Avoid ambiguous situations that you can't control.
Keep busy!
Have lots of engrossing things you can fall to doing if you are abandoned.
When your partner talks about things you don't know about, bombard him/her with questions.
This stops you being excluded.
Draw up a ‘contract’ with your partner spelling out the limits of acceptable behaviour.
It helps if you both keep independent jealousy logs for a few weeks beforehand.
Then you find out what needs to go into the ‘contract’.
Rather than modify anything to do with the external events that trigger your jealousy you might decide to go for option 2 and identify the thoughts or beliefs that herald your jealousy and examine them for possible replacements.
Typical thoughts for feelings of jealousy are:
They are enjoying themselves — I am being excluded/rejected/ abandoned/ignored.
I can no longer thrill, dazzle, charm or delight.
There must be something wrong with me.
He/she thinks they are more attractive/better than me.
I may lose them and that would be terrible !
He/she will compare me with them and find me wanting.
Why are they doing this to me?
I knew he/she couldn't be trusted.
I can't survive without them.
Lucky them — poor me!
And, finally, here are some thought-starters on ways of replacing unrealistic thoughts and beliefs that provoke feelings of jealousy so that they become more realistic and less likely to hinder your behaviour:
They are enjoying themselves but that takes nothing away from me.
No-one can make me feel jealous.
I choose to feel jealous.
I don't like it-but I can lump it!
This isn't catastrophic or awful or terrible.
It is just annoying/ irritating/disappointing/unfortunate.
The only Person I possess is me.
I don't depend on them .
I depend on me .
Leadership
Opinions vary as to what a leader really is.
It is helpful to think of a leader more as a role with characteristic ways of behaving than as a particular person.
Usually organizations and groups have designated leaders but even then it doesn't necessarily follow that the official leader will behave as such.
If you examine the way people are behaving you may discover that someone else is acting as unofficial leader.
Often the role is shared, with different people at different times doing the leading.
An effective leader is concerned both with the task in hand (the ‘what’) and with the decision-making processes (the ‘how’).
It is the role of a leader to:
create the rules for others to follow
take risks and make ‘exposed’ decisions which go outside existing or accepted constraints
wrestle with ambiguity and uncertainty (rule making is always a  messier, more uncertain process than rule following)
enthusiastically communicate a vision to people (vision is seeing the cathedral while you're mixing the cement)
bounce back when things go wrong and find new pathways, blaze new trails.
A leader can only achieve results through other people and in doing so needs to draw on a range of different styles such as Directive (see page 53),Consultative (see page 38),Collaborative (see page 32), and Delegation (see page 49).
The acid test of a good leader is the extent to which they select a style to suit the circumstances.
Learning from experience
Learning from experience is such a fundamental process that it is easy to take it for granted and assume that having experiences and learning from them are synonymous.
But is it true that we learn just by virtue of being busy and having lots of experiences?
Clearly something rubs off because you can observe people developing habits and behaviour patterns as a direct result of repetition.
This is an example of learning to cope.
However, learning to cope is only a fraction of what is involved in learning from experience.
What about learning how to change things for the better rather than merely learning to adapt to the way things are now?
Learning to cope is a recipe for complacency (see page 35).
Learning from experience is a recipe for continuous improvement.
Learning from experience is a process and, like all processes, it is possible to break it down into its constituent parts.
Stage 1: Having an experience
Clearly, it is difficult to learn from experience if you don't have any.
Fortunately, most people have plenty of experiences.
However, there are two different ways of having an experience.
One is to let the experience come to you (reactive) and the other, to deliberately seek it out (proactive).
The opportunities to learn from experience are greatly increased if the normal everyday things which happen to you are supplemented by extra experiences that you create.
Suppose, for example, you regularly attend a weekly meeting which tends to be deadly dull.
As a learner from experience you could decide to view it as a learning opportunity and start to experiment with different ways of running the meeting.
Stage 2: Reviewing the experience
If we are to learn from an experience it is vital to review what happened during the experience.
Unfortunately, in the hurly-burly of a busy existence it is likely that the next experience will occur (rather like waves relentlessly breaking on the shore) before there has been time to review.
Reviewing involves looking back over what happened during the experience in a non-judgemental way.
Once you are in the habit of reviewing it can be done, alone or with others who participated in the experience, in about five minutes fiat.
To return to the example of the deadly dull meeting.
You might have experimented by having a different person take the chair for different agenda items.
In this case your review might focus on the differences you had observed between the way the best and worst chairperson had undertaken the task.
Stage 3: Concluding from the experience
Clearly there would be little point in reviewing the experience unless it helped you to reach some conclusions.
The temptation is to jump to conclusions without arriving at them via a review.
Unfortunately jumping to conclusions as a practice has a poor track record since, so frequently, they are proved to be inadequate or wrong.
Concluding involves scanning the raw material from the review for conclusions, ‘answers’ or lessons learned.
There is no limit to the number or variety of different conclusions that can be reached at this stage in the process.
It helps, though, if the conclusions are specific rather than global or ‘motherhood’.
To return once again to the example of the meeting.
You might conclude from your review of the styles of the best and worst chairperson that the best one:
clarified the objective of whatever was to be discussed
actively sought people's ideas
summarized at frequent intervals.
Stage 4: Planning the next steps
There is little point in reaching conclusions unless you do something better or differently as a result.
Before being in a position to do that, you need a plan.
The peril is that intentions will be mistaken for plans and thus not be in a sufficiently doable form.
Planning involves translating at least some of the conclusions into a form where they can be put into action when next it is appropriate to do so.
An example of a plan resulting from the conclusions about the key differences between the best and worst chairperson might be to spend 10 minutes at the start of the next meeting discussing your conclusions and working out how to give those who had most difficulty with the three modes of behaviour most practice, encouragement and feedback.
The four stages in the process of learning from experience are therefore mutually dependent on one another.
No stage makes sense, or is particularly useful, in isolation from the others.
The whole process can be summarized in a simple diagram which looks like this:
As you look at the above diagram of the learning cycle you may well be saying to yourself ‘Is that all there is to it?
Why, I do that already!’
I venture to suggest, however, that you are probably, in common with most people, doing some parts of the process but not all of it.
This is because you will have developed, without necessarily ever having thought about it, some learning style preferences that equip you better for certain stages in the cycle than for others.
Essentially there are four different learning styles:
Activist : ‘I'll try anything once’
Reflector : ‘I'd like time to think about this’
Theorist : ‘How does this fit with that?’
Pragmatist : ‘How can I apply this in practice?’
Each style equips you to carry out a different stage in the learning cycle.
Activist tendencies aid and abet stage 1, having experiences; Reflector tendencies stage 2, reviewing; Theorist tendencies stage 3, concluding; Pragmatist tendencies stage 4, planning.
Having all four styles comfortably within your repertoire thus equips you best for the total process of learning from experience.
Unfortunately researches show that only two per cent of people are in this category and, therefore, qualify as ‘all round’ learners.
You are more likely to be amongst the 35 per cent who only have one preference, or the 24 per cent who have two preferences, of the 20 per cent who have three preferences.
(In case you are wondering about the arithmetic, 19 per cent don't have any preferences at all!)
The best way to ensure you learn from experience is to adopt a discipline which forces you to complete all the stages in the learning cycle.
This can be done by regularly keeping a written learning log.
It takes about 15 minutes to do this so you will have to be realistic about how frequently you could schedule it in.
Even once a week would be better than nothing.
Three times a week would be admirable.
The learning log routine is simple:
Start by thinking back over the experience and selecting a part of it (a 15 minute period or so) which was significant or important to you.
Write a detailed account of what happened during that period of the activity.
Don't at this stage put any effort into deciding what you learned — just concentrate on describing what actually happened.
List the conclusions you have reached as a result of the experience.
These are, in effect, your learning points.
Don't limit the  number and don't worry about the practicality or quality of the points.
Finally, decide which learning points you want to implement in the future and work out an action plan which covers:
What you are going to do
When you are going to do it.
Spell out your action plan as precisely as possible so that you are clear what you have to do and that it is realistic.
The advantage of this self-imposed discipline is that it forces you deliberately to do all that is involved in learning from experience and at the same time markedly increases the lessons learned from your various activities.
The original Henry Ford said ‘Anyone who stops learning is old, whether at 20 or 80.
Anyone who keeps learning stays young.
The greatest thing in life is to keep your mind young.’
If learning from experience can do that it must be a good thing!
Manipulation
Manipulation can be considered good or bad depending on the context in which it is used.
It is generally considered good to manipulate the controls of a machine but bad to manipulate election results.
It is good to manipulate a strained back but bad to manipulate the market.
On the one hand manipulation means to handle something with skill and on the other to make dishonest changes to suit your purpose.
Manipulating people by tricking them into doing something which is against their best interests is clearly bad.
By contrast, interpersonal skills encourage people to achieve their objectives by being honest and open rather than dishonest and furtive.
Manipulating behaviour is usually considered bad but this is more debatable.
Many people feel that behaviour should be ‘natural ’(see page 113) and spontaneous rather than premeditated and planned.
The assumption is that natural behaviour is honest and planned behaviour is dishonest.
The irony is that the more people are encouraged to think about their behaviour and take responsibility for the impact it has on other people, the more they  tend to become open and honest rather than furtive and clandestine.
Thinking about behaviour and its likely effects are prerequisites for considerate, helpful behaviour.
Few people regard considerate behaviour as in any way manipulative.
People often feel that it is in some way distasteful deliberately to use your behaviour to influence others and this also leads to the conclusion that manipulating behaviour is unethical.
The plain fact is, however, that behaviour, whether it is deliberate or not,always influences people.
This being so, it is surely better to acknowledge the power of behaviour and use it to improve relationships and enhance communication between people.
Behaviour can help or hinder just like a hammer that can be used to construct or destroy.
The gamble is that the more people know about the workings of behaviour the more they will use it skilfully to benefit themselves and others.
The choice, as always, is yours.
See Helpful behaviour on page 84 and Unhelpful behaviour on page 169.
Meditation
There are various meditation or relaxation techniques which are admirable in counteracting the effects of stress and in releasing unwanted feelings (see Preventing unwanted feelings on page 138).
If you use a meditation technique regularly it helps you to acquire a calm frame of mind so that you are not so vulnerable to the onset of unproductive feelings.
Experiments have shown that many relaxation techniques result in a state of consciousness quite unlike either being awake or being asleep.
The state has been described as one of ‘restful alertness’ and physiological measures have shown that the heart rate decreases, metabolism is lowered, breathing rate decreases, blood pressure is lowered and brain waves change pattern.
There are four basic components necessary to successful meditation.
A quiet environment
A mental device, usually a sound, word or phrase repeated silently to help break the train of distracting thoughts
A passive attitude.
Adopt a ‘let it happen’ attitude.
Distracting thoughts will occur but do not worry about them.
Also don't worry about how well you are performing the technique.
The  passive attitude is perhaps the most important element in successful meditation.
A comfortable position, usually sitting down in a chair with no undue muscular tension.
It is best not to lie down since this makes it easy to fall asleep.
(Sleeping is not meditating!)
The most straightforward meditation/relaxation technique (there are many different permutations) is as follows:
1
Sit quietly in a comfortable position.
2
Close your eyes.
3
Deeply relax all your muscles, beginning at your feet and progressing up to your face.
Keep them relaxed.
4
Breathe through your nose.
Become aware of your breathing.
As you breathe out, say the word ‘one’ silently to yourself.
For example, breathe in…out, ‘one’; in…out, ‘one’ etc.
Breathe easily and naturally.
5
Continue for 10 to 20 minutes.
You may open your eyes to check the time, but do not use an alarm.
When you finish, sit quietly for several moments, at first with your eyes closed and later with your eyes opened.
Do not stand up for a few moments.
6
Do not worry about whether you are successful in achieving a deep level of relaxation.
Maintain a passive attitude and permit relaxation to occur at its own pace.
When distracting thoughts occur, try to ignore them by not dwelling on them and return to repeating ‘one’.
With practice relaxation should come effortlessly.
Practise the technique once or twice daily, but not within two hours after any meal, since the digestive processes seem to interfere with meditation.
Meetings
Meetings are infamous for taking up time when people claim they would otherwise be doing ‘proper’ work.
Meetings are, of course, an important part of work; indeed some people have calculated that they spend at least 60 per cent of their time in meetings of one sort or another.
Meetings are not just time-consuming they are also expensive.
If you calculate the cost of people's salaries, travelling expenses  involved in getting to and from the meeting place etc it can come to a frightening figure per hour's worth of meeting.
There are a number of reasons why meetings tend to have a poor reputation.
Amongst them are:
a lack of clear purpose or objective
poor chairmanship
the wrong people at the meeting
behavioural problems such as getting side-tracked, going round in circles, people hogging it
interruptions through messages and phone calls from outside the meeting
an over-ambitious agenda which takes too long to complete or has to be carried over to the next meeting.
The answer to all these problems is to put effort into two things:
the objectives for the meeting
the structure of the meeting.
Meetings often do not have real objectives (see page 119) so much as a list of activities.
If, for example, you attend a meeting where the ‘objective’ is to ‘discuss XY and Z’that is not really an objective at all .
The objective would be whatever end result is desired from the activity of discussing XY and Z. It might be to have decided something, planned something, agreed something, or merely to have discovered people's points of view about something.
If a meeting has no objectives then it is unlikely to have an appropriate structure since the structure flows logically from the objectives.
Simple advice on structure is to:
have a logical sequence to the items on the agenda
schedule the most important, difficult, contentious items first to catch people when they are fresh
save a ‘high note’ item for the end to send people away enthusiastic
allocate, and advertise, a time limit for each item on the agenda.
The contrast between ineffective and effective meetings can be captured under 10 headings:
Mistakes
We all make mistakes and whilst unwelcome they are often good for us because they jolt our complacency.
Mistakes give people a shock and therefore make it more likely that they will learn.
It is commonplace to hear people claiming to learn by their mistakes but that assumes that a mistake is recognized as such.
In the area of behaviour a mistake is often a hard thing to detect — particularly if you are the one who has made it!
It is clearly easier to spot other people making mistakes than either to catch yourself or to admit to yourself that you did so.
Unless you possess extraordinary powers of self-insight (see Self-awareness on page 153) you are likely to delude yourself into thinking that since your intentions are good your behaviour is good also.
Unfortunately, the one does not necessarily follow from the other.
You may intend to he helpful, and even think you are being helpful, by, for example, giving someone advice.
The recipient of this advice may, however, find it positively unhelpful and wish that you'd shut up and listen to them.
The best way out of this quandary is to stop thinking about mistakes as such and to ask yourself regularly ‘What could have gone better?’
This question allows for the possibility of an actual mistake, big or small, as well as acknowledging that you can always do even better than you did.
This acts as an excellent safeguard against complacency without the gloom and doom which tends to accompany mistakes.
It is a recipe for self-improvement through a process of continuous fine tuning rather than merely being shocked into learning as a result of the occasional mistake.
For more on the mechanics of Learning from experience see page 100 and Reviewing on page 147.
Motives
Motives, at their simplest, are the underlying reasons why someone is behaving in a particular way.
If, for example, someone was being persistently negative in a meeting their motives might be:
to prevent agreement being reached
to win some concessions
to draw attention to a particular cause
to get their own back against someone who ‘won’ last time
to draw attention to themselves and so on.
Motives are never directly observable whereas behaviour always is.
The presence of a particular motive can only be inferred by working backwards from the behaviour itself.
Often people are unclear themselves about their motives for doing something so even if you question them you may not reveal the real motive.
Fortunately it is not essential to know what someone's motives are in order to deal with them effectively.
It is more important to be clear about the links between the way they are behaving and the situations they are in.
The reason for this is that the circumstances of the situation are just as much a cause of behaviour as the underlying motive.
For more on the mechanics of doing this see Behaviour modification on page 16.
Myths about behaviour
People often hold some ‘odd’ beliefs about behaviour.
For example, it is more convenient to believe that your behaviour ‘just happens’ because this absolves you from having the responsibilities that accompany choice.
Most of the ‘myths’ exposed in this section are excuses of one sort or another not to take responsibility for your own behaviour.
Here are four commonly held myths about behaviour:
1.
Behaviour is born not made
This is partially true because there are some behaviours that are intact from the word go.
A new-born baby can cry, suck, sneeze and is equipped with other basic reflexes, all of which are examples of observable behaviour.
All the other more sophisticated behaviours develop through a process of learning and are thus more ‘made’ than ‘born’.
It is important to believe that you have acquired most  of your ways of behaving because that opens up the possibility of behaviour being malleable rather than something fixed and unchanging.
2 Behaviour is caused by ‘internal factors’ such as motives, attitudes and feelings
Again partially true, but only half the story.
The truth is that behaviour is caused simultaneously by a combination of internal and external factors.
Usually when you wonder what makes people tick you speculate about such things as their motives, attitudes and feelings.
If someone is resistant to change, for example, you might attribute this behaviour to an underlying fear of change.
The fear alone does not cause the behaviour, however.
It is equally true to say that the advent of the impending change has caused the behaviour in just the same way as an itch causes a scratch.
So whilst internal factors are an important part of the picture the external factor of change itself triggered (ie caused) the whole sequence of events.
3 Your behaviour once formed is fixed
All your behaviour, with the exception of those reflexes that were built into the system, has been acquired over a long period of ad hoc learning.
It follows, therefore, that there is no end to the period of acquisition.
You can go on learning and adding to your repertoire of behaviours for as long as there is breath in your body.
The problem is not so much whether you can or can't but rather whether you want to.
4 The way you behave makes very little difference
Often people maintain that it is knowing your stuff that really counts and behaviour is just the icing on the cake.
Whilst it is certainly true that behaviour is no substitute for knowledge, the way you behave is the biggest single factor in making an impact on the way other people respond to you.
Behaviour breeds behaviour.
So far as other people are concerned, you are your behaviour.
The theme running through all these myths about behaviour is ‘Don't blame me, it's not my fault.’
It is obviously more convenient  to blame the situation and especially other people for the way you react but the truth is that you, and you alone, are responsible for your behaviour.
It is yours to manage and mould.
For more detail on how to do this, see Behaviour modification on page 16.
Natural behaviour
Natural behaviour can mean one of two things.
Either it refers to behaviour which does not have to be learned or it refers to behaviour which has been so thoroughly learned that it can be done ‘naturally’, ie without conscious thought and application.
Natural behaviours in the first sense are few and far between (see Instincts on page 93) since the majority of human behaviour has been acquired through an ad hoc learning process.
The second meaning is therefore more applicable and this equates so-called natural behaviour with skilled behaviour.
All natural behaviour has, therefore, become so by going through a stage of being unnatural.
People often object to practising behaviours that they do not usually use on the grounds that it isn't natural.
The only way, however, to increase your repertoire of behaviours is to force yourself to use behaviours which are ‘unnatural’ so that with practice they reach the stage of being natural.
For more on this transition see Skilful behaviour on page 155.
Negotiating
Negotiating is an activity that seeks to reach agreement between two or more different starting positions.
Negotiation is therefore a means of getting what you want from other people and as such qualifies as a tricky situation (see page 168), where the way you behave is a make or break factor.
There are eight behaviours that are typical of successful negotiators and distinguish them from the less successful.
(Success is defined by the extent to which the negotiator not only achieved the immediate objective (see page 119), but also by the extent to which the agreement stuck when implemented.)
In no order of importance the eight key behaviours are:
1 focusing on interests not positions
One of the problems frequently encountered in negotiating is that sides take up incompatible positions.
Skilled negotiators don't take up positions.
Instead they concentrate on the interests that lie behind the positions.
A position is a decision.
The interests are the reasons for the decision.
Positions tend to bring things to a grinding halt.
Interests are much more likely to provide footholds for finding common ground and moving ahead.
For example the position might be ‘I must have a promotion within six months’.
The interests behind this might be:
to have a more stimulating job
to have extra responsibility
to earn more money
to qualify for a company car.
If we assume that for various reasons promotion within six months is not possible, all or some of the interests might be met in alternative ways.
Agreement is more likely if both parties explore their interests rather than state their positions.
2 Exploring proposals rather than counter proposing
Less skilled negotiators are far more likely to match a proposal with a counter proposal.
Unfortunately counter proposals are perceived as disagreements rather than as constructive ideas on possible courses of action.
Skilled negotiators resist the temptation to counter propose and instead explore the pros and cons of each proposal as it comes up.
£ Attacking the problem not the person
Less skilled negotiators are far more likely to get locked into an attacking spiral where one side attacks the other which provokes a counter attack and so on.
Skilled negotiators avoid criticizing or attacking the other person and concentrate instead on ‘attacking’ the problem in a no nonsense but constructive way.
4 Sticking to the facts rather than exaggerating
Less skilled negotiators are inclined to exaggeration.
Thus they will use expressions such as‘very generous offer’, ‘an offer you simply can't refuse’, ‘mutually beneficial’, to describe their own proposals.
By contrast they tend to exaggerate the unacceptability of proposals from the other person, ‘a derisory offer’, ‘completely unreasonable’, ‘laughable’ and so on.
Skilled negotiators avoid using irritators such as these and keep the emotional temperature down by sticking to the facts.
5 Disagreeing constructively
Disagreements are inevitable during the course of a negotiation.
There is, however, a marked difference between the way negotiators disagree.
Less skilled negotiators disagree in the order they think, that is, saying they disagree first and then going on to give reasons.
This often provokes a negative reaction from the other person who bridles at the explicit disagreement and therefore fails to listen to the reasons — indeed, is highly likely to interrupt the reasons rather than hear them out.
The skilled negotiator, by contrast, reverses the order and gives an explanation first (ie the reason for being in disagreement) and finishes by saying something like ‘and that is why I disagree’.
This has a more constructive effect in that the explanation becomes the focus for the other person's reaction rather than the fact of a disagreement.
6 Being open about thoughts and feelings
The skilled negotiator is far more likely to say things that reveal what he or she is thinking, intending and feeling than the less skilled, who reckon that to expose such things is naïve.
The less skilled negotiator feels vulnerable to losing the argument and is more likely to ‘keep his cards close to his chest’(see Openness on page 126).
7 Asking questions
Skilled negotiators ask at least twice as many questions as the less skilled.
The less skilled are more likely to assume that they understand the other person's point of view and that the other person has  the same basic information.
This makes asking questions redundant.
The skilled negotiator, on the other hand, asks questions not only to gain more information and understanding but also as an alternative to disagreeing bluntly and as a means of putting forward suggestions (ie possible courses of action said as questions.
See Idea-having on page 86).
8 Summarizing
The skilled negotiator summarizes (see page 159) and tests understanding far more frequently than the less skilled.
The less skilled negotiator prefers to leave things vague and ambiguous fearing that explicitness will jeopardize any agreement.
The skilled negotiator knows that explicitness aids common understanding and leads to a quality agreement that is more likely to stick.
Non-verbal behaviour
Non-verbal or visual behaviour covers a wide range of different aspects including:
facial expressions
eyes
hand movements
gestures with hands and arms
leg movements
body posture
spatial distance and orientation.
In addition, there are some fringe areas such as clothes, physique and general appearance.
There is overwhelming evidence from many research studies to show that visual behaviours play a larger part in communications between people than is usually supposed.
It seems that, without necessarily being able to describe how they do it, people make judgements and form impressions based on the visual behaviours they see other people using.
Perhaps the most dramatic example of this is when people meet for the first time.
Within seconds visual behaviours are sending signals which create a  favourable or an unfavourable impression.
Initial judgements are formed about whether the other person is friendly or unfriendly, confident or timid, trustworthy or untrustworthy, nice or nasty.
Sometimes these first impressions are so strong that they stubbornly linger and defy revision even when different signals are being transmitted by subsequent visual behaviours.
Clearly the great advantage of thinking about your visual as well as your verbal behaviour is that you can choose visual behaviours which help rather than hinder progress towards your objective.
You may be in the habit of using some visual behaviours that run the risk of giving the other person a poor impression of you.
The secret of success is to concentrate on some simple combinations.
If you do just one thing in isolation it probably will not have the desired effect because people gain a general, overall impression from a combination of:
your facial expression and head movements
gestures with your hands and arms
the rest of your body including your legs.
All three aspects need to be practised so that they all come together to give the right impression.
Here are some combinations of visual behaviours.
Practise doing less of the left hand ones and more of the right hand ones.
Non-verbal behaviours need to accompany and reinforce what you are saying, your verbal behaviour.
It is the combination of verbal and non-verbal that is likely to have the desired effect.
For guidance on verbal behaviours see page 170.
Objectives
Objectives are important because they act as an essential backcloth to behaviour itself.
Behaviour in a vacuum may be very interesting but that's about all.
Decisions about the effectiveness and appropriateness of different behaviours can only be made within the context of particular situations and specific objectives.
Despite this, resistance to the objective setting message is high.
Typical blockages to objective setting include the following:
People are often not clear about what an objective actually is.
They get confused about the differences between activities and objectives, about short term and long term objectives and about semantics.
People often prefer the excitement of ‘playing things by ear’ or having a very vague open-ended objective to the discipline of pinpointing a precise objective.
People often prefer to rationalize after the event and convince  themselves things went well and ‘according to plan’, rather than compare what was actually achieved against the objective.
People often feel that pinpointing a precise objective wastes time that could be used more productively getting on with the job in hand.
People have often had bad experiences with objective setting.
For example, they may have been encouraged to stick their necks out and set an objective and then been clobbered for not achieving it.
Alternatively, they may have found objective setting a dull ritual that didn't make any difference to anything.
People often feel safer if they play things close to their chests and don't reveal their hand too early.
Since they wouldn't want to declare their real objective, even if they had one, they see little point in having one at all.
People find that, by and large, they get by without bothering about objectives.
They think they've been successful if they have kept busy.
Never mind if they were busy doing all the wrong things!
An objective is a clear, precise forecast of what you want to achieve some time in the future.
The objective could forecast achievement in the immediate future (like thirty minutes, one hour, two hours, etc), in the short term (like today, this week, this month), in the longer term (like this quarter, this half year, this year) or in the distant future (like two years, three years, four years, five years, a decade, a lifetime).
Irrespective of these differences in rime, a respectable objective has certain known qualities as follows:
Any objective has two parts to it:
A forecast of the end result Indicators of success .
Any objective should be in step with the circumstances of the situation as you know or understand them.
Any objective should be realistic or, in other words, possible to achieve successfully within the forecasted time span.
Any objective should be challenging or, in other words, pitched at a level of achievement where you are going to have to strive to pull it off (and have deserved feelings of satisfaction if you succeed).
It is important to have clear, precise objectives when interacting.
Here are some of the benefits:
The objective helps you to be clear about what you have to do in a bid to get it to come true.
The objective makes it easy to compare the actual outcome with your prediction.
This means you can be quite certain about total success, relative success and failure and, therefore, be in a better position to learn from experience.
The objective helps you to organize your behaviour.
It means that you can spot irrelevancies and be better at controlling your behaviour so that it contributes to the achievement of your objective.
The objective helps you to communicate to others what you want to achieve.
Doing this helps them to decide whether they can subscribe to it or not.
Objective setting is a skill which, like any other, develops with practice.
Here is a step by step routine to follow when setting an objective for an interaction:
1
Clarify the overall aim (ie the longer term end result).
2
In the light of the overall aim, set an immediate end result by answering the question ‘What result do I want to achieve by the end of this interaction?’
3
Work out indicators of success by answering the question ‘How shall I know that the end result has been successfully achieved?’
Here is an example of an objective set this way.
OVERALL AIM
The customer has bought goods to the value of X by the year end.
END RESULT
By the end of the meeting I will have established rapport with the customer.
INDICATORS OF SUCCESS
The customer has asked at least six questions about me/my work.
The customer has ‘opened up’ to me about a significant current problem.
The customer has relaxed sufficiently to volunteer at least a couple of personal details (about outside interests, family, etc).
We have booked a date, time and place for our next meeting.
The customer has specifically asked me to provide some additional data for our next meeting.
All achieved within an hour (longer than the customer originally scheduled, ie he was ‘happy’ to overrun).
Finally, here is a check list to help you determine whether an objective is satisfactory:
1
Has the objective got an end result together with some indicators of success?
2
Does the objective pinpoint an end result, as opposed to merely describing an activity?
(An activity is something you do.
An end result is what is achieved as a result of doing it.)
3
Is the objective achievable by the end of the interaction?
4
Are the indicators of success obviously linked with the end result?
(Sometimes people drift off and dream up indicators which don't adequately tie in with the end result.)
5
Are the indicators of success precise enough to enable the achievement to be assessed with considerable certainty?
6
Do the indicators of success cover
quantity
quality
reactions (behaviour)
and time?
Observing behaviour
Observing behaviour is easy because behaviour, verbal and nonverbal, is always overt and therefore eminently observable.
The difficulty is not in the observing but in the interpreting of what has been observed.
For example, suppose you observed someone in a meeting intermittently tapping their left foot.
This would be easy enough to notice but not so easy to interpret.
It might signify a whole host of different things, such as the person is:
impatient to finish the meeting 
irritated with whatever the speaker is saying
limbering up to put a point themselves
physically uncomfortable.
Or, of course, it might simply be a habit the person has acquired that has no particular significance.
It is important to observe behaviour as accurately as possible because the more accurate the observation the more this helps you to place a valid interpretation on what you have seen or heard.
Even accurate observation will not guarantee that you will reach the right conclusion but it certainly makes it much more likely.
Observing behaviour is greatly aided by having a system of some kind to follow.
The system acts as a discipline to ensure that you concentrate sufficiently on observation instead of being tempted to jump to conclusions.
There are basically two different systems on offer.
One is the ‘clean sheet approach’, where you make copious notes on everything to do with a person's behaviour.
Typically this involves writing down lots of verbatim quotes and also making notes on any non-verbal goings-on.
Afterwards the notes are scanned to identify themes and patterns and to interpret them.
An alternative system is the ‘checklist approach’, where you decide in advance which verbal and/or non-verbal behaviours you are going to observe and devise a number of categories to monitor behaviour against.
This has the obvious advantage of reducing the sheer volume of data to be gathered and processed but the disadvantage of being inflexible and possibly missing significant happenings because the category system didn't allow for them.
The answer is to use the ‘clean sheet approach’ when scrutinizing one or two people's behaviour and the checklist approach for observing behaviour in groups and meetings.
For more information on categories see Categories of behaviour on page 26).
OKness
OKness is a concept (American as you might guess!) from transactional analysis (see page 167).
In transactional analysis (TA) it is assumed that our habitual ways of feeling and behaving largely stem from the way we feel about ourselves in relation to other people.
The conclusions we characteristically reach about this were learned in childhood when we needed to make sense of the many confusing and contradictory recordings in our three ego-states.
These assumptions about ourselves in relation to others are called life positions because they tend to dictate the positions we take up throughout life.
The life positions can be generalized into ‘I'm OK’ or ‘I'm not OK’, and ‘You're OK’or ‘You're not OK’.
They fit together to form four basic life positions: Even though people may have favourite life positions and spend a majority of their time in one or other of the corners, everyone  experiences all four at different times and in different situations.
In particular, it is common for people to oscillate between withdrawal and arrogance.
In many people's experience futility and OKness are rarer positions.
OKness is the only position that requires in Adult ego-state (see page 57).
Life-positions throw light on why it is that some people tend to be winners and some losers in life.
There is not much you can do to make radical changes to other people's basic life positions, but you can use your awareness of the four ‘OK — Not OK’ positions to understand why you sometimes feel hopeless, depressed, victimized and so on.
Self-understanding is not in itself going to bring about changes, but it can be half the battle in recognizing what is happening early enough and encouraging you to do something about it.
What is it like being in the ‘I'm, OK — You're OK’ position?
There are two aspects to it; things to do with yourself (that's the I'm OK bit) and things to do with the other person (that's the You're OK bit).
I'm OK with me
You feel confident, within your depth, alert and interested in what's going on.
You feel sure you are in touch with the salient aspects of the situation and that you have an important contribution to make.
You don't feel the need to prove yourself, to seek approval, to be careful what you say, or to put up a façade of any kind.
You don't feel compelled to say a great deal, to he interesting, to be the life and soul of the occasion.
You are free of feelings of guilt, worry, anxiety, embarrassment, envy or jealousy.
You do not feel competitive so much as creative and co-operative.
You are happy to react ‘there and then’ even if this means expressing half-baked ideas.
You do not feel inhibited because you haven't prepared adequately or fear that other people might catch you out or ridicule you.
You're OK with me
You accept that the other person is important — just as important as you, no better, no worse.
This means that you seek their views, listen to their opinions and actively consider their contributions.
You do not try to catch them out, to trap them or to expose them as inadequate in any way.
On the other hand you don't wrap things up in cotton wool.
You don't worry about offending them (OK people  don't get offended).
You praise and criticize as appropriate but always authentically rather than to create an effect.
You are glad about their successes and triumphs.
You are realistic about their faults and weaknesses.
Just because they are OK with you it doesn't mean you are blind to their inadequacies or view them through rose-coloured spectacles.
They are OK with you, warts and all!
You have confidence that they will respond to your OKness and that together you can tackle whatever has to be accomplished in coherent partnership.
Since we all experience all four life-positions at different times and in different situations we can at least increase the frequency of OKness.
Two practical tips for increasing the probability of OKness in your relationships with others are:
Work out what sort of situations seem to cause you to experience the four different feelings.
If you can identify some of them, you may find you can arrange things so that you avoid some of the situations that make you feel Not-OK and increase your exposure to situations where you experience OKness.
In situations where you don't feel OK you can use your Adult to prevent the feelings ‘surfacing’ in your overt behaviour and to control your behaviour so that it is conducted on an I'm OK — You're OK basis.
This will not necessarily stop the Not-OK feelings but it at least contains them so that they don't damage the transaction.
Often behaving OK and getting the resultant strokes, loops back and causes you actually to feel OK.
If, through self-awareness and conscious effort, you can get more frequently into an I'm OK — You're OK position, you are, in effect, inviting other people to adopt an I'm OK — You're OK stance also.
Since behaviour breeds behaviour these are mutually reinforcing positions and lead to increased trust and the release of energies in more productive and enjoyable ways.
Openness
Openness is a value that tends to pervade all the behavioural sciences.
This is not only for ethical considerations but more  pragmatically because there is an assumption that if you treat others as you would wish to be treated, they will respond in kind.
In other words, if you are open with people they will tend to reciprocate by being more open themselves.
Being open and honest about what you are thinking, how you are feeling and why you are doing whatever you are doing is deemed to be efficient and helpful because otherwise people waste precious time and energy trying to ‘second guess’ what you are up to.
No-one has access to your thoughts, feelings and motives, only to your actions (ie behaviour), and so unless you are open in revealing them, people are obliged to indulge in speculation.
Openness features particularly strongly in Assertiveness (see page 8) and in Transactional analysis (see page 167).
Personality
Personality is an all-embracing term that covers everything about you; your outward behaviour as well as all the underlying factors, such as beliefs (see page 21),attitudes (see page 12)and feelings (see page 66).
People often assume that personality and behaviour are one and the same and this leads to the erroneous assumption that because the fundamentals of your personality are relatively fixed so also is your behaviour.
The difference between personality and behaviour becomes clearer if you think of your personality as the thread of consistency that runs through everything you do.
Your personality sets boundaries on what you can and cannot do in rather the same way that your physical build also sets constraints.
Suppose, for example, you have a so-called extraverted personality, this means that for most of the time in most situations you will tend to think, feel and behave in outward going ways.
But even a dyed-in-the-wool extravert will sometimes choose to behave more demurely.
This doesn't mean they have changed their personality, it merely demonstrates that even extraverts are capable of modifying their behaviour.
Even more frequently there are people who claim to be introverted,(in other words they think and feel as an introvert) but who nonetheless over-compensate and behave in extraverted ways.
So your personality sets very broad limits, but whatever its nature it  leaves you with plenty of room to manoeuvre when it comes to ways of behaving.
People often use their personalities as an excuse not to bother to take responsibility for their own behaviour.
‘You must take me as you find me’, ‘A leopard can't change his spots’ and other maxims take an essentially pessimistic view about the malleability of behaviour.
All the evidence suggests, however, that whilst our basic personalities are relatively unchanging (except in response to fairly drastic interventions such as the use of drugs, brainwashing and brain damage as a result of an accident or stroke) our overt behaviour is amenable to a process of continual modification and change.
(For more advice on how to do this see Behaviour modification on page 16.)
Persuasiveness
All of us, whatever our walk of life, are frequently in situations where we want to persuade someone or, in other words, influence someone to do what we want them to do (eg a salesperson trying to persuade a buyer or a negotiator trying to persuade another negotiator).
You may not consider yourself as either a salesperson or a negotiator but you are a persuader nonetheless.
Think how often you have an idea that you need to ‘sell’ to your boss or to colleagues.
Think how often, say in a meeting or discussion, you have a point of view that you want to persuade other people to agree with or adopt.
The plain fact is that in most of your interactions with other people you are seeking to exert some influence — to persuade.
Success depends on three interrelated factors:
1 The starting position of the people you wish to influence
They are likely to be somewhere on the following continuum 
Clearly the five positions along this continuum are an over-simplification and there are various shades of grey in between each position.
It is obvious that the starting position affects what it is realistic to aim for.
Thus, for example, persuading someone from position 1 and expecting to convert them to position 5 is unrealistic.
Generally speaking it is best to aim to move someone two places to the right:
From 1 to 3
From 2 to 4
From 3 to 5.
4 to 5 is relatively easy and if someone starts off at 5 they don't need any persuading at all(attempts to persuade them may irritate them so much that they start to move to the left!).
2 What you say
Clearly the subject matter of the persuasion is going to influence the outcome.
If it is inappropriate or if you are underprepared then the likelihood of success is reduced.
The sequence of what you say makes a considerable difference to success.
Persuasiveness is enhanced if your message unfolds in a chronological sequence, ie:
an initial benefit statement to catch the interest of the other person
your idea 
the potential benefits of the idea for the person
the evidence/rationale to back up the benefits you are claiming
the diffusion of possible objections before they are raised
a summary of the idea and its main benefits.
This sequence is designed to synchronize with the unspoken questions that the other person is likely to be formulating:
Why should I listen to this?
What is this about?
What's in it for me?
Can I believe this?
Yes, but…?
Have I got this right?
Different circumstances and the type of situation will make some of these aspects more or less important.
for example, if it is an informal discussion with just one person, you may ‘relax’ the formal sequence set out above.
If, on the other hand, you are seeking to influence a group of people in a more formal meeting, then consciously working through each stage in the sequence is more appropriate.
3 How you behave
Your behaviour is at least as important as the content of what you have to say.
If your behaviour is inappropriate it will detract from, even negate, the message and seriously reduce the likelihood of success.
These are the key persuasive behaviours:
a strong, enthusiastic voice
fluent speaking without hesitations and urrs and umms
the use of open-ended questions (ie that avoid yes/no answers) that begin with what, when, where, how and who
the use of silences and pauses rather than fillers and ‘non-words’ such as‘OK’, ‘Right’, ‘You know’
looking at the other person for at least half the time and holding eye contact for a complete thought (usually about five seconds)
using gestures with hands and arms to add emphasis to points.
(Gestures are more convincing when unplanned and spontaneous.)
After a gesture your hands and arms should always return to an ‘at rest’ position.
So, in summary, your persuasiveness depends on two equally important aspects:
what you say (content)
how you say it (behaviour)
Planning behaviour
Planning is acknowledged as necessary for most activities in life but strangely there is often a blind spot when it comes to planning behaviour .
There are a number of reasons for this:
People think of behaviour as a vast amorphous thing which is impossible to plan.
People believe that behaviour is best left to natural, spontaneous expression.
People prefer to be opportunists and leave themselves the flexibility of ‘seeing what happens and reacting accordingly’.
People argue that if you don't know the people you are going to meet you can't plan how best to behave.
None of these reasons provides an adequate excuse for leaving an important ingredient like behaviour to chance.
Behaviour is just as amenable to a planning process as, say, constructing a building.
It only requires behaviour to be broken down into some specifics, the equivalent of building blocks, and for those specifics to be cast into a coherent plan of action.
Behaviour categories (see page 26) are the key to breaking behaviour down into manageable proportions.
However, before deciding which categories to employ, it is necessary to have:
a clear idea of the objective you wish to achieve
some notion of what behaviour you ideally want from the other person, or persons, in order to achieve your objective.
Once you have these you are then in a position to work out which behaviours to use and which behaviours to avoid yourself in order to shape the reactions you want from the other person.
The mechanics of putting together a behaviour plan will become clear if  you look it two other sections:Verbal behaviour on page 170 and  Non-verbal behaviour on page 116.
The following is an example of a behaviour plan arrived at using the behaviour category approach.
The situation
Imagine that you are the manger with three supervisors reporting to you.
One of them, Bill, was promoted to a supervisory position a few months ago.
Technically he is excellent but you have noticed that he is falling down on the supervisory aspects of his job.
For example, he tends to pitch in and sort things out for himself and does not spend enough time on man-management.
You decide to help Bill improve his performance as a supervisor.
The overall aim
To have improved Bill's performance as a supervisor.
The immediate objective
End Result: To have agreed criteria for judging Bill's performance as a supervisor.
Indicators of success
We will have produced at least six criteria.
Each criterion will be specific enough for Bill and me to judge performance against it without hesitation and to reach the same conclusion,.
Each criterion will be concerned with the supervisory aspects of Bill's job and not the technical aspects.
Bill will have spontaneously suggested at least half the criteria himself.
Bill remarks that the criteria have helped him to be clearer about what is involved in being a good supervisor.
Bill volunteers the suggestion that we should meet to review his performance against the criteria quite soon.
All to be achieved within one and a half hours.
The behaviours I want from Bill
proposing and suggesting
supporting and building
The behaviours I don't want from Bill
disagreeing and difficulty stating
explaining
The behaviours I will use to get what I want from Bill
seeking ideas
suggesting and building
supporting
The behaviours I will avoid
proposing
disagreeing
seeking clarification
This plan makes it as likely as possible that I shall employ behaviours that are appropriate in two vital ways:
1
to achieve the immediate objective and thus have taken a significant step towards achieving the overall aim
2
to shape Bill's behaviour so that he is positive and helpful.
A plan can do nothing more.
It is then up to me to implement it successfully by controlling my behaviour whilst keeping an eye on progress towards the indicators of success.
In this way behaviour is eminently plannable.
The existence of my plan does not mean, however, that I shall stick rigidly to it come what may.
I might have to modify it in the light of circumstances.
Suppose, for example, Bill is very forthcoming and has lots of ideas on possible criteria.
My plan assumed that I would have to work for these by actively seeking ideas.
If in the event there were plenty of ideas then my plan to seek them would become redundant.
Neither objectives nor plans are an invitation to become inflexible.
They need to be constantly revised, up or down, depending on actual circumstances rather than assumed circumstances (see Assumptions on page 12).
Positive reinforcement
People do things (ie behave) in anticipation of certain consequences.
If, after having done something, the consequence is ‘nice’ then the behaviour is said to have been positively reinforced.
Positive reinforcement encourages people and its opposite, punishment, discourages people (see Punishment on page 142.)
Most people find life a mixture of nice and nasty experiences and behaviour is aimed at maximizing the nice experiences and minimizing the nasty ones.
This sounds very bland but in practice it is complicated by the fact that what is nice for one person is nasty for another and vice versa .
For example, one person may find it nice to be rewarded for good work by being taken out to a slap-up dinner and another person may be embarrassed by the whole business and have preferred a quiet word of thanks.
A third person may resent the waste of money and prefer to have been given a bonus to spend as he wishes.
Reinforcement, or lack of it, plays a major part in all behaviour and is especially important when attempting to get people to do what you want them to do.
Here is a simple illustration.
Suppose your boss asks you for suggestions about how a particular problem could be solved and you immediately respond with some ideas.
If your boss listens, agrees with your suggestions and even adds to them, providing you found this ‘nice’, your behaviour of putting forward ideas has been positively reinforced.
In similar circumstances you are, therefore, more likely to come forward with ideas again.
If, on the other hand, your boss kept chasing you for ideas and generally putting the pressure on you until he got ideas that he considered satisfactory, then, providing you found the pressure ‘nasty’ and its cessation ‘nice’, behaviour of putting forward ideas would also have been reinforced.
This, however, would not be positive so much as negative reinforcement, ie it was nice when the pressure stopped.
Your boss's behaviour of chasing you and putting pressure on is likely to have been positively reinforced, ie it was ‘nice’ for him when you finally came up with ideas which he found satisfactory.
So, at the same time, your behaviour is being negatively reinforced and your boss's behaviour positively reinforced.
So positive reinforcement is anything that happens soon after the behaviour in question that is welcomed by the recipient.
Negative reinforcement is something unwelcome that happens before or during the behaviour in question has occurred.
Both types of reinforcement increase the frequency of behaviour.
Whenever you want to get someone to do more of something be careful to use either or both of the types of reinforcement.
Positive reinforcement is the most straightforward.
For more on this see Behaviour modification on page 16.
Praise
Praising people, if it is done authentically, is a behaviour which is generally welcome and tends to encourage people to do well.
Indeed most people, however accomplished and apparently confident, suffer from praise deprivation.
It is a common experience that when things go well nothing gets said but when things go badly it is certainly noticed and all hell breaks out .
How can you praise people authentically so that it functions as an encourager?
Here is a table contrasting effective with less effective forms of praising.
Presenting
Giving a presentation is a classic example of where your behaviour is at least as important as the content of what you have to say.
If the behaviour is inappropriate it will detract from, or even destroy, the message the presentation is designed to convey.
The key behaviours that help a presentation to be effective are:
1
Eye contact on one person at a time for a complete thought, usually for about five seconds.
2
Strong vocal projection conveying confidence and enthusiasm.
Speak as if there were twice as many people in the audience than there actually are.
3
Use silences and pauses rather than fillers and non-words.
4
Stationary feet and hips so that energy is released upwards into appropriate gestures.
Pretend your feet have been cemented to the floor.
5
Hands and arms relaxed at your sides except when making gestures to add emphasis to a point.
Gestures are more convincing when unplanned and spontaneous.
After a gesture your hands and arms should always fall back to your sides.
6
Pitch and pace should he varied to avoid monotone and an uninteresting delivery.
7
Use simple visual aids (preferably diagrams and pictures rather than words) to enhance the main messages.
Remember that 75 per cent of all we know has come from seeing.
All these behavioural skills fall into the easier said than done category but they are all learnable techniques that can be mastered with practice.
So far as the contents of the presentation are concerned, persuasiveness is enhanced if the message unfolds in a chronological sequence as follows:
1
The initial benefit statement.
This is a short statement designed to catch the interest of the listeners.
2
The idea.
3
The advantages, ie the direct and indirect results of implementing the idea.
4
The evidence, ie the rationale that proves that the advantages will come from the idea.
5
The objections.
This deals with possible objections listeners may be formulating about the idea before they have a chance to raise them.
Dealing with them in an honest, open way diffuses the objections.
6
The summary.
A quick recap of the idea and its main advantages.
7
Any questions?
For more on persuasiveness see page 128.
Preventing unwanted feelings
Feelings, as we saw in the entry under that heading (see pages 66 to 69), either help or hinder your behaviour.
Unwanted feelings are those that hinder your behaviour such that you are not functioning at the level you are capable of.
feelings such as anger, worry and guilt are only worth having if they provoke you into doing something effective.
Unfortunately, such feelings often tend to be both unpleasant to experience and to hinder behaviour.
You are hindered when:
you can't talk candidly with someone even though you want to
you can't settle down to work on a project even though it interests you
you are restless and broody
you don't join in some enjoyable activity because of a gnawing feeling that you ought to be working
you can't introduce yourself to someone who appeals to you
your anger keeps you from thinking clearly
you can't sleep because something is bothering you
you can't say what you want to say because you are so nervous and so on!
Preventing unwanted feelings
The problems with unwanted feelings are that they tend to hinder us in the here and now even though the feelings are often associated with past or future events.
Worry and guilt are excellent examples of this.
You worry in the here and now about things in the future which may never happen.
You feel guilty in the here and now about things that happened in the past which you cannot correct.
In both cases the present moment is being spoilt by fretting needlessly over past or future moments.
What, then, can be done to prevent (not suppress but actually prevent ) unproductive, unwanted feelings?
It is important to be realistic.
The objective is to prevent, or at least nip in the bud, unwanted feelings.
In other words, the aim is to neutralize a troublesome feeling rather than to replace it with a positive feeling.
If you were prone to feeling miserable, for example, the aim is to prevent feelings of misery rather than to swop them for feelings of ecstasy.
There are really two options when it comes to preventing unwanted feelings and the following diagram showing the chronological sequence of events helps to pinpoint them:
Option 1: Avoid external events
Since the whole sequence of events begins with an external event, one option is to identify what external events tend to trigger unproductive feelings and to arrange to avoid or change the external events themselves.
The snag with this is that it is often impossible to avoid the triggering events altogether and in any case it might be better to face them squarely and control your reactions to the events rather than the events themselves.
However, even if you draw a blank, it is always worth checking to see whether or not you can influence the external event that starts the sequence, so either while you are being hindered by an unproductive feeling or after an experience where you were hindered ask yourself: ‘What external event has triggered this feeling?’
If you can identify it, ask yourself ‘can I do anything to avoid or minimize my exposure to this external event in the future?’
If the answer is yes, firm up an appropriate avoidance plan.
If the answer is no, avoidance isn't viable in this case and you will need the second strategy as follows:
Option 2: Replace the thoughts and beliefs
Intervene between the thoughts/beliefs and their attendant feelings.
The idea here is consciously to replace the thoughts that trigger an unproductive feeling with other ones that do not.
Since a feeling is always heralded by a thought, and since we have the ability to control our thoughts, then thinking offers the best hope for the prevention of unproductive feelings.
the snag with this option is that it requires people to be rational and let their ‘heads rule their hearts’.
This sort of control is harder for emotional people to practise and yet they are the ones who need it most!
Emotional people often reject this option as unhealthy, unnatural and unethical.
As we saw under Beliefs (see page 21) it is easy to fall prey to some recurring unrealistic thoughts or beliefs which cause you to feel upset whenever they are violated so, either while you are being hindered by an unproductive feeling or after an experience where you are hindered, or when you feel vulnerable to the onset of an unproductive feeling, ask yourself: ‘How can I make more effective use of this present moment?’
Force yourself to think of an effective here-and-now action and go ahead and do it.
Other ways of thinking are available to jerk you free from the clutches of an unproductive feeling.
They are all conscious thoughts and once you have experimented with them you'll be able to adopt your favourites or replace them with your own.
Examples are:
No-one can make me feel unproductive.
I, and I alone, am in charge of my feelings.
I will decide how to feel about that.
I am OK.
I can do it.
It's OK to…
Why should I choose to feel upset?
Why should I let him/her decide how I am going to feel?
There are other sections in this book that focus in more detail on various unwanted feelings.
You can take your pick from the following:Anger , page 4,Boredom , page 23,Depression , page 49,Feeling hurt , page 64,Guilt , page 80,Inadequacy , page 88,Inhibition , page 90,Jealousy , page 97,Worry , page 175.
Process
Process is the word used to describe how someone or a group is tackling a task.
This is in contrast to what the person or group is tackling, ie the task itself.
The task might be to review the progress of a project or to plan a piece of action or to analyse a problem or to decide on the best solution to a problem.
Examples of process (ie hows) might be agreeing a common understanding of the objective, deciding in which order to do thinks, apportioning time, deciding how best to organize a group.
Processes are therefore means, whereby the task itself is an end.
Achieving the task is top priority but process is vital because it either helps or hinders the achievement of the task.
People are often process ‘blind’, seeing only tasks and underestimating the importance of process aspects.
Awareness of process tends to down on people in a chronological sequence which typically goes like this:
1
Structural awareness , ie having clear objectives, a plan and a time schedule.
2
Role awareness , ie having a co-ordinator, leader or chairperson.
3
Behavioural awareness , ie using behaviours that are appropriate to the circumstances of the occasion.
4
Emotional awareness , ie being open about feelings and having empathy for how other people are feeling
Of course, some people fail to comprehend all four process aspects.
They may chug along believing that structure is all there is to it or that a combination of structure and roles is the answer.
Whilst it is certainly true that any process is better than none, awareness of all four aspects best equips people to deal with all eventualities.
For further information on process issues see Groups on page 77 and Teams on page 161.
Punishment
Punishment is the opposite of positive reinforcement (see page 134) and it decreases behaviour.
If, for example, your boss asked you for ideas but each time you produced one he totally disagreed with it and rejected it out of hand then, assuming you found this unpleasant, your behaviour of putting forward ideas has been punished.
This would make you less likely to behave like this in similar circumstances in the future.
If you tend to be a ‘hard-liner’, you will be attracted to punishment as a way of controlling people's behaviour.
Be warned, however, that punishment has two major disadvantages.
First, evidence shows that punishment only temporarily suppresses behaviour rather than permanently changing it.
As many exasperated parents and teachers have discovered, when the punishment, or the threat of it, ceases, the old behaviour tends to pop up again!
The only way to ensure that the unwanted behaviour does not reappear is to keep it dampened down by more punishments.
So punishment tends to lead to more punishment.
To illustrate the fact that punishment only temporarily suppresses behaviour, consider the following incident.
Imagine you have an office with large windows looking out over an open-plan office; through these windows you can see what your subordinates are  up to.
You notice time and time again that one of them keeps reading a newspaper instead of working.
Knowing that this particular subordinate is sensitive to criticism, you decide to reprimand him in the open-plan office where many of his colleagues at neighbouring desks will hear what is going on.
After you have done this, you are pleased to notice that he does not read the newspaper again.
From your point of view, the punishment exactly fitted the crime and has been totally effective in stopping the unwanted behaviour.
This successful experience makes it more likely that you will use public reprimands again in similar circumstances in the future and, naturally, you conclude that public reprimands work!
But do they?
Certainly it appears so, since you did not see the subordinate reading his newspaper again.
However, if it were possible to keep careful watch over a longer period, you would discover two interesting things.
Firstly, whenever you were absent from your office, the subordinate would very probably read his newspaper — in effect, the subordinate has merely learned not to read his newspaper when you are around!
This is obviously not the rip-roaring success you imagined it was.
Secondly, in the absence of further punishments, the subordinate would gradually slip into reading his newspaper again, even when you were around.
The second disadvantage of punishment is that rather like potent drugs, it leads to unwanted side-effects.
It is very likely that the subordinate you publicly rebuked for reading his newspaper will:
use every opportunity to tell everyone what a swine you are
waste time and energy plotting how to get his revenge
engage in minor, or even major, acts of sabotage that will inconvenience you.
Presumably, none of these reactions would be welcome by you; the punishment that appeared so successful at first sight has backfired.
The answer is to use punishment sparingly, very much as a last resort.
Another useful way to use punishment is in combination with positive reinforcement.
This is the ‘carrot and the stick approach, the carrot being positive reinforcement and the stick punishment.
Even then it is best to err on the side of too much reinforcement rather than too much punishment.
Rapport
Establishing rapport is the process of getting on the right wavelength with someone — usually, but not inevitably, with someone you are meeting for the first time.
Once established, rapport makes it more likely that there will be genuine understanding and agreement and that the interaction will be mutually beneficial and enjoyable.
The actual mechanics of establishing rapport have been investigated very carefully and there is no doubt that it is a behavioural phenomenon.
When you meet somebody, especially if it is the first time of meeting, your senses are working flat out to process all the data.
You can see what they look like.
You can feel the handshake, you can hear what they have to say, you may even be aware of how they smell.
All the information is taken in via your senses and rapidly processed.
Tentative conclusions are reached.
You decide whether you approve or disapprove, whether you like or dislike, whether you trust or distrust.
While you are busy with such things, you are also transmitting and receiving additional visual and verbal behaviours.
These give you an opportunity to update your conclusions.
There are five key behaviours involved in establishing rapport:
1
Non-threatening small talk that succeeds in establishing some shared experiences.
‘Small talk’ greatly aids the process of establishing rapport.
The objective is to and something to share before getting down to the real business.
The small talk might gently probe for some common experiences.
It might be something to do with the weather or with the experiences of travelling to the meeting.
The whole idea of small talk is to select a ‘safe’ topic where it is likely that the other person will have no trouble in meeting you halfway.
2
Appropriate use of the other person's name.
Using the other person's name early on in the transaction also helps establish rapport, so long as it isn't inappropriately familiar or done in a routine, ‘mechanical’ way.
3
Humour.
Humour plays an important part.
If both you and the other person can find something to laugh about together it paves  the way for a harmonious transaction.
A technique for doing this is to make an amusing remark against yourself.
It is much too risky at the start of an interaction to make a joke about the other person.
Pulling their leg can come later, if and when rapport has been established.
4
Empathy.
Empathy is another crucial ingredient when establishing rapport.
Empathy is the ability to put yourself in the other person's shoes and see the situation from their point of view.
The important thing is to demonstrate empathy, not just to feel it.
5
Compatible non-verbal behaviours.
Non-verbal behaviours also play a key part.
In fact there is evidence to suggest that visual behaviours may be more important than anything else when establishing rapport.
There are even techniques for mirroring the other person's non-verbal behaviours for the first few minutes of meeting them, and then testing whether rapport has been established by changing your visual behaviours to see whether the other person will reciprocate by mirroring yours.
If this happens, it is an indication that rapport has been established.
Resistance to change
Change invariably triggers some form of human resistance, sometimes subtle, sometimes blatant.
It is popular to assume that other people resist change but, of course, we are all potential resisters of change.
It is always easier to stick to the tried and true than to risk doing something different.
This is why people find it difficult to experiment with their own behaviour and to practise using behaviours that are unfamiliar.
It is not because, as they'll so often claim, they can't do it, but rather that they won't do it.
The four most common reasons for resistance to change are:
1
Parochial self-interest — People think they will lose something of value as a result.
In these cases people focus on their own best interests and not on those of the organization as a whole.
2
Misunderstanding and lack of trust — People do not understand its implications and perceive that it might cost them more than they will gain.
Misunderstandings and distorted perceptions often  occur when trust is lacking between the initiators of the change and people on the receiving end of it.
3
Different assessments — People assess the situation differently from the initiators of the change.
Managers, for example, often assume they have all the relevant information required to conduct an adequate assessment of the need for change.
They also tend to assume, conveniently, that those who will be affected by the change, have the same information.
It is rare for either assumption to be correct.
The differences in information inevitably lead to different assessments.
4
Low tolerance for change — People fear that they will not be able to cope in new, unfamiliar circumstances.
Even when people intellectually accept the need for change, they are sometimes emotionally unable to make the adjustment.
People with a low tolerance for change therefore tend to fight hard to maintain the status quo , often without being able to articulate their reasons for so doing.
There are other reasons for resistance to change.
People sometimes resist change to save face when, for example, they think that supporting change would amount to an admission that some of their previous decisions or beliefs were wrong.
People might also resist change because of peer group pressure to do so even though, off the record, they may acknowledge the changes as beneficial.
Strategies for overcoming resistance to change in other people have to be appropriate to the type of resistance encountered.
for descriptions of the strategies on offer see Change on page 29.
So far as overcoming your own tendencies to resist change, it is best to have some limbering up exercises that you inflict on yourself from time to time.
Do something that you have never done before at least once each week.
It need not be a big thing so long as it is something novel to you and breaks your normal routine.
Travel a different way to work, visit a part of your organization you are unfamiliar with, read a different newspaper to your normal one, drink tea instead of coffee, volunteer to do/lead a project team, etc. etc.
The possibilities are endless and they all do their little bit to help keep you in a state of readiness for change.
For more detail on change and its associated areas see Change , page 29,Learning from experience , page 100,Self awareness , page 153,Self development , page 154.
Reviewing
Reviewing plays a key part in the process of learning from experience.
If you don't review your performance then you have no data to carry forward into an improvement plan (see Action plans on page 1).
And if you have no improvement plan then you just drift doing things more or less as you have always done them.
The best way to ensure that you review is to adopt a routine that you can swing into either alone or with others.
The discipline of the routine makes it more likely that you will review thoroughly enough and not skimp.
A simple review procedure is as follows:
1
List what went well and what could have gone better.
2
Select (either from the ‘wells’ or from the ‘betters’or from both) one or two issues to focus upon.
3
Generate ideas on how the selected issues could be tackled in future, either to maintain a success or to improve a weakness.
4
Select a feasible idea or ideas.
5
Plan action so that you are absolutely clear what you have to do.
The joy of this procedure is that it is not laborious.
Sometimes the whole process can be completed in five or 10 minutes.
It clearly takes longer if you do it with another person or as a group but even then 15 to 20 minutes is adequate unless you are tackling some really contentious issues.
The extraordinary thing is that reviewing isn't done more often as a systematic deliberate process.
Most meetings, for example, would benefit by regularly having a 15 minute review as the last item on the agenda.
Meetings, despite their reputation for being boring, are rich in opportunities to learn about behaviour but without a review mechanism the opportunities are mostly missed (see Meetings on page 106).
For more on the total process of learning from experience see page 100.
Rewards
See Positive reinforcement on pages 134–136
Rights
A right is something to which you are entitled.
The most obvious examples tend to be in the legal sphere (consumers' rights, rights of way, etc) but in addition to rights which are legislated for, you have behavioural rights.
Rights are a central issue in being assertive (see page 8), since a decision to be assertive, as opposed to aggressive or submissive, is in effect a decision to stand up for your rights in a way that respects other people's rights.
Behavioural rights are more a matter of belief than legislation since they tend to be based on conclusions which you have reached about yourself in relation to others.
You may believe, for example, that you have the right to speak your mind and from this will follow certain ways of behaving that will differ markedly from someone who believes they have the right to remain silent.
The problem with beliefs is that they can often be unrealistic and stubborn (see Beliefs on page 21) but reasonable behavioural rights are such things as:
the right to express your opinions, views and ideas
the right to be listened to
the right to have needs and wants that may differ from other people's
the right to ask others to respond to your needs and wants
the right to say no
the right to express your feelings when you choose to
the right to be fallible, ie to be wrong and make mistakes sometimes
the right to be clear what is expected of you
the right to know how you are doing (feedback)
the right to know what you need to do to improve
the right to be consulted about decisions that affect you.
All these rights, reasonable in themselves, become unreasonable if you insist on standing up for them every time they are infringed.
You need to be selective and judge when it is appropriate to assert your rights.
Another important implication of behavioural rights such as these, is that if you believe in your own rights then, to be consistent, you must also believe that other people enjoy the same rights.
In dealings with other people a balance needs to be struck, therefore, between standing up for your own rights whilst respecting other people's.
If, for example, you asked someone not to smoke in your presence (the right to ask others to respond to your needs and wants) you need to respect their right to have different needs and wants and, much more difficult, their right to say no.
This then becomes a classic case of conflict resolution (see Conflict on page 35).
The clearer you are about your behavioural rights the better prepared you are to handle tricky situations assertively.
For more details see Tricky situations on page 168 and Assertiveness on page 8.
Roles
Roles are characteristic ways of behaving and are especially significant in group and team-work (see Groups on page 77 and Teams on page 161).
It is vital in carrying out a role to:
know which behaviours go with which role
be able to deliver the required mix of behaviours.
Some people know but can't do, others do but don't know.
The best of both worlds is to know and do.
Here is a checklist of the key behaviours which comprise the roles of co-ordinator, challenger, doer, thinker and supporter (for an introduction to these roles see Teams on page 161).
Co-ordinator role
Co-ordinators employ some or all of the following behaviours.
They:
bring in group members by inviting their comments and soliciting their ideas
clarify the group's objectives
‘grasp the nettle’ by raising issues and problems that the group ought to face and tackle
listen to group members' opinions and check that they have been understood
summarize at frequent intervals
steer conversations through to consensus decisions by encouraging group members to say what they really think and genuinely agree on a course of action
‘lead from the front’ by deciding what needs to be done in difficult situations, where a consensus cannot be reached or where time is tight.
Challenger role
Challengers employ some or ill of the following behaviours.
They:
tend to get their own way by pressurizing people
have no hesitation in objecting to others' views
are quite prepared to be a minority of one if they think they are right
show impatience and irritation with people who are slow on the uptake (they don't suffer fools gladly)
become exasperated with what they regard as inefficiency
challenge complacency whenever they come across it
challenge the ‘system’(ie accepted ways of doing things, rules and procedures)
tend to ginger up people whenever they think they are dragging their feet on something
tend to point out the snags and difficulties with people's ideas
they step in and take a positive lead when things aren't progressing well.
Doer role
Doers employ some or all of the following behaviours.
They:
get impatient with people who ‘beat about the bush’
urge people to stick to plans and schedules and meet deadlines 
push ahead and get the job done when things aren't progressing well
don't mind being unpopular if it gets the job done
have a reputation for having a no-nonsense ‘call a spade a spade’ style
tend to be forceful and dynamic
press for action to make sure people don't waste time or go round in circles
urge people to press on with the task in hand especially when they have second thoughts
like to get straight to the point
get irritated with flippant people who don't take things seriously enough.
Thinkers role
Thinkers employ some or all of the following behaviours.
They:
can be counted on to contribute original ideas
can quickly see what is wrong with unsound ideas put forward by others
tend to put forward lots of ideas
develop other people's ideas so that they are improved
are careful not to jump to conclusions too quickly
enjoy analysing situations and weighing up alternatives
like to anticipate probable difficulties and be prepared for them
like to ponder alternatives before making up their minds
have a reputation for being analytical and cautious
like to think things through before doing something
Supporter role
Supporters employ some or all of the following behaviours.
They:
use humour to ease tensions and maintain good relationships
avoid getting involved in conflicts
are always ready to back a good suggestion in the common interest
tend to change their minds after listening to other people's points of view
tend to seek approval and support from others 
are friendly and find it easy to establish good rapport with others
are good at noticing when someone in the group is feeling aggrieved or upset
work well with a wide range of people
like to foster good working relationships
tend to be open about their feelings.
These five roles are complementary.
A group or team works best when all the roles are represented.
The Co-ordinator ensures that the Challengers and Doers are counterbalanced by the Thinkers and Supporters.
A homogeneous group of, say, Challengers is not likely to be very successful.
For more on how these roles can be blended into a successful group, see Groups on page 77 and Teams on page 161.
Seeking ideas
Seeking ideas is a behaviour that doesn't happen all that often.
Statistics show that typically it only accounts for two per cent of all the verbal behaviours that take place in a conversation.
You are seeking ideas whenever you invite someone else to put forward an idea about a possible course of action.
Examples are:
‘Any ideas?’
‘We've discussed the problem at length— has anyone any ideas on how to solve the problem?’
‘How can we improve the situation?’
Seeking ideas is, therefore, a participative behaviour that concentrates on soliciting ideas from other people and does not include proffering one yourself (see Idea-having on page 86).
Despite the fact that it is one of the rarer species, it is i highly successful behaviour.
Eight times out of ten seeking ideas succeeds in eliciting an idea and that is a surprisingly high hit rate.
Seeking ideas is an appropriate behaviour when you want to:
pick someone else's brains
encourage a reticent person to come up with ideas
stop going round in circles 
force someone who is being negative to be more positive
involve someone in solving a problem so that they have some ownership for the solution.
Self awareness
Despite the fact that it is a basic right to know how you are doing, most people are starved of feedback (see page 63) and may even resent it when they get it.
In the absence of regular helpful feedback from other people the answer is constantly to subject your own behaviour to scrutiny.
The aim in doing this is not to depress yourself but to be open to the possibility of self-improvement.
Here are four suggestions to help you remain aware of your own behaviour and opportunities for its modification and improvement:
1
Whenever you fail to produce desired results,assume that the failure resulted from things you did rather than being caused by other factors that were ‘beyond your control’.
Conduct a careful post-mortem of your own actions and compile a list of all the things you could have done better.
2
Even when you succeed in producing desired results, periodically review your own actions and list what you could have done better.
Often you know in your heart of hearts that you are capable of performing better, and your own disappointments with yourself are an important information source.
3
When you are disappointed with the way other people react to you, assume (even though it may not be true) that it is your fault.
So when people do not listen to you, do not adopt your suggestion, do not consult you etc, assume that your behaviour was at fault, not theirs.
This forces you to scrutinize your own behaviour rather than blame other people.
4
On the rare occasions when people criticize you (see Criticism on page 44) and offer you explicit feedback about your behaviour, accept it gratefully rather than springing to your own defence.
Feedback is easier to accept if you can do something constructive once you have got it; if you know how to develop yourself, you are more likely to welcome feedback when it is offered and also more likely to solicit it actively.
Other people's perceptions of us  are there to be collected if only we can pluck up the courage to ask for them.
Self awareness is a prerequisite for self development (see below).
Self development
Self development is the development of yourself, by yourself, through a deliberate process of learning from experience.
This definition includes a number of assumptions that are worth expansion.
1
It assumes that it is always possible to develop yourself, not just your outward behaviour but also your inner thought processes and feelings.
2
It assumes that you need to organize it for yourself rather than expecting other people to be responsible for your development.
3
Finally, it assumes that self development needs to be done deliberately rather than left to chance.
For expansion on the first and third assumptions see Learning from experience on page 100.
The second assumption is the very essence of self development.
The argument is that you only have one life, that you are the most important person in the world and that if you don't take responsibility for your own development, who else will?
Indeed, who else can ?
Nobody else, no matter how hard they try, can force you to do anything.
The door to development is locked with the key on the inside.
It is popular to believe that managers are responsible for developing their people but closer examination reveals this to be a nonsense.
Managers are responsible for providing their people with development opportunities, but it is always up to the individual person to take the opportunities on offer and make something of them.
There are advantages to self development.
Since in your life and work you are going to do things anyway, you might as well kill two birds with one stone by doing and learning in parallel.
Another advantage is that self development is capable of converting even the most boring situation into a learning opportunity.
The philosophy maintains that it is up to you to take initiatives and through so doing  to refuse to be bored.
If self development is so wonderful why isn't there more of it about?
One of the most common excuses is lack of time.
People tend to invest more time deciding on a house purchase or what car to buy than deciding what to do with their lives and how to develop themselves.
As John Lennon sang ‘Life is what happens to you while you're busy making other plans’.
Another deeper-seated inhibition to self development is the avoidance of what is termed ‘discomfort anxiety’.
This is a strong preference for short term comfort (ie staying with what is familiar) even though it is self-defeating in the long run.
An example would be writing a book in longhand instead of learning to use a word processor.
Here is a list of a dozen things that self-developers tend to do:
Put themselves first (and others a close second)
Strive to improve their current performance
Deliberately seek out learning opportunities
Get learning mileage out of chance events (at work, home, socially)
Assess own needs
Set own self-development objectives
Assess own progress
Experiment/try new or different things
Review experiences
Reach conclusions from experiences
Plan to implement what has been learned
Tolerate short term discomfort in the interests of longer term learning.
Skilful behaviour
Skilful behaviour, like any other skill, is acquired through practice.
The acid test of a skill is to watch someone else doing something effortlessly and then to try it yourself — you quickly discover that there is much more to it thin you imagined.
A good example is to watch a skilful presenter, making eye contact with the audience, standing still, using gestures and visual aids to emphasize a point.
It looks easy until you try it.
The acquisition of a skill is a tortuous process that takes us through the following sequence:
1 Unconscious incompetence
This is the stage where ignorance is bliss, when it looks easy and you don't realize how much there is to it.
The skilful presenter is doing it effortlessly.
2 Conscious incompetence
This is the realization that, when you first try to emulate the skilful performer, you can't do it.
This is an unpleasant discovery which may shock you into giving up and returning to the relative comfort of Stage 1.
3 Conscious competence
This stage is hard work!
It is where you are able to do a competent presentation but only by investing an enormous amount of conscious effort into every aspect.
You have to force yourself to make adequate eye contact with the audience and to stand still.
You have to force yourself not to talk to the visual aids and to synchronize your gestures with your main messages.
This is such hard work that you may decide that it isn't worth the effort and abandon your attempt to acquire the skills in question.
4 Unconscious competence
This stage is the skilful stage when you too can do professional presentations effortlessly!
Even this, however, isn't the end of the story because of the very real danger of complacency creeping in (see page 35).
The more skilful you are, the more you tend to cut corners which, if unchecked for long periods, degenerate into bad habits.
The answer is to drop back to conscious competence every now and again to check things out and eradicate the bad habits.
Strokes
If ego-states (see page 56) are the backbone of transactional analysis (see page 167), strokes are its heartbeat.
A stroke is simply a unit of recognition.
Where someone compliments you (‘Well done.’
‘That's  a good suggestion.’
‘You managed that well,’‘I'm glad I talked that through with you.’
‘It's always so nice to see you.’
‘You have been a great help.’)
they are giving you a stroke.
In TA it is assumed that we all have stroke quotas, established in early learning.
Some need only a few strokes, others need many.
Furthermore, all three ego-states, Parent, Adult and Child, have their own stroke requirements.
The need for strokes is strong.
When a person is not getting their quota, or the right sort of strokes, they go out of their way to manipulate situations in order to obtain the strokes they need.
Unfortunately, many of these manoeuvres are counter-productive and ‘crooked’ and result in games (see page 71).
Strokes tell people ‘You're OK’.
For strokes to function successfully, however, they need to be genuine rather than phoney and they need to stroke the appropriate ego-state in the other person.
It would be no good stroking their Adult, say, if the transaction had largely come from their Child.
The most obvious practical implication of strokes is that we need to help people achieve their stroke quotas.
Games and other ‘crooked’ ways of getting strokes are most prevalent in people who are under their quota.
In TA it is observed that the strokes that work best are often unconditional rather than solely dependent upon someone behaving in the desired way.
Unconditional strokes come with no strings attached and are given simply because a person is OK with you, warts and all!
The vital thing about strokes is not so much in the giving, however, as in the receiving.
It is important to observe whether the stroked person accepts or rejects the stroke.
If they are feeling ‘Not OK’ they may reject the stroke by discounting themselves (‘It was nothing really.’
‘It didn't take me long.’
‘I'm sorry it was so incomplete.’).
If what you imagine to be strokes are rejected, they aren't functioning as strokes and need to be replaced by others.
For further advice on how to stroke people authentically see Praise on page 135.
For other concepts from transactional analysis see Ego-states , page 56,Discounts , page 55,Games , page 71,OKness , page 123.
Styles
Styles are a convenient way of summarizing a collection of different behaviours under one heading.
A style is, therefore, a useful shorthand for various bits and pieces of behaviour that, taken together, give a discernible pattern.
Thus we have styles such as autocratic and democratic, each capable of being broken down into its constituent behaviours.
Autocratic for example breaks down into:
lots of telling and little asking
lots of proposing and little suggesting
lots of interrupting and little listening
lots of disagreeing and little building.
Styles are, in effect,conclusions we reach about the way others operate.
The conclusions are based, as they have to be, on the smaller bits of behaviour that make up a given style.
Since styles are so attractively brief there is an understandable temptation to think of all behaviour at a styles-level of description.
This leads to two problems:
1
Becoming sloppy in observations of other people's behaviour.
Once you have concluded that someone is being autocratic this is likely to become self-reinforcing.
In other words, you tend to notice behaviours that confirm the conclusion you have already reached and to ignore the behaviours that contradict it.
2
Intending to adopt a particular style on a particular occasion without realizing that intending is not the same as planning.
The ‘secret’, inasmuch as there is one, is to break style-level descriptions down into smaller behavioural bits.
Our behaviour plan can then be built around the ‘bits’ instead of depending on vague intentions.
Intentions are infamous for getting put into action less frequently than plans simply because intentions leave a yawning gap which only plans can bridge.
Intending to get up early and do two hours work before breakfast is less likely to happen than planning to do it.
Planning involves a series of action steps, such as going to bed earlier than usual and setting an alarm (or a failsafe system incorporating two or more alarms!). for more on the need for specificity see Action plans on page 1.
Styles of various kinds are described elsewhere in this book.
for more detail see Directive on page 53,Consultative on page 38,Collaborative on page 32,Delegation on page 49,Assertiveness on page 8,Learning from experience on page 100.
Submissive behaviour
See Assertiveness on pages 8–11
Successes
‘Success breeds success’ goes the saying in just the same way that behaviour breeds behaviour.
After a success it is obviously tempting to relax and bask in feelings of self-congratulation.
The advent of the success is so delightful that all thoughts of learning from it are banished.
Understandably, therefore, people take success as it comes and rarely consider the ingredients of the success nor how to replicate it.
Learning from successes is just as valid and useful a process as learning from mistakes (see page 110).
Indeed it could be argued that learning from success is even more useful than learning from mistakes because, by and large, things go right more often than they go wrong.
We therefore stand to learn more if we trouble to analyse our successes.
The answer is to develop the habit of asking yourself the question ‘What went well?’
This forces you to reflect on successes rather than to bask in them.
For more on the mechanics of Learning from experience see page 100 and Reviewing on page 147.
Summarising
Summarizing is a compact restatement of points which have been made in a discussion.
The objective of summarizing is to check on the level of understanding and give an opportunity to sort out misunderstandings.
There are two different ways of accomplishing this objective.
The first is, at intervals in the conversation, to give a summary of the salient points as you have understood them.
The second is to  test understanding by inviting someone else to summarize and check that their summary accords with the one you yourself would have given at that stage in the proceedings.
If a number of people are present, invitations to summarize can be shared around rather than becoming the prerogative of one person.
This is a splendid incentive for people to listen hard since they never know when they might be called upon to paraphrase what they have heard.
Summarizing reduces ambiguity by pointing things out explicitly and helps to reduce the likelihood that people are agreeing to different things (see Agreeing on page 3).
Summarizing is a key behaviour in effective meetings where it is usually an important part of the chairing role.
In fact, however, any participant in a meeting or discussion has a right to offer a summary to test that their understanding accords with everyone else's.
See Meetings on page 106.
Suppression
Suppression is a way of hiding your true feelings so that they remain an internal experience but don't manifest themselves in your behaviour.
The socialization process trains us to ‘have a stiff upper lip’ and not express our feelings in an open, straightforward way.
As a result some people are already skilled at hiding their feelings behind a behavioural façade.
The snag with this is that the suppressed feelings are still experienced internally rather than avoided or prevented.
A further difficulty is that repeated mismatching between feelings and behaviour can build up stresses in the system to the extent that something has to ‘blow’.
The indiscriminate over-suppression of feelings is generally condemned as unhealthy.
When you feel angry, for example, involuntary responses increase your blood pressure, heart rate, rate of breathing, blood flow to the muscles, and metabolism, preparing you for conflict or escape.
All systems are go to react angrily and if you don't there is evidence to indicate that repeated suppression eventually leads to furred-up arteries and high blood pressure.
The natural physiological mechanisms put us in a state of alert and prepare us for what is called the fight-or-flight response.
The problem is that fight-or-flight behaviours are less and less appropriate in today's civilized society and this is how the damage is done.
Healthier alternatives are to learn how to prevent unwanted feelings (see Preventing unwanted feelings on page 138) or to practise some form of relaxation or meditation technique (see Meditation on page 105).
Synergy
See Teams below
Teams
Teams are special.
They evolve from groups who have learned to work together skilfully (see page 77).
A team is a small group (6 to 8 people is a typical size) who co-operate together in such a way that they accomplish more than the sum total of the individuals.
The jargon word for this is synergy.
This is sometimes expressed as one plus one equals three because you count the ‘plus’, which represents the interaction between different people, the ‘ones’.
The idea that a combination of different people working together can achieve synergy is central to the concept of a team as opposed to a mere group.
Eight people each with different views who fail to cohere or who simply proceed by letting the majority view prevail (as in voting) are a group (ie a collection of individuals) not a team.
Research into the differences between successful and unsuccessful teams highlights the importance of having a mix of people with different ways of behaving.
It is the combination of different roles within a team that seems a crucial factor in its success.
A team benefits from the differences rather than the similarities between people.
Five key roles are:
Co-ordinator — making sure that objectives are clear and that everyone is involved and committed.
Challenger — questioning ineffectiveness and taking the lead in pressing for improvements/results.
Doer — urging the team to get on with the task in hand.
Thinker — producing carefully considered ideas and weighing up and improving ideas from other people.
Supporter — easing tensions and maintaining harmonious working relationships.
A successful team blends these different roles together so that the strengths of one compensate for the weaknesses of another.
This is why a mix of different people has the potential to dovetail and become a cohesive team.
It is the co-ordinator's job to aid and abet this dovetailing process.
for lists of the specific behaviours that go with each role see Roles on page 149.
There are some characteristics that are helpful in distinguishing a mere group from a team.
Here are eight hallmarks of a team:
A team has a high success rate, ie more often than not it achieves what it sets out to do.
A team agrees clear, challenging objectives, ie everyone in the team contributes to, shares understanding of, and is committed to the objectives.
A team has a co-ordinator (it may not always be the same person) who adjusts the leadership style along a spectrum, from participative to autocratic, in the light of circumstances.
A team has a mix of people who contribute in different but complementary ways thus achieving synergy, ie the team produces more than the sum of its individuals.
A team operates in such a way that a balance is struck between concern for the task (the ‘what’) and concern for the process (the ‘how’).
A team creates a supportive atmosphere where people are happy to go at risk, say what they really think, develop one another 's ideas and commit to an agreed course of action even though there may have been differences of opinion.
A team learns from experience, both successes and failures, by reviewing its processes and constantly improving its own performance.
A team works hard and plays hard, ie its members not only achieve challenging objectives but enjoy themselves as they do so.
When a team is functioning at the skilful level and achieving these eight hallmarks, it alters the behaviour patterns in various ways.
Here are data contrasting behavioural data for a group as opposed to a team.
(For definitions of the behaviour categories see page 26.)
The striking differences are that a team increases seeking ideas, suggesting, building and seeking clarification and decreases proposing, disagreeing, difficulty stating and clarifying/explaining/informing.
Supporting stays about the same but there is a marked difference in quality which is not reflected in the figures.
In a group there is more acquiescing and in a team there is more commitment (see Agreeing on page 3).
It is easy to assume that teams are ‘a good thing’ and therefore, in some way, essential, but experience indicates that they are only essential in certain sorts of situations.
The simplest way to decide whether a collection of individuals (a group) will be sufficient or whether a genuine team operating at the skilful stage is necessary, is to look at the nature of the task to be tackled.
If the task is certain , there is less need to share and a group will suffice.
As the uncertainty of the task increases there is more need to share and a team is necessary.
Suppose, for example, a group is given a task that is tightly defined and where the group has previous experience of similar talks, it is likely to succeed by operating at a formal stage level.
If, however, a group is set an ambiguous task with an uncertain outcome and with little previous experience to draw on it is unlikely to succeed unless it operates as a team at the skilful level.
Clearly, the more prescribed the task the less room for  manoeuvre and the less of a challenge for the group.
On the other hand, tasks that are dogged with uncertainty are more of a challenge and put greater onus on the co-operative skills of the team members.
This is an important distinction because it reminds us that a high level of teamwork, whilst perfectly desirable, is not absolutely essential for many routine activities.
Teamwork is vital for the tougher, more challenging activities which, whilst less frequent, are more crucial when they do occur.
Telephone behaviour
The telephone as an instrument of communication between people is being used more and more.
Some of the reasons for this are:
Telephoning is often more convenient than travelling to meet people face-to-face.
Telephoning saves time, both because telephone conversations tend to be shorter than face-to-face conversations and because it is not necessary to spend time travelling.
Telephoning is cheaper than face-to-face meeting, mainly because of savings on travelling expenses.
This is dramatically true with telephone calls overseas.
As a result of this, more people than ever before are telephone users.
The growing popularity of the telephone is not, however, without its problems.
The more people have access to the telephone, the more likely it is that you will encounter unskilled telephone users.
Whenever this happens, the onus is on you to control the call and steer the conversation to a successful conclusion.
This, in essence, is what telephone behaviour is all about.
Whenever you have dealings with someone face-to-face you can see them.
Upon meeting them you instantly see what they look like, and quickly observe their facial expressions, gestures and body language.
In addition you can hear what they say and how they say it.
So if you are sufficiently observant, you have lots of information about them.
This is important because you reach judgements and  conclusions about everyone you meet based, first and foremost, on these observations of their behaviour.
By contrast, whenever you have dealings with someone over the telephone you cannot see them.
This simple fact deprives you of most of the information you would normally have about the other person.
You are therefore obliged to base your judgements and conclusions about them on what you hear them say and how they say it.
The fact that you can only hear behaviour on the telephone has both advantages and disadvantages.
Some of the disadvantages are:
It is more difficult to establish rapport on the telephone.
In face-to-face meetings all the visual signals are a great aid to getting on the same wavelength with someone.
Without them this is tougher to accomplish.
When you telephone someone you are more likely to intrude at an inconvenient time and not realize it.
When you meet someone you can see whether it is convenient or inconvenient and act accordingly.
The telephone increases the likelihood of jumping to the wrong conclusions.
It is easier, for example, to conclude that someone is being abrupt if you only have what they say and how they say it to go on.
It is also easier to assume that you have someone's undivided attention when you talk to them on the ‘phone.
When you are having a telephone conversation you are more likely to be distracted and let your attention wander.
You don't suddenly go blind for the duration of a ‘phone call and are, therefore, prey to all sorts of visual distractions — people walking past the window, someone coming in to see you and so on.
You are also more likely to be tempted into doing two (or even more than two) things at once.
You know the caller can't see you continuing to sign letters, do the crossword, read a magazine, pull faces at a colleague…
On the telephone it is more difficult to communicate accurate information and avoid misunderstandings.
People remember more of what they see than what they hear.
On the telephone, all information has to be transmitted in words and that limitation increases communication problems.
On the other hand the telephone has some advantages:
On balance it is easier to reach someone by telephoning them than by trying to see them.
Not only is it more convenient to pick up the ‘phone and make contact, you are also more likely to succeed since few people are able to ignore the telephone and leave it unanswered.
When you speak to someone on the telephone it is easier for you to represent your company or organization.
As far as the person on the other end is concerned you are the company or organization.
The fact that they can't see you increases your authority in their eyes.
Telephone conversations are, on average, significantly shorter than face-to-face conversations.
The telephone, therefore, saves time and gives you the opportunity to be more businesslike, if that is appropriate.
Since telephone conversations are usually confined to you and just one other person, not a group of people, it is easier to take initiatives and control the conversation.
This is a relative point.
No-one is claiming it is easy to control the conversation, just that with some simple, learnable techniques it is easier on the telephone than in the more complex circumstances of face-to-face meetings.
On the telephone it is easier (though not necessarily easy) to be firm, to say what you might not have the courage to say face-to-face.
This ‘Dutch courage’ can be useful if you are in a situation that requires you to be resolute.
The key to minimizing the disadvantages and reaping the advantages of communications over the telephone is the way you behave.
Here is a list of specific standards to aim for:
Answer the telephone promptly — within three rings if possible.
Start each telephone call by saying who you are, your name and position.
Always enquire whether or not it is convenient to proceed.
If an incoming call is not convenient, explain why and take the name and number of the caller and offer to phone back.
Explain, in a straightforward way, the purpose of the telephone call.
Establish and use the other person's name early in the telephone conversation.
Ask open questions.
Listen, resist the temptation to interrupt.
When listening demonstrate that you are by making ‘continuity noises’ such as‘um’, ‘yes’, ‘really’.
Concentrate — don't be tempted to do two things at once.
Give the telephone conversation your undivided attention.
Make notes and ‘read back’ key points so that the caller knows you are being attentive.
Be lavish in explaining what you are doing — especially if it involves a silence while the caller ‘hangs on’.
Err on the side of being helpful — volunteer help, don't wait to be asked.
Use assertive behaviour (see Assertiveness on page 8) to control the call.
Stay assertive even when you don't feel like it and especially when dealing with a submissive or aggressive person.
Finish by recapping exactly what it is you are going to do as a result of the telephone conversation.
Smile, for even though you can't be seen by the other person, if you smile it helps your voice to sound more assertive and friendly.
Always remember, behaviour breeds behaviour and that, so far as the person on the other end of the telephone is concerned,you are what you say !
Testing understanding
See Summarizing on pages 159 — 160
Transactional analysis
Transactional analysis (TA) is the name given to a number of related concepts that seek to throw light on the way people behave and feel.
The basic assumptions in TA are that:
people learn at an early age ways of feeling and behaving that tend to become habitual regardless of their continued appropriateness.
feelings cause behaviour.
even though characteristic ways of feeling and behaving are habitual, they can be controlled and, if necessary, unproductive ways of feeling and behaving can be replaced with more satisfactory ones.
you can do much to help other people, whether they be your superiors, associates, colleagues or subordinates, to modify their feelings and behaviour for better.
feelings of doubt, indecision, embarrassment, fear and anger drain energy from both individuals and organizations and, in various ways, exact a heavy toll in time and money.
TA claims to be a simple and practical method for understanding and modifying human behaviour.
It is intended to give you some comprehensible concepts so that you can improve yourself and help others to do the same.
This process is not intended to be dangerous or impossible, or to require the help of experts.
The basic TA concepts together with their implications are given in the following sections (best read in this sequence):Ego-states , page 56,Strokes , page 156,Discounts , page 55,Games , page 71,OKness , page 123.
Tricky situations
Some situations are tougher than others.
The trickier the situation the more your behaviour matters as a means of influencing the other person or people.
There are three factors which tend to make a situation especially testing.
If any one of them applies then that is tough enough.
If they ill apply, then that makes the situation even harder to handle successfully.
The first factor is time.
The less you have of it as, for example, in a short face-to-face contact, the more difficult it is to impress and/or influence.
Every door to door salesman knows that.
A second factor relates to objectives.
When the people involved in the interaction have conflicting objectives it is more difficult to reach agreement.
Every negotiator has experience of that.
Thirdly, when the situation is emotionally charged with feelings  running high, it is more difficult to resolve.
Every husband or wife in the middle of a row knows that.
The only hope in a tricky situation is to look to your behaviour and use it to influence the behaviour of others for the better.
The secret of success is to use your Adult (see Ego-states on page 56 and hang on to assertive behaviour (see Assertiveness on page 8 and Conflict on page 35).
Triggers
A trigger is any event which causes a behavioural reaction.
Literally,any event can act as a trigger.
It may be a spoken remark from someone or just a ‘meaningful’ look.
It may be a place, or a time of day or a specific occurrence, such as being stuck in a traffic jam or being promoted.
Triggers are important because they help us understand why people behave as they do.
Behaviour is always a reaction to a trigger of some kind.
Scratching, for example, is a reaction to an itch.
Answering a question is a reaction to having been asked a question.
Going on the defensive is a reaction to criticism.
And so on.
Identifying the triggers or cues for your own behaviour and other people's provides a useful foothold when it comes to working out how to change or modify behaviour.
See Behaviour modification on page 16.
Unhelpful behaviour
Unhelpful behaviours are those which hinder you from achieving your objective and/or which run the risk of giving other people a bad impression of you.
Obviously what is helpful and what is unhelpful depends to a large extent on the circumstances of the situation.
Nonetheless, there are certain behaviours that tend to engender unfavourable reactions in the people you have dealings with.
Here is a list of 19 such behaviours:
Lean away from the other person with hands clenched, arms crossed and legs crossed.
Look at the other person for less than 50 per cent of the time.
Listen silently with no continuity noises and/or interrupt before the other person has had their say.
Have a blank expression.
Sit opposite the other person (rather than beside them).
Don't use the other person's name or use it artificially so that it jars.
Don't ask questions or ask closed questions.
Offer no summaries and don't check your understanding.
Stick rigidly to saying things that are routine and standard.
Don't acknowledge the other person's expressed feelings or point of view.
Acquiesce or never explicitly agree with the other person.
Pick holes in the other person's ideas.
Criticize the other person.
Disagree first then say why.
Be defensive and never admit to any inadequacy.
Be secretive and withhold information from the other person even though it affects them.
Have visual and verbal behaviours out of step with each other.
Remain aloof and don't touch the other person.
Don't give the other person anything.
That's the bad news.
For the good news see Helpful behaviour on page 84.
Verbal behaviour
Verbal behaviour covers everything you say to people either face-to-face or on the telephone.
This clearly covers such a vast range of possibilities that it is best to break verbal behaviour down into a number of categories and concentrate on some specifics.
Nine such categories are introduced and defined on page 27.
Obviously what you say to another person and the way you say it will have an effect on what they say back as a response.
The ‘chemistry’ of different verbal behaviours in interaction with  one another has been carefully investigated and here are some of the findings together with their implications for you.
Seeking ideas is a powerful behaviour.
Nine times out of ten it is successful in provoking some ideas from the other person.
It is a helpful behaviour to use whenever you need to pick someone else's brains.
Proposing ideas unfortunately provokes difficulties or objections more often than it wins support.
If you want to ‘flush out’ people's reservations then proposing is a good behaviour to use.
If, on the other hand, you want to make it more likely that there will be agreement to your idea then the next behaviour is a safer bet.
Suggesting ideas is a more effective way of gaining agreement than proposing ideas.
There are, of course, no guarantees that it will succeed because your idea may be such a rotten one that even though it is suggested it runs into difficulties.
The actual statistics reveal that four times out of ten a suggestion is followed by an agreement and that isn't a bad hit rate.
Building on someone else's idea is a powerful way to get their wholehearted support.
Despite this, building is a fairly rare behaviour.
It seems that people find it easier to find fault with ideas than to build them up into something better.
This is a good example of having a choice.
People who think about their behaviour are more likely to try building than people who are in the habit of immediately criticizing ideas.
The fact that seeking clarification is so prevalent reminds us what a potentially confusing behaviour building can be.
The lesson is to ‘flag’ building so that people are in no doubt, and then supporting and more building are the most likely reactions.
Disagreeing on seven out of ten occasions triggers a defensive reaction or even further disagreements.
It is interesting how often people get locked into a disagreeing ‘spiral’ where one disagreement breeds another which, in turn, breeds another and so on.
Disagreeing is very much a last resort.
It is best to try some of the more constructive options first.
Agreeing with something someone else has said is a powerful way to encourage them to go on and say more.
Eight times out of ten this will be the effect.
Agreeing is, therefore, a useful behaviour if you want to gain more information from the other person.
It isn't an appropriate behaviour if you want them to shut up.
Pointing out difficulties is a very common behaviour but is one of the riskier ones because research shows that it is far from certain how people will take it.
Marginally, the most likely reaction is to offer some clarification or explanation.
However, people often take umbrage and start disagreeing or, if you persist with difficulties, they may give up and go and find someone more positive to talk to.
You need to watch carefully to see whether pointing out difficulties is hindering or helping the proceedings.
No surprises here.
If you ask for clarification then nine times out of ten you will get it.
Seeking clarification is a frequent behaviour that exerts a powerful influence over the behaviour of the other person.
It is a very useful behaviour when trying to get to the bottom of things and when you need to tease information out of the other person.
Informing is the behaviour that happens more often than any other in conversation between people.
This isn't surprising, of course, since the overall purpose of talking with someone is to impart information of some kind.
The most interesting aspect is how informing breeds informing, which breeds informing and so on, in what can be a time-consuming loop.
Sometimes this is appropriate and necessary.
At other times the loop amounts to going round in circles and not getting anywhere fast.
The reason why people often prolong the informing loop is because it is a relatively ‘safe’ way to pass the time.
When you offer a piece of information, you don't commit yourself in quite the same way that you do when you propose or suggest an idea.
The lesson from all this?
Simply that the behaviours you use have known shaping effects on the behaviours you get back from other people.
The data underline the fact that you are more likely to succeed with people if you think about your behaviour and select and use behaviours that help rather than hinder progress towards your objective.
This process is enhanced still further if you adopt visual behaviours which reinforce the things you are saying.
It is the combination of verbal and visual that has the desired effect.
For guidance on non-verbal behaviours see page 116.
Win-win
Win-win describes one of three possible outcomes from a transaction between people.
The other two are lose-lose and win-lose.
A win-win outcome is where all parties involved are successful in achieving their objectives.
Clearly this is most difficult to achieve when people's objectives are in conflict, but even then, with skill, a win-win can be secured.
The key behaviours that, even in the most difficult circumstance, make a win-win outcome more likely are:
being open about your objective, what you hope to achieve
encouraging the other people involved to reciprocate by being equally open about their objectives
exploring different objectives for common ground
suggesting common objectives in an even-handed way, ie that favour what they want to achieve at least as much as what you want to achieve.
In addition the eight key behaviours typical of successful negotiators (see Negotiating on page 113) are all relevant to achieving a win-win outcome.
Here is an example of win-win behaviour overheard, coincidentally whilst writing this section, as my four-year-old son, James, played with a friend.
James: ‘I'm the leader.’
Mark: ‘No.
I'm the leader.’
James: ‘I want to be the leader.’
Mark: ‘No.
You said I could be the leader.’
pause
James: ‘I know!
Let's both be the leader.’
Mark: ‘How could we do that?’
James: ‘You be the leader in front and I'll be the leader behind.’
Mark: ‘OK.’
Worry
Worry is an unwanted feeling that frequently spills over into behaviour.
Fortunately worry is a preventable feeling but it is vital to read the section on Preventing unwanted feelings (on page 138) before reading the remainder of this section because what follows assumes you have understood the two options involved.
Unproductive worry hinders your behaviour in a variety of ways.
All or some of the following might apply to you:
You can't settle to anything.
You flit butterfly-like from one activity to the next.
You overeat, smoke, drink, bite your nails etc.
You don't give your best.
You become tense, short-tempered and irritable with other people.
You procrastinate.
You become accident prone.
You sleep badly.
You become physically ill (ie get ulcers, headaches, tummy upsets).
Your worry is always triggered by some external event or happening.
Typical examples might be when:
thinking about gloomy things over which you have no direct control (ie the economy, wars, famine, natural disasters, getting older, dying).
people close to you engage in dangerous/risky activities (eg mountaineering, riding a motorcycle, flying).
you are waiting (eg for someone overdue to come home, to go into the dentist).
before going to any big event where you are not sure you will be able to cope (eg to an interview, to a meeting, to a party, to an exam).
you have pains in the chest, lumps in your breast, shortage of breath etc.
you do something new/unfamiliar.
Clearly, ideas for changing the events that trigger your worry will depend on the exact circumstances, but here are some thought-starters that might help you to arrive at a feasible plan:
Keep a worry log and when you have found out what worries you, plan to avoid it.
Keep a list of things you worry about and analyse it from time to time to see what your worrying changed.
Plan your day so that you have too much to do.
Being busy is one of the best antidotes to worry.
Cut down your waiting time or if this isn't possible keep busy while you wait.
Each time you start to worry say to yourself ‘What action can I take right now to alleviate my fears?’
If you can think of something do it.
If you can't think of anything at least realize the futility of your worrying.
Deliberately force yourself to do something you worried about.
You will find it isn't nearly so bad as you expected!
Allocate a specific time each day as your ‘worry time’.
You'll find it extraordinarily difficult to find anything to worry about.
Rather than modify anything to do with the external events that trigger your worry you might decide to go for option 2 and identify the thoughts or beliefs that herald your worry and examine them for  possible replacements.
Typical thoughts for feelings of worry are:
Wouldn't it be terrible if such and such happened?
I'm sure they have met with an accident.
I fear the worst.
It's sure to crash.
I know I won't be able to cope.
I'm sure I have got cancer/heart disease.
It's only natural to worry.
I care, so I worry.
And, finally, here are some thought-starters on ways of replacing unrealistic thoughts and beliefs that provoke feelings of worry so that they become more realistic and less likely to hinder your behaviour:
Worrying doesn't change anything.
What action can I take right now ?
In 100 years time my worries will be of no consequence.
What is the worst possible thing that could happen?
What is the likelihood?
No news is good news!
Nothing can make me worry.
I choose to worry!
Why worry?