

A Method for Information Systems Enquiry
Introduction
When embarking on a study that addresses the information needs of an organisation it is often difficult for the project leader to ensure that the project is both cost-effective and comprehensive.
Large or small organisations may comprise a variety of functional groups, some undertaking essentially manual tasks (eg assembling or manufacturing components), others involved with sales, marketing, costing etc, and others with indirect support work such as typing, filing, and the distribution of correspondence.
Each function requires information to operate, and produces information for others to use.
The information base is diverse and complex, and, to the outsider, can be difficult to understand and difficult to investigate in any structured or systematic way.
As a consequence, there is either a tendency to overcompensate and carry out too much fact-finding in a rather loose fashion, or to simply focus on specific information processes with a view to introducing new technology.
In neither case does a clear picture emerge of the true value of any improvements in relation to the the organisation as a whole, and often the analyst is left with an uncomfortable feeling that more could have been achieved if the situation had been approached more methodically.
The Method for Information Systems Enquiry, known colloquially as MINSE by the research project team, specifically addresses the problem of structuring the approach to information studies.
It uses systems thinking to develop ideas about what information is needed to achieve a defined purpose, ideas that are independent in the first instance of how this information appears in practice.
In the process an information model is built up on a computer database which is then used as a framework to explore the situation and identify problems at a number of levels (Fig 11.1).
At the outset, it also considers issues within the organisation that may indicate areas of potential improvement.
MINSE has been developed using unsophisticated database software, software that is generally affordable and available to most practitioners, and does not require any depth of knowledge or training.
In the sense that it is an enquiry method, this is considered sufficient; extending the analysis to produce a comprehensive information model of an  organisation is possible, but this would require the use of additional software and then becomes a more specialised operation.
However, the principles are the same regardless of the extent that MINSE is applied, and only the purpose of the investigation will determine the depth of analysis needed and the amount of resources that are worth employing.
This chapter describes the research project that was carried out to develop the method.
Like the FAOR Field Trial (Chapt 10) it took place in an establishment that was under the control of a Social Services Department.
This establishment, a residential home for the elderly, was chosen deliberately because of its multifunctional nature, operating in effect as a self-contained enterprise, responsible ultimately to the parent department but encouraged to manage its own affairs on a day-to-day basis.
In addition to fulfilling its primary function (ie providing support for elderly persons in a residential setting), the manager is also concerned with all the financial aspects of the home; with equipment purchases, catering, maintenance of premises and gardens; deploying staff, accounting for their time and arranging appropriate payments; resolving personnel matters, and so on.
In other words, the overall management of an organisation that is in many ways similar to a small hotel or guest house, where most of the guests are extremely frail elderly people.
This multifunctional environment was considered suitable for developing a method that would be equally applicable to a wide range of organisations, albeit with totally different business objectives.
Overview of the Method
MINSE was developed from the hypothesis that ideas about information needs can be derived from an agreed systems model that reflects the primary purpose of an  organisation, expressed as the transformation in the root definition of the system.
The information needs would be identified by taking the model through various stages of decomposition until such time as it is possible to define the information requirements of each activity that contributes to the transformation.
Once the systemic information base has been clarified, this would be used as a template to explore, and where necessary improve, aspects of the actual information base of the organisation.
MINSE makes full use of the SSM stages as summarised in Fig 11.2.
A series of interviews is carried out to clarify relevant factors about the organisation, which are then analysed and illustrated in a rich picture.
After discussions with the client, a neutral viewpoint is selected as the basis for a root definition and conceptual model.
The model is progressively decomposed until the lowest order of activities can be identified, at which point the information needs of each activity are listed.
A standard database application (eg SMART on the IBM PC, WORKS or JAZZ on the Macintosh etc) is then used to record and code each information need by type (eg Financial Information — FI, Personnel Information — PI, and so on).
Further codes are added to indicate the functional groups that use the information, the source and/or destination of the information item, and whether it is generated from within the system, or received from an external source.
The analysis reveals the information that could or should exist if the model is a fair reflection of the real world activity.
Using the database sorting facilities to regroup the information as required, it is then possible to explore the actual information base of the organisation in a number of ways.
For example, to:
a.
Examine a particular category of information where there appears to be a problem.
b.
Concentrate on a particular activity or function that uses a variety of information types, but where it is considered that some improvement is needed.
c.
Investigate the communication of information between all or selected functions.
The Research Project
A project to research the method was undertaken over a period of approximately one year on a part-time basis; at various stages a number of different practitioners from management services disciplines were involved, each receiving some informal training on the principles and practice of soft systems analysis.
Overview of the Organisation
In the United Kingdom, local authority Elderly Persons Homes (EPHs) provide residential accommodation for elderly people who can no longer manage in their own homes.
There are similar facilities provided by the private sector, but, in terms of the number of residents, these are generally smaller than the local authority Homes where the average size at the time of the study was around 48 beds.
In recent years there has been a tremendous drive to keep elderly persons in their own homes for as long as possible, by giving close support to relatives and friends and by providing support from community services such as home helps and ‘meals-on-wheels’.
As a consequence, elderly persons entering residential accommodation tend to be more physically and mentally dependent than in the past, and the type of support needed is similar to that given in a nursing home, rather than a guest house or private hotel.
Working in an EPH, either as a member of staff or as a consultant analyst, can be a moving and traumatic experience, and is far removed from more typical analysis work in office and business situations.
Staff are dedicated to their work  and generally regard it as vocational, having to cope with frail and sometimes difficult people in their declining years, and, on occasions, the reality of death.
In these circumstances the analyst cannot help becoming involved, particularly if he or she has elderly relatives in similar situations, and it is sometimes difficult to retain objectivity.
It is also necessary to recognise the fact that the organisation is the home of the residents, and their dignity and privacy must be respected and given priority over analytical considerations whenever necessary.
The nature of the organisation and the staff it employs tends to lead to a greater commitment to any investigation and subsequent changes, particularly if it is felt that they could eventually benefit the residents.
In this type of situation, once a study is underway and the initial reservations are overcome, staff tend to talk freely to the analysts and there is a high level of client participation in all stages of the exercise.
The Organisation Structure
By way of background information, some EPHs operate with a hierarchical structure of an Officer-in-charge (ie the manager) with 3 assistant officers, one of whom would be appointed as the Senior Assistant and act as deputy for the Officer-in-charge when required.
Care Assistants are employed to provide direct support to the residents with such matters as toileting, dressing, washing and so on, supervised by a Senior Care Assistant.
Cleaning and other domestic duties are carried out by Domestic Assistants, and every EPH has cooking staff, clerical support, and help with gardening and building maintenance, generally provided by a gardener/handyman.
The structure is summarised in Fig 11.3.
The EPH which featured in the MINSE project provides residential facilities for more than sixty elderly people, some in advanced stages of dependency, and it is in full-time operation throughout the year.
It also offers a limited number of places for the elderly in the community to attend as day clients.
The Officer-in-charge (OIC) is under the line control of the local Social Work Area Office, but is semi-autonomous with regard to the day to day running of the EPH.
The type of work undertaken in the EPH and the functional groups responsible can be summarised as follows:
Management and personnel matters — OIC and Assistant Officers.
General administration and clerical work — officers and clerical assistant.
Care of the residents and day clients — officers and care assistants.
Cleanliness of accommodation and offices — domestic assistants (supervised by officers/Senior Care Assistant).
Catering and food preparation — cooks (supervised by officers).
Routine maintenance of buildings and gardens — gardener/handyman.
Stage 1 — Exploring the Situation
The first stage of the process involves a conventional fact-finding exercise, where representative staff are interviewed to determine views about the purpose of the organisation, the role of the staff, and any problems that are pertinent to the study.
The interviews are then analysed, using the database analysis technique described in Chapter 5, and a summary of the situation prepared as a rich picture.
This is used to develop ideas about relevant systems and construct a neutral conceptual model, which is then expanded to identify activities and related information.
Information Collection and Analysis
At the outset of the research project, after initial discussions with the Officer-in-charge, a formal briefing was given to all staff explaining the aims of the project and the approach to be taken, giving the opportunity for any questions to be raised.
The reaction at the meeting was rather subdued, but at the subsequent interviews most staff expressed their views freely about the way the EPH operated and the purpose that it served.
It was noticeable that many of them made emotive comments  when addressing this question (for example, ‘a last resort ’, or ‘a place for old people to go when nobody else wants them ’), a reflection possibly of their personal involvement with the residents of the home and concern for their well-being.
The interview analysis, a process that invariably requires a great deal of judgment on the part of the analyst, was even more difficult as a result, particularly when attempting to derive an uncontentious root definition at a later stage.
Nonetheless, the examination helped to focus attention on relevant facts and issues about the situation, although drawing the rich picture was quite difficult, and there was the usual tendency to include too much detail.
An extract from the picture is shown in Fig 11.4.
The early pictures were drawn on a flip chart with the help of staff from the home, and later reconstructed using computer graphics.
The picture highlighted amongst other things the perceived role of the EPH, differences of opinion between members of staff about the value of existing information and the manner of communication, and the general consensus of opinion that the operation was a success if residents are happy (shown as ‘smiling faces’ in the illustration).
The picture also served as a useful summary or overview of the whole EPH situation, reflecting its position in the surrounding community, liaison links with social workers and relatives of the clients, and its relationship with the area office and the department headquarters.
The views of residents were also taken into account, following informal conversations in the course of the study with those who were able to understand what was happening and were willing to voice an opinion.
Constructing the Model
As in most studies using the SSM, the development of the root definition was a difficult and lengthy process.
Although it is easy to observe what is going on in practice, constructing an explicit statement of what the system is that is being considered inevitably gives rise to problems of interpretation and semantics.
The nature of this particular situation added an emotional element that made the task even more difficult, and many subjective statements were made about the transformation, statements that appeared to reflect the concern of the analysts for the recipients of the service (for instance,making old people comfortable in their last few years , and providing caring services for terminally old people ).
Eventually, after prolonged discussion, the following was agreed as a working definition:
‘A system owned by the Area Organiser (O)—(ie the Social Services officer responsible for the area, using the ownership hierarchy theory explained in Chapter 5), operated by officers and staff of the EPH, other designated Social Services officers, associated staff of the District Health Authority, relatives and friends of clients (A), which uses given resources to provide a congenial dwelling place for referred elderly people (C), within which the individual needs for physical and emotional support are determined and met (T).
The system also identifies and meets the needs of elderly people in temporary attendance as day clients (C), and is continually subject to the constraints of the local authority and other statutory regulations (E).’
The W assumed was a neutral one, ie reflecting a public or common viewpoint.
The first-resolution conceptual model shown in Fig 11.5 was then constructed from this root definition.
Consideration was then given to the requirements of the formal systems model, eg the relationships between the system components (taken in this case to be information flows), the resources needed for the system to operate, and how the system would be regulated and controlled.
At this high level, it was only possible to make a broad assessment of these requirements, and further ideas were developed as the study progressed to lower levels of detail.
Each sub-system of the model was given a decimal code so that an audit trail could be established for the subsequent detailed analysis.
As a matter of procedure, it was agreed that all the monitoring and control components of the model would be given the suffix ‘.1’, whereas all other components would be numbered in a  convenient order, ie depending on their place in the diagram, rather than annotated to indicate a logical sequence of events.
It is normally impossible to display all the components of an expanded system model in the same plane (without using the whole wall of an office!), so they were also shown as a hierarchical scalar, an example of which is given in Fig 11.6.
Expanding the Model
To progress the analysis to the level at which activities could be identified, a root definition was developed for each sub-system in turn, and a second-level conceptual model constructed.
Taking sub-system 1.7 for example, the lower order systems needed to provide full board catering for residents, and occasional meals for day-clients were considered, and the second-level model shown in Fig 11.7 was constructed.
Each component of these models was then expanded in the same manner to identify the associated activities.
To avoid losing control of the analysis process it was necessary to list the activities in tabular form as well as show them diagrammatically (Fig 11.7).
For example, the activities associated with sub-system 1.7 were listed as:
1.7.1
Monitor and Control
1.7.1.1
Ensure hygiene
1.7.1.2
Ensure nutrition
1.7.1.3
Obtain feedback
1.7.1.4
Take control action
1.7.2
Obtaining (ingredients)
1.7.2.1
Prepare menus
1.7.2.2
Determine ingredients/supplies needed
1.7.2.3
Determine source of supplies
1.7.2.4
Obtain ingredients
1.7.3
Delivering (meals)
1.7.3.1
Prepare food
1.7.3.2
Cook and serve
1.7.3.3
Clean up
In the case of the MINSE project, where the intention was to record activities on a computer database, this also served to validate the codes given to each item before entering them into the computer.
Identifying Related Information
Having identified the activities associated with the sub-systems, it was then possible to start considering what information was relevant to the performance of each activity.
To illustrate this, consider what information is needed by, or produced from, the activity preparing menus (1.7.2.1), such as:
The number of residents requiring meals each day
The number of day clients taking meals on a day-by-day basis
The food preferences of residents and day clients
Residents' dietary needs
The number of meals required at each meal session
Budgetary provision for catering
Availability of ingredients
Sources of food supplies
Cooking instructions, etc
The most difficult part of the exercise, apart from handling the sheer volume of data that was being produced, was deciding what was meant by ‘monitor and control’ for each system element, and then drawing out the related information.
There is a tendency for analysts to add monitor and control to system models almost as an afterthought, just to meet the requirements of the formal model.
Experience has shown that many real situations are lacking in mechanisms for monitoring what is going on, and taking the necessary control action when the required standards aren't being met.
Ergo, developing ideas about measures of performance, feedback and control mechanisms is arguably the most important and potentially productive part of the exercise.
As a rule of thumb, this element in the main system model can be considered as monitoring the performance of the system as a whole (for example, ensuring that residents are happily domiciled and day clients receive appropriate support), and setting, then maintaining, the standards of each sub-system (Fig 11.8).
This idea of a hierarchy of control allows the analyst to focus on each element in turn, and derive ideas about monitoring and controlling at various levels.
With regard to the performance of the catering sub-system (1.7.1), this indicated the requirement for information such as the following before adequate control could be achieved, together with mechanisms for feedback on the extent that standards are complied with:
Required standards and practices for hygiene and safety in the kitchen.
Cleaning standards for the kitchen.
Standards and practices for freezing and defrosting food.
Information on balanced meals for the elderly.
Nutritional standards.
Spending constraints, ie budgetary control information.
It is also worth noting that, as the analysts became immersed in the detailed examination, there was a tendency to forget that this was still part of the systems thinking stage , and that the models, activities and related information needs were those that were desirable in systems terms, and not did not necessarily reflect the real situation.
The conceptual line between the systems world and the real world was crossed at a later stage when the information model was used to explore what was actually happening in practice.
Using the Database
The idea of using standard (ie flat-file) database software arose from the earlier experiments with interview analysis.
It became obvious as the system model was expanded to activity and then information level that the volume of data produced was becoming impossible to handle and comprehend using manual methods only.
An impression of the extent of expansion and subsequent volume of data can be gathered from the illustration in Fig 11.9, which also summarises the stages of the exercise up to this point.
The software utilised for the interview analysis (ie JAZZ) operated quite successfully on the semi-portable (luggable?)
Macintosh Plus, which could be taken on site to encourage the full participation of the client group.
In the absence of more sophisticated software, and taking account of the desirability of direct client involvement, it was decided to try and make use of the same programme for record-keeping and analysis.
(Having the Macintosh on site also helped to establish a good rapport with the EPH staff, who occasionally commandeered it to help with administrative work, rewarding the project team with small tokens of appreciation, such as cups of tea and bacon sandwiches!)
In a similar manner to the interview analysis technique, a record was set up on the database for each activity using the numerical codes as an identifier, and a second field used to type in all information needed or produced by that activity.
These were first written down in draft form, then refined on input to the database.
An example of the database is shown in Fig 11.10.
As with most research projects covering unfamiliar ground, it was not clear at the time how this would help the subsequent investigation, but it met the immediate need to record the results in a concise and tidy manner.
The next stage therefore was to consider how this large systemic information base could help in exploring and understanding what was happening in practice, and how to link the system activities with the functional groupings that existed in the EPH.
Coding by Type
After detailed examination of the information fields, it was felt that it would be possible to categorise them by type as a basis for selecting areas for further study.
For example, many of the system components made use of, or generated, information about residents — their names, their preferences, their current state of health, and so on .
In the real situation, assuming that the model was a reasonable reflection of the real-world activities, this information would be used by a variety of functional groups, and an investigation without a master checklist would be complex and potentially inaccurate.
Grouping all resident-related information would provide this checklist for probing the availability, quality, and communication of the actual information about residents in the EPH.
Accordingly, all the records in the information field were scrutinised, and coded to one of the following categories:
RI
Resident Information
FI
Financial Information
PI
Personnel Information
CI
Catering Information
AI
Accommodation Information
EI
Equipment Information
Certain information within these main categories was considered to be primarily concerned with monitoring and control activities, and, where this could be specifically identified at this stage, it was coded accordingly (ie COI).
The EPH information types are summarised in Fig 11.11.
Coding by Functional Group
To make the link between the activities, information and functional groups, further fields were added so that the possible users of the information could be identified.
This effectively established a matrix on the database (Fig 11.10) so that an annotation could be made to indicate whether each item of information,in relation to the activity described , was relevant to the functional groups that existed in the EPH, ie the Officers (OICs), Clerical Assistant (Clerk), Care Assistants (CA), Domestic Assistants (DA), the Cook, and the Gardener/handyman (Gdnr).
The annotations ‘x’ and ‘o’(relevant or not relevant respectively) provided the basis for an alphabetical sort within each functional category.
Coding by Source/Destination
The most difficult part of the process was attempting to identify information links between the system components, ie the source of information required by the activity, and the destination of the information produced.
The use of Net Theory, often called ‘Petri nets’ after its initiator C A Petri (Introduction to Net Theory — Brauer 1980) was considered, but discarded as being too specialised to meet one of the research project aims, ie to produce an enquiry method that could be used by practitioners with the minimum of training.
Consequently, simple codes were devised and entered in separate fields to indicate, in broad terms, the source or destination of information items.
The codes used are summarised in Fig 11.13;internal in this instance referred to any activity within the EPH system model, and external to those of the wider system of interest or surrounding environment, eg the Department headquarters, Area Offices etc.
At this point, the limitations of the database were realised, ie whenever information was received from, or transferred to, more than one system component, it was necessary to add one additional record to the database for each source/destination.
This in turn made it necessary to repeat the entry for all related activities, causing a great deal of duplication of records.
From this it was concluded that, although the principles of identifying systemic information links by this method appeared sound and it could be achieved to a limited extent by using the facilities of a flat-file database, it would not be cost-effective to pursue without access to more sophisticated technology.
Sorting Options
To summarise, at this point in the analysis the database had been set up listing all activities considered systemically desirable to achieve the transformation defined by the root definition, identified by description and by code.
Against each activity the information required for successful operation, or produced during the activity, had been listed.
To this database had been added further codes to indicate the type or  category of information, the functional groups in the EPH using it, and its source or destination.
This exercise established the potential for sorting the database in a variety of ways, for example:
by activity
by category
by functional group
by source or destination (subject to the limitations explained earlier)
Further sorting within these primary groups was also possible, for instance to bring together specific categories of information (eg FI, RI) within the ordered list of activities , and so on.
It was later found to be useful to set up separate databases for each functional group, which prevented earlier versions of the full database being corrupted as experiments in sorting and producing reports were carried out.
Data Validation
Before moving on to make use of the database, it was necessary to assess whether or not the data itself was valid for the organisation being studied, bearing in mind that so far the exercise had been a systems-thinking one, rather than a study of what was happening in practice.
The validation was carried out by first producing in report format a list of activities and associated information that appeared relevant to each functional group, then asking questions of selected staff on the basis of this list.
As a result, it was possible to draw certain conclusions:
1.
The systemic information base was of a general nature, and did not indicate the form or usage of the actual information objects in the EPH.
After some discussion it was realised that this was a what/how problem, ie the analysis had revealed what information was needed, but not how it appeared in practice (see also page 188).
Although this meant that the investigation required a further step to make the link with what was happening in practice, it also implied that the systemic information base would remain valid even if changes took place to the form of the actual information items.
2.
Some systemically-desirable information, although part of the wider system, was not relevant to the actual activities carried out in the EPH.
For example, the analysis indicated that domestic staff should be deployed on the basis of information about the cleaning areas of rooms in the establishment, but deployment was actually based on the experience of the officers, tempered by such considerations as staff availability and custom and practice.
However, the domestic staffing levels overall had originally been calculated using room areas as an indicator of workload, confirming the validity of this information in terms of the wider system, although not related to the EPH activities.
3.
There were noticeable omissions in some areas, primarily those concerned with administrative tasks.
This was considered to be due to the limited involvement of the officers and the clerical assistant in certain parts of the analysis.
The MINSE approach requires a detailed investigation which moves beyond the intuition of the analyst, and can therefore only be accurate with a continual input of local expertise which was obviously missing during some of the phases of the research project.
4.
In many respects, the level of detail appeared too fine for an organisation where most internal communication was of an informal nature, and unlikely to be suitable for enhancement by electronic means.
Conversely, where there is potential for electronic improvement to a particular process or activity, the analysis could provide the basis for identifying the relationships necessary for setting up a suitable system.
At this point it was obvious that there were some shortcomings in the manner of carrying out the analysis, but these were due to the research nature of the project and the consequent inexperience of the project team.
There were no indications that the original hypothesis was incorrect (ie that the information requirements of an organisation could be derived by the progressive decomposition of a primary task model), and the study entered the next phase of deciding how the information base could be used in practice.
Using the Information
Having achieved a reasonably acceptable summary of information needs, there was a great deal of head scratching and heated discussion about how this could or should be used.
The method is designed to help analysts to make enquiries about how well the information requirements are met in practice, so that areas of potential improvement can be highlighted.
However, the size of the database resulted in some confusion as to the best way to proceed with the enquiry, and the next few stages were undertaken on a trial and error basis.
The lessons learned from these trials are considered in the following paragraphs.
Activity Comparison
Even without rearranging the order of the records in the database, it was considered possible to use them to examine the actual organisation in a manner similar to that of the comparison stage of the SSM, ie by listing all activities and posing questions about their existence and effectiveness in the real situation, at the same time considering information-related problems.
On this basis the earlier validation exercise was extended and further questions of the form ‘When you carry out activity A, B, C etc, is this information available/produced ?’ were prepared.
The subsequent interviews reinforced the view that the detail of the information base was too fine in its original form to be the basis of searching questions, and some summation was found to be necessary to avoid redundancy, or posing questions that could insult the intelligence of the interviewee.
For example, rather than cover item by item the information given to new residents and staff with questions such as ‘Do you tell them where the post office/bed room/toilet/ etc is ?’, it was necessary to ask the broader question of ‘What information is given to newcomers ?’, resulting in a discussion about an informative brochure that everybody received on arrival at the EPH.
The process of asking questions about the whole range of EPH activities, although revealing a number of minor problems, was eventually discontinued because of the time involved in trying to cover all aspects of the database.
After further experimentation, it became obvious that the analysis had to be more specifically targeted.
This was achieved by utilising the sorting facilities of the database to focus the direction of the study on areas where there seemed to be potential for improvement.
Exploring by Type
It was subsequently agreed that the examination would address information needs by type , ie to concentrate on one or more categories where there appeared to be a problem, as indicated by the earlier interviews with staff and the issues reflected in the rich picture.
Accordingly, a report was prepared from the database listing all information by type, and discussions held with the OIC to determine a priority order for further study.
As a guide to these priorities, a summary of the comments made about each type was prepared in matrix-format, showing also the main information category for each sub-system and the importance of each sub-system in relation to the primary role of the EPH Fig 11.14).
To prove the point that this is not an exact science, although the issues illustrated in the rich picture indicated some general concern about the need for more information on residents, leading to the conclusion that the RI category would be a good place to start, the OIC's main concern initially was the lack of accurate information about how to make sure that residents received their full entitlement of equipment (some W's can be more relevant than others — see Chapter 5!).
After further discussion it was agreed that, due to the complexities of the regulations surrounding financial transactions, and the obligation to make regular returns to the headquarters about financial matters, investigation of the FI category seemed to offer the most potential for improvement.
Consequently, although the team did not wish to limit their investigations to one category only, it was agreed to examine financial matters first, and then review priorities for subsequent study.
Financial Information Category
To investigate the FI category, the database was first rearranged to separate out the FI items, which were then listed by functional group.
This allowed a number of questions to be to be formulated from the activity lists (Fig 11.15) for discussion with all those persons in the EPH dealing with financial matters, the answers being noted on a separate formatted sheet.
The questioning process was essentially undertaken in two stages; the analysis had indicated what information was required or produced, and it was first necessary to check whether this was the case in practice.
If this was verified, further questions were posed about how the information appeared, and if it was acceptable.
At either stage, if there was considered to be a problem, then it was noted for later discussion.
For example, the analysis indicated that information about establishing and maintaining accounts was necessary in support of the finance function.
If a related question (eg ‘Have you received any training or instruction in setting up or keeping accounts ’) resulted in a negative answer, then this could be pursued further to find a way of improving the situation; for example by arranging for accounting instructions to be held at the EPH, or by ensuring that newcomers received formal or informal training in accounting procedures, and so on.
However, if such information was available at the outset, further questions would be asked to determine if the form of the information could be improved by manual or other methods (Fig 11.16).
This exercise revealed that, although there were problems with the availability of information to support the finance function, generally these were outside the control of the OIC.
For example, there was some confusion over a recent policy decision to allow OICs greater autonomy in the use and administration of their budgets, without any clear guidelines as to what this meant in practice, or when it would take effect.
Most of the difficulties with the financial category were of this nature, and consequently not within the power of the defined problem-owner for this situation.
Similarly, certain information produced by the finance function for external agencies (eg weekly returns of staff working hours for payment purposes) caused problems, but in most cases the form and frequency were already prescribed.
Within the EPH, the necessary information about internal financial matters was readily available to authorised staff, and all associated records were held in a tidy and methodical manner.
However, it was noted that the processing of financial data was laborious (eg budgetary calculations, recording the receipt and issue of residents' cash etc) and could possibly be improved in some way.
In other words, the exercise had revealed a number of difficulties associated with what information was needed or produced, but these were not under local control.
With regard to how the information appeared in practice, there appeared to be little potential for improvement, except where information or data was subject to routine processing.
It was noted that a number of forms and procedures had been devised by the Clerical Assistant and the OIC, and it was considered possible that the analysis might have been more revealing in other establishments where the approach to administrative work was not so methodical.
Resident Information Category
After further discussion, a similar exercise was carried out based on the RI category, with the results also indicating that most internal information storage and transfer needs were met within the EPH in an effective manner.
As reflected in the original rich picture, there were concerns about the routine handover of information  about the day-to-day condition of residents, and it was obvious that the process of keeping records for a large number of residents was an arduous manual task, indicating that some gains in efficiency might be possible by the introduction of computer support.
Furthermore, when considering what information was produced for outside agencies, the aggregation of statistics on such matters as resident dependency levels seemed to offer some potential for improvement.
Other Information Categories
The FI and RI categories represented the largest proportion of information needs within the EPH, and specific question lists of the other categories were not prepared at this stage.
However, the initial investigation had revealed that there was some potential for the use of a computer to support the primary functions (ie identifying and meeting resident needs), which in addition could be used to support other tasks, such as processing financial transactions and records.
This was obviously an issue that could have affected other EPHs, and, after consultation  with the OIC and the responsible officers at the department headquarters, it was agreed to pursue the development of a user requirement that would reflect the needs of this establishment and others within the local authority as a whole.
Development of a User Requirement
In the course of the MINSE project, comments had also been made to the effect that, although OICs were able to purchase a microcomputer if there were sufficient funds available, little thought had been given to how these might be applied, or to the staff training needs.
As a consequence, limited use was made of the microcomputers that were already installed in other EPHs, and it appeared that many officers were dissatisfied with the situation.
These views gave additional weight to the argument that the MINSE analysis should address the issue of defining how a computer could support the organisational objectives.
The initial examination of the requirement was based on the categories derived in the earlier analysis, which produced some tentative conclusions about the type of records that could be held on a computer, and the potential advantages that could be gained.
ft was then necessary to review the work carried out so far, which, due to the extensive coding exercise and sheer size of the database, was making it difficult to ‘see the wood for the trees’.
Eventually it was realised that a number of other conclusions could be drawn from the analysis which were relevant to the development or selection of a computer system, such as:
The activities required for successful operation of the EPH were known, and, based on the acquired knowledge of the EPH environment, those activities that were suitable for computer support could, in consultation with the client, be identified with reasonable accuracy.
The information needed, or produced, by each activity was also known, and could form the basis of the records to be held on any computer system.
If required, the activities could be prioritised on the basis of whether they were primary, secondary, support or control activities, providing the basis for the evaluation of any proposed systems.
(This was a similar exercise to that carried out during the study of the Adult Training Centres described in Chapter 10, where a weighting was given to software depending on the relative value of the functions that it could support.)
In other words, by careful examination of the database it was possible to assess and list the processes that could be supported by a computer system, and identify broadly the associated information.
As a result of this and an examination to collect volumetric data about the main EPH records and procedures, a draft user requirement was prepared, showing the potential for computer support and the likely costs of the options for system development.
Apart from the functional advantages, cost-justification was obviously an important consideration.
The investigation had revealed that, due to low activity  rates, an EPH would gain only limited benefits from computer support of isolated functions, and it was necessary to exploit the relationships that existed between the functions so that an integrated package could be developed.
For instance the names of residents were used not only for personal records, but also for certain financial accounts, and for day-to-day tasks such as preparing menus and issuing medicines; the statistics about the dependency levels of residents were periodically collated from individual records and passed to the headquarters, and so on.
The source/ destination codes added to the database during the MINSE analysis gave a fair indication of these relationships, and were used informally during the initial evaluation of software packages.
This supported the earlier conclusion that the use of a more sophisticated software during the analysis phase would have been beneficial by allowing the relationships to be properly charted.
After the user requirement had been produced, and the options for system development had been considered, it was agreed that it would be most cost-effective if suitable applications software could be identified, which would also reduce the time required for installation.
Initially, two application packages were examined, both of which had been developed for privately run EPHs and emphasised the medical aspects of residential care.
Neither of these packages were entirely suitable for the operation of local authority establishments, and some customisation was considered necessary before the requirement could be met in full.
However, to avoid unnecessary delays in meeting the expectations of the staff, and to keep development work and associated costs to a minimum, agreement was obtained to carry out pilot studies of these packages in two EPHs, ie the one involved in the MINSE project and another of similar size.
As a result, a computer was installed in the EPH where the research was carried out shortly after the project was completed, which, being suitable for general administrative tasks such as wordprocessing, had the additional benefit of providing some immediate reward for the efforts of the staff who assisted with the analysis.
Conclusions
The primary aim of the project was to undertake research into the theory that the soft systems approach could be used to identify and explore the information needs of an organisation.
In this respect the exercise was a valuable learning experience, and showed once again that there is sometimes a tremendous gap to be crossed between the theory and the practice of soft systems ideas.
The analysts encountered many problems in the process of bridging this gap, but each problem was addressed in turn and an appropriate solution found, generally by making imaginative use of computer software to record and manipulate the mass of data that was produced as the analysis progressed.
In retrospect, the research might have been easier in a situation with fewer functional elements, as a great deal of time and effort was directed at trying to tabulate the information links between the system components and construct a comprehensive information model.
However, by applying the theory in the first instance to a complex situation the limitations of the  software being used were highlighted, from which the obvious conclusions could be drawn.
Even in these circumstances the approach provided a deep insight into the information needs of the organisation, and revealed a considerable number of potential improvements, some of which were implemented in the course of the study and others that were addressed in the longer term.
The most tangible outcome of the MINSE research project was the user requirement for computer support of EPHs, which, arguably, could have been produced using a more conventional approach.
However, this resulted from an improved understanding of how certain information handling functions supported the organisation's objectives, rather than from a deliberate intention to introduce a computer to the situation.
In the course of the exercise a great deal of knowledge had been gained about EPH activities and associated problems, and various other changes were made as a result of the investigation.
For instance the responsibilities of the four officers were rearranged to reflect the structure of the first resolution conceptual model; the OIC personally addressed the issue of developing performance indicators for the system as a whole and the associated sub-systems; and measures were put in hand to improve the handover of information about residents between shifts.
These latter actions highlight an important aspect of the MINSE approach, ie it is not necessarily concerned with changes of a technological nature, but with any that result in improvements to the problem situation; furthermore, because of the continual participation of the people that the organisation depends on, it helps to ensure a firm commitment to those changes.
In conclusion, the main findings from the project can be summarised as:
A valid information model of an organisation can be compiled by adopting the MINSE approach.
Full client participation is essential to ensure accuracy when compiling the information model.
The model is generally used to assist with enquiries into the effectiveness of information provision, but could form the basis for an engineered system in appropriate circumstances (ie where a particular set of processes is being examined in detail).
The approach encourages both manual and technological improvements to be considered.
The manner of using the information model cannot be prescriptive, and will depend on the type of situation being studied
Imaginative use of the sorting and report facilities of a flat-file database can facilitate the analysis process.
It is not cost-effective to pursue the development of a full information model (ie showing communication links) using a flat-file database.
However, the addition of simple codes indicating the general source or destination of information can be of value
It is important that the analyst is aware of the what/how distinction in relation to information needs
Like other soft systems studies, it is a participative approach and encourages full commitment to changes.
Additionally, the level of detail achieved by the extended breakdown of the conceptual model could have been utilised to explore other aspects of the formal systems model (eg resource levels, control or communication issues and so on), or to examine matters such as the ideal groupings of systemically desirable tasks, an approach discussed further in Chapter 12.
As a final point it is worth reiterating that, although it takes a lot of time and intellectual effort to derive an acceptable information model using the MINSE approach, the model is independent of the actual form that the information takes in the real situation, and will remain valid until such time as the role of the organisation undergoes a fundamental change.
Investigating New Requirements
Introduction
It is not always possible to place soft systems studies into strict categories, such as those concerned with organisational analysis, defining user requirements and so on.
Frequently the analyst does not set out with one of these specific aims in mind, but just applies systems thinking to generate ideas, making use of these ideas in whatever way proves to be of value.
This same point was made earlier during the discussion of general applications, and examples were given of how it can assist with such things as planning, exploring relationships, putting particular aspects of an organisation into context, etc; in other words, using it as a basis for creative thinking and logical deduction.
In a similar manner, it can often help to provide an overview of situations that are being affected by changes, particularly where these changes will cause a significant disturbance to the stability of the existing system.
The effect of such disturbances on isolated parts of the organisation structure, individuals, resources etc may be obvious, but the overall effect and how the changes relate to current practices may not be so clear.
Systems thinking can help to put all new and existing factors into context, clarifying relationships and providing a baseline for deciding what action is needed to absorb the new requirements.
This chapter examines a study, where, at the outset, the analysts were not entirely clear what could be achieved by using soft systems analysis, but felt it would provide an overview of the situation, enabling ideas to be formulated about new relationships that would arise from a fundamental change in role.
The study was commissioned to examine the effect of the Education Reform Act (ERA) of 1988 on the non-teaching staff structures and responsibilities in certain Colleges of Further Education.
In brief, the Act gives increased powers of delegation to Local Authority Schools and Colleges to manage their own affairs, with far greater autonomy than in previous years.
It is the intention and the spirit of the Act to encourage them to be more accountable to their Boards of Governors, and, to a large extent, to become self-sufficient within the limits of their given finance and income generated by legitimate business activities.
The Local Education Authority would continue to provide some central support and advisory services and be responsible for corporate matters concerning further education, but in most other respects, functional control would be passed to the individual establishments.
The Act was implemented in April 1990, and all the Colleges affected progressively took over their own affairs from that date.
In the run-up to implementation there was naturally some concern, as it was obvious from the outset that changes would be required to accounting procedures and practices, personnel matters, and local control and management of resources.
What was less obvious was the effect on the system as a whole, which had evolved over a long period of time influenced by a variety of political and economical pressures, and not necessarily in a methodical manner.
A fresh look at the whole process was needed, and it was felt that this could be achieved by taking a systems view , unbiased by what was then happening in practice, ie before the Act took effect.
Overview of Approach
Although the brief for the study could be regarded as a loose one, the full SSM was not formally applied by moving deliberately through each of the SSM stages, although in retrospect there were many similarities.
A form of rich picture was drawn up following the initial investigations, but it was used mainly as a summary of the structures, staffing levels and other essentially static factors that existed in the situation, and not as the basis for selecting a relevant system.
The initial conceptual models were developed almost intuitively, based on the idea that, for a College to be self-sufficient, the income received must be at least equal to the cost of providing the further education courses at the required level.
This concept is illustrated by the equality paradigm shown in Fig 12.1, where the resources required to provide further education have been accurately defined and costed, the necessary finance obtained and used to purchase the resources, which in turn satisfy the needs for education.
From this starting point, a series of models were developed to determine what changes in practices would encourage Colleges to move towards a state of equilibrium in the new circumstances.
To do this, an ideal model based on the equality paradigm was constructed and then compared with a neutral model reflecting the further education system as it existed before the Act took effect.
These two models were compared, leading to a third model that showed what could happen once the Act was implemented.
It was hoped that this would reveal the differences to be taken into account when establishing a revised organisation structure, and also highlight the areas of opportunity to enable the Colleges to move towards the state implied by the ideal model.
The approach, which is explained in more detail in the following sections, is summarised in Fig 12.2.
Responsibilities and Roles
To put the discussion into context, responsibility for providing further education in the United Kingdom is divided between three hierarchical levels, with the central government Department of Education and Science having overall responsibility, which is devolved to Local Education Authorities (LEAs) each accountable for the education provision in specified geographical areas.
Delivery of the appropriate courses is the responsibility of specified Colleges, in accordance with the plan for the area; prior to implementation of the ERA, each was controlled in respect of staffing levels and general mode of operation by the parent LEA.
The majority of College finance is provided by central government grants, which are divided at local level into that required to provide central administrative and support services, and that used to finance the College operations, allocated on a pro-rata basis to individual establishments dependent on the level of course provision and student numbers.
This forms the bulk of the College budget , which can be supplemented by income generated by additional courses provided to meet specific demands, which in effect are outside the statutory requirements.
The System Models
The models illustrated in this chapter are based on those used during presentations to the staff of the Colleges involved in the studies.
As such, they are simplified versions of the working models used during the analysis, which became extremely complicated due to the interactivity between the components, usually represented as a series of inputs and outputs of relevant information.
They are also the end-product of a prolonged exercise where a variety of root definitions and conceptual models were developed, then discarded or amended as the analysis progressed.
The starting point was a description of a system that reflected the equality paradigm, ie showing the activities necessary to maintain equilibrium when providing further education.
At this stage it was not the intention to explore the real world on the basis of the model, but to use the model as a starting point for further development, and the analysts concentrated on specifying the transformation required, without too much concern about the system ownership, actors, etc.
After much discussion, the following transformation was agreed:
‘to obtain and organise resources at appropriate levels to deliver Further Education as required by statute and to meet local demand, unconstrained by financial considerations'
On this basis, a model was progressively developed that would:
a.
Allow finance to be equated to the resources needed to provide education at the required level (ie achieve equilibrium)
b.
Organise these resources to provide the appropriate courses.
Within this ideal model (Fig 12.3), the actual costs of providing education at the appropriate level would be calculated for both academic and non-academic resources (eg staff, equipment, facilities, services, etc).
On this basis the necessary funding would be obtained for ongoing conversion to resources at the correct levels.
Once resources have been obtained, they would be organised to provide the College curriculum, and ensure the necessary non-teaching support.
Although expressed simply, it is assumed that the necessary liaison takes place between the sub-systems of the model on matters of common interest.
In systems terms, there would also need to be mechanisms for taking control or corrective action based on defined measures of performance, related in this case to the effectiveness of education provision (ie ensuring that the curriculum delivered meets the defined education requirements), and to the accurate provision of resources.
It was realised, of course, that this ideal could never be achieved or sustained in practice, as precise information on resource needs is not easy to obtain, therefore accurate costs cannot be calculated.
Furthermore, even if it were possible to make the necessary calculations, the finance available is unlikely to be equivalent to these costs.
Consequently, resource levels may never fully satisfy the needs, and an imbalance between academic and non-academic staff, equipment, services, etc is inevitable.
However, the ideal could be pursued, which was the basis of the arguments that were considered at a later stage.
Pre-ERA System Model
The next step was to relate this model to what was then happening in practice, ie before the Act took effect.
This was achieved by developing a neutral model, based on the following CATWOE components:
C
recipients or students of further education
A
staff of the LEA headquarters, and College teaching/non-teaching staff
T
obtain and organise resources to deliver education at the appropriate level to meet statutory requirements and local demand
W
a primary task system
O
the LEA (ie on an ownership hierarchy basis)
E
influenced by central (ie headquarters) requirement to ensure parity of all Colleges in the geographical area of responsibility
The second model (Fig 12.4) illustrates a systemic view of the pre-ERA situation, assuming that, although the primary aim was to deliver education to meet statutory requirements and local needs, the provision of the necessary resources was constrained by limitations on finance, in turn influenced by the requirement to ensure parity of resources in all Colleges controlled by the LEA.
Consequently, the model excludes activities associated with making precise calculations of actual resource needs and costs, and reflects the use of weighted factors to determine instead the relative costs of courses, thus allowing the available finance to be allocated on an equitable basis to Colleges, and within Colleges, to Departments.
This provides the College budget, which, based on the local detailed plan for course provision, is converted into resources, constrained not only by finance, but also by central directives about staffing levels and grades, the use of support services etc, and the way the support services are organised and controlled.
The role of the Colleges in this situation was limited to one of service management , ie organisers and providers of the prescribed education using resources allocated by the LEA headquarters, with little flexibility to enhance levels or types of resource to meet shortfalls.
The division between the headquarters and the College responsibilities is shown as occurring between sub-systems 4.0 and 5.0 in the system model.
In this situation, where the fundamental requirement is to allocate available finance on an equitable basis to Colleges, it is unlikely that the system can achieve equilibrium.
However, prior to the Act taking effect, Colleges were effectively underwritten by the LEA, and an input of additional finance could normally be expected in the event of major shortfalls, compensating for any underlying inequality in the system.
The removal of this insurance was, of course, a significant factor in terms of developments, as the consequences of poor management in the future would have to be addressed at local level.
Post-ERA Models
There are certain obvious differences between the first two models, the most significant being the basis of their construction, ie the first is demand driven , relies on an accurate assessment of costs, and is not concerned with financial constraints; the second is constrained at the outset by the finance that is available, restricting resource levels regardless of the actual needs of Colleges.
Whilst accepting that this is an oversimplification of a process that includes a sophisticated method of calculating relative costs (ie the weighted factors), it nonetheless indicated how the further education process could be improved, assuming that Colleges could enhance their income level once the majority of constraints on local operations were removed.
However, fundamental changes were not inevitable, as it was quite possible to maintain the service management role for the foreseeable future, with Colleges obtaining and utilising resources in the manner previously prescribed and implemented.
In this event, the effect of greater delegation could lead to some enhancement of grades or levels of staff to recognise the increased responsibilities and workload associated with delegated budgets, personnel matters etc; commercial activities could be enhanced to increase income where possible, but not in true recognition of actual resource needs.
In broad terms, resource levels would continue to be based on the existing weighted factors.
The second, and potentially more successful development, would be for Colleges to recognise the need for accurate information about costs, so that shortfalls in finance could be identified and addressed.
This, in effect, would require the costing elements of the ideal model to be superimposed on the current (ie pre-ERA model), as illustrated in Fig 12.5.
Activities associated with adjusting income/expenditure would take on greater importance, and would be related to defined shortfalls in resource needs.
In this case, the role effectively changes from one of service management to one of a franchise operation, with Colleges having the right to market the education product or service in a defined areas, constrained mainly by the overall strategic plan set by the LEA.
Use of the Models
The analysts had so far carried out a largely theoretical exercise, developing models in a detached and objective way so that broad-based ideas about future strategies could be discussed with the College Principals and officers from the LEA headquarters.
Once general agreement to the models had been obtained, it was then necessary to consider how they could help in providing practical advice about the effect on College structures.
To carry out a more detailed examination of the existing activities and functional groupings each sub-system of the post-ERA model was expanded, and the ideas and information generated during the exercise used to explore the real situation.
Although not explicitly regarded as such at the time, this equated closely to the comparison stage of the SSM, as described in the following sections.
Question Generation
At this stage in the study, there were still many questions unanswered about detailed aspects of the new legislation, and it was also necessary to find out more about College activities and functions, particularly those that could eventually contribute to the exercise of balancing costs with income.
To develop a list of questions in a structured way as the basis for a second round of fact-finding, a root definition was formulated for each sub-system of the post-ERA model, and a series of second level models constructed.
Although a fall root definition for each was derived, the model development was based mainly on the transformation needed, using the simple guidelines considered in earlier chapters, ie by defining the inputs and desired outputs, leading to an understanding of the change that the sub-system brings about.
For example, having expanded components 1.0 to 7.0 of the model shown in Fig 12.5, it became apparent that the main input to sub-system 8.0 (ie ‘adjust income/expenditure’) was the detail of the College allocation of the total budget, with secondary inputs of information about the actual costs of providing the appropriate level of education.
The desired output was considered to be finance adjusted to the correct level, with the transformation being the link between the two (Fig 12.6).
From this starting point, after considering such factors as who would be involved in the implied activities and system ownership etc, the following root definition was formulated:
‘A system owned by the Governing Body and operated by designated administrative and academic staff to adjust the income/ expenditure of the College so that the finance available tends to equal the actual direct and indirect costs of providing the statutory and desired further education courses’
This seemed a reasonable system to consider, as, although it was unlikely that a perfect balance between costs and income could ever be achieved, it provided a target to aim for, or a shared value for all staff engaged on activities concerned with cost control and income generation, regardless of their departmental position.
The  main environmental factors were taken to be the effect of market forces on such things as staff recruitment, purchase of materials, and course demand, etc, constrained by the long-term contractual obligations to existing teaching and non-teaching staff.
The model constructed from this definition is shown in Fig 12.7.
Examination of this and the other expanded models enabled a series of questions to be prepared to aid the analysis, eg:
What cost-control methods currently exist?
What are the main expenditure outlets?
What are the total income sources?
Who is responsible for purchase of equipment, etc?
It also focussed attention at each level on the measures of performance required for effective monitoring and control, and the information dependencies of all subsystems.
Further expansion was carried out on the same basis, progressively moving through the model until more specific activities started to emerge, such as those that could be associated with component 8.7 , ie reduce costs :
8.7.1
Monitor and control
8.7.2
Reduce waste
8.7.3
Tender for services
8.7.4
Control purchase
8.7.5
Introduce improved methods
8.7.6
Consider new technology
This further expansion gave greater insight into the information requirements of the system (eg for the activity Tender for services , information about tender procedures, potential contractors, standards required, etc could be relevant), and could be checked against the information actually available in practice, an approach that is examined further in Chapter 11.
Analysis to this level was not undertaken for all sub-systems, only those where some significant change was implied, as even the secondary expansion was extensive and time-consuming.
This was mainly because of the multi-functional nature of a College, which, in addition to the many activities associated directly with course provision and support, also provides a full range of student services.
As an example of the level of detail produced at the secondary modelling level, the outputs from the sub-systems concerned with calculating academic and non-academic resource needs included lists of:
Direct Support Resources — Lecturers, classroom technicians, classrooms, workshops and laboratories, equipment, facilities, and so on.
Indirect Support Resources — Administrative and clerical staff, central support technicians, cleaning and catering staff, grounds and building maintenance implications, etc.
The questions raised during the modelling exercise were a mixture of those concerned with furthering the knowledge of the analysts in relation to the facts about present procedures and responsibilities, and those concerned with whether or not the systemically desirable activities were being undertaken, by whom, and with what level of effectiveness.
This mixture of basic fact-finding and the comparison stage of the SSM eventually allowed some conclusions to be drawn about the possible effect of the new legislation on existing groups and responsibilities.
Effect on Functional Groupings
Although the analysis was of necessity extensive, it was not the intention of the study to explore each activity in detail to determine where procedural or other changes were required, but to provide the basis for reviewing existing structures, particularly those related to non-teaching staff.
As with all systems exercises, because the model does not reflect functional groupings that have evolved for administrative convenience or other reasons, making the link between the model and the organisation was problematic.
To do this in the College study, each activity drawn out from the model was itemised, and a judgment made as to who, or which functional group, might be responsible for carrying out the task if it existed.
This posed the complementary questions of ‘do the activities exist’ and ‘who could be carrying them out’, leading to the normal enquiries about effectiveness and efficiency.
It is worth noting that imaginative use of unsophisticated technology (as discussed in Chapter 7) can aid this part of an investigation, enabling a large volume of activities that may be undertaken by specified functional groups to be readily summarised.
In the case of the Colleges, the increased delegation of responsibilities bought about by new legislation warranted the introduction of new endeavours, or changes to existing ones, and the analysis helped to identify where these were required at all levels.
Each activity was assessed in relation to the function that it could form part of, and whether a functional group currently existed that could be responsible for it.
Where no such group existed, it implied that some addition to the organisation was needed; in other cases, the new requirements indicated a change in the responsibilities of existing functional groups.
This process is summarised in Fig 12.8, and is essentially a variation on the Checkland matrix, customised to suit the particular circumstances.
Bearing in mind that the review was directed at determining the broad changes necessary to a College structure, at this point the analysts were primarily concerned with those areas where new functions were required.
For example, the management information function referred to frequently in the chart did not exist in most Colleges before the study was carried out, but appeared to be essential for effective operation in the future.
The lower order changes in responsibility were considered at a later stage when working with Principals to determine the detailed changes required at individual Colleges.
Cross-relating each activity from the model to the existing functions indicated that a number of these could remain virtually unchanged, in particular those concerned with organising academic resources and delivering courses.
In generic terms, these were regarded as the operational functions of the College, ie those primarily concerned with delivering the end product.
Similarly, many of the activities could be grouped under a generic support services heading, ie those concerned with organising indirect services such as finance, personnel and general administration etc.
In broad terms, the College organisation structures prior to the Act reflected this two-pronged approach (ie operational and support).
Within this structure, the legislation would require an enhancement of the finance and personnel functions, and recognition of the increased responsibilities of College Administrative Officers, especially in relation to the servicing of the new Governing Bodies.
The analysis findings are summarised in Fig 12.9, showing new functions that could be needed in the changed circumstances, but weren't formally included in existing structures, eg:
a.
Business and marketing functions, ie those required to develop income potential.
b.
Cost and purchasing control.
c.
Coordination or control of management information systems, inter alia, to provide the basis for calculating the cost of resources, and establishing effective monitoring and control mechanisms throughout.
This approach also gave rise to a change in attitudes about the split between the academic and non-academic functions within the Colleges, which encouraged the Principals to make more flexible use of resources.
Traditionally, all non-teaching staff had been grouped together regardless of their actual duties, but the concept of operational and support groups (rather than teaching and non-teaching ) suggested that some of these staff who were directly involved with classroom activities (eg workshop technicians) could reasonably come under the control of the lecturing department heads, recognising their direct contribution to the delivery of courses and involvement in the operational side of the business.
Conclusions
Following acceptance by the client of the findings of the systems exercise, and their value for focussing the direction of College developments, it was then necessary to provide some pragmatic advice about the new grades, salaries and groupings that would be required once the Act was implemented.
It was accepted from the outset of the study that it would be unrealistic to expect changes to be made overnight, and that a gradual evolution to the desired state would be necessary.
The final part of the exercise, therefore, was to merge the systems conclusions with a more conventional examination of the various real-life factors affecting the way in which new groupings could be achieved.
For example, there was a continuing requirement to comply with the pay scales used by the Authority as a whole, although the Governing Bodies were free to appoint new staff at any level in the scale.
There were natural concerns about ensuring a degree of parity of gradings and structures between and within Colleges, not least to avoid industrial relations disputes; it was also necessary to take due account of the frameworks and levels of expertise that then existed and evolve a strategy for change, rather than take radical action.
Most important, of course, was the recognition that, although in the long-term measures to increase income and reduce costs would enable Colleges to become more self-sufficient, in the short-term the finance available would not necessarily allow all desirable changes to be introduced simultaneously, and some prioritising would be required.
Furthermore, the analysts were aware of major computer developments that were taking place that would eventually have significant effects on the duties and responsibilities of certain functional groups at the Colleges.
Taking all these factors into account, a strategy for the development of Colleges was prepared, and discussed with the client organisation.
This strategy and the supportive arguments are explained briefly in the following paragraphs
Requirements for Change
The system models represented an ideal that applied equally to the situation before and after the implementation of the ERA.
However, given the increased powers of delegation to Colleges authorised by the Act, and the effective removal of certain  constraints in terms of staffing and budgetary control, Colleges will have more freedom in the future to make adjustments locally to resource levels.
The analysis showed that there were many similarities between the activities that are systemically desirable and those undertaken at the time of the study, but highlighted certain aspects of the organisation that needed strengthening to allow the Colleges to become more self-supporting once the ERA took effect.
Overall, changes could be required to functions and to the structure as a whole.
Functional Developments
More emphasis would need to be placed on calculating the actual costs of providing FE courses, so there was a baseline for deciding what adjustments to expenditure and income would be required.
Although there were already many activities concerned with cost and financial control, these functions would assume greater importance in the future, inferring that the expertise in Colleges should be developed or enhanced, and officers nominated to assume new responsibilities.
To this end, the analysts also examined the procedures and responsibilities for financial matters at one specific College, taking account of the earlier systems findings and the forthcoming introduction of computer support.
Similarly, Colleges were involved with income-generating and marketing activities to some extent.
After the Act took effect, it would become increasingly important to coordinate the efforts of all personnel in this respect, and to establish a focal point for business activities.
This could be achieved in a number of ways, for example by establishing a business centre or by nominating one person as head of business services, at the discretion of individual establishments.
Management information systems would need to be developed.
Given the varying levels of computer expertise in Colleges at that time, and the current status of the proposed new systems, it was difficult to make specific proposals about how the associated responsibilities should be handled at College level.
The term management information systems itself covers a wide variety of, mainly, computer developments, ranging from the installation of stand-alone microcomputers and wordprocessors, to the sophistication of the proposed computer system.
The importance of providing a focal point for these developments was also emphasised, and it was felt that this could be part of the role of the College Administration Officer so that non-partisan strategies for computer developments could be evolved.
To recognise the increased responsibilities that Colleges would assume for finance, personnel and local administrative matters, the related functions that existed before the Act took effect would need strengthening.
Structural Changes
The system model, although not intended to reflect ideal functional groupings, also indicated that a sub-division of activities to those directly concerned with course delivery (ie the operational functions), and those concerned with non-teaching tasks (ie the support functions), was appropriate to align systemically-related activities.
This tended to support the broad structure at most Colleges at that time, ie reflecting a division to operations and support.
There were, however, certain functions grouped under the generic support heading that were involved in the delivery of courses (eg departmental assistants and technicians), and Colleges were advised to consider their position in the organisation structure in light of the expressed argument.
Similarly, the library and student services functions, which also related to the delivery of courses, could be regarded as part of the operations group.
In high-level terms, cost-control and management information functions seemed to fit comfortably within the generic support heading.
However, activities concerned with the development of income sources (eg business functions), whilst dependent on the administrative services for day-to-day support and information, and overlapping the business activities of some teaching departments, are primarily concerned with the interface between the College and potential income suppliers, eg public and private sector employers, government agencies etc, and the public.
Arguably, these functions could be located within other the support or operational groupings, or be established as a separate agency with liaison links as appropriate.
In addition, the analysis indicated that each of the main functional divisions (ie operational, support and business) should be at executive level so that all aspects of College activities would be reflected in the development of policies and in the overall management of the College.
Representation of the support functions would be accomplished by nominating a ‘Support Executive’ from those officers who would be responsible for the revised finance, personnel or administrative groups.
Strategy for Change
Whilst recognising the need to introduce measures that would make Colleges more self-supporting, it was considered unrealistic to expect such measures to be effective immediately.
In terms of priorities, the client was advised to consider first the changes required to reflect the responsibilities that would be assumed from April 1st 1990, accepting that, in the longer term, further changes would be needed as a result of management information and computer system developments, and to improve cost control and income-generating activities.
Although all Colleges that were within the control of the LEA had broadly similar organisation structures, at a detailed level there were significant differences (ie in structural arrangements and in the numbers and expertise of staff), and it was not appropriate to make detailed proposals for individual Colleges at this stage.
Taking all these factors into account, the analysts advised that the following actions by College Principals were appropriate in the short-term, in consultation with the LEA as required:
a.
Examine the existing administrative and clerical responsibilities to determine how the new functional groupings of finance, personnel, and administration could be achieved, together with support service representation at executive level.
As part of this examination, the requirement to provide a focal point for management information development should also be considered.
b.
Determine the grades to be applied for revised posts that would assume responsibility for all financial and cost-control matters, for personnel, and for enhanced administrative support.
c.
Determine the local strategy tor filling these posts, taking account or the existing expertise within the College.
d.
Review the effect of these changes in relation to administrative and clerical staff overall, at the same time considering the potential advantages of reallocating those posts that provide direct support for teaching departments.
It was also agreed that, once the changes implied by these actions were effective in each College, further measures would be taken to reflect the computer developments and to address the issue of adjusting finance in relation to actual costs (ie by enhancing cost-control and income-generating activities) so that the Colleges could move towards the state of financial equilibrium implied by the system models.
Summary
Following the systems exercise and a full report to the client, the structures at two Colleges were examined in detail and revisions made to reflect the new requirements.
The ideas expressed in the report, and the example structures, were then used to assist the remaining Colleges within the control of the LEA in the development of their own strategies for change.
The approach used during the study did not follow strictly any prescribed format, but nonetheless made effective use of the soft systems ideas to produce results that were well received by the Principals of the participating Colleges.
The process of decomposing system models mirrored the requirement to consider first the overall effect of the Act on functional groupings and structures, then to examine responsibilities and tasks in some detail, ie taking a top-down approach that was initially unconstrained by existing factors but progressively took them into account.
Significantly, it allowed the relationships between existing activities and those considered necessary in the future to be more clearly understood, illustrating the benefit of using the soft systems approach in a proactive role.
Procedure Audit
Introduction
Procedure Audit is a particular application of soft systems ideas developed by the Northern Region of the Institute of Management Services (IMS) Technical Board, with the main authors being Peter Mcloughlin of The New College, Durham, and Geoff Brown of Sedgefield District Council.
The description that follows is based on an article that appeared in the November 1989 issue of the IMS Journal, and additional material supplied by the authors.
ft provides an invaluable example of the way in which soft systems ideas can be of benefit to MS professionals and other analysts, and, in turn, to those organisations that make use of their services.
Most practitioners undertake reviews of procedures at some time or other, whether they are procedures in the commonly accepted sense of the term, ie low-level processes or activities with a set order of steps (Collins Standard Reference Dictionary), or the total activities of an organisation that combine to achieve the purpose of the business as a whole.
Procedures of both sorts can be found in any type or size of organisation, for filling in forms, processing goods, inputting data to a computer system etc, and those directed at the continual development and implementation of policy, or the preservation of the mode of business operation.
Procedure Audit can be used to examine and review any of these, not as a financial tool or a means of apportioning blame for failure, but as a device for assessing the effectiveness of a procedure and the efficient use of associated resources.
It is not a work or method study exercise, but a way of establishing and monitoring agreed measures of performance, as a basis for determining whether action needs to be taken to bring this performance within desired parameters.
The practitioner or analyst is not necessarily concerned with implementing changes, but with identifying where such changes could be beneficial so that appropriate action can be taken.
In this respect and others the approach has similarities with the SSM, particularly with regards to client participation to encourage a commitment to any changes that result from the audit.
The Rationale of Procedure Audit
A procedure can be viewed in systems terms, ie transforming inputs to outputs to achieve a desired end (Fig 13.1).
The inputs could be details entered onto a form, with a completed form as the output, or the raw materials that are fed into a production process for conversion to assembled components.
A procedure carried out by people with the aid of tools technology etc can therefore be considered as a Human Activity System, one that is comparable with the formal systems model described in Chapter 3.
Ideally, it will reflect the characteristics of the model, eg comprise a series of interrelated subsystems, have resources for its own use, an expectation of continuity, and be part of a wider system that is influenced by the surrounding environment.
It should also have defined measures of performance, a mechanism for recognising when deviations occur, and a means of taking control action when necessary, factors that are particularly relevant to the Procedure Audit process.
Like other Human Activity Systems, procedures can be considered from a number of viewpoints, each leading to the derivation of different criteria for success.
For example, typing a document may be a time-consuming chore for a secretary who might view success in terms of how quickly the chore can be completed, but the author will be concerned with the accuracy of the conversion from manuscript to type, and the value of the final document as a means of communication.
These concepts are utilised in the Procedure Audit process to determine measures of success from a specified point of view, as agreed by the person responsible for the procedure and its continued existence, which in practical terms is generally the person who can authorise changes to be made.
This approach also encourages the analyst to look beyond the basic procedure to the wider systems that it is part of and the environment that can affect both requirements and performance, in the process gaining an understanding of all the relevant factors that need to be taken into account.
Taking a series of views across the whole situation, referred to as the hill tops approach by Mcloughlin and Brown, recognises that the wider system could be instrumental in:
setting the objectives or defining the purpose of the procedure
influencing the person making decisions as part of the procedure
monitoring or measuring performance of the procedure
providing the resources to carry it out
In practice, this means that the analyst needs to take account of such factors as the rules, regulations, and criteria for performance laid down by the parent organisation.
These may consist of constraints imposed by the finance section, the legal or tax advisors, those who set the house-style for documents, and so on, representing elements of the wider system, which is influenced in turn by environmental factors.
A procedure does not exist in isolation from its surroundings, and Procedure Audit requires this to be acknowledged explicitly.
These ideas are summarised by Mcloughlin and Brown in a manner similar to that shown in Fig 13.2.
This is a derivation of the formal systems model, and is used in essentially the same way, ie as a checklist to ensure that the model of a procedure is well-formulated and all the necessary attributes are considered during the analysis.
Procedure Audit and Conceptual Modelling
Procedure Audit follows the same process as the SSM, using a conceptual model of the defined human activity to make a comparison with what is actually happening in practice.
The approach also takes into account that the way objectives and goals are defined can be influenced by the perceptions, attitudes and behaviour of individuals.
In any situation where there is felt to be problems, these will not exist independently of the human beings involved.
The perception of the problem will differ, depending on such things as the views and experiences of individuals, and their beliefs about what is or what ought to be.
Furthermore, the analyst must realise that problems do not exist in isolation, but are interrelated with other problems affecting the same situation.
It is important, therefore, that all the circumstances are considered during a Procedure Audit, including peoples' views of problems and potential solutions.
Involvement of individuals in the development of these solutions will also make it easier to implement any changes that are necessary.
A conceptual model is constructed to take these factors into account, and used to make a comparison with the existing situation.
The rationale underpinning Procedure Audit, therefore, is that a conceptual model of a chosen procedure can be constructed on similar lines to that of the SSM, which, after checking with the formal systems model, can be compared with the real situation to determine where changes are appropriate, taking account of defined measures of performance.
This variation of the SSM is summarised in Fig 13.3.
The Practice of Procedure Audit
In practical terms, the audit process can be summarised as a sequence of stages (Fig 13.4) although, like the SSM, these should be regarded as guidelines rather than prescriptive, as there may be a need to refer back to earlier activities and make adjustments as the audit progresses.
Stage 1 — Create Commitment
The first step toward putting these ideas into practice is to gain a commitment from the client organisation to establish and support the audit mechanism, and where changes are warranted, to make these changes effective.
The extent to which this is required, and the difficulty in achieving it, will depend on the level of procedure that the audit is directed at.
A major review of the business operation (a meta-procedure ?), which could comprise a series of nested procedures, will require commitment at all levels.
In this instance participation and team-building are particularly important, together with the development of objectives to which all individuals, sections, departments and so on can contribute.
For lower-level activities involving fewer staff, commitment is probably easier to achieve, but is no less important in ensuring that the audit process is effective.
It is also crucial to avoid any suggestion of recrimination, regardless of the level of procedure being examined.
The audit is essentially aimed at identifying and rectifying procedural flaws, and not at the individual's performance, although realistically this may feature when considering efficiency aspects at a later stage.
Once again, involvement of staff in the process can be of value in overcoming these fears, encouraging a feeling of association with any problems identified and their solutions.
Stages 2a & 2b — Determine the Objectives and Owner or the Procedure
The ownership and objectives of a procedure interrelate, as each will vary with the viewpoint taken, and both these factors need to be considered before the measures of performance can be derived.
The analyst must aim to define an uncontentious view of the transformation the procedure aims to achieve, bearing in mind the variety of viewpoints that could be considered relevant.
The example in Fig 13.5 shows a replenishment procedure for a stationery store, viewed by a user in terms of the timescale of delivery, quality of the order, and potential deficiencies, whilst the storeman has subjective feelings about his own status, wages, and so on.
Different viewpoints lead to different models which, in turn require different measures of performance, and it is necessary to ensure that the model used as the basis for the audit is one that reflects the organisation's needs in relation to the procedure.
Having agreed this with the procedure owner, a procedure description is prepared, showing amongst other things, the resources and activities needed to meet the objectives, and this is compared with what actually exists.
Significant discrepancies between the two may be resolved at this stage, ie before monitoring is carried out.
The activities are then decomposed until such time as the related resources (eg people, time, money, skills etc) which need to be committed to the procedure can be clarified.
Any deviation from this in practice would be taken as a constraint, the analysis having revealed where such constraints are necessary so they can be taken into account when carrying out the audit.
Stage 3 — Establish Measurable Factors
As with other types of soft systems exercises, deciding performance measures is of prime importance, but can prove extremely difficult, particularly when considering abstract ideas such as customer satisfaction.
Asking questions about the consequences or signs of failure can be of assistance at this stage.
For example, posing the question ‘What happens if the stationery replenishment procedure fails ?’ could give rise to a variety of answers.
The customer might suggest:
‘I get the wrong amount of stationery ’
‘I get stationery at the wrong time ’
‘I cannot get the correct stationery ’
and so on, from which a statement of a performance measure could be derived logically, ie the procedure is effective if the customer receives the right amount of the correct stationery at the right time .
Alternatively, if the storeman's view were to be considered, the answers might be:
‘I get complaints from the customer ’
‘My boss thinks I'm inefficient ’
‘I won't get a pay rise next year ’
indicating that the procedure is effective if the storeman remains in good standing with both the customers and the boss, and receives pay rises when eligible .
The latter is, of course, unlikely to be chosen and would be extremely difficult to measure, but does emphasise the need to determine a neutral view of a procedure before attempting to measure its success.
Stage 4.
Determine Levels of Acceptability or Optimality
Once the performance measures have been agreed, the acceptable or optimal levels of achievement have to be determined.
It may be possible to gain access to past records so that a realistic assessment can be made of achievable levels; alternatively, in the absence of any historical data, utopian levels (eg 100%) could be set initially, then modified if the auditing process highlights that they are unattainable.
The earlier decomposition could reveal activities within the procedure that are amenable to monitoring (such as adherence to bin-card re-ordering procedures), which could obviously have an effect on the success of the procedure as a whole.
When auditing meta-procedures , if the overall exercise revealed failings, these lower-order activities would also need monitoring to determine more precisely the reasons for this failure.
Stage 5.
Monitor Appropriate Indicators
At this stage mechanisms for collecting information about attainment levels need to be designed and implemented.
Mcloughlin and Brown emphasise that this exercise must be undertaken after due consultation with all those involved, recognising that such matters as customer satisfaction cannot be addressed without the involvement of the customer, who could be asked to score the quality of the service provided.
This may require additional information to be recorded on requisition forms etc, or involve setting up new registers, all of which will demand extra staff time, and could lead to some resistance.
The underlying purpose of recording new information must be made clear to avoid it being regarded as just a bureaucratic exercise.
Stage 6.
Comparison of Levels
For comparison purposes, there are fundamentally two choices, ie either the attainment levels can be assessed against an agreed target, or relative comparisons  can be made, eg against what happened in the past if records are available, or what is happening at the start of the exercise compared with what happens at selected future points in time, effectively establishing better or worse levels, as summarised in Fig 13.6.
Stage 7.
Identify and Evaluate Discrepancy
The comparison stage should produce one of the following results:
1.
Under-achievement, ie worse than target level
2.
Over-achievement, ie better than target level
3.
No discrepancy between levels
Where there is a difference in levels, either as an under or over achievement, then some investigation is required.
Even for over achievement, or where there appears to be no problem, it could be worth reviewing the target levels to consider if these have been set incorrectly; perfection the first time round might well be suspect!
Once the analyst and the client are satisfied that the procedure is effective, then it is necessary to decide if it is also efficient, as effectiveness could be achieved by employing unnecessary resources.
It is also worth noting that efficiency should not be considered until the effectiveness is proven, the procedure could be doing the wrong thing in an extremely efficient manner.
Stage 8.
Investigate the Discrepancy
At the start of the exercise, the actual procedure was checked against a conceptual model that included the activities deemed necessary to achieve the agreed transformation.
If the changes revealed by this comparison have not been made prior to the audit commencing, this could be the reason for the failure to meet the target levels of attainment.
If, however, the procedure does comply with the procedure description derived earlier, then it will be necessary to subject each element or activity of the model to further scrutiny, for example by breaking them  down to lower-order activities, or by auditing each element in the same manner as the parent procedure.
This process is similar to work study exercises where measurable elements of a task are identified before the actual measurement takes place, and consideration is given to the resources required at each level, including the skills and experience of the operator.
Stage 9.
Communicate Findings
The final stage is to communicate the findings of the audit to the procedure owner, to allow decisions to be made about the action to be taken.
To improve the presentation of results a Procedure Audit Report may be devised, listing the purpose and objectives of the procedure, the nested activities and required resources, the performance indicators and desirable target levels, and the results of the analysis.
At this point, the auditing process is essentially completed, the role of the analyst in this context being an investigatory one, rather than as an agent of the change.
In practice the brief for the study may well include a mandate for advising on the implementation of the changes, and, in certain circumstances, actually installing revised procedures.
The distinction, nonetheless, needs to be made, so that the aim of Procedure Audit is properly understood, ie to identify levels of disorder within procedures.
Procedure Audit — An Example Application
To provide a summary of these stages, and give an example of how Procedure Audit might work in practice, consider typical procedures for claiming travel and other expenses in a small section of a large organisation.
This process frequently comprises the following steps:
Individuals informally record expenses incurred (eg in notebooks etc).
Pro-format claim forms are completed at the end of a set period, eg one month.
The claim forms for each section are checked and totalled by administrative assistants, and totals transferred to section registers for record purposes.
After leaving the section, the completed forms are passed to the department personnel section for verification of the claimants eligibility, and then processed by the data preparation section of the Finance department onto the main computer for subsequent issue of cheques.
For this exercise, the procedure being examined is that carried out within a section, and the procedure owner is taken to be the person who could authorise changes at this level (eg by the introduction of pro-formats for day-to-day recording of mileage etc), in this case the head of each section.
Establishing the Audit Criteria
Firstly, to explore the idea that procedures do not exist in isolation, the relationships between the internal procedure, the wider system and the environment can be considered (Fig 13.7).
The wider system would include the parent department, the personnel section who verify the claims, the finance department that influences the format and timing of claims, etc, and the boards or committees that determine the organisation policy as a whole.
These elements of the wider system are in turn influenced by factors of the surrounding environment, for example the liability for income tax imposed by the Inland Revenue, trade union agreements, market trading conditions, and, for public service organisations in particular, the policies of central government, and initiatives such as the introduction of the community charge and the subsequent effect on local authority revenue.
The wider system is generally responsible for allocating the resources of people, equipment, facilities, including the design of the calm forms which are used to complete the procedure within each section; setting the rules governing the eligibility of individuals for certain expenses; and exercising control over the procedure in the widest sense.
The environment affects not only the decisions made in these respects, but also the amount of expenses that the company can afford to pay.
Secondly, a number of views of this procedure can be considered relevant, eg from the point of view of the individual who is concerned with the speedy settlement of claims, the administrative assistant who checks the claims for errors, and the boss who is concerned with the effect on his status if a large number of false claims were to be made, and discovered outside the section.
An uncontentious view could give rise to a conceptual model (Fig 13.8) that reflects the actual procedures followed, based on the transformation:
‘to collect and transfer information to the finance department about legitimate expenses incurred in the course of normal employment '
By examining each of the nested activities, a list of appropriate resources can be prepared, including:
time of individual claimants 
notebooks etc 
claim forms 
time of administrative assistant 
calculator 
section register 
information about rules and regulations 
For this simplistic example, it can be assumed that these are readily available, and no adjustment of the resources is needed before the audit process can start.
The next step is to consider whether the notional system reflects the characteristics of the formal system model.
The existence of the wider systems and the environment have been explicitly considered, and at this stage are mainly relevant to ensuring that the analysts is aware of the whole situation and the influencing factors.
At a later stage, if errors are found in the procedure's performance which cannot be traced to a falling within the local system, it may be necessary to examine these influencing factors further, for instance the design of the form might be inadequate for the accurate recording of information, a factor outside the direct control of the section involved.
The resources required by the procedure have been identified, and some degree of interconnection between the envisaged sub-systems is apparent, mainly involving the transfer of information.
(It is worth noting that Mcloughlin and Brown also make use of other general system models eg control, communication and human factor models , during their investigations.)
The procedure owner at this level is the section head, who will have the authority to act as the regulator of the procedure's performance.
It is then necessary to develop appropriate measures for this performance.
To illustrate the effect of taking different viewpoints, if the views of the main actors in the situation were to be considered, performance measures such as the following could be derived:
Individual claimant —the speed of receiving the expenses cheque .
Administrative assistant —the accuracy of the checking procedure, ie the number of errors undetected at this stage that could be referred back by the personnel section or the finance department .
Section head —the number of occasions that fraudulent claims are made, ie indicators of honesty or dishonesty .
In relation to the primary task model, one acceptable indicator of success in achieving the transformation (ie collecting and transferring information about legitimate expenses) could be the occurrence of queries, either from the claimant  with regard to the expenses received, reflecting the accuracy of the information transferred, or from the recipients of the claim forms, eg the personnel section and the finance department.
In terms of target levels, because of the importance to the individual of receiving the correct level of payment, then 100% attainment would probably be aimed for.
Monitoring the Procedure
To test this particular application of Procedure Audit, a monitoring process was established in a section of thirty persons, and the administrative assistant briefed to record the number of queries referred back over a period of two months.
During the first month, only one query was raised, in this case by the personnel section, but it was considered important enough to warrant some corrective action.
A claim had been made for travel outside the normal operating area, a journey which should have been authorised before it took place.
On investigation, it was apparent that the claimant had been unaware of the regulations in this respect, and they had also been overlooked by the supervisor and administrative assistant who were involved in processing the claim.
It was accepted that there had been no deliberate attempt to claim for unauthorised travel, but it was obvious that the regulations had not been publicised effectively, and the section head took steps to ensure that they were more widely circulated to prevent any further occurrences.
This incident was an isolated one, but it served to highlight the overlap between the possible measures of performance that had been considered; an undetected error not only slowed down the payment of the expenses, but could also have bought into question the honesty of the individual and thus affected the status of the section head.
During the second month, two unsigned claims were processed and passed for payment, which were then returned to the claimants for signature.
As a consequence, the claims missed the normal weekly batch-processing of data into the organisation's mainframe computer, and the subsequent delay in receiving the expenses cheques was greater than the actual time taken to reprocess the forms within the section.
Although this was a relatively minor error, it indicated that the process for checking the claims (ie a sub-system of the main procedure) should be improved so that expenses would be received in the most timely manner.
The most significant outcome of this relatively simple test was an increased awareness within the section of the effects of not adhering closely to the ideal requirements of the procedure (as reflected in the conceptual model).
As a result, a greater commitment to accurate recording was made by all the staff concerned, generally improving the effectiveness of the procedure overall.
No further changes were considered necessary to address efficiency aspects, as, in this instance, the activity rate was low and there were few resources involved.
It is worth bearing in mind that, in terms of the wider system, the data on the forms was subject to a number of validation checks, and failure of the procedure at section level would not have had any disastrous consequences.
However, the exercise highlighted the  value of the Procedure Audit approach for not only identifying procedural flaws, but also for encouraging the commitment of staff to making improvements effective.
Conclusions
Procedure Audit has been thoroughly tested across a wide range of situations by Mcloughlin and Brown, and can be applied at any level within an organisation.
For illustrative purposes, only a simple example has been given here; however, the approach has been used for a number of major investigations, including a study of the procedures of a local authority for making policy decisions about housing stock, covering in excess of fifteen thousand buildings.
(Hitherto, information about these and other studies has not been published, but they are covered by the regular workshops held by the IMS to promote the approach.)
At whatever level Procedure Audit is applied, it is a worthy addition to the toolboxes of all analysts or managers who are concerned at any time with making improvements of a procedural nature, and provides a further example of how soft systems ideas can be used to good effect for everyday analysis work.
Bridging the Pragmademic Gap
Introduction
This chapter picks up on the development of the FAOR methodology, examining the concluding phase where all the main components, including the SSM, were tested in the field as a final trial of the package as a whole.
The package is used to explore a given situation, identify a problem area, then produce a requirements specification for a computer system to effect some improvement.
The description, illustrations, and conclusions given in pages 231 to 249 are based on the FAOR publication, which provides an excellent example of the use of the SSM to generate productive ideas about a situation, and to do so in an ordered and logical manner.
The work that followed to finalise the user requirement is hitherto unpublished, and is derived from a series of discussion papers raised during the latter stages of the project.
In this chapter I have also endeavoured to clarify the relationship between the soft systems approach and other more conventional methods of examination.
In the opening pages of the book I referred to the pragmademic gap that seems to exist between pragmatists who have not had the benefit of a formal systems education, but might wish to make use of soft systems ideas, and those who have developed and applied these ideas at a more academic level.
The term could also be used to describe the gap between the practice of solving problems, and the somewhat academic exercise of systems thinking, where ideas can be generated about desirable changes that, in light of subsequent investigation, cannot be realised fully in the real-world.
To develop this theme, two distinct phases of a study into the information support needs of an organisation are examined here, the first making extensive use of the SSM to obtain an overview of these needs and produce a high-level user requirement for computer support, and the second applying standard O&M techniques to progress the study to an acceptable conclusion.
These exercises were essentially discrete studies in their own right, and, whilst certain conclusions can be drawn about the complementary nature of the different approaches, taken overall, the study also highlights the importance of merging systems thinking with real-world considerations.
Background to the Study
Until this study was carried out the individual elements of the FAOR methodology had been developed and tested in isolation, each being the responsibility of different organisations within the FAOR partnership.
The purpose of the final case study was to test the viability of the package as a whole, and all the main partners were represented in the team that addressed the selected problem situation.
Unlike the exercise described in Chapter 10, the team did not include representatives from the parent organisation (ie the County Council), a deliberate omission to avoid the results being conditioned by the knowledge or views of internal analysts, who nonetheless assisted with the general arrangements and administration.
Since the earlier study, the team's experience with the SSM had increased considerably, and any difficulties encountered at this stage were related more to the use of the FAOR package as an integrated whole than to the individual components themselves.
The Client Organisation
The chosen organisation was a local authority that had participated in earlier developments, but this time the study examined the problems that had arisen in the Highways and the planning departments following the establishment of a common unit providing both with financial, administrative, personnel and computer support.
It was felt that this unit had not met the expectations of the department heads, and some improvements were necessary, without a clear definition of where these might be achieved.
This was considered to be a scenario ideally suited for the soft systems element of the FAOR approach, and it was hoped that the exercise would not only reveal where the problems lay, but also produce a requirements specification to show how technology could provide solutions.
The Highways and Planning departments are separate organisations within the local authority, each under the control of a specialist Chief Officer and with a range of responsibilities, including:
Highways :
construction of new roads, and the design of major road schemes and bridges
maintenance of existing roads
traffic management and road safety
street lighting
refuse disposal sites
planning :
environmental services, including countryside design and development
control of local plans and development
co-ordination of public transport
promotion of employment opportunities
Some of these responsibilities were undertaken as agents of the central government Department of Transport, with agency arrangements also in force with District Councils in the corresponding administrative area.
The departments were co-located in the same building, and, as it was felt that their roles were similar and some economy of scale would be achieved in terms of staffing, equipment, and accommodation, a Central Services Support Unit (CSSU) had been established.
This included a Registry function for receipt and despatch of correspondence, acting also as custodian of the central filing system, which was supplemented in the branches of the two departments by outposted files maintained by branch clerks.
The CSSU, which became the main focus of the study, together with a centralised forward planning unit, employed a total of 150 staff under the joint control of the two Chief Officers.
Summary of FAOR Activities
The FAOR methodology was described briefly in Chapter 9, and for ease of reference the main components of the package are shown again in Fig 14. 1.
It is not the purpose of this book to give an in-depth explanation of the methodology, as the theory and practice of the approach is covered extensively in the FAOR publication.
However, in order to demonstrate how it makes use of the SSM to complement the other components of the package, its application during the case study is summarised briefly in the following sections.
Activity 1 — Office Exploration
The FAOR methodology is directed at analysing the requirements of offices for information technology improvements, and the first Activity is to carry out an exploration of the chosen office domain, using the SSM as required.
Apart from familiarising the analyst with the particular problem situation, it is also concerned with identifying those aspects of the organisation where there may be issues that need addressing.
During the field trial, this exploration was carried out in a conventional manner, eg by gathering background information relevant to the client organisation, by becoming familiar with the physical layout of the offices involved, and by interviewing a representative sample of staff from both departments and from the central support unit.
Rich pictures were used to express the findings from the interviews, then combined to form global pictures showing the situation as a whole.
One of these, showing the relationships between the central service providers and the information users throughout the Departments is shown in Fig 14.2.
Following the analysis, a number of issues emerged that seemed worthy of further consideration, for example:
Information usage : this was problematic due to the diversity of sources, such as planning applications, conservation areas, highways design specifications, and so on, involving communication with external bodies as well as other departments of the Council.
Information storage : there was a need to store a large volume of accurate and up-to-date information, which had to be readily accessible.
Although there was a facility for central storage of information, localised filing systems were also in operation, and there appeared to be a large amount of duplication.
Communication problems : there also appeared to be problems with communication between and within the branches of both departments.
The FAOR team felt this could cause difficulties where information of mutual interest was being handled, information which could have benefited people in all functional groups.
In addition, the team noted further issues concerned with the lack of an office automation strategy and incompatible technology, a paucity of resource tools for managers, and the difficulty that central support staff had in identifying with their customers.
The analysis also highlighted the complexity of the relationship between the CSSU and the departments, and the problems that inevitably arise when trying to meet the demands of a large number of customers whose  requirements differ.
Amongst other things, the examination had revealed possible areas where improvements could be made to the services that the CSSU provided, in particular those services concerned with supplying the information needed for staff to fulfil their functions.
Defining Relevant Systems
Having expressed the main factors about the situation in rich picture form, the analysts than considered viewpoints that were relevant, and the systems that might be developed to explore the issues that had been uncovered.
At this point in the study the following systems were selected as relevant to the situation:.
An information handling system to support the manipulation of information and the needs of individual users.
A communication system to support lateral communication, both within and outside the departments.
An information management system to manage the distribution of information.
An information storage system for efficient storage of large volumes of information.
An information retrieval system for rapid access to information.
Tentative root definitions for each of these were prepared, and it was then necessary to discuss them with the client to obtain feedback on the analysts’ ideas, and to consider the direction that the study would take.
(The involvement of the client in the selection of relevant systems is stressed in Chapter 8.)
The discussions indicated that the client was mainly concerned with improving the speed of access to information and the efficiency of information storage.
Consequently, the draft root definitions for the storage and retrieval systems were combined to form a new definition for an Information Provision System (generally referred to as the IPS).
This included the following transformations:
‘…to collect appropriate information, as defined by the activities of the Highways and Planning departments, to maintain that information cohesively, such that it is consistent, accurate, up-to-date, complete and easy to manage, and to provide access to that information within the time constraints of the users,…''
A conceptual model constructed from this definition is illustrated in Fig 14.3, showing the main activities of:
Collecting information
Maintaining information
Making information available to users
Monitoring the system
Allocating resources
Deciding criteria for assessing performance of the systems
Following the sequence of the FAOR methodology, the output from Activity 1 is a statement of the study brief, and this was prepared as a result of these discussions and the modelling exercises.
It was agreed, therefore, that the main focus of the study would be to investigate the information provision and access requirements of the Highways and planning departments…, with a view to improving the level and quality of the service, within current resource constraints .
Activity 2 — Method Tailoring
The second Activity is concerned with tailoring the method to suit the particular circumstances, and the FAOR package introduces the concept of instruments, each representing a pre-packaged set of tools, techniques and application principles which can be used as required to address a situation from a desired viewpoint.
In the Method Tailoring phase, the analyst considers the type of instrument, or instruments, that are considered suitable for the particular investigation and decides their specific role in the analysis.
The instruments provided and their agreed use in the case study are summarised in the paragraphs that follow.
Functional Analysis Instrument (FAI)
The FAI is designed to assist with the task of understanding a given office as a functional system within the organisation.
In brief, it is used to identify, define and characterise the essential functions that the office serves in order to fulfil the organisational objectives.
This allows a planned office system to be perceived in terms of these functions, and to specify clearly what should be achieved by implementing any new system.
In relation to the development of the IPS, the FAI was used to define the areas of the organisation that were concerned with information provision.
In practice this meant clarifying the roles of the service providers and service users to determine which processes would require support from the proposed system.
The FAI was also used to define the scope of the other instruments.
Communications Analysis Instrument (CAI)
The CAI is employed to examine the office as a communication system, where information objects (such as documents, files, microform, etc) are transferred between individuals and functional groups in support of the organisational objectives.
In particular, this instrument was used during the case study to examine the information needs of customers in terms of time, security, reliability etc, and to decide how these factors might be improved.
Information Analysis Instrument (IAI)
The function of this instrument is to address information objects and their form and usage.
It was utilised to explore the characteristics of the information objects to be covered by the IPS, eg determining the form of the information to suit the users’ needs, and assessing whether or not the objects that then existed were adequate.
Needs Analysis Instrument (NAI)
As explained in Chapter 8, the NAI addresses the needs of people ; in the context of the FAOR package, it is concerned with clarifying the interests and preferences of those who will use any designed office system, and how they could affect its success.
During the study, it was also used to address some of the issues uncovered during the first Activity, particularly with regard to cooperation and coordination.
Benefits Analysis Instrument (BAI)
The BAI, which is used within a Benefits Analysis Framework , provides concepts, criteria and fundamental steps to aid the evaluation of potential benefits to the users of new office systems.
After the IPS requirements had been specified during Activity 3 of the FAOR approach, it was employed to forecast the possible effects of the proposed system in terms of benefits and disadvantages (the latter being referred to disbenefits in the FAOR publication).
Activity 3 — Analysis
During Activity 3 , more detailed analysis is undertaken by applying selected instruments to the problem situation.
It is generally accepted that an analysis of functions (ie using the FAI) is a prerequisite to the use of the other instruments, as illustrated in 14.4, which shows the planned sequence of application for the study; moving from the method tailoring phase to the development of the requirements specification, followed by an evaluation of the proposed system in the final stages using the Benefits Analysis Instrument.
The analysts were concerned at this point with improving their understanding, by taking the conceptual model of the IPS as a starting point, and using the instruments to explore the relationships between the model and the actual situation.
This was carried out over a three-week period using a mixture of interviews and questionnaires covering a representative sample of persons from the CSSU and the departments.
To assess the needs of the users in relation to the support actually provided, the team interviewed the service providers and the users within each branch of the departments.
Functional Analysis Conclusions
The wide diversity of tasks carried out by the Departments made it inappropriate to carry out a detailed examination of each function.
However, the functional analysis enabled areas of commonality to be identified at a high or general level, showing how and where the two departments interacted.
For example, both were concerned to some extent with the following:
The production of the infrastructure plan for the area covered by the local authority
The design of detailed changes to the plan
The control of design changes 
The control and execution of changes to the plan
The maintenance of the infrastructure
The Planning department was mainly concerned with County-wide planning and design aspects, and the Highways department with the detailed design of specific structures such as roads and bridges, including control and implementation of changes.
Design and control appeared to be the main areas of commonality, indicating that a high degree of cooperation and communication was needed with regard to information of mutual interest.
Some general conclusions were also drawn in terms of the requirements for the IPS, ie that:
1.
It must support the technical staff (ie engineers) and their clerks alike, and be integrated with the departments.
2.
The major emphasis must be on providing the users with an overview of the available information, and how the information is interrelated.
Information Analysis & Communication Analysis — Conclusions
The analysis of the information objects and communication aspects, carried out as a joint exercise to ensure method economy, was undertaken in two stages, ie first by interviewing a few staff, then distributing a questionnaire based on the initial findings.
Questions were posed about matters such as the perceived importance of certain information objects, the most frequent communication means and partners, and the perceived problems (and possible solutions) relating to information objects and the current services.
The subsequent analysis enabled certain conclusions to be drawn about the importance of knowing about, and having access to, current information; the availability of material; the low utilisation of the CSSU Registry; and the need for alternative methods for organising and locating information.
Fig 14.5 shows the type of information objects used by the Departments and the main issues regarding information handling and communication.
Needs Analysis — Conclusions
The introduction of computer support could have had significantly different effects on the service providers and on the users , and the Needs Analysis was carried out using a different questionnaire for each generic group.
Service providers were questioned about such matters as their attitudes towards new technology, and their willingness to adapt to new circumstances, whilst the emphasis for service users was on the possible effect in terms of work results and achievements.
Amongst other things, the Needs Analysis indicated that:
Users were unsure of the level of service to expect, and there was uncertainty among the service providers about how the service was utilised and the criteria that should determine quality.
The tasks of the CSSU staff were poorly defined, and it was not possible to achieve a high level of identification with the organisation.
There was a readiness to accept new technology and a general desire for improvements.
The majority of interviewees were not well informed about the services provided by the CSSU, and, partly as a consequence, the services were considered to be inadequate.
The role of the Needs Analysis is essentially to reveal user-related issues that should be taken into account when producing the requirements specification in the latter stages of a study.
In this case the analysis indicated that, in terms of users' needs, the proposed IPS should:
allow the work of the CSSU to be more clearly definable
improve contact between the service providers and users
allow direct access by customers
encourage better coordination and communication processes
have a high availability
be adjustable to the particular needs of individual technical branches
be of a high quality, eg in terms of accuracy and cross-references
Comparison with Conceptual Model
At this point in the exercise, the use of the instruments had revealed a number of factors in terms of the requirements of the IPS, and the problems that could affect its implementation and effectiveness.
The next step was to compare the conceptual model with what was actually happening in practice, a process similar to that described in Chapter 9, where the existing situation is considered in light of a proposed new system.
This comparison was made more difficult by the existence of two organisations with a number of disparate functions, each using similar information but stored and utilised in different ways.
The FAOR team noted these differences, but unfortunately did not realise the true significance in terms of the detailed user requirement that would eventually be needed to progress the IPS proposals.
However, these variances were reflected in the comparison findings for each component of the model, which are summarised below.
Collect Information
The FAOR team felt that, although there were some similarities in the sources and form of the information used, there were significant differences in the way indexes were organised, the codes used to represent districts of the County, and the extent to which localised (ie non-central) indexes were established and used by individual branches.
Maintain Information
Keeping information up to date was considered to be difficult due to the increasing number of information sources, and the fact that only certain sections of documents might be superseded by new information.
In addition, the use of local filing systems, taken as a sign of lack of confidence in the Registry, led to duplication of items of common interest, and, pragmatically, inefficient utilisation of office  accommodation for storing files.
Localised filing being more difficult to control than central systems, there was evidence of out-dated files being held in office space, which exacerbated storage problems.
It was noted by the team that, although this was tolerable in the accommodation then occupied, a forthcoming move of both departments to a new central complex could make the volume of files difficult to accommodate, office space being more restricted.
The problems were not confined to standard paper-based files; the work of the departments required a variety of file forms, such as large plans, maps and drawings, and computer storage media.
Make Information Available
Examination of the activities in the real situation indicated a number of possible problem areas.
For example, the procedure whereby files were requested (ie using a messenger service) appeared to cause unacceptable delays with access to information held in the Registry.
There were also difficulties for staff who undertook priority work for such matters as public enquiries, and required access at times when the Registry was closed, eg at lunchtime and hours outside the normal working day.
Staff in both departments found it necessary to maintain informal or social contacts to obtain information required for their tasks, and had some misgivings about the lateral flow of mutually relevant information.
Monitor
The technical staff had difficulty verifying the up-to-date status of information being used, which could be significant in terms of accuracy of work produced.
Control of the movement of files (and journals, technical books, etc from the CSSU Library) depended on staff adhering to prescribed procedures, particularly those for registering file transfers between staff.
These procedures were not strictly observed, resulting in temporary or permanent loss of items.
In addition, it was felt that the problems were made worse by the files on loan being the only master copy; additionally, when files were held by staff for excessively long periods, a backlog of items for filing could accumulate.
Allocate Resources
A number of resource problems were also identified, relating to the lack of clearly defined responsibilities for microfilming, and the archiving/destruction of files.
It also appeared that there were insufficient resources for maintaining localised filing systems in good order, considered to be a result of the departmental policy to centralise filing and associated staff.
Decide Criteria for Assessing Performance of System
It was suggested that the morale of Registry staff was low, and they appeared isolated from other parts of the departments with no appreciation of their role in terms of other functions, due to the lack of feedback about their performance in meeting the needs of the users.
Development of Functional Requirements Specification
In the latter stages of Activity 3, a requirements specification was developed, taking into account the problems and needs identified during the analysis.
It was concluded that these could be addressed by two overlapping systems, described as:
1.
A locating and accessing system (ie an index system), where references to information objects would be kept and cross-related to other items of information;
2.
A storage system for maps, drawings and other technical documents which need to be updated frequently and are used in various branches of the Planning and Highways departments.
Functional Description of the Proposed Index System
The functional description contained a statement of the purpose and main characteristics of the index system, referring to the need to record, in a central index, all categories of files and documents generated, processed and received by the departments.
It was also acknowledged that it would be necessary to determine which information objects should be indexed, accepting that certain brochures, circulars and so on would probably be excluded from this general requirement.
The statement also recognised that, in terms of accuracy, integrity, consistency and up-to-date status, the quality of the index would need to be extremely high.
The structure of the index items was described in terms of the type of search facility required to support the work of branch and other clerks, for example, on the basis of title, keywords, or links to geographic map references.
There was also a requirement to maintain consistency with past practice by generally following the file references of the departments which were then in use.
An example was given of the type of index entry items that could be supported by the system:
unique identification number for each file or document,
title of file or document,
short description of contents of item,
primary reference code (= current references of Registry),
originator of entry (person and their position in the organisation),
authority for contents (person and their position in the organisation),
home location of the item (eg Registry or branch filing system),
current holder of item (when it has been loaned out),
change history of information items (versions and dates),
keyword list for use in topic searches.
The remainder of the functional description was concerned with elaborating on the ideas expressed by the conceptual model, explaining how they would be implemented in practice.
For example,collecting information would be achieved by the Registry and branch clerks entering the information into the index on receipt, or after categorisation in terms of the topic area.
Items generated internally would be recorded once they had been authorised for issue.
Accessing the information would be improved by providing procedures that would be easier to use, and the structure of the index would enable a search on a variety of parameters, with each item adequately cross-referenced.
Maintaining the index would be improved by establishing a specific role of system manager with responsibilities for the quality and integrity of the index, and for making exceptions to rules when required.
Other management functions would be authorised to cover the deletion or amendment of certain fields.
System monitoring would be enhanced by the collection of statistics (computer-aided) to influence archiving policy, the integration of local indexes with the central system, and, by demonstrating the benefits of the new system, encouraging greater adherence to required procedures.
Functional Description of Proposed Storage System
The concept underlying the proposed storage system was that files and documents would be subject to central management, achieved by keeping a record on the proposed indexing system.
The functional description also recognised the need to agree and implement an archiving and purging policy, making use of the Council's central records office for storing information that had to be retained but was no longer in regular use.
The systemic requirements of the conceptual model were also considered.
Collecting information would be improved by making the officer who generated or handled information objects responsible for transferring the master copy to the central storage system, a back-up copy being retained on file for use when the master is already on loan and further copies are required.
Accessing information would be improved by showing the file location in the index, and making secondary copies available for issue if required.
Maintaining the storage system would be the clear responsibility of the CSSU, ensuring quality in a number of ways, eg by chasing up holders of master files, by inserting new objects into files, and by making secondary copies of files and documents.
Monitoring would be based on the frequency of access to files, and the archiving policies of different types of information items.
The FAOR Technical Scenarios
During the final stages of the Case Study, two technical scenarios for implementing the requirements of the functional descriptions were developed.
These can be summarised as:
1.
A hybrid system consisting of a centralised computer index, and a variety of microforms used primarily to provide back-up copies of all information Items.
Terminals to access the central index would be located in all branches, and staff changing the status of any document or files would up-date the index accordingly.
A secondary copy of all information items generated or received within the departments would be held in the Registry on microfilm.
2.
A fully computer-based system, where all objects (ie including maps, drawings and texts) would be filed electronically.
This would be mainframe-driven with suitable terminals in all branches, and the person responsible for any information item would ensure that it was copied to the master file for other parties with the necessary authority to access.
The two technical scenarios are summarised in Figs 14.6 and 14.7.
It was felt that these would allow a gradual transition from computer-supported indexing (with back-up copies of documents held on microfilm) to a filly computerised filing and retrieval system.
A detailed description of each technical scenario is contained in the FAOR publication, but certain points made by the project team are worth repeating here.
It was noted at that time that there were low level information technology utilisation in the departments, consequently the cost of implementation would be a major factor when considering the design of either system.
The other significant points can be summarised as:
1.
Both systems would require a critical mass of terminals to be effective.
2.
The systems would only be effective if they were planned to converge towards an integrated system.
3.
Electronic filing would require very large storage capacities for maps and technical drawings.
4.
The filing and retrieval of graphic-based items would require interfacing to computer aided design workstations or digitisers, ie for entry, creation or updating of documents.
5.
Considerable further work would be required to analyse and describe the information objects which would be candidates for indexing, and/or electronic filing.
Activity 4 — Benefits Analysis
Having defined the functional requirements, and elaborated the technical scenarios for the proposed IPS, the benefit analysis instrument was used to investigate the possible improvements to the communication and cooperation processes between the providers and users of the service, as proposed during the method tailoring activity.
The main questions of the benefit analysis for this project were stated as:
How will the proposed changes affect the respective achievement of objectives of the information users and providers ?
Which processes should primarily be supported to gain the most benefits for the IPS as a whole ?
Which benefits (efficiency, effectiveness, human factors) will materialise in the implementation process ?
Addressing and answering these questions was essentially a process of considering how existing work practices would be affected by each of the technical solutions, aided by a device known as a measurement unit, developed from the knowledge gained during the analysis activity.
The measurement unit used in this study was similar to a flowchart showing the procedures undertaken to store, retrieve and deliver information to users, which enabled the analysts to consider the possible effects of the proposed solutions on each phase.
In parallel with this examination, questions were posed about the possible efficiency, effectiveness and human factor benefits and disbenefits, in relation to the information providers, information users and the organisation as a whole.
It should be noted that this exercise was not concerned with cost-benefit analysis, as at this point no potential costs had been derived or considered.
Consequently the assessment was mainly a qualitative one carried out at a fairly high level, with little examination made of matters such as staff increases, equipment costs, technical feasibility, and so on.
The results of the benefits analysis in this case are summarised in Fig 14. 8.
Conclusion of FAOR Study
Having completed the evaluation stage (Activity 4) and produced a broad statement of the requirements for an IPS, the part of the study using the FAOR methodology was completed.
Design and implementation of the proposed system was outside the FAOR remit (Fig 14.9) but the proposals had raised the expectations of the two client departments, and it was decided that a follow-up study would be carried out using management services practitioners from the parent organisation, supported initially by an analyst from an external consultancy.
The Follow-up Review
On completion of the study, and a report to the client on the lines described above, the project team spent a number of months preparing the final documents for the ESPRIT Project as a whole, which formed the basis of the FAOR publication.
It was accepted by the Highways and Planning departments that it was outside the scope of the methodology to progress the technical solutions to the point of  implementation, which, in any event, could not have been undertaken by the FAOR team due to their disbandment after the final report had been rendered to the European Commission.
Second-phase Analysis Activity
In the early stages of the internal follow-up review, it was agreed that the proposed hybrid system (ie making use of microfilm supported by a computer index), rather than reduce duplication of documents, would tend to encourage it.
By allowing a number of copies of the same document to be produced on request from the microfilmed back-up copy, branches would be likely to establish their own duplicate files.
Furthermore, it was felt that the potential costs of providing the necessary microfilming equipment, plus additional staff time, would outweigh any benefits gained, particularly as this could only be regarded as an interim solution before progressing to greater computerisation.
Accordingly, after the initial investigations, it was accepted by all the parties concerned that it would be inappropriate to pursue the microform aspects of the hybrid system.
However, at this point, the proposal that a computer index could be developed to improve the management of filing systems generally was considered worthwhile, and this became the focus of the early part of the study.
It was also agreed that the options for storage/retrieval of information in the long-term would be examined, based on the FAOR proposals to move towards a filly computerised storage system.
Bearing in mind that the departments comprised a multitude of functions, and, at this point in the study, no detailed breakdown of these functions was available, two parallel exercises were considered necessary to progress the study, ie one concerned with clarifying roles and information needs , and the second exploring and quantifying the existing information base , as represented by the central and outposted filing systems.
To bridge the gap between the outputs from the FAOR study and the development of a detailed user requirement, at this point systems ideas were merged with a more conventional fact-finding exercise.
A brief description of the second phase activities and findings is given in the following paragraphs.
Investigation of Functions
To help the analysts understand the roles of the sub-groups of the departments, a conceptual model was constructed based on the findings of the functional Analysis Instrument, ie that the main complementary roles of the two departments were:
The production of the County infrastructure plan
The design of detailed changes to the plan
The control of design changes
The execution of changes to the plan 
The maintenance of the infrastructure
In a manner similar to that described in earlier chapters, the model was expanded to reveal the lower-order activities (Fig 14.10), and each one cross-related to the branches and sections of the two departments.
This exercise provided a guide to the logical roles and activities of each group and the relationships between them, which, in conjunction with other background documents, was used as a basis for interviews with representative staff.
These interviews followed a semi-structured format, each person being given a set of preinterview notes posing questions about roles, responsibilities, information needs, and their usage of the existing filing systems.
Although this appeared to repeat some of the work already undertaken by the FAOR team, because the analysts were now concerned with documenting the user requirements at a detailed level it was necessary to focus the questions more precisely and, taking account of the proposed technical solutions, to consider with the interviewees the potential  advantages of information being indexed and stored by electronic means.
As a result of an extensive series of interviews, a comprehensive functional description was prepared, and used to put the findings of the filing system examination into the proper context.
Examination of Filing Systems
Over a period of two months, a thorough survey of the central and outposted filing systems and associated activities was carried out to provide quantitative data related to the IPS conceptual model.
This included taking a sample from each section of files to identify the type and quantity of file contents and the level of time-expired material, and also analysing daily activity rates for file creation, up-dating, movements in and out, weeding/culling and file transfer or destruction .
The exercise proved to be extremely complex and time-consuming because of the sheer volume of material involved (ie in excess of 60,000 files), and the variety of different reference systems used.
The examination not only confirmed the findings of the comparison stage of the FAOR study, but also highlighted the difficulties and expense that would be involved if the proposals were to be implemented at the level suggested; at the same time it helped to dispel certain misconceptions about the needs of the users overall.
The output from this analysis was summarised in the final report as a functional description of the filing systems, and used as the basis for the detailed user requirement that was prepared for the client.
Findings of the Second Phase
Review of Functions
Eventually a full picture emerged of the roles of the functional groups, their information needs, and the structure and use of the existing filing systems.
At first it was felt that the variety of reference systems in use had developed because of inept control mechanisms and general lack of discipline in applying procedures, but as the analysts' knowledge increased, it became apparent that the references had evolved to suit the needs of users, needs which were considerably different throughout the departments.
For example, all sections that dealt with Planning Applications from District Councils preferred to use the District Council reference as a common base for their filing systems.
In other instances, specific case files were raised to bring together all information related to individual projects, which could have a life-cycle of several years; some sections were primarily concerned with specialist subjects on a geographical basis (eg all the archaeological sites in each district of the County); certain support services required files on matters of policy, or personnel, or finance, and so on.
Overall, with the possible exception of Planning Applications, most references were subject-based , and, although in broad terms certain subject matters were the same, at a working level the information needs were totally dissimilar, reflected in the manner of structuring the reference codes.
The detailed examination of the organisation of these references confirmed  the view that there was little or no commonality between the systems used, and within each system, reference fields were utilised for any combination of alphanumeric codes that suited the purpose of the prime users.
(At one point it was commented that ‘There are an infinite number of ways of organising our file references, and most of them have been used already !’)
It was also obvious that there was no common set of criteria of needs (ie in terms of access times, location, form, archiving etc) that applied to all groups, a conclusion that had serious implications for the proposed systems.
For example, some functions required fast and frequent access to both active and dormant files; others managed efficiently with slower access times, but had a need for more extensive cross-referencing; some items had a limited life only, whereas information relating to policy and major structural changes had to be kept indefinitely.
It did not appear appropriate, therefore, to develop one global user requirement for the two departments as implied by the FAOR proposals, and, in any event, this would not have been possible without extensive reorganisation of the filing and reference systems as a whole.
Review of Index Requirements
During the second phase, the analysts had also investigated systems that were then available for filing system support, using statements given in the FAOR report as a basis for defining the type and level of system required, eg:
‘All major categories of file and document, either generated and processed by the branches of H & P, or received subject to later referral as part of the highways and planning functions, should be recorded (for subsequent reference) in a central
and:
‘Many of the fields proposed for the index item will support different kinds of search, e.g. on the basis of title, keywords, last date of updating, or linked to geographic map references.
''
These and other statements indicated that a comprehensive computerised records management system was intended by the proposals, ie one that required all activities and events associated with the files, and the documents they contain, to be recorded.
Whereas the FAOR team took a high-level global view of the departments and the CSSU, in the second phase all the filing systems were examined and quantified in fine detail, and existing problems and long-term needs were discussed with filing and branch clerks, and the potential customers of the system.
This detailed investigation revealed that, although in broad terms the earlier proposals were supported, the total number of files held by the departments (ie approximately 60,000), and the variety of ways in which outposted files were managed and used, would make the cost of providing a sophisticated computer system throughout excessively high, compared to the benefits that could accrue.
The analysts were unable to identify any software available at that time that could have supported this volume and variety of files without considerable development.
Based on an earlier estimate of £70,000 for computerised support of approximately 20,000 files in another department (without networking costs), a similar system for the Highways and Planning departments, allowing for some economy of scale, could have cost in excess of £150,000 at the prices that were then current.
In addition to the obvious costs of hardware/software, greater disciplines would have to be imposed on all users of the filing systems in order to keep the computer record up to date; for example , all movements of files in and out from their home base would have to be logged by the user, including branch officers who have direct access to outposted files.
It was also likely that all incoming correspondence would have to be recorded before circulation in order to maintain system integrity, which would be difficult to control as some correspondence was passed directly to branch officers without being opened in the Registry.
The involvement of technical staff was recognised by the FAOR team in the functional descriptions of the proposed systems; however, the cost of this involvement had to be considered carefully.
Although these actions could eventually lead to improved records management generally, the high cost in terms of staff involvement that would result was felt to outweigh the benefits that would be gained.
Long-term Storage of Information
The FAOR proposals for storage of information in the long term using a filly computerised system were also investigated thoroughly, particularly as these had a bearing on the manner in which the index system would be developed.
Despite the earlier reservations about the differing user needs, it was felt that, because both departments were dependent on images in their operations, eg plans, drawings etc, rather than just textual documents, there could be considerable potential for the use of Document Image Processing (DIP)systems.
Accordingly, an investigation of the current state of the DIP market was carried out and the results presented to the client.
This investigation indicated that, although the potential existed for use of such systems by the departments, at that time the costs were high and there was a general lack of standards and a limited amount of expertise available, and it was felt to be unwise to consider any major capital investment.
Once again, because the needs of each group in the departments varied considerably it would not have been cost-effective to consider a general global use of DIP systems.
However, because of the immense potential for the integrated (ie raster/ASCII/vector) systems that were under development, the point was made that the strategy could be to plan their eventual use for those functions where they could be of value.
In particular, the purchase of a stand-alone system for specified functions was considered beneficial, as a pilot project to encourage the learning process for subsequent extended use.
Conclusions
That the FAOR team had identified a significant problem area was indisputable; however, the extent that the proposed solutions could be attained, given the related costs and other demands on available finance, was questionable, and it was necessary to review the solutions in light of the more detailed analysis.
The findings from the investigation, as given above, caused both the client and the analysts to review the situation and concentrate first on the general organisation of the filing system as a whole, to determine if it were possible to achieve some degree of commonality as a prerequisite to the development of a computer support system.
Consequently, a Filing Working Party was established and, alter extensive examination of the reference construction, it was found that the only changes considered viable (ie that could be made without having to completely revise the titles of some 60,000 active files) were to the first three fields of the reference structure, establishing the basis for a limited computerised search facility in the proposed index system, rather than the extensive facilities envisaged by the FAOR Team.
Additionally, to address the problem of large amounts of time-expired material being held in office space, a positive weeding exercise (based on an identifying dormant files by the date they were last used) was carried out, also reducing the number of file titles that would need to be held on the computerised index.
Development of a User Requirement
In summary, it was concluded from the initial examination of the FAOR proposals that the development of a global user requirement for the introduction of either computerised indexing and storage systems was not appropriate, or possible, at that time, and it was necessary to take an evolutionary bottom-up approach that recognised not only the limitations and costs of the current market in software and equipment, but also the particular needs of individual functions.
In order to develop a suitable strategy to take these factors into account, a further examination was carried out to determine:
a.
The extent that computerised indexes/records management systems could be of vain e to individual functions within the two departments.
b.
Which functions would benefit by the introduction of a DIP system, either as a stand-alone system or as part of an eventual network.
These examinations progressed from the work already undertaken, and further discussion with staff of both departments.
It was then necessary to prepare a strategy document showing how the eventual development of a comprehensive system could be achieved, and indicating where pilot schemes would be introduced for both filing support and the use of DIP.
At this point, it became apparent that the systems being considered had lower priorities than other current developments, and  as a result, the proposed pilot studies for DIP systems were discontinued, and the analysts concentrated on the development of the index system only.
The strategy finally agreed consisted of a number of actions to be taken progressively, ie:
1.
Implement the changes to the filing references proposed by the Filing Working Party, to achieve some degree of commonality.
2.
Following the production of a suitable user specification, introduce limited computer support of the central filing system to assist with records management and indexing.
3.
Review the requirement for computer support of outposted files as an added value factor once a department network had been installed (Note: this was due to take place after the departments had moved to the new accommodation).
On the basis of this strategy, the analysts produced a user requirement for the index system; however, this did not compare with the idealised IPS that was originally anticipated as a result of the two extensive studies.
Nonetheless, it did seek to address the problems identified during the FAOR analysis, albeit at a  lower level of attainment in the initial stages.
For example, amongst other things, the specification aimed to achieve:
Significant reductions in the time required to retrieve files
Immediate cross-referencing to related files, using word-search facilities
Improved knowledge of file whereabouts once issued
The elimination of unnecessary duplication of files
An analysis of file events, as the basis for improving records management procedures
It was also felt that the system proposed in the final user requirement would lead to improvements in the working conditions in the Registry, and, by introducing more interesting and rewarding procedures at this level, generally improve staff morale.
Management of the filing system would be aided by the introduction of the disciplined procedures required to operate the computer system, and by an improved awareness of the overall state of the system at any time.
The eventual extension of the index to include outposted files would bring them under closer scrutiny and control, and, although a degree of consistency would be achieved by revising the file references to the level recommended by the Working Party, branch officers would still retain considerable discretion to organise their files in a manner that suited their particular needs.
The system would be configured so that the file database could be interrogated against a wide variety of search parameters (eg officer name, file reference, file titles, etc), and the basic structure of the index entries reflected that given in the FAOR functional descriptions.
At the time the analysts and the client were somewhat concerned that it was not practicable to implement fully either of the FAOR technical solutions, as expectations had been raised about the final outcome before the implications of these solutions were known in any detail.
However, taken overall the exercise had focussed attention on the problems associated with the filing systems of the two departments, and many of them had been alleviated by the time the study was completed, albeit using manual methods rather than technical solutions.
There was also a reasonable and sound expectation that, on the basis of the initial computer support installation, many of the other problems identified by the FAOR team would eventually be addressed and solved.
It is worth recalling some of the advice given earlier about soft systems studies, ie that the analyst should not attempt to convert a problem situation to a situation without problems , but consider how to improve it in a manner and to the degree that is attainable, given the influencing factors in the situation at the time of the study.
Conclusions for the Systems Approach
The SSM is only one part of the total FAOR package, and as such was used to good effect to identify and select a specific problem area in the client organisation, and to complement the other analytical instruments.
It also provided a basis for the subsequent investigation, encouraging the analysts to approach the second phase in a structured and methodical manner.
The idealised FAOR solutions, although impractical to implement at the time, nonetheless provided a goal that could be pursued via a strategy that would recognise the speed of technological developments, the availability of finance, and other priorities of the two departments.
It was always accepted that the FAOR study was essentially a research project, and any reservations about the final outcome in relation to the extensive analysis that was undertaken must be viewed in this context.
However, in terms of the use of soft system analysis for everyday project work, were are some useful lessons to be learned from the FAOR experience.
A parallel can be drawn with any examination that uses SSM to draw out ideas about improvements before using more conventional techniques to develop those ideas to a satisfactory conclusion.
It is important that the potential costs of actions to improve , in terms of extended research, development, equipment and so on, are also considered when debating possible changes with the client, together with an examination of conflicting priorities for whatever finance and other resources are available.
The danger otherwise is the development of utopian ideas about moving towards ideal systems without true recognition of the problems involved, ideas that, at a global level of consideration, can also seem appealing to the client.
In addition, it can be demotivating for staff who are subjected to a prolonged investigation that does not result in tangible benefits that offset the level of disturbance caused.
The soft systems approach often leads to conclusions about fundamental problems in an organisation, problems which in turn would require fundamental changes before they could be resolved.
From these conclusions it may be possible to derive a high-level strategy for change.
If, however, the expectations of the client are of a lower order, the analyst must be prepared to use the idealised solutions simply as a knowledge base to determine where acceptable and attainable improvements can be made.
The exercise of decomposing the system models will aid this process, progressively bringing the systems ideas closer to what can be observed in practice; imaginative use of unsophisticated computer software can also help, particularly where the level of detail makes manual analysis impracticable; simple matrices similar to those employed to good effect in many of the studies described in this book can also be of benefit; not forgetting, of course, the significant value of discussing ideas with experienced staff from the organisation being studied.
Other analysts may well develop different ways of making the connection; however, no matter how close the systems ideas come to the real-world activities, it will always be necessary to temper those ideas with a firm grasp of the practical effects of any changes.
The follow-up work carried out after the FAOR study involved an extensive fact-finding exercise, where a number of parallel investigations of real-world activity were undertaken to consider more precisely the effects of the proposed changes, in terms of data quantities, costs, staffing implications, and technical feasibility.
Having completed these, it was then possible to develop a strategy for implementing solutions that were feasible and desirable to implement in the existing circumstances.
The main lesson to be learned from this and certain other studies where soft systems thinking has been used, is that analysts, when making specific proposals for change, must take account of all the factors that determine the acceptability of such changes; in this way there is a better chance that the so-called pragmademic gap will be successfully bridged (Fig 14.11)
Application Guidelines
Introduction
Having entered the soft systems world as an untrained novice some years ago, and endeavoured to apply the theories to problem situations within my normal sphere of activity, aided only by the few textbooks that were then on the market and occasional contact with other exponents of the approach, I am keenly aware of the difficulties that some practitioners may have, not only with understanding the principles but also with putting them into practice.
I hope that this book overall will provide additional assistance in both respects, particularly for those who may not have had the advantage of formal systems training.
In the preceding chapters there is a lot of advice about how to apply systems ideas, but, to encourage a more complete understanding, it has been necessary to surround this advice with detailed explanations and examples.
Consequently, the reader may have reached this point in the book without a firm idea of how to start, or progress, a project that makes use of soft systems thinking.
Throughout the book 1 have tried to make it clear that the approach is not prescriptive, and successful applications depend a great deal on the intellectual and creative skills of the analyst.
Nonetheless, it is always useful to have some general guidelines, and in this final chapter I have gathered together many of the points that, from my personal experience, are worth bearing in mind when embarking on such a project.
As detailed explanations are provided earlier in the book they are not given here, but I have included appropriate chapter references in the text.
Applying the SSM
An overall summary of the SSM is given in Chapter 4, which includes a valuable statement of the outputs from the main stages in conjunction with the constitutive rules that apply.
In addition, there are a number of useful devices and hints that can help whenever the SSM is used, and these, together within certain pitfalls to be avoided, are summarised in the following sections.
Getting the Picture Together
Chapter 5 refers to the process of exploring a situation and expressing the main factors as a rich picture.
As a guide to construction, these pictures should reflect relevant structures and processes , and give an overview of the climate of the particular situation being addressed, together with any issues that are pertinent at the time of the analysis.
In practice, it isn't necessary to concentrate on including these factors, as they will generally appear in some form in the finished product.
From the outset of a study the picture can be developed simply by:
Noting down (in picture form) any points about the main characters, policies, locations, finance, constraints etc that seem relevant when reading through background papers, correspondence and other related material.
As interviews and other meetings are held, adding the issues to the picture as they arise, making sure that the source of these can identified, or the reasoning behind the selection of an issue can be substantiated.
Bear in mind that issues should reflect fundamental concerns (in relation to the level of study), and might also include those problems that arise frequently , or are in vogue at the time of the study.
Using the interview analysis technique where there is a need to draw conclusions about issues from a large number of interviews notes, discussion papers etc.
This analysis can be carried out manually by examining related complaints, grumbles etc and assessing the root cause of the expressed problems, or by utilising the facilities of a computer database to record, assess and regroup a series of minor points.
Do not be overly concerned with the correctness of rich picture, particularly in terms of format and layout, although the conventions used should be understood by all the analysts involved.
The term ‘rich’ implies that the pictures should contain a wealth of information relevant to the study; however, trying to include too much detail can result in them becoming extremely cluttered, and it is often necessary to summarise the detail (using the interview analysis technique if required) and redraw them as the study progresses.
Two further points are worth remembering ie:
When using the pictures as the basis for discussion with the client or representatives, be conscious of the sensitivity of any comments or issues that they reflect.
The clarity and definition of rich pictures can be aided by using computer graphics; however, attempting to construct them on a computer from the outset can impose artificial constraints, and the original pictures should always be drawn freehand.
Developing System Models
Apart from the value of the pictures in terms of summarising the main factors about a situation, they are used as the basis for selecting relevant systems when preparing root definitions and associated conceptual models.
This is carried out by first defining what the system is that is being modelled, using the CATWOE mnemonic as a guide (Chapter 6).
Selecting a Viewpoint
The most important part of the CATWOE analysis is the determination of the  Weltanschauung  or Worldview and the associated Transformation , which normally precedes consideration of the other CATWOE components.
If the concept of  Weltanschauung is difficult to grasp, consider instead the different viewpoints that are relevant to the situation being examined.
As a starting point, study the rich picture and make a list of the main characters or groups of people that could have an interest (particularly those who are influential in some way) and then consider the systems that can be perceived from their points of view.
For instance, the staff, management, shareholders, customers etc could each view the enterprise in different ways, and the list will encourage the analysts to focus on each perspective in turn, leading to ideas about the systems that could be modelled.
In most cases it is also useful to develop a statement of the primary task of the enterprise, based on a neutral assessment of what is actually happening or is being achieved (such as making motor cars , or providing a specified service and so on).
The development of a number of root definitions and associated models will be enlightening; however, if time is a constraint then it may be necessary to be more selective and pursue only the viewpoints that are most relevant, such as those of the main client or other influential persons, ie people whose agreement may be needed before changes can be implemented.
Transformations
Once a viewpoint has been selected, the subsequent CATWOE analysis is made easier by first considering the transformation that could be taking place in the selected system, using as a starting point a simple sketch of the conversion process, ie input-transformation-output (Fig 15. 1).
Bear in mind that:
It sometimes helps to decide first the desired output from the system and work backwards to consider the input, leading to a statement of the desired transformation.
Inputs and outputs should be at the same level of abstraction; in other words conversion of an abstract notion (such as customers needs ) to a tangible form (such as the specific goods or services that are supplied) is not supportable in a root definition.
It is, however, acceptable to illustrate in the conceptual model secondary inputs/outputs in support of the main transformation, and some of these (such as resources, information etc) could have a tangible form in the real situation.
Environment and Wider Systems
When deciding the environment of the system being modelled, keep in mind the simple definition that applies in this context, ie it influences but doesn't control the system, and also the notion that the environment provides the inputs to the system and receives the outputs from it.
Don't confuse the environment with the wider systems of interest , which, although providing inputs and receiving outputs, exercise control over the system being considered, normally by setting the standards, rules and so on; additionally, the wider system often provides the resources that are used by the subject system.
To avoid delaying the progress of a study by being too concerned with defining the environment or other CATWOE elements correctly, it may be necessary to merge some real-world facts with the systems thinking, for example by considering the relationships between the group being studied and other parts of the organisation, and setting the system boundary accordingly.
This might appear contrary to the idea of keeping systems thinking and real-world aspects separate, but it can provide a compromise that ensures that progress can be made; however, such compromises should be recognised as such and not made as a matter of course.
Other Factors
Similarly, because system boundaries are not synonymous with functional or organisational boundaries, difficulties can be encountered when defining the actors ,owner(s) and customers of a Human Activity System.
During the initial development of root definitions these factors should be considered in systems terms only , otherwise the analyst may just relate them to the subject organisation, overlooking other individuals or groups who contribute to the system as defined.
If progress is unduly delayed by failing to agree on sufficiently ‘pure’ definitions, then the systems thinking can be tempered by using such devices as the hierarchy of control model (as covered on pages 81 to 83 of Chapter 6).
Don't forget that customers can be defined for each lower-order element of the model, as well as for the system as a whole.
Expressing the Root Definition
As a final point about the root definition, it is sometimes useful to express it as a statement to see if it makes reasonable sense, and to double-check that all the CATWOE factors have been considered.
There is no precise form for such a statement, but the following structure has been found useful in practice:
‘A system owned by (Owner as defined ), operated by (Actors as defined ) to carry out/do/provide etc (ie the Transformation as defined ) for the (Customers as defined ) in an (Environment as defined ) '
It is not necessary to include the viewpoint taken in a statement of the root definition, as this will have been explicitly considered in the early part of the CATWOE analysis.
One further point is worth remembering; the root definition is concerned with what is being achieved, not how it is done, and any inclusion of a ‘how’ statement should be shown as a constraint, eg improving productivity by the use of incentive bonus schemes .
Constructing the Conceptual Model
Model styles can vary considerably, but there are certain general points to be conscious of when constructing them, ie:
The components of the model are expressed as verbs.
If the model contains too many sub-systems/activities, it is likely that there is a mix of resolution levels.
Five to ten sub-systems is accepted as the normal range, which can then be decomposed as required to show lower-order activities.
It is often difficult to show on the model precisely how the components interact (eg by a transfer of information or resources), particularly when drawing high-level models where such interactions may be extremely complex.
However, it is important to show the links between components, even if the detail is not included.
The ‘monitoring and control’ sub-system, which relates to all components of the model, can be shown as a separate element to avoid cluttering the illustration.
The process of expanding or decomposing the model should be carried out by developing a root definition for each sub-system, taking into account that these are subject in turn to ‘monitoring and control’ at the new level of definition.
The formal systems model provides an invaluable checklist for ensuring that all the general system characteristics have been considered when developing Human Activity System models.
The ideas generated (ie about resources, interaction, measures of performance, decision-making processes etc) when checking with the formal systems model can also be used during the comparison stage of the SSM to determine if these factors are represented in the actual situation.
Exploring the Real Situation
Chapter 7 examines in detail the methods for making the comparison between the conceptual models and the real situation.
The main points to remember are:
System models are seldom synonymous with organisational structures or functional groupings, and high-level models reflect what is being achieved rather than the manner of achieving it (ie how this is done).
Expanding the model will, however, progressively reveal activities that may be observable in practice.
There are a number of tried and tested approaches for making the comparison (eg general discussion and observation, question generation, model overlay ), but these are not intended to be exhaustive; analysts should endeavour to make imaginative use of the ideas generated during the systems thinking stages to examine what is happening in practice.
Expansion of the model (ie extended analysis ) can be aided by using a computer database to record and retrieve each activity, associated resources, information, and measures of performance.
To maintain links between the main model and the outputs of the expansion, an ‘audit trail’ should be established by numbering each component of the model in thumb, then extending the numbers on a decimal basis as the expansion progresses.
In addition, as discussed in Chapter 11, the use of a ‘hierarchical scalar, can assist with obtaining an overview of the main components of an expanded model (Fig 15.2).
Agreeing and Implementing Changes
As explained in Chapter 8, the output from the comparison stage will be an agenda for debate about areas where some improvement appears to be possible; in practice this may comprise a list of problems that the analyst has identified for discussion with the client so that one or more can be selected for further study.
The changes that will be deliberated at this point are those that are considered desirable in systems terms, and culturally feasible in light of the prevailing attitudes within the organisation.
In addition, experience has shown that it is equally important to make a provisional assessment of factors such as development and staffing costs, and the technical feasibility of pursuing any proposed computer initiatives.
Whether or not a formal debate is held will depend on the purpose of the examination and a number of other factors, but it is obviously necessary to seek the client's opinion before deciding the direction that a study should take once a number of problems have been identified.
Discussions should also be held when relevant systems are being considered during the early stages, and when some specialist input (ie from the organisation) would be advantageous to the modelling exercises.
Informal Applications
Chapter 9 covers a variety of different situations where systems ideas can be used informally to help with general analysis work, and these can be summarised as:
Making a sketch in rich picture form when gathering information for any type of study, or when attempting to obtain an overview of a complex situation.
Without deriving a full root definition, modelling the activities required to undertake a particular process such as project planning, performing a task or set of tasks, developing ideas about new functions, and so on.
In summary, systems concepts and principles can, with a little imagination and effort, be utilised to good effect in virtually any situation, including those where computer systems development is taking place, either in the limited sense described above, or by making use of the full SSM package to put such developments into an organisational and social context.
Final Comments
In the book I have attempted to give a practical interpretation of the soft systems approach, an interpretation that has been found to be of value in many studies with which I have been associated.
To achieve this, and also to attract the interest of would-be exponents of the approach who have not had the opportunity to undergo an extensive systems education, it has been necessary at times to over-simplify the explanations of concepts and applications, and condense them from those  developed by system researchers over many decades.
Any reader who wishes to pursue the concepts further and obtain a more complete understanding should first explore the main textbooks on the subject, ie by Peter Checkland and Brian Wilson, and then delve into the many others that examine systems ideas, some of which are given in the list of references.
On the whole, I hope that there is sufficient material in the book for analysts of any persuasion to make a start on the process of using system ideas to investigate and understand human activity; at the same time, systems students and researchers may well benefit by studying some of the interpretations and practical examples given here, reflecting as they do a  Weltanschauung  with which they may not be familiar.
In broad terms, because soft systems thinking represents a unique way of encouraging an observer to learn about a situation, it should appeal to virtually anyone who has an enquiring mind, a notion reflected in the closing paragraphs of Systems Thinking, Systems practice ; as I have made frequent reference to this work throughout, it seems appropriate to finish my book with the following quote from Professor Peter Checkland, who says about soft systems thinking:
‘It will appeal to all those people in any discipline who are knowledgeable enough to know that there is much they do not know, and that learning and re-learning is worthwhile.
For such people a systems approach is not a bad idea’
Which is not a bad idea either!