

THE CARRIAGE TRADE
From 1862, Wolverton lost its independence as a locomotive works and came under the direction of Ramsbottom at Crewe.
Most outstanding orders were completed, but two Extra Large Bloomers were cancelled, which would have made a total of five of that class.
Men were beginning to move to Crewe, and others further afield.
The Loco Department at Wolverton was now under a Mr Peet, who came from Carlisle; Mr Mumford from Crewe was his second-in-command and chief draughtsman.
In 1864, the L & NWR Board decided to centralise the Carriage Works at Wolverton.
Previously new carriages were built at Saltley, near Birmingham, and repairs were carried out at both Crewe and Euston.
At the time the L & B railway was built there were no railway carriage building firms so that underframes for original stock were constructed at Euston or, as it was then called, Euston Grove Station, while bodies were built by a West End road vehicle builder and carted from his works to the station.
This is how the Royal Saloon was built for Queen Adelaide.
On the completion of the L & B line in 1838, the Works at Euston were fully equipped and all vehicles built there.
With the absorption of other lines into the system, together with carriage building shops, the number of branch works became too scattered, so they were all amalgamated, and works leased at Saltley, Birmingham.
There the work was carried out until the L & B Railway had amalgamated with and leased a number of small lines, notably the Birmingham and Manchester, Liverpool and Manchester, and the South Staffordshire Railways.
Wolverton, which had been the seat of the locomotive building industry for the L & B Railway was no longer so convenient as when the northern terminus was at Birmingham.
The locomotive works at Crewe now provided engines for the Northern Division and, in 1 8 65, some of the Wolverton Shops were vacated, the Carriage Works at Saltley abandoned, and the whole of the plant removed to Wolverton.
Saltley was recorded in the Birmingham The New Illustrated Directory of 1858: ‘Saltley, formerly a pleasant little village about two miles out of Birmingham, but now, from the great demand for building sites, virtually a part of the town itself, is remarkable for the immense manufacture of railway carriages, at the works of Messrs. Joseph Wright and Sons.
These works were founded by Mr Joseph Wright, who had for many years been intimately connected with what we may call ‘the system of locomotion’, having been a contractor for the conveyance of mails, and the owner of most of the coaches running between the Metropolis and Birmingham, and other large towns.
He was also a coach and carriage builder.
When railway travelling commenced, Mr Wright was wiser than many other coach operators.
He did not, like them, attempt to enter on a ruinous competition with the new mode of conveyance, but on the contrary adapted himself to changed circumstances, and became a railway carriage builder.
At his works in London he built the first carriage used on the L & B line and also the carriages for the Eastern Counties, the London and Brighton, the London & South-Eastern, the London South-Western, the Blackwall Railways.
In consequence of the increasing demands of the trade, Mr Wright erected works at Saltley, a locality chosen on account of its central situation and facility of access to some of the most important railways in the kingdom, such for example as the L & NW and the Midland.
These works were erected thirteen years ago, and being ultimately leased to the L & NWR Company, the present buildings were erected on a still larger scale.
The business is now carried on by the sons of the original proprietor who trade under the name of ‘Joseph Wright & Sons,’ and employ from six to  seven hundred men.
The firm has constructed carriages of various descriptions for almost every railway in the kingdom, and for many lines in other countries — amongst others for Egypt, Sweden Norway, Denmark, Holland, Spain, India and Australia.
For the last eight years, Messrs. Wright & Sons have had the contract for the maintenance and working of the North and South Staffordshire Railways.’
The original Saltley Works built by Joseph Wright in 1845 was let to the L & NWR Company in 1853, and Joseph Wright & Sons continued to manufacture railway rolling stock in new premises on an adjoining site.
The LNWR remained in the original section of the Saltley Works, where they built and repaired their own rolling stock until 1865.
Then the Metropolitan Railway Carriage and Wagon Company Limited — which the sons of Joseph Wright had formed in 1862 — purchased the unexpired leasehold interest and the Railway Company transferred its activities to Wolverton.
So the L & NWR were building coaches in the same area as Joseph Wright & Sons, at best not a satisfactory arrangement, and a major factor in the decision to transfer this activity to Wolverton.
In addition, access would have been over Midland metals, the route being Curzon Street via Exchange Sidings to Washwood Heath, the site of Saltley Works.
The LNWR line from Aston Junction, to Stetchford, passing Washwood Heath, was not opened until 1888.
During 1865, the Carriage Department completed its move from Saltley, and the company bought twenty more acres adjoining the nine bought in 1858.
On it were quickly built two workshops, a sawmill and body shop (no's 14 and 13 on the 1906 map).
Mr R. Bore, superintendent of Saltley Works, took charge of carriage building at Wolverton Works, the first carriage superintendent of the L & NWR, all carriage activities all over the system coming under his control.
To give rail access to these new shops and the new Smithy, Boiler and Erecting Shops, built in 1859, a bridge was erected (No 171E) and an entrance curve laid in, containing two sets of track.
Carriage work commenced alongside locomotive work.
In 1877, the manufacture and repair of locomotives at Wolverton was given up and the whole of this work was done at Crewe, so that Wolverton became an exclusively carriage building centre.
In the beginning (1838), early carriage department officers were mainly selected from those who had experience in the building of road vehicles, and their efforts resembled road coaches set upon a flat railway wagon.
An undercarriage was fitted with two pairs of rail wheels, and two or more road vehicle bodies were fixed on top.
The coaches gradually increased in size, length and weight, until overhang at the ends and a sag in the middle necessitated a third set of wheels.
With Moon as Chairman, the Carriage and Loco Departments came under strict financial control.
Carriage development at Wolverton was slow by the early 1880s, vehicle size and design remained similar to that of the 1860s.
Design was also influenced by the locomotive policies of Ramsbottom and Webb, in particular Webb's vested interests' the chain brake and radial truck.
The chain brake could not be applied to stock mounted on bogies, and Moon condoned it, at a Board Meeting in 1879, as ‘the most perfect brake that could be devised’— it was also the cheapest.
So the maximum length of a coach on six wheels was 34ft 0in over body.
The first six-wheeled coaches were 30ft 6in long, 7ft 9in wide with a total wheel base of 18ft, the distance from centre to centre of the wheels being 9ft and the weight about 11. ¼ tons.
The standard length of a third class compartment at that time was 5ft 10in, and a first class compartment 7ft, so that a first-class coach contained four compartments and a third-class, five.
But the wheel base continued to increase and, to negotiate curves, it was necessary to allow the centre pair of wheels a certain amount of side play.
This was limited and, in order to use a longer vehicle, radial axle-boxes were introduced.
These radial coaches, of which the first was built in 1882, were 42ft long over bodies, with a total wheel base of 32ft; the end pair of wheels were 8ft centre to centre and 1 6ft between the centres of  the middle wheels.
They were carried on four pairs, of which the two middle ones were fixed, whereas to move sideways in a radial direction when going round a curve, though normally they were held in a straight line with the fixed wheels by a pair of springs in compression.
When passing round a curve, one or other of these springs (depending on whether the curve was a right hand or a left hand one) had to be still further compressed.
These 42ft vehicles were sleeping saloons and, after they had been running some little time, some ordinary coaches 34ft in length, carried on six wheels, were built; these had a total wheel base of 22ft, or 11 ft between centres.
The centre and one end pair were fixed wheels, while those at the other end were radial.
These were followed by 8-wheel coaches 42ft long on the same lines as the sleeping saloons.
While this type of wheel arrangement answered its purpose when introduced, the spring recoil after compression, compresses the opposing springs immediately on regaining the straight, and these in turn recoiled, setting up a disagreeable lurching movement.
The introduction of bogies soon put an end to any further construction of such vehicles.
In 1887, Bore retired as Carriage Superintendent and C.A. Park succeeded him.
Henceforth the Works expanded, and L & NWR coaching stock evolved, to take the lead over all rivals in Great Britain and perhaps Europe.
Initially, Park was handicapped because the steel underframes were built at Crewe, for Wolverton was not tooled up to produce them.
For the first few years the maximum carriage length remained at 42ft.
Richard Moon retired from the Board in 1891, removing the main stumbling block to progress in design of coaching stock.
By 1893, coaches were being built with bogies of an 8ft wheel base.
(The Midland Railway first introduced bogie-mounted coaches in the 1870s, some indication of how far Wolverton lagged behind its rivals.)
Radial under-frames ceased to be manufactured from around 1891 and the conversion to automatic vacuum brake was completed in 1892.
In 1897, the standard length selected for most bogie coaches was 50ft.
The first bogies used at Wolverton were designed after the American model, and were constructed like the underframe then in use, partly of iron and partly of timber.
Elliptical bearing springs were first employed, but these afterwards gave place to spiral springs.
In 1892 bogies were constructed entirely of steel, and iron and timber under-frames were abandoned.
Among other improvements was lighting.
Until 1880 oil was the only illuminant in use, but in that year a number of West Coast vehicles were lighted by compressed shale oil gas or, as it was commonly known, Pope's gas.
Seven years later an experimental train was fitted with electric light supplied by a dynamo driven by a three-cylinder Brotherhood engine.
This lighting set was placed on the tender of the locomotive and manipulated by the driver.
As there were no accumulators on the train the lights went out if the engine uncoupled from the train.
This train ran for some time, but was not considered entirely successful.
Then Stone's system was introduced in 1895.
By 1912, Mr Foale of Wolverton had designed and put in production, the famous ‘Wolverton System’.
The Works was described by a Mr V.L.
Whitechurch of the Railway Magazine in 1897.
Mr Park told him ‘that his authority extended beyond Wolverton to Crewe also; and then we have repairing sheds at Carlisle and Willesden.’
He was also responsible for all cleaning and examination of the coaching department.
‘The average number of vehicles passed through the shops for repairs annually is 8,100…. there are 3,200 employed at Wolverton, while outside we have 2,000 at Crewe, Carlisle and Willesden, and scattered over the line’.
Park explained ‘we include brake-vans for passenger trains, horse-boxes, fruit, milk, and luggage vans, and also all the omnibuses, parcel carts and vans, broughams, gigs and so on are made and repaired by us’.
Whitechurch was shown the works by Mr G. Coker, chief draughtsman: ‘There are two chief ways of seeing the works, either to begin at the finished coach and work backwards to the details, or to go to the beginning first and work upwards, but, at all events, you shall see as much as we can show you in a day’.
Whitechurch wrote: ‘The immense timber yard is enough to make one imagine that material had been laid in for building a fleet of a hundred arks after the pattern of Noah's.
There are huge logs of mahogany to form panels in the future; long strips of oak — wood everywhere of all shapes and varieties; while undercover are stored up thousands of boards for panels, etc.’
He was told: ‘We try to keep the panelling for three years, to get it thoroughly seasoned while other wood is dried artificially if required before it has time to get seasoned…we use chiefly mahogany, oak and walnut, a vast amount of teak — one of the most useful woods in railway  construction — sycamore; yellow deal for partitions, roofs and floors; elm we find of very little use, but we are now very partial to Padouk wood [from South Australia], though the workmen don't like it much on account of its toughness’.
Adjoining the timber stores were the saw mills in two large shops.
‘I saw a huge mahogany log, over two feet in width and thickness and very long, weighing five tons and worth twenty-five pounds, being sawn into panels by a set of vertical saws.
Five boards were sawn off either side and once from end to end, and when these ten, destined for side panelling, were cut, the log was turned, and thirty boards of narrower width sawn for end panels, thus utilising all the wood possible.’
Whitechurch continued: ‘Closely adjacent to the sawmills is the Smiths’ Shop…a large building resounding with the clang of the hammer, and bright with forge-fires and hot iron.
…one hundred forges, while fourteen steam-hammers (of which two weigh three tons), three gas-furnaces, and four gas producers go to swell the machinery.
One of the most important of the many articles manufactured in this shop are the steel carriage springs, each of which is submitted to a test quite as severe as that applied to the guns in Woolwich Arsenal, before it is sent out to administer to the comfort of the travelling public, the test chiefly consisting in the dropping of heavy weights upon the springs.
‘An intensely interesting portion of the 25 shops that make up Wolverton Works is before me as I enter the wheel department, for here I have an opportunity of studying in detail the basis of the running of the modern railway-coach.
And here I might remark that the chief point that strikes the observer as he goes through this department is the predominance of the bogie — in fact, there is very little else.
‘The joiners shop contained scores of carpenters’ benches, upon which every species of detail work was to be seen…door panels, door pillars;…window frames and skirtings,…panels…ventilators, sashes, rests for water bottles.’
‘Entering the body shop, I speedily saw the beginning of the erection of the coach itself.
The steel frames are sent down from Crewe.
Those for the new carriages, which I shall describe presently, are fifty feet in length.
‘We entered the ‘body’ of a corridor coach that was in a state of semi-completion…different woods used in various parts of the construction.
The framing was of teak…the cantrails were oak, and the partitions, roof, and floor of yellow deal.
The panels were mahogany, strengthened on the outside with stout canvas glued to the back, and supported to the angles of the framing by glued blocks.
Deal was the wood used for seats, with oak for the seat rails.
The roof was spanned by curved ribs of channel steel, with an internal lining of wood, for screwing the roof outside and the panels within.’
Whitechurch then saw ‘one shop where a group of female polishers and varnishers were rubbing seat-arms and panels…the upholstery department…a room above, where was a row of sewing machines, worked by steam, and an army of fifty women and girls stitching busily at cushions, and cordings and hand-rests, and the like, while in another room were more of the gentle sex preparing strips of leather for window straps.
Next came the ‘'stuffing'’ department, where seats and backs were being fitted with horsehair.’
‘In the paint shops each coach received no less than sixteen coats of paint.’
These included three coats of white priming, four coats of filling up, and one coat of red staining; three coats of lead, one  coat of Kremnitz white, one coat of enamel and three coats of varnish on the white panels and on the chocolate body, two coats of lead, one coat of brown, one coat of lake (carmine, a very expensive colour), one coat of enamel and three coats of varnish.
The modern ‘Mansion House to Broad Street’ trains of the L & NW are not painted at all.
They are built of the teak, polished and varnished, and are well adapted to the Underground, whereas if ordinary coloured coaches were run they would soon show the dirt — as do the G.W. ‘And now,’ said Mr Coker, ‘you shall see some of our crack rolling-stock — the finest trains in the Kingdom’.
Mr Whitechurch described it: ‘The first train that I went over was the very latest type of West Coast Joint Stock corridor, designed to run from Euston at 11.30 am to Edinburgh and Glasgow, returning from Edinburgh at 11.35.
This was a reserve duplicate of those now running.
It is fitted with the Automatic Vacuum for the L & NW, and the Westinghouse brake for the Caledonian, the pipes running along the sides, under the frames; and Peters & Co's American system of steam heating — an inner tube filled with acetate of soda, and heated by steam from the engine sent through an outer one, the amount of heat being under the control of the guard.
The coaches are fifty-four feet in length from buffer to buffer; the corridors are two feet six inches in width; the doors one and three-eighths inches in thickness.
In a third-class carriage there are seven compartments, seating three a side, each fitted with electric bell push for attendant, and a lavatory at either end.
The upholstery is brown and black rep with black and red seaming cord and laces, and leather corner arm-rests; the partitions are pine, and the roof covered with white lincrusta.
The corridors are fitted with teak pillars and framing, and are roofed with sycamore (veneered).
The floor is covered throughout with Kork linoleum.
There are two fold-up seats in the corridor, a water filter at one end, and twenty-four gas-burners in all.
The first class coach contains five full and one coupe compartment.
The lavatories, one at either end, are fitted with silver-topped basins, and the interior finished with V-jointed American oak, with walnut mouldings and skirtings.
The corridors are fitted with walnut framing, sycamore panels relieved with gold, dado of Italian walnut, sycamore roof V-jointed and banded with walnut.
For the compartments, black American walnut, highly polished, is used for the framing, while photo prints and mirrors in walnut frames are under the net racks.
The panelling is of sycamore, relieved with gold beading, and the roof of Walton lincrusta, in cream relieved with gold.
The upholstery is figured moquette of a crushed strawberry-coloured ground, and the floors are covered with figured Kork linoleum and matting.
The dining cars on this train are of the newest West Coast pattern, first and third composite on six-wheel bogies.
The whole train is made up as follows: EDINBURGH PORTION 1.
Composite brake and first class; 2.
Composite dining car; 3.
Third class coach; GLASGOW PORTION 4.
First class coach; 5.
Composite dining car; 6.
Third class coach; 7.
Composite third class brake.
Mr Coker was a forward-looking fellow: ‘And now’, he said, ‘let me show you the third class coach of the future.
This is a sample of four hundred which we are busily engaged in turning out, and a type of railway carriage that in time will succeed nearly all the present main line thirds of our system’.
Mr Whitechurch was impressed:
‘As I looked at the magnificent vehicle I could not help thinking of the historical ‘Experiment’ of the Stockton and Darlington Railway, or of the Exhibition excursions of 1851, when the GW nailed rough boards across their permanent way trucks at Didcot to accommodate their third class passengers!
These new examples of modern luxury in railway travelling are fifty feet in length, and mounted on two four-wheel bogies.
They are corridor carriages, but differ from those of the ‘West Coast Joint Stock’ above described in that they are slightly narrower, in order to be of uniform width with the present ordinary rolling stock, their actual body width being eight feet.
But the seating accommodation is not diminished, the corridors being narrower — to wit, two feet instead of two feet six inches.
‘But they beat the GW,’ said my companion, ‘for they only provide a twenty-inch corridor’.
There are seven compartments in each coach, and a lavatory at each end.
The panelling is similar to the West Coast corridors, but the roofing is white lincrusta.
‘Now’, said my guide, ‘you've seen about the finest thing in corridors and new main line coaches, so come and have a look at our new Watford locals — the best locals, bar none, in the Kingdom’.
The L & NW may be justly proud of these exquisitely finished trains.
They are not corridors, as, of course, the exigencies of local traffic scarcely render that sort of coach desirable, but are built specially for the service between Watford and Euston, and Watford and Broad Street.
They are fifty foot frames on four wheel bogies.
Three are already running and three more will shortly be turned out of Wolverton.
Two of those that are now running are fitted up with electric light, more as an experiment than anything else.
‘Just look inside this third-class compartment’, I was asked.
‘I could mention several local lines that haven't a first to equal it.
And you must notice in this new first smoker the seats and backs are fitted with embossed crimson leather.
Isn't that good enough for anyone?’
‘Other departments are the huge storage rooms,…and the omnibus and parcels cart erecting and repairing shed.
…the ‘brake shop’, into which coaches are continually coming for repair.
I was asked particularly to notice the very simple but effective apparatus for raising the coaches.
It consists of an upright cylinder containing a twelve-inch piston with rod two and a half inches in diameter.
This is wheeled by hand and placed under the end of a coach.
Compressed air, stored by a beautiful little machine on the premises, is admitted into this cylinder, the connection being made by means of an ordinary Westinghouse joint from one of the many rubber pipes leading from the air cistern (which is eighteen feet long by four feet diameter).
A tap is turned, a pressure of 120 pounds per square inch applied to the piston, and up goes the end of the coach as easily as though it were a doll's house.
‘And how long did this operation take under the old screw-jack system?’
I asked.
‘About an hour and a quarter’.
And they do it in five seconds now!’
The following year, 1898, the Works expanded again, westward in the form of a body shop and wheel shop (Shops 6 and 7).
By 1899, it was completely independent from Crewe.
Marked changes in the design of underframes and bogies were made.
These new designs also showed the lack of foresight in the small and underpowered loco policy: these locos could not haul a train of modern coaches and keep time.
In 1901, General Manager Sir Frederick Harrison ordered that all trains loaded to more than ‘equal 17’ must be provided with a pilot engine.
In 1900, the Power House was built and became fully operational in 1901.
This made Wolverton Works the first in the UK to be completely powered and lit electrically.
Also during 1900, the new lifting shop was built (Shop 5, doubled in size in 1913).
In 1902 further enlargement took place when a new paint shop was built (Shop 3).
In 1903 a hair room was erected and in 1905 a chemical laboratory.
The Works had now reached what was to be its zenith as regards workshops, covering an area of 80 acres of which 37 were workshops and offices, making it the largest in the UK solely devoted to carriage building and repair.
From the spartan Moon era, which finally ended in 1891, Wolverton Works under Park's leadership developed a palatial standard.
During 1892–93, the first Wolverton twelve-wheel diner was introduced.
This was followed on 1 July 1893 by the first all-corridor trains in the UK: three new trains of six coaches each, used on the West Coast route to Scotland, two in service and one in reserve.
After progressively improving the style, comfort and riding qualities on all stock, the year 1905 saw the final Park design for dining cars.
These were also the last vehicles to be constructed at Wolverton with a clerestory roof.
They were 65ft 6in long, 9ft wide, and 8ft 1in high, carried on 11ft 6in wheel-base bogies mounted at 43ft 6in centres.
There was seating accommodation for 15 first-class passengers at one end, and 21 third-class passengers at the other; and between the two compartments was the kitchen and pantry, cooking by gas.
The general decoration of the interior of the first-class was polished walnut, with mahogany panels banded with green ebony and tulip wood, while the roof was of lincrusta in bright and matt white enamel.
The third-class  compartment was almost exactly similar, except the woods used here were polished teak and light oak.
In both saloons moveable dining-room chairs were used and the tables also were made moveable, so that the interior of the saloons could be more easily and thoroughly cleaned than the old style of car with the fixed and upholstered furniture.
A contemporary account describes the scene thus —‘When the tables are laid and the electric light turned on, the effect is more that of a West End restaurant than a railway train.’
The Sleeping Saloons of the same era were of the same dimensions and weighed about 40 tons.
The underframes carried on six-wheeled bogies were identical.
There were many variations in the interior layout of this type of vehicle built around this period.
One of these saloons, built in 1905, had two double and seven single berths, and accommodated eleven passengers.
Another innovation was the club saloon.
A number of businessmen living on the North Wales coast, travelling to and from Manchester daily, joined together and formed a club.
Two saloons were attached to a morning train from Llandudno and an evening train from Manchester.
There were two large compartments in each vehicle with tables and moveable chairs; between these was a small compartment holding four, and at the end an attendant's compartment containing a sink and gas stove.
Lockers were provided, of which the members had keys.
Second only to the Royal Saloons of this time were the 57ft saloons de luxe, built for the accommodation of the Royal suite, when the King and Queen were travelling; when they were not required for this purpose they could be hired.
The compartments, or rooms, were decorated in white enamel, the corridor in fumed mahogany.
The body was divided into two small and one large compartments, which could be divided in the centre by folding doors.
For night travelling, brass bedsteads with handsome eiderdown quilts were provided.
The floors were covered with green figured Wilton pile carpet laid on grey felt throughout the saloon, except in the attendant's compartment and balconies.
When used for day service, the furnishing comprised three easy chairs, upholstered in green and gold tapestry, one oval centre table in mahogany with inlay of tulip wood and satin wood and two folding side tables.
In the smaller compartments only two easy chairs were used.
Another type was the invalid saloon, designed with accommodation for medical attendant, nurses, or servants.
1907 also saw the introduction of the famous and spectacular trains which were comprised of completely new twelve-wheel coaching stock.
These were the ‘American Special Boat Trains’ that ran between Euston and Liverpool, and ‘West Coast Corridor’trains.
Even at this early stage of motor car development the LNW built special vans to convey its rival; the carrying trucks designed for horse-drawn vehicles were too small for modern cars.
But the new vans specially built to convey this traffic were 27ft long and capable of holding two at a time, the forerunner of the car flats of the 1970s and '80s.
Milk traffic was a big revenue earner and continued to be until around 1950.
Until after the 1939–45 war, nearly all the country's milk was transported by rail.
Milk vans had to be kept scrupulously clean, and were 50ft long, 8ft wide, and 7ft 10in high in the centre, carried on two standard four-wheeled bogies.
The automatic vacuum brake was fitted in conjunction with a hand brake for the guard's use.
Gas was carried underneath to supply the six gas lamps in the roof and the guard's side lights, and in the centre of each van there was a guard's seat and look-out.
The vans could be operated singly, or could be coupled together to form a train, for which purpose they were provided with gangways.
In order to minimise delay at stations, a low truck, or trolley, was provided in each van, so that the milk could be sorted en route .
This truck stood 9in from the floor, and was constructed to carry two milk churns and, at the same time was narrow enough to pass through the end gangways, so that the churns could be taken from one end of the train to the other.
There were two side doors 5ft wide on each side of the van for dealing with the churns at the stations, and sliding, instead of folding, doors were fitted.
For cooling and ventilating, 12 torpedo  ventilators were placed in the roof to extract the air, and on either side of the gangways, some 5ft from the floor level, were louvred ventilators, protected by perforated zinc to keep out the dust.
These ventilators could be closed if necessary, by means of a glass door and, in order to keep the temperature constant, the roof was made double, with an air space between, while the sides were also made double, and were lagged with hair felt, placed between the outside and inside panelling.
Light was admitted during the daytime through the long framed windows fitted with moulded glass, which could be seen stretching from end to end of the van under the cornice.
The floor was entirely covered with sheet lead, which was protected from wear by oak slats, and the sides, to a height of 3ft were sheathed with stout zinc sheets.
On either side of the gangway doors were small doors on the floor level; these were for the double purpose of allowing a hosepipe to be brought through from the line for washing out purposes, and also to allow free escape of water.
From milk to money is but a step.
For such traffic, special bullion vans were used.
For obvious reasons, the exterior of these vehicles on the L & NWR were not conspicuous.
They were fitted with special locks, and the roof, sides, ends, and floor were plated with steel.
At one end was a compartment for the two armed guards who always travelled with a consignment of this kind, and in the partition between their compartment and the portion where the bullion was stored, there were portholes, or bull's eyes, of stout glass, so that the interior was always under their view.
Park retired in 1910, H.D. Earl taking his place as Superintendent of the L & NWR Carriage Department.
Earl continued to improve on the, now famous, Wolverton style of carriage design.
In 1913, the Wolverton Train Lighting System was patented and adopted by the L & NWR and put into production at Wolverton.
Mr Earl by 1914 had about 4,700 men at Wolverton and 2,400 at various outstations.
These figures taken in conjunction with the fact that 10,000 carriages and similar vehicles had to be maintained and repaired and up to ten new carriages turned out weekly for the L & NWR system alone, emphasise the importance of the department; Wolverton Works was the ‘largest works entirely devoted to carriage building and repairs in the UK’.
In 1914, Mr J. F. Gairns of the Railway Magazine visited the Works which he described in its final form.
‘The various shops may be said to form an inverted L, the southern arm following the railway towards London, while the western section is bounded by the Grand Junction Canal and the Stratford Road.
Connection with the main lines is made entirely to the south, and a system of burrowing-junction lines gives access to the works sidings, as also the good yards, without fouling the standard running lines.
‘The general offices are now accommodated in a neat but unobtrusive building fronting the Stratford Road, a short distance from the station.
Along this road runs the Wolverton and Stony Stratford Steam Tramway, the lines of which terminate beyond the L & NW station.
‘In the Carriage Finishing-off Shop (50), vehicles are delivered into service This is a large building containing 12 tracks.
It is 19 7 ft 6in wide and 43 8ft long, the roof columns dividing it into four longitudinal bays.
The three eastern lines are reserved for special vehicles, including the King's and Queen's present saloons, Queen Victoria's well known saloon (not now used), the Director's Inspection saloon, the Duke of Sutherland's saloon (painted with Highland Railway green lower panels instead of the usual L & NW lake), and other vehicles used for royal trains and other special purposes.
Remaining lines receive the general rolling stock, ranging from North London four-wheelers to the latest sleeping and dining saloons, all receive final attention here before going out into service.’
Gairns then listed other shops: ‘No.
49, known as ‘No.
2 Paint Shop’.
Here long vehicles which have already been in traffic, as distinguished from new coaches, are mainly dealt with.
There are 15 roads, 12 of which are reserved for painting, while Nos. 1, 2 and 3 are provided with pits and used for over-hauling the electric light equipment of the coaches' and ‘46, known as ‘No. 1 Paint  Shop Extension’, in which there are 15 lines.
This building is 246. ½ft wide, and its longest wall extends for a distance of 380ft.
Three lines are specially paved to suit the conditions of ‘rubbing down’ vehicles preparatory to receiving the early coats of paint.
Other lines are used for painting ordinary vehicles, mostly of small class.
No. 45 is No. 1, or the ‘old’ Paint Shop.
These three paint shops give, on 42 roads, accommodation for about 240 vehicles.
Nearly 450 men are engaged here and an average of over 60 vehicles can be turned out every week.
‘The trimming and upholstery shop is reached through the paint shop, of which building it is really a part’.
Mr Gairns noted that proprieties were properly observed: ‘a separate entrance to this department direct from the Stratford Road enables the girls to enter after and leave before the male employees.
The carriage washing shed No. 44 in the centre is a long shed with a single track and platforms on either side,…
Nos. 42 and 43 are the accumulator shops.
The L & NWR is unique in that it manufactures its own accumulators for carriage lighting plants.
A carpenters’ shop repairs and makes cell boxes.
In the lead burning and plate shops the plates are cast, shaped and prepared, with melting furnaces, casting frames and a few appliances.
An elaborate system of nozzles and fan-draught cowls minimises the risks of lead-poisoning.
In another division the paste for the plates is prepared, the men working in white overalls, a system of exhaust nozzles and other safety measures again being adopted to safeguard them.
Another section is equipped for charging and testing cells, while at the side is a long cell-washing shed containing four large washing tanks, acid mixing troughs, etc.
Some 50,000 cells are dealt with annually.
Adjacent is a gas lighting shop…
No. 4 1 is the laundry.
During the winter months, about 22,000 articles are dealt with weekly, and this number is increased to an average of 36,000 per week in the busy summer months.
‘No. 34 is a somewhat old ‘lifting shop’, now used mainly for smaller vehicles.
It has three roads and is served by two overhead electric cranes.
No. 32 accommodates small stores, with a division where lamp reflectors are enamelled, a tinsmith's shop and a section where seat springs are made, lavatory tanks prepared, lamps attended to and other miscellaneous work done.
Opposite is a small engine shed (No. 33), for the saddle tank engines used about the works, with coal stores, etc., adjacent.
Near by is a creosoting plant for preservatively treating timber, and a shed where upholstery is washed.
‘At the northern end of the works area is the gas works, the railway tracks passing a little further on and terminating near the viaduct, these lines forming storage lines for materials and for general purposes.
Alongside is a fine recreation ground, with cycle and other tracks, bandstand, etc.
This was presented to the town by the L & NWR Company in 1 885 immediately adjacent to the general offices, No. 30, alongside the canal, is the brass moulding shop, while No. 31 is the iron foundry.
In the brass foundry (a separate building)…a gas furnace is provided.
No. 29 is the Forge, alongside is the boiler room, containing three Babcock and Wilcox boilers, one fitted with the makers design of mechanical stoker and two with Bennis stokers.
These supply steam for the hammers, and’ for a blowing engine for the furnace draught.
Adjacent is an installation of Ingersoll air compressors supplying pneumatic power for pneumatic tools, sand blast for cleaning castings, fettling tools and the moulding machines in the foundry.
‘The smithy (No. l9) is a very fine building, 350ft long and 90ft wide, built when the Locomotive Works were at Wolverton.
At the east end, the springmakers work, and the machines required by them are installed in this part, together with an electric welding machine and various bolt and nut machines; boiler-makers work on the south and west sides, and the forging presses are also laid down here while the north side is mainly occupied by drop hammers.
There are no less than 70 fires, including three crane fires for very heavy work, in daily use, and in addition, 15 oil furnaces are required for the drop hammers, forging presses, etc.
Fourteen steam hammers are laid down, five of 15cwt each, one 20cwt, six 5cwt, one 2½cwt and one 200lbs.
Taking the smithy and forge together, work is found for 288 men and lads.
‘In the forge (29), which opens out of the smithy, there are three steam hammers,…and two batteries of drop stamps (Bretts).
Four hydraulic presses are used with these drop stamps for finning purposes.
There are three gas furnaces, one each for the steam hammers, drop stamps, and rolling mill.
The rolling mill is a ten inch one, driven by a steam engine.
‘No. 15 is the carpenters’ and joiners' shop — often known as the Old Finishing Shop — where furniture and general joinery for the railway and works and offices, ticket cases for station booking offices, platform barrows and trucks, etc., are made.
‘The sawmill is a very extensive and well-laid out shop.
There are no fewer than 80 machines — many of them large ones — of various kinds, and of these, saws are naturally in the majority.
There are two cranes in use, one in the mill and the other just outside.
The sawmill is in two bays, with an extension not quite so wide owing to the canal alongside.
‘Electric drive is employed systematically for most of the shops at Wolverton, and therefore the power station (No. 9) is, in some respects, the most interesting building of all.
It is situated just beyond the saw mill and by the side of the canal, from which it draws water.
It supplies both light and power to the works.
The building is 137ft long by 50ft wide inside.
The chimney stack is 150ft high.
‘The remaining extent of the Works area along the northern portion is mainly given over to timber stores and small departments.
No. 8 is a large timber drying shed.
No. 4 is a timber stores arranged in three bays for panel and more delicate woods, and No. 2 a large shed with corrugated roof and known as a timber hoist, this building being open at the sides and spanned by an overhead crane serving the various storage compartments.
It is mainly used for planks in the rough.
No. 1 receives mainly log timber and tree trunks, stored in the open until required, a big gantry spanning the yard.
It is estimated that as a general rule these stores will accommodate about 3,500,000 sq ft of timber, or about 300,000 cub ft.
‘A new hair-carding shop (No. 54) has recently been erected at the west end of the works, built of corrugated iron,…adjacent is a small mortar grinding plant and concrete breaker for the use of the building department.
‘No. 3 is the new paint shop, a magnificent department where all new vehicles are given their distinctive livery.
It has 21 roads, on which about 120 vehicles of an average length of 50ft can be painted at one and the same time.
The shop has its own colour room, containing two colour mills and one white lead mill, these being worked by electricity.
‘No. 5 is the new lifting shop, 750ft from end to end, and the longest building in the works.
Of this length, 31 5ft is due to an extension carried out recently.
There are two bays, with three tracks in each, the centre line being used for moving bogies and wheels as required.
The overhead cranes, of 15 tons capacity each, run the full length of the shop.
‘No. 7 is the wheel and axle shop.
It is in four bays.
‘No. 6 is the large carriage repair shop.
It is a large building with five bays, having 15 roads.
As a general rule, only long vehicles are taken in here for repair.
One road is set apart for the testing of the heating apparatus, etc., on vehicles.
About 250 men and apprentices are employed in this shop.
‘At the eastern end is another electric traverser connecting with a group of shops.
No. 10 is known as the horsebox shop, that is, it deals with repairs to horseboxes, carriage trucks, parcel and milk vans, motor car trucks and various smaller vehicles which are incidentals to coaching traffic.
No. 12 deals with road wagon repairs, though it is tending to become also a motor road vehicle body making and repair shop as these vehicles are becoming more numerous.
‘A steam traverser between these shops and Nos. 2 and 13 connects with two interesting divisions.
No. 12 is a finishing repair shop.
Bench work is mainly done here, but the system is that men engaged on each repair job come to No. 12 to do the actual woodworking involved.
About 300 men and apprentices are employed on new work and 180 on repairs.
‘No. 13 is the body shop where all woodwork is assembled and carriage bodies erected.
The shop is built in four bays and has 12 roads — 3 roads to a bay.
On the two outer roads of three bays coaches can be built, the fourth bay being used for a large door-making gang, step board makers, seat makers, and for dealing with steel panels, roof irons, stores, etc.
Twenty-four of the longest bodies can be built at one and the same time.
‘Another steam traverser serves shops Nos. 16 and 17 and these together with the small departments denoted as Nos. 20, 21, 22, 23, 24 and 18 may be considered together.
No. 20 is a veneer shop, containing veneer-presses and a special steam heated press.
‘No. 16 is the underframe shops.
No. 17 is a somewhat similar division but it contains a Tweddle press for shaping steel panel plates, and also deals with steel flooring, vestibule steel-work, and other miscellaneous work, while repairs are also undertaken here.
Alongside the body shop is a shed containing a machine for straightening sole bars and other long members of frames and grinding machine for surfacing sole bars and headstocks.
Nos. 23 and 24 are polishing rooms for finishing panels and cabinet work, girls being mostly employed.
No. 18 is the electrical shop where train lighting dynamos are made and repaired, lamp fittings seen to, and associated work dealt with.
‘In the yard between Nos. 23 and 24 and Nos. 20, 21, and 22 is a trough for washing firehose.
No. 21 is the time office and workmen's main entrance.
Here…the payment of the majority of the men each week takes place four and a half thousand men are handed their wages by the pay-clerks in less than ten minutes.
‘The works are provided with a very well equipped and up-to-date fire station and appliances.
An excellent brigade of about 30 officers and men ably captained by the Works Manager, Mr C.L. Mason, assisted by Second Officer Mr H.H. Coker, has several smart records to its credit.
The whole of the works is very satisfactorily protected by a well laid high pressure  system of water mains and hydrants and what with this and the excellent brigade, the risk of excessive damage by fire is reduced to a minimum.
‘No. 22 is the  workmen's dining hall.
On the ground floor is a section for the girls employed in the works.
Two upper floors together accommodate nearly 2,200 men, each having his numbered place with table, while adjacent staff premises contain steam ovens, tea and coffee brewing and usual appliances for meeting the needs of those workmen who do not go home for meals during the day.
‘No. 25 is the bogie shop.
At the end a section is used for general mill-wrights’ work, with a few machines, lathes, planers, slaughterhouse, drills, etc.
A walking crane serves this division.
‘A special feature of this shop is a system of overhead runways serving many of the machines, each having its own branch line.
This is what is known as the QEF system, equipped by Messrs. Herbert Morris & Bastert, Ltd.
No. 26 is a division of the general stores, with fire-proof doors to the oil section.
They are divided into five portions.
The entrance is used for loading and unloading wagons and vans and next to that is the part in which oil, paint and varnish are stored.
A third portion is used for issuing goods to the shops and out-stations, and in the fourth part gas fittings, pipes, lamps, lavatory basins and fittings, etc., are kept, while the fifth room is used for india-rubber goods, copper and brass articles, and  lincrusta and millboard panels.
A landing is built overhead, running the entire length of these and the iron stores, and this is also divided into separate parts, distinct classes of goods being kept in each.
This landing is reached by a lift.
The iron stores adjoining the general stores, with which there is a direct communication.
Here all kinds of iron and steel articles are kept, ranging from bolts, nuts screws and washers, to heavy rolled iron and forgings.
Everything is systematically arranged, so that anything that is required may be got out without any trouble or delay.
Several weighing machines are provided, ranging from a spring balance taking up to 40 lbs to a 5 ton weighing machine.
A narrow-gauge trolley way runs the entire round of both stores.
‘No. 27, a section of the original works, and still containing evidence of its early date, is now the general fitting shop.
At one end is a tool room, with appliances for making cutters and taps, tool sharpening machines, a cutter hardening furnace, and lathes, etc.
No. 28 was formerly the wheel turning shop, but it is now used mainly for automatic machines.
‘In line with No. 28 is the brass stores, No. 35.
The section marked 36 is a brass-finishing shop.
‘In a gallery…is the brass dipping room and electro-plating and oxidising room.
The plating is carried on in eight vats, one each for silver, nickel and black nickel, two for brass plating, and three for copper plating.
The big building forming what is known as the brake shop (No. 37) was originally the principal section of the original works.
‘Its distinctive feature is the outer wall facing what was for some time the running lines of the railway, though these tracks are now wholly within the works area, the main lines passing on the other side of the canal.
As far as possible original characteristics have been carefully preserved, though the wall cannot be seen from passing trains.
One corner of this shop is partitioned off for brake work, brake testing, metalling of axle-box and other bearings and for dealing with passenger communication apparatus, etc.
It is here that the various valves, heaters etc., comprising the Wolverton system of steam heating are manufactured, and all the stock of the Company is rapidly being fitted with this patent arrangement.
No. 39 is the testing room.
‘…concerning the equipment of the works…there are nine traversers.
Four of these are electric, each driven by a 40 h.p. motor which takes its current from overhead trolley wires.
The other five are steam driven.
Prior to September 1901, the power in the various shops was derived from separate steam engines and two distinct electric power plants.
Then the central power station…was designed.
This then was the works at the commencement of the 1914–18 war.
It had now reached the height of its development.
In 1916, Mr Trevithick took charge of the L & NWR carriage department.
In the last year of its independent existence (1922) the L & NWR amalgamated with the L & YR.
After nearly 77 years, the LNWR ended with 2,149 route miles of railway, Wolverton works being its sole supplier of new carriage stock.
As a predominantly passenger line, the L & NWR had more locos and more passenger carriages than its contemporaries.
It also owned 17 ships, and shared ownership of four more with the L & YR, which owned the largest fleet.
Along with the Midland and GWR, the L & NWR can be classed as one of the three great Victorian railways.
In fact, it was known as the ‘Premier Line’, with an authorised capital of £124m it claimed to be ‘the biggest joint stock corporation in the world’.
The group amalgamations of 1 January 1923, ended another era for Wolverton Works.
THE WAR EFFORT
The first record of the Works' involvement in war-work is that of 1855, when it supplied two locomotives for the Army on the Balaclava Railway in the Crimea.
In the early 1900s, the War Railway Council (later the Railway Executive Committee), asked the L & NWR to prepare plans for an ambulance for home use.
By the end of 1910, complete plans for a standard ambulance train had been drawn up and sent to all the main companies, all of whom agreed to supply one or more in the event of war, to the Wolverton Works specification.
At the outbreak of war on 4 August 1914, the Works lost a large part of its workforce.
Local territorial units were mobilised.
As with the Wolverton Companies, most of the members of the Stony Stratford Field Ambulance RAMC were Works men.
The order to mobilise was received at Stony Stratford at 6 pm on 5 August 1914, and by 10 pm 60% of the Mounted Field Ambulance had reported to their Headquarters at the Cock Hotel.
The remainder joined up next morning.
On the fifth day of mobilisation, Lieut-Colonel Deyns was able to report that the Field Ambulance was equipped according to scale, and ready to move.
Horses were collected, inspected, bought, and issued by the Remount Department to the unit, 12 riding and 40 draught.
Rations and forage were provided by local tradesmen under contracts previously made.
On 11 August, the Field Ambulance marched out complete from Stony Stratford to entrain at Wolverton for Reading, with the satisfaction of knowing that 98% of the men had volunteered for service abroad.
At Reading the unit joined the 2nd South Midland Mounted Brigade, and thence to Churn Down on 31 August, where the 2nd Mounted Division was being formed.
On 8 April 1915, the Field Ambulance embarked for Egypt, from Avonmouth, the transport Menominee with the bulk of the men, and the Commodore with the transport men and all the animals.
They took part in the action against the Turks in the Aden Protectorate.
August 1915 saw them at Suvla Bay in the Gallipoli campaign and they suffered heavy casualties at Chocolate Hill.
On 13 December, the Stony Stratford Ambulance left for Mudros; five days before the final evacuation, the unit suffered 30% casualties.
They returned to Egypt, where they went straight to the front after receiving replacements from the County.
After the second Battle of Gaza, they were part of a reconnaissance column that struck for Beersheba.
In the Jerusalem Campaign, they supported the attack on Mughar and the brilliant charge of the Bucks, Dorset and Berks Yeomanry kept the Ambulance employed at high pressure.
They took part in the advance into Syria, they were part of the Brigade that took Damascus on 1 October 1918, and were there 31 October, when the Armistice with Turkey was signed.
The other Territorial unit manned by the Works was the Royal Bucks Hussars, also part of the 2nd South Midland Brigade and in the same theatre as the Stony Stratford Ambulance.
They were used as infantry at Gallipoli, where they landed at Suvla Bay on 20/21 August 1915, serving with distinction where they took Chocolate Hill and Scimitar Hill with the bayonet; by 1 November 1915, they had been reduced to sixty.
The survivors returned to Alexandria to refit as cavalry and received replacements from the County.
In February 1918 they, with the Berks Yeomanry, were formed into one Machine Gun Battalion.
On 26 May 1918, they sailed for France on the Leasowe Castle , torpedoed at midnight on the 26/27, the survivors taken back to Alexandria.
They embarked again on 16 June and saw the war out on the Western Front.
Added to these were the reservists.
On 2 September 1914, a special train left Wolverton with 441 Wolverton Works men, all volunteers, bound for Oxford to enlist in the Ox and Bucks at Cowley Barracks.
Meanwhile, at the Works they began to implement the Railway Executive Committee pre-war plans of preparing ambulance trains for home use.
The vehicles were taken from main line traffic and altered, the trains completed in ten days, a naval train being actually finished in 30 hours.
The trains were designed to accommodate patients in the central vehicles, those at either end were for the convenience of the staff, stores, etc., and in the military trains, the ward or hospital cars had a pharmacy car in the centre.
The ward cars were converted from open parcel vans, already provided with sliding doors on the sides and ends.
These were refloored, covered with linoleum, coved at all angles, and hooks were fixed in the ceilings for suspending cots in two tiers on both sides for the naval trains, and folding berths in two tiers hinged to the sides for the military trains.
The pharmacy car was sub-divided into treatment room, pharmacy, office, linen stores, etc, and was fitted with all necessary requirements, such as cupboards, shelves for drugs, medicines, bandages, and utensils.
Dining cars were attached to each train.
All the trains were vestibuled throughout, and composed of bogie vehicles with clerestory roofs.
The outside of these home trains were painted in the L & NWR livery, and a Red Cross displayed on each car.
Three such trains had been completed by October 1914.
Following these home ambulance trains, the Works, by order of the War Office, constructed ambulance trains for the use of our troops in France.
Each of these trains consisted of sixteen bogie vehicles, a complete train 950ft long and weighing 440 tons.
They were made up of one pharmacy car, one staff car, one personnel car, two kitchen cars, one mess room car, one stores car, one break car with wards for infectious cases, and ten ward cars.
Each of the ward cars contained 36 cots for lying down cases.
These cots were specially made, arranged in tiers of three, and could be converted into comfortable couches for sitting up cases.
They were so designed as to be easily folded up, enabling the car to be thoroughly cleaned.
A constant current of fresh air was supplied to the cars by means of ventilators and electric fans.
Some of the latter were portable so that a current of air could be allowed to play direct on to the patients' faces.
The pharmacy car contained treatment rooms equipped with operating table, and a pharmacy compartment with fittings for bottles and all necessary medical appliances.
This car also contained an office for the doctors and a store for linen.
The staff car provided accommodation for the medical officers and nurses, including separate mess rooms, its dimensions 52ft 6in by 9ft.
The personnel car accommodated the day and night orderlies, providing 56 seats by day and sleeping berths for 28.
Its dimensions were also 52ft 6in by 9ft.
The kitchen cars (one of which was the kitchen and mess room car and the other the kitchen and stores car) were each provided with suitable heating and cooking ranges.
The mess room car contained a mess room for the personnel and suitable accommodation for the cooks.
Ample storage space was provided in the stores car.
The brake and infectious cases car contained 18 cots and was arranged so that the patients in it were isolated.
All the cars were lighted by electricity, which was generated from the engine.
The cars were painted khaki with the red cross in a prominent position.
The trains were fitted throughout with the Westinghouse brake, in accordance with Continental practice, and with steam-heating apparatus.
Another variation built at Wolverton was the British Naval Ambulance Train.
A standard train consisted of twelve vehicles: a coach for baggage and guard, a staff coach, dining car, cot coach for officers, three cot coaches for patients, a store coach and kitchen day coach for patients, and a crew coach and guard.
The length of the train was around 620ft and the width 8ft 6in, while the weight was about 310 tons.
Instead of berths, patients were received from hospital ships in hanging cots.
These were hung in two tiers on either side, but occasionally serious cases were suspended centrally, so as to be  almost entirely unaffected by the vibration of the train.
The cots were suspended from hooks attached to the roof and further secured in position by chains and springs, known as grips, which prevented them from swinging.
The train was electrically lighted, and in order to economise current when the train had to stand by for some time, nearly every lamp was under separate control.
Steam heating equipment was provided.
The train was painted Navy Grey, with a red Geneva cross on each vehicle in a conspicuous place, while within, enamelled white paint prevailed.
All internal ironwork and insides of gangways were painted with aluminium paint.
Both vacuum and Westinghouse brakes were fitted.
The train had living accommodation for thirty-eight sick berth staff, all in the charge of a medical officer, who had his living quarters in the staff coach, while 140 sick and wounded were accommodated in six cot coaches.
The staff coach included living quarters for the medical officer, and had accommodation for the chief surgeon, two doctors and two sisters.
The compartments were arranged as: a bed sitting room with lavatory accommodation at one end for the two sisters; next were two bedrooms with wardrobes, table for medical officers, these rooms placed each side of a well-equipped bathroom and lavatory.
The store coach consisted of an office for the officer in charge, linen store, two store rooms for provisions, sleeping accommodation for chief steward and cook, and a large kitchen fitted with all accessories for cooking for 140 patients.
The day coach was used by patients for dining and ablution purposes.
At one end were two padded cells for mental cases, and opposite these were cupboards for medical stores.
The day room had nineteen washbasins, and was fitted with seats, looking glasses, and above the washbasins were folding tables which rested on top and were used as dining tables.
Sleeping and living quarters for the crew were in the crew coach, with fifteen bunks in tiers of three, tables and forms, and a locker for each man's kit.
Telephonic communication existed throughout, and breakdown tools and fire extinguishers were distributed along the train.
The cots were disposed to form a long seat along one side of the coach, the remaining floor space being clear.
This was to meet a navy habit of sitting ‘on the deck’ when not otherwise engaged, the floor often being preferred to seats.
In all, Wolverton supplied five of these Naval Ambulance trains for home use.
The participation of America in the war in 1917 naturally involved the provision of Ambulance trains for United States troops.
These were more or less identical to the British Military overseas ambulance train.
Each train comprised sixteen vehicles with accommodation for 423 persons or, with a maximum of sitting cases, 652.
In all, some 368 coaches were converted for use as ambulance trains at Wolverton through the war.
On each overseas train, a team of fitters and lifters from the Works accompanied them to their destination and handed them over to the RAMC coupled up, and ready for use.
Another special train was built in 1915, for the British C in C in France, consisting of 17 coaches, all up-to-date bogie stock, converted into conference rooms, a war room, kitchen cars, dining cars, sleeping cars and lounges, a mobile HQ.
A large number of vehicles were altered for war purposes and 400 20-ton goods wagons and 40 35-ton trolleys were built, as well as 1,350 general service road vehicles, both horse drawn and motor, 18 pounder gun-carriages and limbers, 50 packing cases for aeroplanes, motor and horse ambulances, 2,550 ambulance stretchers.
Over 4,000,000 fuze parts, gauges, gains, stampings for rifle and field, and naval guns, bomb forgings etc, were made to order of the Ministry of Munitions.
676,000 18-pounder cartridge cases were reformed and 48,000 18-pounder shells were painted: sets of harness and horse accoutrements were also manufactured.
In October 1917, minute 27640 states: The Acting General Manager mentioned that in connection with the aeroplanes which the Railway Companies had been asked to construct for the government, the L & NW had undertaken at Wolverton a share of the work, i.e. construction of wings.
But in November 1917 the request was withdrawn.
Added to this war work was the heavy railway rolling  stock build-and-repair programme.
On 11 November, 1918, the Armistice was signed between Great Britain and her Allies, and Germany.
At the end of the war the Works and its men, and indeed the railways as a whole were in an exhausted state, as was the rest of the country.
During the war, 74,311 loaded special L & NWR trains were run for Naval and Military purposes, exclusive of upwards of 16,000 special trains conveying coal to the Grand Fleet.
For the conveyance of wounded men in ambulance trains, refugees, and prisoners of war, 13,318 special trains were provided.
It is estimated that, apart from troops conveyed by ordinary existing services, the L & NWR carried upwards of 25.1/2 millions of His Majesty's forces, together with the necessary complement of horses, guns, baggage, etc.
A total number of 3,288 of the larger description of tanks and 385 guns, varying from 50 to 189 tons each, were dealt with, together with approximately 13,937,000 tons of government traffic.
In order to assist in the urgent necessity for home-grown food, the Company provided 14,000 allotments for vegetable growing alongside the line, and issued a small guide giving instructions for planting, etc.
Owing to the large percentage of employees joining up, female labour was employed in many branches of Railway Work, ie: ticket collecting, platform work, engine and carriage cleaning work in the shops at Wolverton, Crewe and Earlstown. 6,584 females were utilised in place of men.
Some 20% of the Wolverton Works workforce had served in the armed forces during this conflict and, to count the cost in men, the casualty list for the Carriage Department, Wolverton, reads, as on 15 November 1919 — killed 246; died of wounds 56; lost at sea 7; died 57; missing 2; less transferred to killed, wounded 503; gassed 35, a total of 906.
The list of military honours and decorations won by Wolverton Works men during this conflict is impressive: one MC (Mr Mason, later to become Works Superintendent); twelve DCMs; twenty eight MMs; fourteen meritorious service medals; one french croix de guerre; two roumanian medalle si credinta 1st class; one order of St George 1st class (Russian decoration) and seven mentioned in despatches.
Following the 1921 Railways Act, on 1 January 1923 the L & NWR became part of the LMSR.
This Company was not only the largest of the four groups, it was actually the largest railway system with the exception of state systems in the whole world, with a route mileage of 7,790,(excluding Irish Lines).
Wolverton Works became a leading part of this new organisation.
It is perhaps not to be wondered that when the clouds of war then appeared, those in high places turned a speculative eye on this, the greatest privately-owned railway organisation in the world, with facilities and space, equipped in a wide range, from precision tools to mighty hammers, forges, foundries, and a tradition of skilled  craftsmanship grafted to modern organisational and administrative ability, for a possible source of production of the sinews of war.
The utilisation of the Railway Companies Workshops in the 1914–18 war had, of course, not been forgotten.
The first definite approach for the use of LMS workshops on government work apart from preliminary discussions on ambulance trains in 1929 and 1936, and information about workshop capacity supplied to Sir Cyril Hurcomb for the Committee of Imperial Defence in 1934, occurred in June 1937.
Then the Company was approached by the War Office to undertake the design of a medium tank.
A Special Design Office was created at Euston.
In October 1938 the Company was asked by the Air Ministry to help in manufacturing Hawker Hurricane wings.
Thus, in the vital days before September 1939, not only had prime arrangements been undertaken in connection with aircraft and tanks, but the organisation had been laid down for the ready assembly of ambulance trains and casualty evacuation trains and, through the Mechanical and Electrical Engineers' Consultative Committee, which was formed in the abortive crisis of September 1938, to advise the Railway Executive Committee on matters pertaining to Railway Workshops, rolling stock and electrical undertakings.
When war was declared the Works lost many young men to the armed forces.
Some were already serving in the Militia, the Territorial Army and the LMSR Army Supplementary Reserve Units (RE): others volunteered who were not in these units and more were conscripted.
The  construction programme for carriages was suspended,(except for three Royal vehicles completed in 1941) but, during the first seven or eight months, workshop capacity was not fully utilised.
In the spring of 1940 government work started on a large scale, but until then many skilled men became redundant and were transferred to private firms.
A few days before the outbreak of war, instructions had been received to prepare and assemble the ambulance trains.
The six trains for which the LMS were responsible were handed over to the Military authorities in less than three weeks.
Trains for both home and overseas were constructed.
Each of the home trains were composed on five and later eleven vehicles of seven types, while there were 16 vehicles of nine different types in each overseas train, the latter provided with couplings and drawgear of continental pattern and special steam couplings for use with French locomotives.
All these trains were hospitals on wheels.
At the end of August 1942, the War Office in conjunction with the United States Army required, for overseas use, 27 trains.
Of these the LMS provided ten trains of fifteen vehicles each.
In September 1943, an additional requirement was put forward for 10 more identical trains, the LMS to provide four.
Considerable conversion work was involved and the complete exterior was painted in Khaki Green on which were superimposed Geneva red crosses.
In addition to conversions, it was necessary to prepare spare equipment for maintenance of all trains going overseas.
This was manufactured in LMS Shops.
American personnel of the American  Transportation Corps were also trained in the Works to maintain these vehicles.
By the end of the war, Wolverton Works and Derby C & W Works had together converted some 343 coaches into ambulance vehicles, representing some 27 trains (seven of eleven coaches, six of sixteen coaches and fourteen of fifteen coaches).
Another early war contract undertaken by Wolverton Works was for Casualty Evacuation Trains.
In the Spring of 1939, the Ministry of Health approached the Railway Executive committee to consider the preparation of a number of trains for the evacuation of civilian casualties, each train originally being composed of two third-brake vehicles for housing stores and staff, together with 13 passenger corridor brake vans with brackets for carrying stretchers.
After designs had been agreed, the work of fitting out the brake vans was undertaken at Wolverton and the vans returned to traffic, pending requirements, the stretcher brackets stored on the vehicle to enable them to be fitted at short notice.
In September 1939, a request came to fully convert the two brake vehicles for each train by the provision of the necessary cupboards and other amenities required the LMS to provide 15 trains.
This preparatory work was practically complete at the outbreak of war and authority was given a few days before for completion.
These trains were ready two days after war was declared.
During the autumn of 1939 it was decided to release one of the vehicles from each train and insert a Staff, Mess and Recreation Car, completely equipped with cooking apparatus, ample water supplies and seating facilities.
In September 1942, and at the end of 1943, the War Office wanted additional trains and it was agreed that several of the then existing casualty evacuation trains should be disbanded, to provide more ambulance trains.
Other rolling stock for war purposes and another combined effort by Wolverton and Derby C & W, was that of 16 complete breakdown trains for the fighting services.
Ordered for the War Office, each train was composed of four vehicles.
Each was a self-contained unit capable of tackling most normal and special war-time contingencies of railway transport.
These trains were all composed of covered wagons of either French or Italian make, used on the Continental Ferry Service, and left in this country.
Twelve trains had a steam crane attached, in addition to the light tools and guard's van, heavy tools van and packing, stores and guards van.
The light tools and guards van, as its name implies, carried a multitude of light equipment, over 160 items exclusive of hand tools in bulk.
Facilities for resting and messroom accommodation were provided in the riding or kitchen and mess van which was divided into three compartments, one for officers, another for the men and the third arranged as a kitchen.
The latter was a compact compartment equipped with a stainless steel sink, large slow combustion cooking range, ample hot water, commodious cupboard accommodation, hinged flap table, serving hatch to the two adjoining messrooms and meat safes.
Some 350 articles of equipment were carried in the 12 heavy tools vans which ran in the trains containing the steam cranes, and some of this equipment was so heavy as to need the use of demountable jib gallows with a frame at each double door to get it in and out of the van.
The other four heavy tool vans carried ‘kelbus’ re-railing equipment with demountable drums containing 1 50ft of steel wire each.
The fourth vehicle, the heavy stores van, consisted of three compartments, a small riding compartment for the guard, a large compartment for hardwood packing and caboose, with the guard's lookout extension at the extreme end of the van.
There were approximately 1,300 articles of equipment apart from bulk quantities of nails etc, carried in each train and all were itemised and listed and wherever possible each article was shadow painted.
In early 1940, government contracts started and in June the Ministry of Transport held a meeting with Railway Executive Officers the outcome of which was a Committee of representatives of the Ministries of War, Transport, Supply, Aircraft and Production, Labour, the Admiralty and the Railway Executive Committee entitled The Committee for the use of Railway Workshops for Government work.
Its aim, outlined at its first meeting on 17 December 1940, was ‘to agree on the Railway Shops and how much reserve capacity could be allowed to the various Supply Departments.’
Among the first jobs taken on was the ‘Armadillo’ contract — for an improvised armoured vehicle.
In June 1940, Britain was digging in, expecting a grim struggle for existence and feverishly improvising every weapon of defence against the possible invader.
As part of this came the ‘Armadillo’ for the protection of men employed in defence works at aerodromes. 677 motor vehicles of differing types were variously converted at Wolverton.
Tradesmen's vans, builders lorries, furniture vans (brought by night, twelve to twenty-five at a time,) followed into the Road Vehicle Shop gate, their mechanical condition as varied as their outward appearance, to be fitted in the first place with a double wooden box lined with pebbles — a Heath-Robinson contraption, but resistant to machine-gun fire at close range.
Later vehicles were of a more standard type, such as the Bedford 3-ton and 30 cwt lorries and the 5 ton Leyland.
These stronger vehicles were fitted with full metal protection and, to protect the driver, the ordinary doors and windscreens were removed and armour plating provided.
In December 1940, Wolverton Road Vehicle Shop undertook the construction of four Mobile Kitchens, on the lines of a container which could be lifted and placed either on a road trailer or lorry, or on a railway freight wagon — exactly the same idea as the container which the LMS developed pre-war for removing furniture directly from door to door.
The kitchens were complete with stoves, racks, hot water facilities, ample cupboard accommodation and a wide range of equipment.
Wolverton had the opportunity of giving concrete expression to a gift from the Canadian Government to the Home Office (Fire Office Division) by way of the manufacture of 18 mobile kitchens constructed to standards laid down by the Home Office.
The repair of Whitley bombers was allocated to Wolverton Works in January 1941, and to accommodate these repairs, two bays in the Road Vehicle Shop and part of the Hair Carding Shop were used.
Storage accommodation had to be designed to accommodate upwards of 10,000 items used in these repairs.
The first aircraft came into Wolverton Works on 2 April 1941, when shop adaptations were incomplete and only eight men trained to commence work, and whilst the layout had to be completed and the staff were being gradually built up and trained, the first aircraft was completed by 31 July 1941.
Its number was 4224 painted white underneath, and it was taken to Marshall's airfield at Cambridge to be assembled.
By request, it flew over the Works after assembly.
Unfortunately it crashed a few months later on a training mission in Scotland, when part of a Polish Squadron.
These damaged Whitley's, were received on RAF loaders, usually known as Queen Marys.
The doors at one end of the RV Shop had to be widened to accept the partly winged fuselage.
The staff was gradually built up to a strength of 460 and, by the end of September 1943 60 planes had been repaired.
Later in the war Wellington and Stirling bombers were dealt with.
It took 18,000 man-hours to repair a complete Whitley.
During the Battle of Britain, an urgent call came for quick production of Receiver and Transmitter Cabins — radio location or Radar.
By October 1941, 240 cabins were completed.
When Germany was attacking our vital Atlantic life-line in December 1940, Wolverton Works were asked by the Admiralty to make Domes S.L., part of the famous (ASDIC) device for detecting the presence of submarines.
The body of these Domes was cast in two parts (and weighed around 1.
½ tons) in the Works Iron Foundry and machined by the Machine Shop, the component parts also being manufactured in the Machine Shop and wired and fitted in the Electric Shop.
Some two per 12 hour shift (ie four per day) were produced, the first order being for 200.
During early 1940, representatives of Woolwich Arsenal and Enfield Small Arms visited the Works to see if Wolverton could assist with rifle furniture — stocks and butts.
There was only one machine at Enfield, German manufacture, which could not be spared to be stripped and copied.
The delegation left patterns and drawings and an order for 200 sets to be inspected by Government Inspectors on completion, further orders depending on the product conforming to specification.
The stock presented no problems.
The butts were more difficult.
One of the spoke machines from the Road Vehicle Shop was adapted; cutter block was quickly made and set up by the tool-room, but two dimensions could not be attained in this process.
These were the portion that fitted into the metal block and atop the trigger guard, due to this section being of such a geometric shape ie three radii and tapered, and the hole through the butt, which was counterbored some 3/4 of its length.
This hole had two functions: a cheese headed bolt secured the butt to the block, and the chamber left of the bolt, the head to the foot of butt, and held the oil bottle and pull through.
A jig was made to hold the butt and accurately bore and counterbore the hole.
Then Mr Claxton (Foreman of the Finishing Shop) consulted one of his machinists: ‘Can you do this Jim?’ 'Yes, I think so, leave it with me'.
Jim, using the jig bored oil and bolt hole as datum, made a hardwood fixture for his general joiner.
This produced the perfect job, and a metal copy was made down in the tool-room.
This was all achieved and 200 sets completed before the week was out, and the authorities informed.
An inspector sent from Enfield was so surprised at the speed, high standard and quality of the product, that he summoned his superiors.
They concluded Wolvertons' method was quicker and more efficient than the Ordnance Factories'.
Spoke machines were acquired, sent to Wolverton for alteration and the fitting of cutter blocks and, together with drawings and fixtures for the other operations, sent to other firms also engaged on this type of work.
The complete rifle (wooden components) made at Wolverton cost: butt — 2 cuts at 3d, stock — four cuts at 3d: total cost 1s 6d (7. ½p), which included sanding, for which a machine was specially adapted, and soaking in linseed oil.
On 20 September 1941, the Ministry of Aircraft and Production placed a contract for the production of Horsa gliders with a number of firms, and Wolverton Works, together with three other firms, formed a Wing Group for the production of outer mainplanes and detachable bays, the others being Messrs Cravens Ltd, Railway Carriage & Wagon Works, Sheffield,(holding the Group Chairmanship); LNE Railway, Doncaster & York; Wolseley Motors Ltd, Birmingham.
The Horsa glider was of considerable size, with a wing span of 88ft, and was 67ft long.
A target figure of 70 machine sets of components was set for delivery by 31 July 1942, out of a total order of 225 sets, later reduced to 160.
During manufacture, 1,700 production drawings were received at Wolverton, together with some 800 alterations and modifications.
There were also some difficulties in the supply of raw materials and a new target had to be set of 35 machine sets.
They were despatched exactly to schedule and from that date further deliveries were also made exactly to programme.
The first pair of wings from Wolverton on 16 April 1942, was only 3. ½ months after receiving working drawings.
The total man-hours for the production of one pair of Horsa Wings, was 3, 167, of which one-third was occupied in assembly.
A tank known as the A.14 Model was designed in conjunction with the War Office and facilities were provided at Crewe Locomotive Works for the erection of a pilot model, completed in July 1939.
Before its completion, there was a greater requirement for a lighter and less costly tank.
Accordingly, at the end of April of that year, the Company was asked to design and complete a further vehicle, the Covenanter.
The specification called for a fast vehicle with a low silhouette and when it was built, it proved to be the fastest tank in the British Army.
Two pilot models were constructed at Crewe and in production, 1,771 were built during 1941 and 1942, of which 161 were produced there, until 20 August 1942, when tank construction was concentrated at Horwich Locomotive Works.
Wolverton made the wheels, track, track pins, turret base rings and powered mountings, and as the war progressed, produced this equipment for the A. 13 Cruiser, Matilda and Centaur tanks.
In all, the LMS Works manufactured some 642 tanks.
Wolverton also constructed carriages and limbers for the 9.2 in Howitzer, employed for transporting these heavy guns.
51 carriages and limbers were provided for transporting the Howitzer body and cradle and 45 for the Howitzer bed.
The wheels were made of wood and constructed in the Road Vehicle Shop.
They were 5ft diameter with 6in tire, manganese bronze nave, 12in pipe, with dust cap, two screws and locking wire, pipe box bolt and drag washer.
Plans for the forging and machining of shells at Wolverton Works were considered and discussed in early 1939.
Plant was installed by Works staff and planned and laid out by Richard Hagley, the works Machinery and Plant Superintendent, and his staff of technicians.
The first undertaking was for shell forging, and the idea of the LMSR doing this work was initiated in July 1940, by the Director of Ammunition Production, the original intention being to accommodate one unit to produce 4.5in (60-pounder) shells and two units to manufacture 25-pdr shells.
The first unit to be completed was the 4.5in shell, the first of which was forged on Saturday 11 October 1941, and with this unit in working order, effort was concentrated on the erection of the second unit, but on 24 January 1942, owing to a change in policy, the manufacture of the 25-pdr shell was taken over by the States, and the second and third units were dismantled and prepared for despatch to America.
Elaborate arrangements were made to mark every item, including pipework and brackets.
Everything went, even the furnace ironwork (though not the bricks).
Rumour later had it that they were sunk en route .
The production of the 60-pdr shell ceased on 28 June 1942, and that of the 4.2in chemical bomb on 3 July 1943.
A total staff of 82 were employed on the Shell Forging Plant, by far the largest proportion being men owing to the heavy work involved in handling billets.
Some 166,910 60-pdr shells and 432,819 chemical shell containers were forged.
The layout for the machining of 25-pdr shells covered an area of 35,350 sq ft.
Shells were also machined from forgings produced elsewhere.
The first shell was completely machined on 18 August 1942.
A higher proportion of female labour, almost 80% of a total of 140, was possible on the machining than on the forging, and a high percentage of the female staff were part-time workers.
Work ceased on 3 July 1943.
The sequence of production was as follows: 1 Centre drill shell base; 2 rough machine outer surface; 3 finish machine outer surface; 4 recess base for base plate (this removed the centring); 5 turn base plate; 6 roll to secure base plate; 7 reface base end; 8 heat shell nose end; 9 press form shell nose; 10 finish turn shell nose and thread internally for fuse; 11 part copper driving band from tube; 12 heat copper band; 13 press copper band into recess in shell body; 14 turn copper band to profile; 15 inspection; 16 shellac spray shell cavity and 17 grease outer surface.
The two foremen in charge of this shell machine shop were, Sid Freeman and Percy Dyball, both toolmakers, the former for a time employed at Woolwich Arsenal during the first war; he was later made a foreman in the Fitting Shop.
Repair work on damaged Hurricane wings began with the closing of the Shell Machine Shop in 1943.
This was transferred to Wolverton from Derby and placed in one bay of the vacated Shell Machine Shop.
The output was 22 wings per week.
There was a pair of master checking frames.
These were more like gauges than assembly jigs, and checked every wing before despatch, both port and starboard for correctness and alignment of connection joints to fuselage and sing tip pick up points.
The damage to wings was sometimes considerable and it was possible to almost rebuild them, provided the two main spars were in a reasonable condition.
There was also a lot of superficial damage by birds, mostly seagulls.
The equipment needed was quite elementary — padded trestles to lay the wings on, and cradles for holding them upright, small portable drilling machines and  riveting guns and general metal fitting tools for one man and a woman assistant at each repair position.
Most details came from Derby, as they were building Hurricane wings.
All press-formed skin panels came oversize and undrilled; other panels were cut from sheet.
Every panel had to be fitted tight and all outside rivets were countersunk.
It was important that these were flush.
It was so easy to over-rivet and depress the  riveted areas.
Another interesting feature was the refrigeration system for aluminium rivets.
The alloy of which they were made age-hardened quickly at normal temperatures, and all rivets had to be chilled before use.
In the shop they were kept in a refrigerator.
No rivets could be used that had been out of the refrigerator for more than two hours.
Every two hours, all rivets were collected and fresh ones issued.
Coloured tins were used to identify each two-hour period of the day.
This routine was used on Whitley bomber repairs in the RV Shop.
Mr Cyril Stayley was the initial foreman of this shop and he established and laid out the system of repair.
After some 18 months he handed over to Mr T. White.
He was promoted to Jig and Tool Assistant.
In April 1943, the contract was extended to the repair of Typhoon mainplanes and this work was accommodated in the space at the Works vacated by the cessation of manufacture of the Horsa glider wings.
The necessary preparatory work was completed by the end of July 1943, on the basis of 10 repaired mainplanes per week.
From 150 productive staff, of which two-fifths were women working day and night shifts, this target was maintained.
Bridges and Trestles was another major enterprise.
No one was more alive to the vital necessity of keeping open lines of communication than the Railway Companies and the LMSR readily accepted a suggestion from the Ministry of Supply to assist in the production of railway bridges and trestles for use of the fighting services.
The conventional type of bridge was obviously an impossibility under war condition, owing to the necessity to survey the site, and the time for its provision.
Even the known and tried types of temporary bridge took too long to erect and were difficult to construct.
The War Office had  therefore designed a structure which, from its general appearance and use, looked to have been based on the idea of a boy's Meccano.
In all, 120 sets of a light trestle, eight Through types and eight Deck types, with 75ft bridge spans, 12 sets of unit construction bridges, six sets of ‘V’ type trestles, and literally thousands of parts, chiefly for the ‘V’type trestles, were produced at Wolverton and Derby Carriage and Wagon Works.
The adaptability of the trestles was so convincing that the REC were also supplied with 40 of the heavy type and 60 of the light type.
During heavy air attack, this trestling was invaluable for shoring up damaged bridges, arches and buildings.
In this type of construction there was one essential factor on which everything was dependent and that was the designing and accurate manufacture of the jigs, used for positioning the various parts to be welded, and the drilling of the various members.
Wolverton in another joint effort with Derby C & W manufactured 75 sets of jigs for this equipment, for use of contractors producing components.
The high standard of workmanship achieved was well illustrated by the fact that a bridge assembled from units drawn from four contractors and made from different jig sets went together simply.
Briefly described, these bridges were the Railway counterpart of the Bailey road bridge.
They could be used as either a deck, or through span structure, and the length of spans varied on the light truss type from 45ft to 85ft, and on the standard type, 90ft to 1 50ft.
If trusses were duplicated, however, spans up to 105ft could be erected with the light unit construction equipment.
Rapid assembly was achieved by the use of special drift pins.
All the various members were held together by these 1.
 diameter drift pins, turned to close tolerances to fit snugly into the jig drilled holes and having a head at one end and the other end tapered, for driving.
To ensure they did not work loose, cross pins were fitted through holes in the tapered ends.
Standard trestle piers could be joined, and so could be  constructed to any height, width, or length.
A particularly interesting feature of the trestle piers was the method used for founding them on irregular river beds.
To the lower end of each trestle column was attached a ‘camel's foot’, which consisted essentially of a stout, screwed shaft carrying a large pad base, attached by ball-and-socket connection.
The screw worked in a screw guide bolted directly to the column.
Adjustment was carried out from above water level by means of long driving tubes, operating down the centres of the columns.
It was thus possible to assemble a bridge pier and lower it complete onto the river bed.
By making necessary height adjustments to the camel's feet, the pier would set firmly over the natural irregularities of the foundation.
This item of equipment enabled the rapid assembly features of the whole range of equipment to be fully exploited, and reduced the erection times for some major bridging operations, from what would normally be months to merely a matter of days.
The unit construction railway bridge was exemplified by the structure erected across the River Seine near Rouen, constituting an important link in the advance from Normandy through northern France to Belgium and Germany.
This bridge was 550ft long and was erected in 15 days.
The height from bed level of river to rail level was 35ft to 36ft.
It consisted of six UCRB 75ft spans, and two 40ft spans.
Subsequently, the floods came down and went over the whole bridge, topping the rails, and it was a tribute to the efficiency of both its design and erection that the bridge withstood this successfully.
Assault Boats are, as their description implies, not for pleasurable pursuits, although the construction of 8,442 of them gave the craftsmen of Wolverton, skilled in the art of carriage building, an opportunity to employ their talents.
These boats were collapsible for easy transportation and, whilst the design relied mainly on the use of waterproof canvas, a remarkable heavy load of men and equipment could be carried.
Two types of Assault Boats were built,ie : MKs II and III.
A MK III was a double-ended collapsible boat, consisting of a stiff plywood bottom and hinged wooden gunwhale, connected by  canvas sides.
The boat was kept open by hinged side struts and a straining device at both ends.
 Removable wooden slatted floorings, eight in number, were secured to the inside of the bottom of the boat by metal buttons, mounted on positioning battens.
Two steering oars, two rowlocks and two mooring spikes with painters were provided.
The approximate dimensions were: length overall I7ft; beam 5ft 1in; depth open 24in (amidships); depth collapsed 1 1in (maximum) and freeboard with 2,0001b load 16in (amidships).
On completion a nameplate was fitted on the gunwhale of each boat bearing the contractor's initials, description WD Serial No and year of supply, in this case: LMSR WOLVERTON, BOAT, ASSAULT, MK III No 100, 1942.
Each boat when completed, was tested in water, with a load of 2,0001b applied evenly over the bottom, for a period of 30 minutes.
No leakages were permitted at any points nor were the canvas sides allowed to bulge inward to any greater extent than that caused by the slackness of the canvas specified on the drawing.
The freeboard, when the boat was under this load, was not to be less than 16in amidships and 22. ½ at bow ends.
The MK II was similar in all respects and carried the same load.
It differed in dimensions only: length 1 2ft; beam 4ft 7in; depth open 1 ft 6.3/4in; depth collapsed 7in and freeboard with 2,0001b load 10in.
Bulkhead pontoons and rafts were also produced alongside these Assault Boats, the whole taking up one bay in the Wagon Shop.
The diversity of munition products is exemplified by, on the one hand, the gun and aperture sights for the American Lewis guns, high precision work (they had to be correct to less than a thousandth part of an inch) of which 27, 900 were produced, and on the other hand the unpacking and assembly of the American-manufactured Mercer and Hyster Mobile Cranes, 169 of the former and 207 of the latter being dealt with in addition to 37 Elwell Parker Lift Trucks.
These four projects were another concerted effort between Wolverton and Derby C & W.
In March 1943, Wolverton was given a free hand to co-operate with the designer of an instructional instrument, for the teaching of fuse prediction to naval personnel, in producing a prototype, utilizing wherever possible existing railway stocks of raw material.
On completion of the final prototype, an order followed for 110 of these instruments, the first two despatched on 22 October 1943.
The main structure of the ‘teacher’ was a box, 38in × 23in × 7in provided with a flap for use as a writing table.
There were in all 103 components, and the completed article  weighed 126lbs.
After Government inspection, these ‘teachers’ were despatched worldwide.
The machining capacity at Wolverton was heavily engaged in the early days of production, not only on its own work, but in assisting to relieve bottle neck in other firms' production and much light and heavy machining was undertaken, as was Iron and Brass founding and forging of gun parts for ordnance factories.
An array of other munitions and allied manufactures included 600,000 copper shell bands, 4in to 12in diameter, 17,500 ammunition boxes, 1,460 sets of equipment to enable various types of aircraft tow targets, 400 pole wagons for hauling trees felled in this country, 9 KVA Rotors and 5 K.W Alternators and Stators,(over 1,000), thousands of Raft Connectors and mine detectors, and Catamarans for the navy — the list seems endless.
Whilst this war-work was going on, Railway work was continuing too.
Up to 88 new wagons were produced per week, some 100 carriages and four and six shelled stock repaired per week, and some 30–40 horse drawn vehicles and 12 to 20 motor vehicles.
Added to this was machine and foundry work for Horwich, Derby and Crewe Locomotive Works.
Many skilled men were directed to other industries, though this drain was checked by the scheduling of Railway Workshops under the Essential Works Order in October 1941.
This vacuum was filled, in the main, by female staff, some of whom learnt by doing the job: others undertook courses at the Science and Art Institute, under the direction of Works personnel.
Semi-skilled men were ‘made up’, and did craftsmen's jobs, and pensioners were recalled on a full or part-time basis.
Women showed themselves to be remarkably adaptable to the heavy engineering work involved and many of them displayed such interest and versatility that they were able to undertake really high class work such as turning, milling, and drilling of precision components, high grade fitting work, electric and oxy-acetylene welding, crane driving, and operation of power hammers.
But, as in all things, there were one or two hiccoughs.
One lady of ill repute who had been directed to Wolverton Works, was, after training, placed in the Fitting and Machine Shop, but after further training on various machines, was found to be unsatisfactory.
The foreman called her in and told her.
On the following Monday she was to report to Mr F. Sear in the Tool-Hardening Shed; the money would be £4–18 shillings and 6 pence per week before overtime.
'B…
Hell' she cried,’ 'I used to get more than that an hour for softening them'.
Another incident in the same Shop involved a man who had been on a Government course on turning.
He was being interviewed by the foreman who asked ‘can you work with a mic?’(pronounced ‘Mike’ short for micrometer).
‘Yes’, replied the man, ‘I'll work with anyone as long as they are sociable’.
Food was rationed and anything not on ration was in great demand such as wild rabbits.
A Mr J. Franklin from Beachampton, who worked in the Smithy, used to trap and bring rabbits to work every Monday morning when they were in season, for which he charged 2s 6d (12. ½p) each.
He had, of course, his regular customers.
One lady who was working in the Smithy and had recently been directed to Wolverton, kept pestering him for one, and at times was quite verbal about it.
So Jim killed a rabbit, filled the skin with sawdust, added an appropriate weight and sold it to her.
Next morning she went and reported him to the foreman, who sent for Jim and asked ‘What's this woman on about?’.
The lady intervened with some fervour —‘That rabbit, it was full of B…sawdust’.
‘Ah!’ explained Jim, ‘I wondered about that one, I shot it at dusk Sunday night as it was coming out of the’Grove’, that's a small wood young lady' he explained.
‘Its what they call a ‘wood rabbit’; they eat a lot of wood, hence the sawdust'.
To return to more serious events, several contracts were accepted under the euphonious ‘Reduce to Produce’.
These contracts covered the breaking down of damaged aircraft considered beyond economical repair to salvage repairable and  reusable components.
The value of this work can be assessed by the fact that of 2,000 parts which may be needed for the repair of a bomber, 1,000 of them could often be obtained from such recoveries.
This type of contract also offered a suitable opportunity to familiarize staff with components and aircraft work generally, before the more important job of repairs.
The necessity of obtaining every ounce of production in the grim days of 1940 raised the standard week of the workshops to 66-hours and, it was not unusual for men to work up to 80 hours per week for long periods, involving seven days a week without a break.
As elsewhere in industry, this terrific pace could not be maintained and ultimately, when the Minister of Labour recommended the reduction of working hours to 56, the Railway Workshop followed suit, so far as was practicable.
Even so, the general average remained at about 60 hours per week.
In the early days of the war it was the practice for all staff to take shelter on the ‘alert’, but loss of production time demanded a better system, and late in 1940, a ‘spotter’ was detailed to observe enemy aircraft and to warn when danger was imminent.
This spotter was positioned on the canteen roof, and to house him was built a wooden structure somewhat like a pillbox with a hinged ‘porthole’ in the roof, to give him a clear 360 ° view.
Firewatching was compulsory for everyone between 16 and 18 years and for those over 50 who were not in the HG, or ARP.
This fire watching was only done at Wolverton on Saturday and Sunday nights; for the rest of the week a full night shift was employed.
This entailed stopping on the Works premises and calling the fire station at intervals or in the event of a fire, informing them and helping to put it out.
The Works had its own Home Guard Company, that of B Company of the 2nd Bucks Battalion, under the command of Major P. Dewick.
Its main functions were that of guarding the Works and  Gas Works, and all bridges and installations from the Blue Bridge to the Castlethorpe Troughs on the main line.
Even this HG activity had its lighter moments, but not to the participants of this incident.
The Blue Bridge Guard of four men marched up to their position one summer evening, which was a specially constructed guardroom or cabin alongside the bridge.
From here the guard each did two stages of 1 hour 15 minutes (from 8 pm to 6 am) patrolling the bridge.
Once, while they were busy lighting the fire and sorting out equipment and the guard list, some children playing in Luckets field surreptitiously closed the door and pegged the hasp and clasp.
Bedlam broke out inside, threats were made, but the children became frightened and ran home.
Came 6 o'clock and all the other guards reported to HQ and were dismissed.
At 7 o'clock someone said, ‘Where's the Blue Bridge got to?’ and off they went to investigate, to find the men ‘guarding’the inside of their cabin.
ABOVE: View of women on shell production at Wolverton Works.
(SHC) LEFT: Red Cross Ambulance, 1914.
(SHC) RIGHT: Interior of Naval Ambulance train (ward with beds).
(WWC)
IN NEW COMPANY
On 1 January 1923, the LNWR became part of the new LMSR Company.
Wolverton Works from this date lost its independence, the LMSR Carriage Superintendent being R.W. Reid, with his HQ at Derby.
Mr Trevithick resigned as Works Superintendent at Wolverton, and his post was taken by F.E. Gobey.
The Board decided to concentrate all its new building of carriages at Derby and Wolverton, Derby to be the HO Over the next decade, carriage works at Newton Heath, Plaistow, and Crewe were closed.
In the main the chosen men (on a seniority basis) were transferred to Wolverton.
It was also determined to introduce wagon building at Wolverton.
But under these centralization plans, Wolverton had to forfeit from its smithy most of its hammers and drop stamps to Derby, to bring, it was said, this works up to the standard and capabilities of Wolverton.
With these tools went the men, hammer and pressmen and die sinkers (Derby had no die shop at all).
With the introduction of wagon building, and the acceptance of Wolverton Train Lighting System as the standard for the LMS the Works were reorganised.
The changes can but be seen by comparing the 1926 map to the 1930–59 plan of the works.
Wolverton already had a flow system for carriage building in operation; the works were laid out by Park for this, as the plans show.
This was improved by the progressive system, applied both to carriages, and to wagons and road vehicles.
Over forty years wagons were constructed at Wolverton, using this progressive system.
Through these years, some changes were made in method, and layout.
In the main these were the moving of all the machinery from the Frame Shops themselves and Body-Shop lean-to, relocating them in the Old Lifting Shop (No 34 on the 1906 map), and the introduction of welded frames.
The plan shows the original layout.
The point at which the system may be said to have commenced was in the Progress Office.
For progressive building to be successful, it was essential that the supply of completely manufactured parts should be on the ground at the point of erection, before the building of a vehicle was commenced.
The procedure for manufacturing these was as follows: the steel channel and angle iron was taken from its store area (The Haversham Bank) by steam crane and loaded on converted carriage underframes, of which there were four, two for wagon material, and two for carriage material.
These loaded special wagons were then taken to the Underframe Machine Shop (formerly the Old Lifting Shop), which contained the following machinery: multispindle drills, beam-end milling machines, shears, saws, straightening machines, oxy-acetylene burners, punches, and an overhead crane, where the material was machined as necessary.
A two shift system was introduced in this department to coincide with the shift working in the underframe shop.
The finished machined material was then transported from this section via the special wagons, to the underframe shop: one load for the wagon side, and one load for the carriage side, each morning, for the first shift, and a repeat delivery in the afternoon for the second shift.
When these wagons arrived in the Underframe Shop they were unloaded at the required points or areas by hand-operated overhead travelling cranes in the ancillary bays, adjacent to the main workshop area.
Then the first coats of paint were applied, either by the dipping method, or by brush.
Meanwhile all the knees, brackets, spring shoes, stanchions, door pillars, top and bottom rails and drawgear etc, were either pressed, forged, stamped, or cropped in the Smithy, the leaf springs completed by the spring gang and sent direct to the Underframe Shop.
All the other components were taken to the machine shop, where multi-spindle three head drills, straight line drills and umbrella punches, completed the machinery and the finished articles were taken direct to their place of assembly.
Added to these, all the bolts and nuts used were forged in the Smithy and threaded on the screwing gang in the machine shop.
The Foundries produced all the castings required,ie : the Iron Foundry, the axle-boxes, brake blocks etc; the Brass Foundry, the bearings.
All these components were again completed in the machine and fitting shops.
The manufacture of the 12 ton covered wagon underframe commenced at the eastern end of the shop, with assembly of the headstocks, diagonals, and longitudes in a fixture; these were then  riveted by pneumatic rivet machines.
On completion of this operation, the assembly was lifted by overhead crane and placed in the inverted position of carriers.
The solebars were then attached to this assembly (the solebars already having the axleguards fitted and  riveted by a hydraulic  riveting machine adjacent to this position).
All components on and below the solebar were fitted and  riveted at this stage, for example, spring shoes.
After this, temporary lifting and turning journals were fitted in the draw-gear position and the frame was lifted, and turned over to accept the wheels.
Two sets of track were used for fitting parts above the solebar, wheeling wagons alternately.
Firstly the brake-work and draw-gear were fitted, then the ends, stanchions, and door pillars, the last stage being a further coat of paint at the western end of the shop.
The now complete wagon underframe was taken by traverser to the southern side of the New Body Shop, where its body was fitted in four stages.
First, all the wood for the body was finished and machined in the Sawmill, and transported to the relevant positions for assembly, as follows: No 1 stage was the fitting of the floor, No 2 stage, the ends moving, to No 3 stage when the sides were temporarily fitted, after being job-built.
At the fourth (roof) stage the roof was positioned (by a hand operated pneumatic hoist), having been previously assembled in a jig.
The roof together with the sides were bolted into position permanently, after which the sliding doors were fitted, these also having been built in a jig.
The wagons were taken by traverser to the Wagon Shop for final coats of paint and the completed wagons were taken to the Gravel Sidings where they were brake and steam tested (if fitted with same).
This then was the method or system of building a railway wagon at Wolverton, of the 12 ton covered goods type: for other types of wagon the building procedure was adjusted.
At the peak, 16 wagons per day of the covered goods type were built, using this system.
To ensure that this progressive building was a success, it was essential –hat a supply of completely manufactured parts was on the ground at the point of erection, before the building of a vehicle was commenced.
Under the old system, it was possible, if a shortage of any one part occurred, to complete a large number of bodies up to the point at which this particular part was required, and even if the whole of the body shop floor eventually became taken up by partially built bodies, it was still possible to keep the body makers employed in splicing bottom sides and cantrails and fitting the pillars in position alongside the partially erected bodies.
Under the progressive system of construction it was, however, impossible to do this, and with a very few exceptions a shortage of any one part held up the whole of the line.
In order, therefore, to make absolutely certain that the manufactured parts were always ready and on hand, and further, that there was a sufficiency of raw materials and parts in all stages of completion, some form of stocktaking was necessary, and this was kept up to date day-to-day, and even hour-by-hour.
It was the purpose of the Progress Office to ensure what may be termed the feeding of the works with the necessary parts.
The material for a given vehicle was split up for convenience under various grouped headings.
One or more of these groups was placed under the control of an individual.
In order to do this he  followed up the material throughout its various processes, and plotted its progress on a chart or series of charts.
The material itself was itemised in a column on the left-hand side of a sheet of squared paper, on which each square represented one set of material.
The length of these lines, measured in squares, represented the number of carriages or wagons that could be built with the material available.
These lines were of various colours, each colour representing a different department.
A vertical thread on the chart showed the actual number of vehicles which had been completed to that stage at a given time.
The length of the line to the right of this vertical thread showed the quantity of material ahead of the actual progress of the vehicle.
Should the person in charge of the chart see any item that was likely to fall behind, he pinned a flag at this particular point, and if the article was likely to be held up for want of raw material a blue flag was pinned up; but if this delay was due to one or other of the works departments getting behind with the manufacture, a red flag with a numeral upon it was used, which indicated the shop or department.
The shop at fault was clearly shown on the chart as its horizontal line was much shorter than the similar line above it showing the progress of earlier operations in its manufacture, and as soon as the supply reverted to normal again, the red flag was removed.
In the preparation of the details themselves in the various shops, the underlying idea of continuous progression from one operation to another was adopted.
The previous layout of machines and benches was altered.
This saved unnecessary handling, and also avoided work being neglected whilst in a half-finished condition.
This frequently necessitated the redistribution and scattering of men who formerly worked in one department and under one roof.
For instance, instead of sending work to the paint shop to be painted, the painters were in many cases permanently located at points where work was sufficiently finished.
As an instance, carriage doors which were formerly framed up in the body shop and then transferred to the finishing shop for the fixing of the interior lining, afterwards being sent to the polishing shop to be french polished and finally returned to the body shop for fixing in position, were now dealt with by an altogether different method.
A certain number of finishers and polishers were drafted from their own shops to a section of the body shop, where the bodymakers framed up and panelled doors.
The bodymaker passed the doors to the finishers, who in turn passed them on to the french polishers; the doors then moved along to those whose work it was to hang them in position, the operations being so arranged that the polished door was completed just at the point where it was to be hung on the coach.
The timbers used in the construction of railway carriages and wagons at Wolverton composed teak, oak, Jarrah, mahogany and deal.
These were brought to the works as square baulks or round logs, or alternatively, as scantlings, all being converted and machined in the sawmill and the pieces sent to the erecting shop for assembly.
The waste wood was converted into various useful articles, such as keys, trenails, scotches,— or firewood.
On the introduction of this progressive system, some new machinery was installed, in particular in the sawmill.
For instance, a double-ended tenoning machine was introduced.
An improved patent band re-sawing machine, with combined vertical and horizontal feed, was used for cutting deals, battens, etc, into boards, after which they were passed through a high speed four-cutter moulding and seaming machine.
Several new chain cutter and hollow mortising and boring machines were installed, one of them having automatic action.
On these, clean and accurate work was done by means of simple but effective jigs.
Each of the component parts of the coach were carefully gauged and inspected before leaving the sawmill to ensure its fitting correctly in position without hand labour in the body shop.
(The previous method was to leave the pieces slightly large, and then to ease them by plane or chisel until they fitted into the mortises, etc.)
The quarters were pressed together in a compressed air jig, and then placed on a bench and the panels, mouldings and windows fitted to them.
The same method was applied for the ends of the coach and the partitions.
The ash sweeps for the roof were steamed and bent in a specially designed wood-bending plant.
The carriage doors were all made so as to be interchangeable, the doors being first of all pressed together in a compressed-air jig, and then panelled up.
The door next passed to a specially constructed machine, which cut the three grooves for the hinges: these were then fixed by screws, after which the door was ready for testing in the gauge, the latter consisting of a metal frame providing a replica of the door opening in a coach.
The doors, after being fitted in this gauge, were handed over to the coach finishers, who fitted the casing boards, either of walnut or mahogany.
From there they passed to a polishing room, and thence to what was known as No 3 position, where they were fitted to the actual coach.
The interior finishing passed through a similar process to the bodywork.
The timber arrived in the finishing shop and was machined by the aid of jigs and stops, passing from machine to adjacent benches where it was fitted together.
As much as possible of this finishing was assembled by the use of compressed air and screw cramps, the picture frames and corridor doors being examples of this method of working.
Once assembled, the details were passed through a multiple drum-sanding machine and sent for staining and polishing before being erected in the carriage.
The upholstery of the carriages also travelled along progressive lines.
The component parts of the woodwork for the sides, backs and quarters were assembled in jigs by a gang of finishers, and when completed they were transferred by means of a conveyor to the trimmers, who were supplied with cloth and other material cut to the correct size and stitched.
The seat backs and seats passed along benches fitted with rollers in the centre, so that each man performed his own operation and then passed the back or seat along to the next man in the line.
The completed upholstery was finished at the point where it was to be fixed in the coach.
The brass work was cast in the brass foundry, and from there it was sent to the brass finishing shop for machining and cleaning up, afterwards traversing the plating department where it received either venetian bronze, oxidised silver or plain brass lacquer finish, next passing to position No 3 for fixing in the carriage.
The brass shop was laid out with the rough brass stores on one side, whence the castings passed to the machines, thence to the benches, and from there to the polishers, next to the platers and finally to the lacquerers at the other side of the shop, each operation in turn bringing the parts further across the shop.
The electric light generating unit was made completely in the Works.
The parts of the generator were cast in the brass and iron foundries and machined in the machine shop, the completed parts being delivered to the train-lighting department, where the armatures were wound and the generator completely assembled.
This also applied to the regulator and switchgear, the cells being manufactured in the cell shop, the lead plates, cast pasted, joined to the bridge, fitted in lead-lined teak containing boxes, formed and delivered complete.
The actual operations performed at the respective stages in the construction of the carriages necessarily varied.
These are those adopted for 57ft corridor composite coaches containing three first-class compartments, and four third-class compartments.
For bogies and underframes the rolled steel bars were dealt with similarly to wagon components.
They were straightened, then cut to length on a saw, drilled, and placed adjacent to their assembly points.
The order in which the various members of the underframe were assembled was:
First operation —(a) solebars, truss bars, longitudinals, crossbars, diagonals, headstocks, buffer brackets, diagonal braces, gusset plates;(b) the ends, comprising the crossbar diagonals, headstocks and buffer brackets, were jigged together before they were  assembled in the underframe, and the truss bars, step irons and brake hanger brackets were riveted to the solebars.
In the second operation the cross truss frames, having been previously jigged together, were assembled in the frame.
Rivet holes were  rearmered where necessary, and the riveting was then completed.
The third operation consisted of mounting the drawgear brakework, brake and heating pipes and electric light installation, and the fourth operation was that of painting.
The fifth operation consisted of lowering the underframe on to the bogies.
The bogies were assembled adjacent to the underframes and in a somewhat similar manner, the final operation being carried out near to, and on the same road as, the underframe lowering operation.
The underframe then crossed the traverser way and entered the body shop for commencement of carriage construction.
First operation — this included (a) floor: bottom, sides (received from the sawmill in two portions); end bars and crossbars were fixed in position on the underframe, the whole was cramped together and secured by the corner knees.
Corridor lavatory partition bearers and floor boards were then fixed.
(b) Ends: the ends, which had already been framed together in jigs and boarded, were fixed in position.
(c) Quarters: the quarters which had also been framed in jigs, panelled up, moulded, glazed and painted with one coat outside, were then erected and secured in position with corner knees.
(d) Cant rails, previously prepared fixed.
(e) Divisions: made in jigs, with cross boards screwed together with automatic screwing machines, and 3-ply panels above the luggage rack, were fixed in position.
(f) Bottom framing, battens and bottom quarter panels fixed and doorways gauged.
Second operation — roof:(a) roof sticks and irons fixed, sides straightened up, and roof boarded, canvased and painted lead colour.
(b) side and end cornices, weather strips and water drips fixed.
(c) finishers fix ceilings, roof packings, roof cable, runners, corridor partitions and patterns.
(d) electricians install distribution, etc, cables (previously prepared on the bench).
Third operation —(a) doors which had been made and gauged in a master jig, cased inside and polished, were hung, the locks and handles fitted and seat bearers fixed by body makers.
(b) inside ceilings painted white.
(c) roof ventilators fixed, gangways, end steps, end commode and ascending handles fixed.
(d) passenger communication fitted.
Finishers fix lavatory tanks and fix and clean up frames, round quarter-lights. (e) electricians fit lamp fittings, switches etc.
Fourth operation —(a) body makers fit door bumpers, door guides, door bottom blocks and drop strip.
(b) finishers case up lavatories. (c) inside ceilings painted third and fourth coats of white, and outside body the second coat lead colour and first coat of filling.
(d) light slips, etc., polished.
Fifth operation —(a) finishers frame up corridor and lavatory partitions; fit window bars and lavatory fittings.
(b) second coat of filling on outside.
Sixth operation —(a) finishers hang sliding doors, corridor parting and end doors, lavatory doors, fit squab and photo frames, compartment quarter panels, pillar facings, ‘hit-and-miss’ vent regulators and compartment vent lights, and welt door mouldings; also fit cornice mouldings.
Fix wearing plates.
(b) fitters fix and connect steam heaters and fit passenger communication tube and chain.
(c) trimmers lay linoleum in compartments, corridors and lavatories. (d) third and fourth coats of filling applied.
Seventh operation —(a) finishers fix luggage racks, seat backs, blind hoods, door lights, seats, tables etc. (b) underneath seats and heaters painted, quarter-lights bedded, frames cleaned up.
Eighth operation —(a) outside of coach rubbed down and first coat of lead colour applied.
Stepboards fixed by carriage makers.
(b) coach was then transferred to the paint shop for completion of painting.
In fitting the electric lighting installation, the whole of the lighting cables were cut to exact lengths, and all joints made and taped prior to erection.
As soon as the casing was in position at stage 2, it was only a few minutes work to pull the cables through the casing and fix the capping.
One lamp holder was then fixed in each compartment and the end of the lighting cable plugged  into the shop mains, a socket for this provided at each stage.
A high voltage lamp was then fixed in each compartment to give light when necessary for the men working in the compartment.
Wooden platforms or stages were erected at different levels, so that men working on the various portions of the vehicle were facilitated in their task.
Some of the work was performed, as a matter of course, at ground level, and the highest staging gave immediate access to the roof of the vehicle.
The progressive system was also applied to carriage repairs, the procedure for repairs as follows:
Vehicles for repair were first placed in the initial examination bay, this activity occupying three rows in the top paint shop.
Here they were steam tested and carriage heaters changed as required and main pipe leaks marked up for attention as the vehicle passed through the lifting shop.
Also as the name implies, all bodywork, roofs, gangways, roof tanks were marked up for repair as required and wheel wear and tyre thickness noted.
After some four hours on these test rows the vehicles were taken to the lift shop.
The first operation in the lift shop was a brake test.
In the northern bay of this shop a progressive ramp system was in operation.
l he vehicles entered the western end of this northern bay, and the coach body was lifted off its bogies and placed on moving carriers, the wheels removed from the bogies, the bogies then also placed on carriers parallel with its body and moved alongside it through the shop at the same pace, that of one vehicle every forty minutes.
The wheels were turned by four wheel lathes, which were positioned in the centre of the shop facing the bogie and body ramps.
Wheels needing retyring were taken to the wheel shop.
During the forty minutes travelling through the shop, all repairs were done to draw, buffing, and brake gear, steam and brake pipe work etc.
The bogies were then wheeled, and the body lowered on the bogies, the vehicle measured and set.
The carriers were then returned to the western end of the shop and the cycle repeated.
In the southern bay all the vehicles needing a heavy repair, or vehicles of a larger type ie: six wheel bogies, articulated stock etc, were repaired, but these were placed on stands and completed in a static position.
From the lift shop the vehicles were marshalled up so that three long vehicles, or five short ones entered the body repair shop and were put in hand at one time, and the repairs were divided into four operations, each requiring two days to complete.
The order followed was:(1) coachmakers removed doors, locks, handles, strip panels and gangways.
(2) finishers strip interior (nets, blinds, trimming, brasswork, etc).
(3) painters burn off.
In the second operation —(1) the coachmakers re-fitted doors, panels, fascias and mouldings. (2) finishers repaired  ceilings , panels etc., scraped lights and remoulded quarter-lights. (3) painters polished lights and painted one coat inside.
The third operation covered the following:(1) coachmakers re-fixed locks and handles, window lights re-bedded. (2) finishers replaced casing boards and moulding on doors.
(3) painters applied two coats of paint and one of varnish inside, and two coats of priming outside.
In the fourth operation —(1) coachmakers re-fitted gangways and fixed door stops and commode handles, end steps, etc. (2) finishers replaced inside finishing, brasswork, seats and backs.
(3) painters applied four coats of filling.
(4) the coach was then ready to go into the paint shop rubbing and completion of painting.
One gang, which consisted of four coachmakers and two labourers, prepared and placed all timber, panels and other materials on the spot where it was required, and no man who was engaged on actual repairs was required to leave the job to look up any material.
During this period the Road Vehicles Department also expanded and implemented a progressive system of new building and repair.
Around 1928–29 this activity was relocated in the then West Paint Shop (Shop No 3).
This department was, in the main, self supporting.
This shop built in 1902 of red brick, runs from east to west and has seven gable ends, each gable containing three roads.
It is divided by an inner wall giving four bays on the northern side for road  vehicle building and the other three for the road vehicle paint department.
The height to the top of the ridges is 32ft and the height of the valleys and outer walls is 21ft.
Each wall contains 26 windows measuring 5ft 3in by 10ft 8in; the shop itself measures 370ft long by 340ft wide.
The roof is 50% glass and 50% tongue and grooved board, once slated but now mineral felted.
Along the north side wall, beginning at the eastern end and for some 250ft was the machine row, which consisted of cross-cut and band-saws, mortising machines, planers, two spoke machines, wheel lathe, trimming machine, boring machines etc.
Then came the marking out section, and alongside these were the repair shaft and tail-board gang.
Next came the wheel-wrights, a highly skilled gang.
LNWR horse-drawn vehicles all had wooden knaves.
On the formation of the LMSR the military or cast iron type of knave or hub was introduced and became standard.
Tyres on both types of wheels were fitted cold.
Finally, at the extreme western end, were the fitters' benches and machines, drills, screwing machine etc.
Their job in the main consisted of the repair and renewal of brakework, both horse-drawn and road motor, and the assembly of new, and the repair of old turntables for mechanical horses and relevant equipment.
Also in this bay at the eastern end and alongside the machine row was the ‘truck and barrow’ gang.
This gang's work consisted of the manufacture and repair of all the different types of manually propelled vehicles, ie: platform trucks, various types of barrows, coffin carriers, invalid chairs, trucks for lame pigs, tricycle carriers, hand carts of all types, ambulance litters etc.
It was on this gang that the Road Vehicle body-maker apprentices began their training and, as all ex-apprentices will remember, for the assembly of a new wheel barrow from scratch, the piecework price was four-pence halfpenny (1.
¾ N.P. approx).
Along the western wall from the end of the office to the northern wall, was the Blacksmith's Department, comprising some five forges, two double and three single, a steam hammer, a set of rolls for tyre making and shears.
In the second bay starting from the western end, northern side and up to the gangway, was H. Webb's black gang, so called because everything they dealt with was black in colour.
This gang repaired all types of horsedrawn vehicle, floats, drays, trolleys, lorries and timber carriages.
On the southern side of this area the undercarriage repairs for these vehicles were undertaken.
One corner of this work space was reserved for odd repairs, say shaft renewal, or one wheel only.
These repairs were all done on the progressive system, one man and an apprentice seeing the job through, from stripping to the completed repair.
On completion of repair these vehicles continued eastward up the bay to the paint dip, where the whole was immersed and drained.
They were then mounted on their wheels and carriages, brakes fitted and so to the RV Paint Shop proper.
So up to the third bay; all the area at the western end up to the gangway was devoted to Tilt Van repairs under chargehand W. Hyde (Ponnie).
The eastern end of this bay on its northern side was the area devoted to motor van and motor flat repairs.
On the southern side, new horse-drawn lorries and vans were manufactured, the chargehand being C. Stapleton.
The fourth and final bay, beginning again from its western end up to the gangway, contained on its northern side, Tilt Van repairs, and on the southern side was Bill Swindell preparing windscreens for motor vehicles; alongside at this time was the experimental area for the Wolverton-designed mechanical horse.
At the eastern end, north-side, was the area where new shafts, tailboards and new horse-drawn carriages were constructed, under Cliff Stokes, chargehand.
Along the outside northern wall at its western end was a corrugated iron shed, which housed an adjustable gas ring, used for heating tyres when using the shrinking-on method.
This process was only used if the wheel press broke down, or if an odd or non-standard wheel required tyring.
Adjacent to this was a quenching tank for use in conjunction with the gas ring.
On the eastern side  of the central gang-way was an overhead crane that spanned two sets of tracks, used for loading and unloading vehicles from rail wagons.
At the eastern end of this wall was a caustic bosh in which all horse-drawn vehicles complete with their under-carriages were boshed before entering the shop for repair.
Around three trains per week were accepted by this shop, all carrying horse-drawn vehicles, coming from Goods Depots all over the country: Camden, Broad Street, Curzon Street etc, whereas it was the rule that road motors came and went under their own power delivered and accepted by the drivers from the depots concerned.
Acceptance after repair was not allowed until the said depot's inspectorate had examined and approved the repair or renewal.
The paint department was self sufficient, having its own colour room.
The significance this department's role had on the railways as a whole, and its part in making the name of Wolverton Works known and respected both in the rail and motor industry needs to be recorded.
The LMSR Company was the biggest operator of commercial road vehicles in the country, and because of this, and the fact that it built all its own stock of horse-drawn vehicles and designed and built all the bodies to its own designs on various motor chassis, it had great influence on the development of commercial vehicles in Great Britain from the early 1920s until around 1940.
Early in Bore's time, minutes refer to horse-drawn vehicles of various types manufactured at Wolverton.
By 1882, a special parcel cart and omnibus shop had been erected,(Shop 11 on the 1906 map), where all the L & NWR road vehicles were to be built.
This shop also produced road vehicles of all types for other railway companies.
It remained there until moving to the just described shop in the late 1920s.
Wolverton took over the whole of the design work for the Road Vehicle Department of the LMSR, the Chief Designer being Mr Fred Purslow, with a team of young draughtsmen.
The modern articulated lorry was born at Wolverton Works.
The first mechanical horse experiments carried out at Wolverton were in 1929, their remit being to find a quickly detachable tractor and semi-trailer.
In the first instance the team converted an old horse dray, by removing the shafts and front wheels and fitting an inclined ramp coupling to the turntable, to carry the front end of the trailer: for uncoupling, a pair of manually operated folding legs were provided.
The tractor was, in this first experiment, a Morris Cowley car chassis.
The Morris as a tractor was unsatisfactory, and was replaced by a Roberts platform truck or trolley, which proved to be underpowered, but ideally manoeuvrable.
In August 1930, Karriers had just introduced a three-wheeled goods chassis named the Colt.
This had been designed as a power unit for working in alleys and narrow back-ways where conventional vehicles were unable to operate.
A modified version of this tractor, the Cob, was the first mechanical horse tractor proper.
For some reason this first mechanical horse did not utilise the inclined ramp coupling.
The trailer remained a converted horse dray, but only the shafts were removed.
The tractor, however, was rigged with two manually operated hydraulic arms, located under the front beam axle of the cart.
These arms lifted the dray vertically, drawing it forward and dropping the beam axle onto carrying brackets on the tractor chassis.
There were no trailer brakes on this model.
Still, in true Wolverton style, trying to find the ultimate answer to the problem, the second type reverted to the experimental model.
The horse-drawn dray was again stripped of its shafts and undercarriage and the turntable fitted with an inclined ramp and rollers.
But, in place of the folding legs of the experimental model, two fixed out side jockey wheels were also mounted on the trailer to support it when uncoupled.
The tractor was fitted with a ramp composed of two channels.
In operation, the tractor backed and lined up to the trailer, and the two ramps met.
The rollers then engaged, and ran in the channels, lifting up the front end of the trailer.
At the end of the run a hook on the trailer engaged with a bar on the tractor, in a like manner to the carriage buckeye coupling.
To uncouple, the hook was held in the off position from a lever in the cab, and  the tractor just drove away from it.
Spring-loaded brakes were fitted to the trailers and acted mechanically through a plunger in the centre pivot of the turntable.
The trailer brakes could be held off by a separate braking system when coupled to the tractor.
Braking was achieved through a foot brake operating on the rear wheels of the tug, a hand brake exerting on the same wheels and a second hand brake acting on the trailer wheels.
This, the ‘Wolverton Coupling’, was used by outside operators and other railway companies.
Karriers produced a similar coupling and did good business through this with many transport firms.
The complete unit or coupling was manufactured within the works from design to smithing, machining, assembly to the fitting on the vehicles.
Many were the types of trailer bodies manufactured for these motor tugs to haul: special flats, cattle trucks, high and low sided types, open and covered, sliding roofed etc.
In the first instance the trailers were converted in true Wolverton style from horse-drawn vehicles, but with the exception of the experimental models, there was nothing primitive about the conversion.
These trailers were fitted with pneumatic type wheels and proper cable-operated brakes in drums.
Another interesting innovation was their application to the conveyance of bulk liquids.
As well as the normal jockey wheels, these tanker trailers had a second air of jockey wheels, which worked in conjunction with a similar wheel fitted on the outside face of the road wheels.
These engaged on rails on special purpose rail wagons, so that the trailer could be shunted straight from the road onto the railway wagon, secured, and transported by rail to its destination and picked up again by road tractor with the minimum handling at its destination.
This was the precursor to the present USA ‘piggyback’ system.
Sometime after the introduction of the ‘Wolverton Coupling’, Scammell produced their patent Napier design.
This design was, as was the Karrier model, based on and more or less a facsimile of the ‘Wolverton Coupling’.
It differed in only two respects, that the turntable was a much narrower arrangement than the Wolverton one, and that when in the uncoupled position, it rested on a single support carried on two small wheels.
To uncouple, the tug drew away and the leg was so balanced that it dropped to earth by gravity: if this leg was, through any reason tight, and it failed to function, the trailer fell to the ground, and so cast its load.
Similarly, this single leg tended to cause problems on slopes.
On the credit side it did allow the rear axle of the tug to be the full width of the vehicle, giving more stability, as did the final ‘Wolverton’ design.
By the end of 1934, on the LMSR system, some 1,395 mechanical horses were in use; some 3,500 by 1938.
Karriers and Scammell supplied three-wheel tractors of three and six ton capacity all through the 1930s.
Some Scammell units were equipped for battery electric propulsion by Partridge Wilson & Co Ltd, of Leicester.
During the late 1930s some four wheeled six ton tractors were purchased, these being Karrier Bantams, Dennis, and the wartime Bedfords.
The Wolverton design team continued to develop this successful system, and in 1938–39 were experimenting to develop a 30 cwt — 2 ton unit.
The idea was to provide an even more economical unit to replace the horse.
Is it not ironic that this great technical achievement in the field of road transport was developed and first made practical by ‘Wolverton Railway Works’?
The works production shops were to remain laid out in the form described for progressive building and repairing, only marginally altering over the years to accommodate new designs and techniques, such as the Stanier all steel body panelling design of the early 1930s.
All carriages built at Wolverton from 1903–11 had wooden bodies with steel panels, but a reversion to wood panels came with the ‘top light’ stock.
Coming to the mid 1930s, the Works approached another peak.
It was selected to produce three train sets, each of nine coaches, that were to run in a train known as the ‘Coronation Scot’.
In early 1937, the coaches for these ‘Coronation Scot’ train sets were chosen.
The vehicles were mainly conversions, the built exceptions being the corridor firsts and first brakes at Wolverton, and the six kitchen cars by Gloucester Carriage & Wagon Co Ltd.
The train sets were made up with the following types of coaches:
BFK Corridor Brake First — three built Wolverton l937 (Lot No 1063) D 1961; FK Corridor First — three built Wolverton 1937 (Lot No 1062) D 1960; RFO Vestibule First Diner — three converted at Wolverton 1937 (Lot No 734) built Wolverton 1934 D 1902); RK Kitchen Only Car — six converted at Wolverton 1937 (Lot No 956) built Gloucester C & W 1937 D 1912; RTO Vestibule Third Diner — nine converted at Wolverton 1937 (Lot No 804/5) Built Met Cam & Birm C & W D 198l; BTK corridor Brake Third — three converted at Wolverton (Lot No 898) built Derby l936 D 1905.
At the commencement of the conversions the vehicles were lifted, and all parts of the underframes and bogies brought back to nominal new as for the standard LMSR coach.
There were two exceptions, these being the side bearing, and bolster springs, which were slightly modified, and the tyre profiles which were turned cylindrical.
After a complete theoretical and experimental investigation in the Cambridge University Engineering Department.
It had also been studied in America, with the result that the cylindrical wheel was recommended for high speed work.
It was also found to give excessive flange wear, and made it necessary to turn the wheels after 20,000 miles in service.
So the company decided, after a few months of running in service, to adopt a 1 in 100 coning which was reputed to give almost as good riding qualities at high speed, and did not suffer from the disadvantage of excessive flange wear.
This profile was used until the service terminated in 1939, at the outbreak of war.
Apart from these points, the sets were mechanically standard.
One set was fitted with L & NWR Wolverton design bogies.
The smooth, or flush sided exterior of these ‘Coronation’ coaches was in Prussian Blue, with silver streaks, that continued back in parallel the whole length of the train, beginning from an inverted prow point on the circular casing over the locomotive's smoke box door.
Special attention was given to the interior of the carriages, completely stripped and refurbished.
The open-aisle carriages had their ceilings down, and the roof panels refitted without beading, so that the whole appeared as one piece.
The seating in these open vehicles was two and one in the first class and the third.
In the first class compartments the seating was two a side and in the brake third three a side.
The total accommodation on these trains was therefore limited to eighty-two first and one hundred and fifty third class passengers.
The coaches were finished with wood veneers from English and Empire timbers: some in a third class coach of each set was made from Canadian silver elm cut from the original piles of Rennie's Waterloo Bridge, then lately demolished.
This wood had been seasoned in Thames mud from 1817 to 1936.
On each different type of timber veneer used was a tablet, making the type and its origin known to the passengers.
The trimming or upholstery was of a different hue for each train set, the first trimmed in blue, the second in brown, and the third in green, all moquettes.
They were also fitted with a pressure heating and ventilating system.
Lighting in the vestibule and open carriages was by tubular strip lighting (but not the fluorescent type), and table lamps.
In the first and third corridor coaches, the lighting arrangements were as in standard coaches, but with the added feature that in each compartment bell pushes were provided.
The Kitchen Cars had gas, both for cooking and lighting.
On completion, the sets were formed into three trains and put on display, on the goods yard sidings.
Local interest was such that the queues stretched from the goods yard gate to Creed Street.
The coaches were marshalled in train sets as ready for service, and from the tender going North as follows: Each train set tared 297 tons.
In service the ‘Coronation Scot’ ran in each direction every weekday except Saturday.
The one upholstered in blue left Euston at 1.30 pm; the other left Glasgow at the same hour and they flashed past one another at Preston to reach Glasgow simultaneously at 8 pm.
The third coequal member of this trinity, but distinguished from its fellows by the brownness of its interior colour scheme, relieved the strain of five journeys a week by doing two or three itself, in both directions.
On this service the LMSR employed five streamlined high-speed locomotives of the Princess Coronation class painted in blue and silver: No 6220 Coronation ; No 6221 Queen Elizabeth ; No 6222 Queen Mary ; No 6223 Princess Alice and No 6224 Princess Alexandra .
All the valve and operating fittings for the above locos were completed and burnished by hand at Wolverton Works Brass Shop.
The Coronation Scot service ceased at the outbreak of war in 1939, and the coaches were stabled for the duration, two sets at Horwich Locomotive Works, and one at Lostock Hall.
They re-entered general service in 1947, but not as train sets.
The years 1936–37–38, and early ‘39, were ones of prosperity for the factory.
Production was up around ten coaches, and eighty wagons were being manufactured, while an average of sixty carriage repairs were turned out weekly.
It is recorded that during ‘Munich’ week in 1 938, thirteen and a half new carriages were produced in an ordinary working week of 47 hours.
During this year Mr E.F.
Merritt resigned from the position of Works Superintendent and his post was taken by Mr A.E.
Peters.
On 1 September 1939, the Minister of Transport made an order taking over the control of the railways.
On 3 September 1939, war was declared.
All new carriage building ceased, with the exception of two saloons and a power car for the Royal Train, which entered service in 1941.
The Works was now on a war footing.
At the cessation of hostilities in 1945, the works got back to its pre-war role.
By the end of 1945, carriage production line was six per week.
On 6 August 1947, the Royal Assent was given to the Transport Act 1947.
Through this, from 1 January 1948, the Works became known as The British Railways Carriage & Wagon Works, Wolverton.
Steam-bending carriage and wagon roof sticks.
(WWC)
THE ROYAL CONNECTION
Wolverton Works has been involved with Royal travel from the beginning of main line railways.
Firstly it supplied the motive power, and since 1865, it has built, stabled, maintained, and supplied the crew for the Wolverton Royal Train — one hundred and forty four years of continuous service.
Although certain other lines had their own Royal vehicles and carried our own and foreign Royalty more frequently than the LNWR, it was in the main the Wolverton LNWR and later LMSR train that carried the Royal family on long railway journeys.
The London and Birmingham Railway in 1842 built a saloon carriage for Queen Adelaide.
It still survives.
The body was built by well-known coach builder Hoopers of Gough Street, London.
The underframe was built in the Company's shops at Euston.
The vehicle was composed of three compartments, in which the rear one was constructed so that the passenger, lying down to sleep, extended her feet beneath what would have been the ‘boot’ of a road coach.
This vehicle, which bears the L & B Railway Company's armorial device, is the oldest in the country and probably the world.
Its main dimensions are a 10ft wheel base, 5ft 6 ins width at the centre, 16ft 6ins length of body, 17ft 11ins long over headstocks, 21ft 9ins long over the buffers, and overall height from rail level, 11ft.
The foundation and framing are of English oak, the panels and case are mahogany, while the interior woodwork is polished white hornbeam.
The interior is upholstered magnificently in tufted brocaded silk of the Georgian period, in a light grey tint.
Of the three compartments, the foremost is an observation room, having windows to the front and sides.
When Her Majesty used this coach, a platform, or flat truck was placed ahead of it to give an unobstructed view.
The second compartment is arranged with facing rows of seats running across the coach.
This coach, after some hundred years of care at Wolverton, was handed to the National Railway Museum, and can now be seen at its York Museum.
The directors of the L & B Railway Company in 1843 constructed a carriage for Queen Victoria.
It was built under the superintendence of Mr Wright, the Chief of the Company's carriage department; and the interior was fitted up by Messrs Gillow, eminent upholsterers of Oxford Street.
The Illustrated London News of 2 December 1843, carried a description:
‘The carriage itself is of oblong shape, the dimensions being about 13ft by 7ft thus forming a handsome saloon, 8ft high in the clear.
The finest mahogany has been used in its construction; and the body of the carriage is double panelled throughout, and stuffed with felt, in order to lessen vibration and increase warmth.
The carriage is divided externally into three compartments, formed by the door and panels on either side.
The body rests upon a bed of the finest ash, a coating of india rubber, three quarters of an inch in thickness, being placed between, which has the effect of almost destroying the vibration generally attendant on the railway carriages.
At either end of the state saloon, and entirely unconnected with it, are small compartments, for each a guard, who has the control of a powerful argand lamp which, on passing through the tunnels along the line, reflects a strong light through a ground glass of globular form inserted in the panelling.
The roof of the carriage projects six inches over the body, and rises in the form of a dome towards the centre, where a ventilating apparatus is fixed, surmounted by a colossal gilt crown, which gives a striking finish to the exterior design.
A newly-invented spring has been adopted, one peculiarity attached to it being the insertion of a thin hoop of steel within a leathern  belt, which has the effect of increasing the power of tension in a very remarkable degree, and rendering the motion of the carriage perfectly easy.
The wheels are of the best construction, having wooden felloes six inches deep, with strong iron centre pieces, and the inconvenience arising from sudden concussion has been guarded against so far as possible by the finest description of buffer springs.
The carriage is painted dark lake (the Queen's colour) relieved with scarlet and gold; the upper quarterings having a broad border of French white round the plate glass windows in either panel.
These windows are three feet six inches wide, by two feet six inches high, and have a gilt beading round the exterior, with small gold ornaments at each corner.
The lower quarterings are ornamented with the heraldic devices of the royal family.
The Queen's coat of arms is emblazoned on the door panel, and the insignia of the Order of the Garter occupy the centre of each side panel.
The entrance is made by folding steps with four treads, covered with morocco.
‘The interior of the carriage is lined throughout with delicate blue satin, wadded and tufted, and the angles finished with broad fluted pilaster of the same elegant material.
The hangings of the windows are light elegant draperies of blue and white satin, tastefully finished with fringe.
The cornices are of satinwood, lightly and exquisitely carved, and slightly relieved with gold.
One extremity of the saloon is occupied by an ottoman, finished in satin, en suite with the curtains.
There are also two chairs finished in the same material, the satinwood frames of which are beautifully carved in the Louis Quatorze style.
Two console tables and two encoigneurs in the same taste complete the furniture, with the exception of the carpet, which is Axminster, of suitable design, and the rich tones of which contrast advantageously with the delicate effect of the other furniture: in the centre of the design are the Royal Arms.
It should also be mentioned that by an ingenious arrangement of an elegant curtain, the saloon can be divided into two compartments at pleasure.
‘The inconvenience arising from cold in the most carefully constructed railway carriage, where a long journey has to be performed in the winter season, suggested to the directors the necessity of fixing a warming apparatus in the bed of the carriage, and Mr. Perkins, the inventor of the steam gun, has accordingly fitted a very ingenious apparatus for the purpose of heating the carriage, which may be thus briefly described:— a coil of pipe placed near the hinder axletree, and supplied with water from a small cistern in the bed of the carriage, is kept heated by means of a lamp with four burners.
This pipe is continued round the carriage between the flooring; and the water becoming hot, the heat is communicated through a small brass grating in the floor, the temperature of the carriage being regulated by the ventilator above alluded to —
‘This carriage was put on view to the public who were anxious to inspect the vehicle.
Who through the attention of Mr. Creed, and Mr. Lord his assistant secretary, many hundreds were permitted to do so.’
Two Royal Saloons destined for fame were built at Wolverton Works in 1869, for the use of the Queen and her suite.
These were special saloons, 30 feet long, running on six wheels and connected by a gangway with sliding doors, one for day use and the other for use as a sleeping chamber.
The day saloon was upholstered in royal blue watered silk, the roof lined with white silk, the floor covered with Turkey carpet, laid on felt and cork so as to be quite noiseless.
The night saloon was provided with two moveable bedsteads, one for Her Majesty, and the other for either of the Royal Princesses who might travel with her.
Her Majesty, although in most respects quite alive to the progressive spirit of the age, was in some things inclined to be curiously conservative, and particularly so with regard to her personal surroundings.
Thus, as time went on, the Royal Saloons, although handsome and commodious, were becoming dated, so the Company wanted to build a new set of saloons.
They encountered unexpected opposition from the Queen herself who had got used to ‘her’ carriages and objected to their being changed.
She even objected to ‘new lamps for old’— electrification, but eventually, in 1895, the two saloons were joined together and  mounted on one steel under-frame, with six wheel bogies at each end, and electric lights were installed.
This vehicle was used by the Queen until her death, and is preserved at York.
In 1903, there emerged from Wolverton Works a pair of the most used Royal vehicles ever run on British metals.
They were two saloons for Edward VII and Queen Alexandra, that saw continuous service with very little change, throughout the reign of George V and Queen Mary, and much of that of George VI and Queen Elizabeth too.
These vehicles were mounted on six-wheel bogies, and enclosed balconies at the adjoining ends formed entrance porches with connecting gangways.
The interior of the King's saloon was of satinwood, inlaid with ivory, while the Queen's day room was in white enamel, with delicate shades of pink and blue in the decorations.
Soft pink draperies were seen in Her Majesty's bedroom, and all four apartments were beautifully appointed.
Next to the open balcony in the King's coach was a handsome smoking room, supplied with central table and four armchairs.
Adjoining was the day compartment, with settee, tables, and armchairs.
Beyond this was the sleeping compartment, with bedstead, table, armchairs and wardrobe.
For journeys by day this was converted into another day compartment, the bedstead removed.
Next was a dressing room and, at the end of the carriage, there was a compartment for the attendants.
In the Queen's carriage a day compartment adjoining the balcony contained couch, armchairs, table and writing desks; next to it was a smaller compartment with a bedstead for Princess Mary.
The Queen's sleeping compartment, beautifully appointed, was furnished with bedstead, dressing table, wardrobe, and armchairs.
Beyond the Royal sleeping compartment was a dressing room, and at the end of the carriage was the attendants' compartment.
For day travelling the sleeping compartment was converted into a second day compartment.
Six saloon carriages provided for the suite corresponded externally with the Royal saloons, so that the train, when made up complete, presented a harmonious and uniform appearance.
All these saloons were magnificent vehicles.
They were similarly arranged for day and night travelling and were all vestibuled together.
In the centre were two day compartments, each with armchairs and tables, while one contained a couch.
Adjoining were two sleeping compartments containing bedsteads, each with its own lavatory; and at one end there was an attendants' compartment with folding bed and facilities for serving light refreshments.
The sleeping compartments were entered from the central saloons, which were reached by corridors outside the bedrooms.
The King's and Queen's carriages were each 65ft 6in long, 9ft wide, and 8ft 7in high; the height from rail level to the top of the clerestory roof was 12ft 7in.
These vehicles were supported by steel underframes, mounted on six-wheeled bogies; from the underframe between the bogies were carried the brake gear and the accumulators for lighting the saloons.
In June 1914, the celebrated dining car which had won the Grand Prix at the Paris Exhibition of 1900 became part of the Royal Train.
The normal make-up of the Wolverton Royal Train then was, in addition to the two Royal saloons and dining car, two brake firsts and six special saloons, which were all of like contour, 57ft long, 9ft wide, and 8ft high, mounted on standard four-wheeled bogies.
It was during the 1914–18 war that the King's and Queen's saloons were modified.
The ‘dressing room’ in each saloon was converted into a bathroom containing copper and silver-plated bath-tubs, wooden cased and lidded and plumbed for hot and cold water.
Also the train had a telephone system fitted, and telegraph and telephone instruments were carried.
These could be connected with the telegraph wires alongside the track, so that communication could be established as necessary with the nearest signal-box or with central control.
Two telegraphists always travelled on the train.
The Wolverton Royal Train remained in this form until 1 94 1, when three superb vehicles were completed at Wolverton Works, two of them saloons for George VI and Queen Elizabeth, to replace the L & NWR twelve-wheelers of 1903, and the third a carriage with sleeping  compartments for the staff, luggage space, and a diesel-electric plant for supplying light and power to the train.
Each was a twelve-wheel coach, the two saloons No 798 (the King's) and 799 (the Queen's) were 69ft long, 9ft wide, with a body of clipper shape, containing end vestibules with double doors.
The sides were double-skinned and armour plated with splinter-proof shutters to their windows.
They weighed 57 tons each, tare.
These were also the only LMSR-built coaches to be constructed with drop head buffers, buckeye couplers and Pullman type gangways.
The Royal bedroom in each car occupied roughly one-third of the car's length, and communicated with a spacious bathroom fitted with a full-sized bath; adjacent to the bathrooms were small sleeping compartments for the King's valet and the Queen's maid respectively.
The side corridor ran along the length of these three rooms, and opened at the other end of the car into a comfortable lounge, with settee, three armchairs, and tables.
At both ends of these cars were large vestibules, 6ft 9in in length by 8ft 6in in width, entered from the station platforms through wide double doors.
Below these entrances were folding steps, in case it should be necessary to enter or leave the train from track level.
The interior decoration and furnishing of the King's bedroom was of weathered sycamore, with brass-finished copper metalwork, and copper and silver electric light fittings.
The walls of the lounge in this car were enamelled fawn, with eggshell finish, and with sunken margins gloss-enamelled in off-white.
The walls of the Queen's lounge were enamelled in pale grey, while the bedroom was finished in pale Worcester blue eggshell enamel, with sunken margins enamelled white and a mulberry-coloured carpet.
Everything possible was done to reduce noise while the cars were in motion, including acoustic blankets, special side friction blocks and rubber shock-absorbing pads, and devices to prevent rattling of brake-gear and any creaking of the car structure.
Double windows were provided throughout, with dehydrators to prevent condensation, and the coach-bodies were insulated against variations in external temperature.
With this there was complete air-conditioning, thermostatically controlled, supplying warmth in winter and cool air in hot summer weather, the former by a combination of steam from the locomotive and electricity from the power-plant at times when the train was standing overnight without a locomotive attached.
It was because of the greater than normal demand for electricity that a powerplant was installed in the auxiliary car.
It consisted of two internal combustion engines coupled to 35k VA three-phase alternators, which generated current at 250 volts.
The current was used for lighting, coachwarming, and for heating the water for lavatories and baths.
In the event of any failure of the electricity supply so generated, all the lighting was switched automatically to a supply from batteries, which were kept fully charged.
Among other electrical equipment on this Royal train was a private telephone system in the Royal saloons, a 25-line automatic telephone exchange for the entire train, and a buzzer-call system for summoning the staff.
The power plant was located in the centre of the auxiliary car, one end of the car being taken up with 14-berth sleeping accommodation for members of the staff, and the other by a luggage compartment.
This then was the Wolverton Royal Train of the later years of the LMSR and of the early British Rail period.
Additions were made to the train in 1948, when two ex-Chairman's saloons, built at Wolverton in 1942, were converted to personal saloons for the use of Princess Elizabeth and the Duke of Edinburgh.
During the years 1955–57, three new vehicles were built at Wolverton to replace old coaches in the Wolverton Royal Train.
These were constructed on standard BR underframes and mounted on BR2 bogies, which were later replaced by B5 bogies; the body contour was as the two 1941 saloons and power car.
The first, a dining car built in 1956 (Lot No 30129) replaced the ex-LNWR dining car No 76.
The second of the three was a nursery car for the use of the Prince of Wales and Princess Anne.
The third was a saloon for the Equerry and Secretary, built in 1957 (Lot No 30131), replacing ex-LNWR 807.
In 1966, the other LNWR dining car No 77 was replaced by BR dining car 325 (Swindon built 1962), as was ex-LNWR sleeper 495, by BR sleeper 2013 (Wolverton built 1957).
With increased train speeds and the introduction of new techniques due to electrification, it was decided to build a new Royal Train to replace the 1941 saloons, and to update other Royal vehicles for speeds up to 100 mph in air-conditioned comfort.
Wolverton Works were asked to build a new string of four coaches, and to modify the ancillary Royal vehicles so they were compatible.
Work started in February 1975; two MKIII, ex-Inter-City coaches were modified for the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh.
The third, an ex-brake-end of the MKII B series built in 1969, was converted into a power car.
The fourth vehicle was the new covering brake.
At eleven o-clock on the night of 16 May 1977 (Jubilee Year) the new train was handed over at Euston Station.
The Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh then travelled overnight to Glasgow for the start of the Silver Jubilee tours of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
In 1983 two new MKIII sleeping cars numbered 2914 and 2915 were added to the Royal Train, part finished at Derby Litchurch Lane, with three compartments in each car left empty of berths.
Into these, and fitted at Wolverton, were a shower room, ironing or pressing room, and an attendant's compartment.
Number 2914 is used by the Royal Household and number 2915 by the Travellers' Fare staff and the Regional Inspectorate.
These cars entered service in the Royal Train in 1984.
The Wolverton Royal Train string now consists of thirteen vehicles.
They are as follows with their running number and  delineation of each vehicle.
They are all painted in a new livery which consists of claret bodysides with a 20mm black line at the waist, banded by two 5mm wide red  vermilion lines, with a grey roof, ends, underframe and bogies.
No 2900 built in 1955 for Prince Charles and Princess Anne; now a back up vehicle, used in the main when two trains are run, or to strengthen the principal train.
2901 built in 1957, originally office and living accommodation for the Queen's private secretary, now used by the Queen's Lady in Waiting.
2902 built in 1956, is a dining saloon for the Royal Family.
A kitchen is positioned at the opposite end of the dining saloon.
2903 built in 1972 is the Queen's personal saloon, converted in 1977 from MKIII FO No M1 1001.
2904 built in 1972 is the Duke of Edinburgh's personal saloon, converted in 1977 from MKIII TSO M12001.
2905 built in 1969; combined power car and sleeping coach with luggage accommodation, converted in 1977 from MKII B BFK No W14105.
2906 built in 1969 is the escort coach, with day and night accommodation for staff, kitchen facilities, and was converted in 1977 from MKII B BFK No W14112.
2907 built in 1960 was No 325, a standard MKI restaurant first with kitchen, and provides dining accommodation for the Royal household.
It became part of the Royal Train in 1966.
2910 built in 1941 as a combined power car, sleeping and brake coach, is now a back up vehicle, used when two trains are run and/or if No 2905 fails.
It is still mounted on LMSR six wheeled bogies with plain bearings.
2911 built in 1920 was No 45000, a saloon for Railway Officers, and originally the Chairman's saloon, an LNWR body fitted to a MKI underframe and mounted on B4 bogies in 1967; this saloon has an all-wood body.
2912 built in 1942 was built as a Directors' Saloon for the LMSR and seconded for Royal Train duty after nationalisation.
It has been used by the Royal Family, and is now used by the Royal Household and senior railway staff.
2914 built in 1983; a standard MKIII sleeping car, with three compartments containing shower room, pressing room and attendants compartment, for use of the Royal Household.
2915 built in 1983 as 2914, but for use of the Travellers' Fare staff and Regional Inspectorate.
At present as always, many security precautions are taken when Royalty travels by rail, which are classified.
Some of the precautions taken to secure the safety of the Royal Train in the 19th and early 20th centuries were quite elaborate.
Ordinary arrangements for working the line were for the time suspended.
A pilot engine ran 15 minutes in advance of the train throughout the entire journey and, to guard against any obstruction or interference, no engine, train, or vehicle, except the pilot, was allowed to proceed upon, or cross the main line, during a certain interval before the passing of the Royal Train, while even shunting operations on adjoining lines were suspended.
Special precautions were also taken to guard stations, bridges, and level crossings, and all facing points over which the train had to pass were securely bolted.
The passage of the train was telegraphed forward from point to point throughout its journey.
The train was (and still is) accompanied by a staff of competent workmen from Wolverton Works, under a Royal Train foreman also from Wolverton Works, to keep a vigilant watch on each side of it, note any irregularity and periodically examine it throughout.
The speed of the train in Queen Victoria's time was, by her own wish, kept down to about 36 miles an hour, but now it travels at the line speed.
There were times when Queen Victoria's frequent long journeys became a source of anxiety to those responsible for her safety, and extraordinary precautions had to be taken.
During the troubled times between 1880 and 1883, when the Fenians were active,(the IRA of that time), and successive dynamite outrages were arousing consternation throughout the country, an anonymous communication was received on the eve of one of Her Majesty's periodical journeys warning the Government that an attempt would be made to wreck the Royal Train.
Typically, the Queen was reluctant to abandon or postpone her journey, but the then Home Secretary (Sir William Harcourt), though feeling it might be a hoax, sought the advice of Sir George Findlay, LNWR General Manager.
‘Tell Her Majesty’ he replied ‘she may travel in perfect security, and I will answer for her safety.
He then mobilised, with the co-operation of the other companies concerned, an army of platelayers and other company servants who were deployed within sight of one another, all along the 600 miles of railway between Windsor and Ballater; every yard of the route was narrowly inspected, and every bridge, viaduct, tunnel, and level crossing was closely watched and guarded until the train had passed.
In early 1985, work started at Wolverton on two new Royal Vehicles built on MKIII underframes; in answer to a question in Parliament in April of 1985, Mr David Mitchell, Parliamentary Under Secretary of State for Transport, stated ‘Most of the existing fleet is old, and several vehicles contain asbestos.
I have accordingly approved British Rail's proposal for a programme of modernisation.
Eight vehicles will be converted from new or surplus rolling stock for use in the fleet and two new vehicles will be built from scratch.
'He continued: 'Four vehicles in the existing fleet will remain in service.
The cost of about £7½ million, spread over four years, will be met by a grant from my department.
The resulting Royal Train fleet will have a service life of at least 30 years’.
Prior to the Queen's Silver Jubilee tour of Great Britain in 1977, two Inter-City coaches were converted for exclusive use by the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh.
These now form part of the existing Royal Train, together with two other converted vehicles used in a supporting role.
Other vehicles on the train are upwards of 29 years old, and do not meet current operational and security requirements.
The modernised fleet will give a high speed capability that will overcome operational difficulties caused by speed restrictions on some of the oldest coaches.
The first two vehicles fitted-out will be based on the new Mark III sleeping cars and will be for the use of members of the Royal Household and other support staff.
Two other new coaches will be constructed and fitted out specifically for use by members of the Royal Family.
Of the remaining six vehicles, four will be converted from surplus Inter-City catering vehicles and used to provide the principal dining saloon and accommodation for the Royal Household and other staff.
Two surplus Inter-City coaches will be converted to house an on-train generating plant and associated equipment.
So it can be seen that the Wolverton Royal Train, with this modern programme, will move into the 21 st century, giving Wolverton Works the unique role of conveyors of Royalty through three centuries.
Her Majesty has honoured the Works by visiting it on three occasions, the first on 11 March 1948 as Princess Elizabeth, when she toured the Works and inspected the two new saloons that had been converted from two ex-Chairman's Saloons (built Wolverton 1942) for the personal use of herself and the Duke of Edinburgh.
The second occasion was Monday 4 April 1968, when she again toured the Works accompanied by the Duke of Edinburgh, part of a seven hour tour of North Bucks.
On Friday 17 December 1976, the Queen made a private visit to see for herself work on her new saloons, Nos 2903 and 2904, and to give instructions on their decor.
The Royal Train is frequently used, with some 35 journeys each year.
ABOVE LEFT & RIGHT: Queen Adelaide's saloon 1842–3; note the boot extension for the Queen Dowager's feet (left).
BELOW: Queen Victoria's twin saloons in their pre-1895 condition and fitted with radial axles.
(All WWC)
ABOVE LEFT: A 57ft semi royal saloon No 75, built at Wolverton in 1903.
RIGHT: Royal Train at full speed, May 1904.
(Both LNW Soc) CENTRE LEFT: Queen Alexandra's day compartment.
WWC) RIGHT: Queen Alexandra's lounge in the 1903 saloon.
BELOW: Diagram of King George VI Saloon of 1941, showing the layout of the car.
ABOVE: The Wolverton Royal Train on the up slow entering Wolverton Station in 1952, hauled by Princess Victoria (Shed 8A, Liverpool Edge Hill) in BR Brunswick Green, lined out orange, black, orange.
Stock from the tender, 5154, 77, 806, 477, 495, 807, 76, 798, 799, 45005, 5155.
BELOW: The Royal Train leaving Milton Keynes on the official opening of the station by Prince Charles.
ABOVE: The Wolverton Royal Train crew of 30 June, 1966, that accompanied the Royal Train conveying the Prince of Wales to Caernarvon Castle for his investiture on I July, 1966: top left to right, Ernie Henson (electrician), Gerald Kingston (fitter), Dick Henson (trimmer), Tony Carter (electrician), Eric Barnes (finisher), Arthur Cowley (painter); front row left to right, Jack Preston (fitter), Arthur Harrap (fitter), Stan Buder (electrician), George Stevens.
BELOW: The Wolverton Royal Train crew in 1965, having a lunch break in escort vehicle 5155, left to right, going round the table: Alf Styan (Catering Manager, Euston), Gerald Kingston (fitter), Harry Elliott (foreman) Stan Butler (electrician), Eric Barnes (finisher), Arthur Harrap (fitter), Arthur Cowley (painter), Jack Preston (fitter), Ernie Henson (electrician).
LOCAL AND PARTICULAR
Initially, Wolverton Station children had to attend Stony Stratford School, which according to Stowell-Brown, was of a low standard and the masters even worse (but Brown was not very complimentary about anyone or anything).
The minute book of the L & B Railway contains many sincere statements with a view to improving social development, and general educational and recreational facilities of the place, often endorsed by financial assistance.
In December 1839, schools were to be established for the use of workmen in the Company's employ; in June 1840, these were to include a reading room.
In September 1847, £2,500 was allocated for a combined lecture room, library, reading room and music hall.
Contemporary accounts describe a reading room and library containing about 700 volumes and 16 papers.
Besides this, there was a flying library of some 600 volumes dispatched free of charge to various stations.
The school itself is described as ‘on a healthy eminence surrounded by a small court and garden.
In the centre there is a room for girls from 5 to 9 years of age who are instructed in reading, writing, arithmetic, geography, grammar, history and needlework.
Here we counted 55 clean, healthy faces’.
While in the east wing there were 90 ‘fine, stout, athletic boys of various ages…learning mathematics and drawing.
One boy was solving a quadratic equation, another was engaged with Euclid.
Others were studying land surveying, levelling and trigonometry and one had reached conic sections.’
At the west end of the building there was an infants school ‘under the superintendence of an intelligent looking person of about 19 years.
Education in Wolverton was well established thirty years before the first Education Act.
Some alterations to the school premises took place in 1883, when the yard was extended to take up the site of an old lodging house.
The Creed Street School remained in this form until 1891, when the Headmaster's house was pulled down and the school extended.
He moved to 99 Ledsam Street (The Tank House).
In 1894, the Board agreed to erect an entirely new school for 400 boys at an estimated cost, ex-land, of £2,800.
The site chosen belonged to the Radcliffe Trustees and lay between the future extension of Church Street and Aylesbury Street.
A proposed letter of appeal from School Managers to rate-payers for subscriptions was agreed.
In February 1895, the Trustees of the Radcliffe Estate agreed to give an acre of land and a donation of a seventh of the cost (not to exceed £400), the Railway Company paying any costs of conveyance.
With the Company and ratepayers’ contributions, nearly £3,000 was raised.
On 20 November 1896, the school was completed, at a total cost of £2,914 4s 1 d.
A cheque for £400 had been received from the Radcliffe Trustees, Mr Park had collected £389 of the £521 from ratepayers, but on 18 December 1896, it was reported that a further debit of £21 6s 6d had been received from the Locomotive Department, increasing the total to £2,935 10s 7d, and none of the ratepayers who owed the uncollected £132 were property owners, so there was little or no hope of collecting it; that was written off.
So in 1896, the new Boys School, was opened, and the Creed Street School continued as a Girls and Infants School, altered at a cost of £225.
On 18 November 1898 Miss Smart was appointed to the Girls' School at £50 rising to £60 per annum, and Miss Townsend appointed Certificated Assistant at £65, rising to £75 per annum .
By 1907, a new school for Girls and Infants was opened and the Creed Street School closed.
Until 1 October 1903, the Railway Company had borne all the costs for these schools and teachers had travelling privileges identical to those of Works employees.
On 14 August 1903, the school teachers asked to keep their travelling privileges after the schools were to be handed over to the Local Education Authority.
They and three charwomen at Wolverton kept their ‘perks’ as long as they retained their positions, at the prevailing salaries, but no longer.
Mr Laurie Bull was the last teacher to enjoy this facility.
In 1840, the workmen at Wolverton, on their own initiative, founded a Mechanics Institute.
Evening classes were started in 1843, and on 20 May 1861, mainly through the efforts of McConnell, the foundation stone of what was to become one of the most valuable institutions in the country was laid near St George the Martyr's Church, by the Duke of Sutherland.
The workforce contributed towards this important asset in the social life of Wolverton — 615 subscribed £523 towards the building fund.
The directors gave the site and contributed towards the building fund of £1,500.
After many problems the Science and Art Institute opened on Monday 16 May 1864.
Additions were made in 1890 and 1892.
From the beginning and right up to its end, it was the centre of social and cultural life in Wolverton.
Its main function was teaching, through evening classes.
In the main, its teachers in the early years came from London, and the minutes record that they were issued with free tickets weekly.
The Institute, although strongly supported by the Company, was run by a committee.
In January 1902 a day school was started in the Institute, becoming the Bucks County Secondary School, Wolverton, later to be renamed the Wolverton Grammar School.
This school remained here until a new one was erected in Three Bush Field in 1907.
In 1925, a new Junior Technical School was opened on the premises.
In the following year the Institute was granted Technical College status.
By arrangement with the LMS Railway Company and the Buckinghamshire County Council, new laboratories were erected and equipped for the teaching of electrical engineering and allied subjects.
The Institute continued as a Technical College and ran Evening Classes until the opening of the Radcliffe School in 1961.
It stood unused for some time and was burnt down by vandals in 1970.
On 24 May 1858, the foundation stone of New Bradwell and Stantonbury Schools was laid by the Marchioness of Chandos.
They were completed and opened on 6 December 18 60 with places for 400 pupils.
In the school grounds was a house for the master.
These were erected by the Company and run under the same conditions as Wolverton School.
All was well until at a meeting on 16 August 1889 at Euston, when the directors heard ‘that a meeting is to be held tomorrow, Saturday the 17 inst., in the Schools at Stantonbury when the question of recommending a school Board for the Parish of Bradwell in lieu of the present voluntary arrangement is to be considered.’
The Board made it clear that ‘if a School Board is resolved upon, the arrangement by which the Company now pay rates upon their cottage property will be terminated, and that the rates will have to be paid by the tenants themselves: On the other hand, if the Board is not decided upon, the Company will combine with the remaining £4,000 of assessment in the Parish with a view of providing a small Infant School at Old Bradwell.
‘It seems the Company had its way, for a School Board is not mentioned until 1895.
The local residents were of course only exercising their rights under the 1870 Education Act, which allowed the establishment of School Boards.
This, at the cost of the rates, aided by Government grants, could erect adequate buildings, and provide a curriculum to suit the residents.
But the powers of these Boards were limited by the method of inspection initiated by the Education Department.
The grant payable depended upon the number of children who could read, write, and do arithmetic to the satisfaction of the individual inspector, and therefore it was not unnatural that every effort was made by the managers of the school, to see that the inspectors’ tastes in such other matters as food and drink were duly considered when he visited them.
Despite this, in January 1892, the Educational Department demanded an extension or enlargement to the schools, estimated by the Company at £850.
On 12 August 1892, a tender was accepted from Messrs Kemp and Sons of Stantonbury for £1,336 4s 4d.
(Further requirements of the Education Department increased that to £1,350).
Minute 62 of the Schools Committee dated 15 August 1895, deals with Stantonbury School and a School Board.
‘Attention was called to the Company's payment of £50 per annum to the Vicar of Stantonbury for managing these schools, seeing that they are about to be handed over to a School Board and it was agreed that the payment be continued as in respect of Sunday School management, but during the pleasure of the Board and to the present incumbent only’.
The minutes of 18 October 1895, quote a letter of thanks from Rev A.C. Woodhouse, as superintendent of the Sunday Schools.
The Bradwell School Board had assumed control but the Company's Solicitor was completing an agreement defining the terms of use of the buildings.
Valuation of the furniture and fittings came to £203, charged to the Board at £ 1 50, plus £126 9s 9d for stationery.
The Bradwell School Board in the beginning comprised Rev A.C. Woodhouse, Messrs Ward, Wyllie, C.W. Powell (Solicitor), and it appears they struggled for some years.
In December 1895, they met the Company at Euston with a list of objections and suggestions in lieu of the Company's offer.
But by August 1897 they had still only paid £100, and the teachers lost their travelling privileges.
In September 1903, Bucks County Council took over.
The County Council extended the old Railway School in 1906 and built a new Boys School in Bounty Street in 1913, this being extended in January 1973.
Now the premises are being used as a Community Centre and small workshops.
Old Bradwell School was built by the Railway Company in 1896 as an Infants School with a certain amount of the building cost borne by the ratepayers.
The Company had promised in 1890 to maintain this school, when it was erected, and if it was free from debt.
But by 15 August 1895, there was still £30 needed to clear the cost of school and site.
Failing payment of the £30 the Company's promise would fall to the ground.
By 21 February 1896, the minute book informs us that ‘the freeing of this school and site from debt brings this Company under the obligation of future maintenance as promised when the school was originally contemplated, and Mr. Park was authorised to arrange accordingly’.
In 1903 the Wolverton (Boys') and Old Bradwell Schools were taken over by the Bucks County Council on 29 September at a nominal rent of 5s per annum for each school.
The Old Bradwell School continued to function as an Infants School until the early 1950s.
The L & NWR Company had entered on the deeds the condition, that in the event the building ceasing to become a school, ownership would revert to the Church.
They in turn sold the property, which has now been converted into a dwelling.
For more than 100 years the Works Brigade was the sole protector of the Urban District against fire, and was also called to villages, and to larger fires in nearby towns.
Before motoring became firmly established, the brigade was not only the district's guardian but also one of its greatest attractions.
The sight of the brigade turning out to a call, pulled by magnificent black horses, drew every child within half a mile of the Works main gates when the warning hooter sounded.
It was a practice that the leading horseman exercised the horses daily in a specially designed trap or gig, and it was the habit of a particular one to partake of a social glass of beer en route .
One day the Works Manager and Chief Officer (Mr Mason) had occasion to go round the Old Road, where he saw the horses and gig tethered outside the Locomotive Inn (now the Galleon).
On his return to the Works, the horseman was challenged by Mason, as to the reason the horses were tethered in this location, ‘I was took short sir’ he said ‘Oh’, replied Mason: ‘It looked as though you were thirsty!!— don't let it happen again'.
One of the brigade's proudest possessions is a letter from King George V, thanking them for the part they played in saving the Royal Train during the disastrous fire in the Works in 1933, when £30,000 worth of damage was caused.
The houses of the early firemen had red crosses, fixed over the door, so marked to assist the knocking up boy.
The first brigade on record consisted of Captain E. Eglin, Sergeant A. Darker, Firemen J. Parker, T. Clarke, R. Johnson, G. Hands, J. Lines, D. Faulkner, D. Mackey, W. Young, J. Leach, G. Knight, C. Timbrell, R. Newbold, and J. Bunn.
In 1880, many of them went to Newport Pagnell when the Swan Hotel was burned down.
Two years later on 25 November, the body shop in the Works was destroyed in a severe blaze.
On 30 November a Special Board Meeting was called.
The Chairman and Mr Bickersteth reported on the fire at the Carriage Works which destroyed the body shop with 25 new and 16 old carriages sent there for repairs, the estimated loss being about £21,420.
The proposed temporary arrangements were explained and authority was given for the advance of £200 or £300 in temporary loans to some of the workmen to enable them to replace tools destroyed.
It was also ordered that the Watchman and Steam Raiser, through whose neglect the fire was allowed to spread, be dismissed.
As a result, it was also decided to run a wire to each of the firemen's houses which came within a very small radius of the works, and to put a wire between each night watchman and the central depot.
Arrangements were also made for two firemen to take it in turns to sleep on the premises and instructions were given to these men to go all round the shops after the Works are closed and ‘inspect every hole and corner to see if there is any sign of fire and afterwards to sleep on the premises so as to be ready in case of accident’.
This entailed 1/4 of a day's pay extra in wages for each of them.
The 25 November fire in the Body Shop started at about 2.40 am, and the whole of the shop and its contents, including the workmen's benches and tools, were entirely destroyed, only portions of the walls, columns and ironwork remaining.
There were 28 new carriage bodies destroyed, seven open trucks, six tilt vans, 22 old carriages under repair, all of which were built between 1867 and 1878, one other old tilt van, and the estimated cost of the damage was £21,420.
The fire was caused through the carelessness of one of the workmen in blowing out a bench lamp he had been using, and putting it in his drawer at 5.30 pm the previous night, without the fire being properly extinguished on the cotton wick.
There were several discrepancies in the statements of the Watchman W. Adams and Steam Raiser James Moore.
Adams stated that whilst he and Moore were at supper he saw an unusual light in the direction of the Body Shop but, instead of going to see what it was and turning on the water from the hydrants to endeavour to arrest the progress of the flames, he caused the alarm bell to be rung and then ran to the gate to admit the Fire Brigade.
Adams and Moore were discharged and the whole of the Works went on short time, 8 am to 4 pm.
In the end, two thirds of the value of the tools destroyed were paid to those whose tools were not insured, and new tool chests were made to replace those destroyed by fire, free of charge.
By 1887, the brigade had new uniforms and brass helmets.
Two years later, one of the strangest fires recorded was at Dr Symington's store house and monkey house.
‘Roof  slightly damaged — monkey's saved’, reported Captain Hillyard.
Wolverton Parish Council entered into an agreement with the L & NWR Company in 1896.
Two guineas were paid for the use of the engine and hose, with payment of two shillings for the first hour and one shilling per hour afterwards for firemen, and one shilling for the first hour and six pence afterwards for pumpers.
But the Parish Council put in the clause that owners of property concerned in the fire had to meet all expenses in calling out the Brigade.
When cottages were on fire at Cosgrove in 1900 the Brigade was informed by telegram.
A brewer's float drew the manual for part of the way; other firemen ran with the hose cart along the canal towpath.
In August 1905  came the big fire at Castlethorpe.
Thirteen families were made homeless in the early hours of that morning.
In March 1900, Sergeant Harold Coker did his first drill, and his name was to become synonymous with the Brigade, for he was later Chief Officer, and designed the fire escape.
When a new manual pump was supplied in 1909 it was named after Miss Gladys Park, daughter of the then Superintendent.
That day the Brigade gave their first public display, and these events, with the rescue from a burning building as the highlight, were to continue into the 1930s.
It was in 1910 that the brigade first entered  competition work, when they competed at Watford.
Chief Officer C.L. Mason was in the winning hose cart team and also won the sack race.
That evening the first annual dinner was held.
Harry and David were the Brigade's first horses but, soon after his arrival, David fell going down the Hill to Haversham, and was returned to Euston.
Bessie came to fill his place.
In March 1912 a test was held for probationers.
It involved the scaling of ladders, runs across the workshop catwalks and tests for general fitness.
As a result, Frank Bates was taken on the strength.
Mr Bates became the Chief Officer in over 43 years of railway fire service — probably a record.
In September 1912 a record for fast travelling was set up when a turn-out was made in 30 seconds to a big fire at the foundry at Deanshanger.
The journey took 14 minutes for the four miles, and water was being pumped on the flames two minutes later.
The same year Wolverton Parish Council went to see the Brigade alerted.
‘Before the fireman could fasten his belt’ read the Wolverton Express report, ‘there was a buzzing sound in the stables, the doors of which flew wide open and Bessie and Harry, with heads erect and eyes flashing, galloped to the shafts, stopping just under the suspended harness which dropped and was automatically locked on their backs’.
The town subscribed towards a new steamer engine which was christened Constance by Mrs Norman McCorquodale in 1913.
It was the time of suffragettes and Mr Norman McCorquodale was reported as saying that a spray of water through the hose on them would be a good thing.
This was a grand year in the Brigade's history, for the team of Sergeant A. Felts, H. Canvin, Firemen F. Adams and W. Mason won the All-England shield for hose-cart drill at the Crystal Palace.
Then followed the war years and members of the Brigade went on active service.
Chief Officer Mason left as a Corporal motor-cyclist in 1914 and returned as a Major in 1919.
In the years that followed the Brigade was called to a vast number of outside fires, until they eventually handed over control to the National Fire Service in 1942.
During World War II they were called out 578 times for air-raid warnings.
During the blitz years the brigade also went to Coventry, Birmingham (twice) and Portsmouth.
After the war, outside calls were taken over by the NFS, who occupied a newly erected Town Station.
The Works Brigade then returned to the purely domestic job of fire protection within the Works.
In 1948 the Works suffered another major fire.
Tens of thousands of pounds of damage were caused in the trimming shop on Monday, 25 October and Tuesday morning, 26 October.
The alarm was given around 11 o'clock.
The Works Brigade and Chief Officer Frank Bates were soon on the spot.
Assistance was given by brigades from Stony Stratford and Newport Pagnell.
The flames were brought under control by one o'clock.
In 1955, Chief Officer Bates retired followed by Mr Barrett 1955–57, and he by Mr Valentine, 1957–74.
Although no competition work is now done, the brigade lives up to its traditions of readiness and competence under Chief Officer E. Riley.
The Yard has always been responsible for the movement of vehicles and materials within the  Works area.
At the outset all vehicle movements were by hand, and material by hand-truck, as the Works developed, traversers were installed, and horses adopted to shunt and move materials.
The first shunting engine was a tank engine and came into the Works in 1877.
This was followed by another of the same type in 1885 and another in 1890.
Then came two Crane engines, built specially for Wolverton Works use.
(Five of this type were built at Crewe Works, two for Wolverton Carriage and three for Crewe Loco.
) Following these came the four famous Ramsbottom Tanks — CDI — 3–6–7–8; CDI was withdrawn in 1937 and was replaced by CD8-Earlstown.
These locos were part of the yard scene from June 1896 until 1959.
From 1959 to 1960 a variety of steam shunters were used and tried in the Works (from Bletchley Shed), but none were successful.
Diesel Traction was introduced at the end of 1960 for shunting — 204 hp diesel mechanical shunting loco (Drewery and BR Standard type 0–6–0); these were replaced by four 330 hp diesel hydraulic shunting locos (North British 0–4–0), both types being underpowered for the work entailed.
These were substituted by 350 hp diesel electric shunting locos (0–6–0), these still being in service in 1985.
There was an engine shed at Wolverton from the earliest days.
By 1855 there were 17 engines in steam increasing to 22 by 1866.
A plan of 1873 shows a four road steam shed alongside the Tender and Paint Shops.
In 1874 the Loco Establishment was removed from Wolverton to Northampton, on completion of the loop line from Rugby to Northampton (opened 1 December 1881) and from Northampton to Roade (opened 3 April 1882).
In May 1890, the minutes state that ‘the old Saloon Shed having been pulled down to make room for the new Paint Shop, a shed is required for the three shunt engines’.
In June 1890, Mr Park was instructed to erect a new engine shed of wood on the Haversham Bank at a cost of £580.
Horses were used for both shunting and moving materials until the early 1930s.
In the late 1920s, battery-driven trucks were introduced to move components and materials between shops.
These in turn were replaced by petrol driven tractors towing trailers similar to those used at present.
But in the main, the movement today of materials and components is by pallets and forklifts.
In 1838–39, Wolverton Station's housing consisted of some five streets: Cook, Walker, Garnet, Gas and Bury, plus four villas.
Bourne, in his London and Birmingham Railway published in 1839, says of Wolverton, after describing the workshop, ‘A new colony of cottages and dwellings for the workmen and their families, hence a small town, or village, is established in a district previously unoccupied’.
The earliest known plan of the Works (August 1840) shows these streets.
Osborne in his London and Birmingham Guide , published in 1840, thought a new town would grow up because over fifty cottages belonging to the Company had already been built (in fact there were 80).
Whishaw in 1842 described the houses in more detail:
' On each side of this extensive structure there is a street running down to a wider street at the back, which is 40 feet in width, including the footpaths.
In the left street are the gas-works, and eight cottages of two stories for the workmen.
Between the street on the right and the canal, other streets run at right angles.
In the principal street, which is at the back of the locomotives' building, there are six houses of three shops on the ground floor.
From the main street there is a communication with the high road, which passes over the railway to the south of this station'.
The four villas (according to the L & B Minute Book) were built in 1838 by Messrs Guyther and Co, for £393 10s each, and let at £18 per annum— the tenants paid rates and taxes, but there was an allowance of £5 per house to meet the expense of putting the garden in order.
The other two villas were completed in 1845 by James Andrews of Tring for £ 1,045.
In the minutes of 1847, Mr Alfred D. Blott is described as the senior of the two ‘Station Clerks’, he had been first appointed on 18 September 1838, the day after the final section of the L & B Railway was opened.
In the 1851  census he is described as ‘Station Master’.
He was 33 years old, and born in Edgware, Middlesex.
His 25-year-old wife Cornelia was born in Geneva, Switzerland, and they had four sons under five years old, all born at Wolverton.
They employed two girls, sisters, aged 17 and 13 years, from a village in Oxfordshire, as housemaid and nurserymaid.
All these villas had a large cellar, outside toilet, large kitchen, scullery, dining room, parlour and large hall with open staircase, four bedrooms, bathroom and toilet.
In June 1840, 14 acres were bought from the Radcliffe Trust on which Creed Street, the northern part of Ledsam Street and Glyn Square, were built.
Young Street and the southern part of Ledsam Street were built in 1846–47.
The year l853 saw the erection of 116 houses and a public house at Bradwell; by l858, some l50 cottages had been completed, and by 1860 the final number of company houses at Bradwell was 198.
The Loco Minutes of 17 July 1862 record that about 2,000 men were employed in Wolverton Works.
Half of them live at Stantonbury, 437 between two and three miles distant, the remainder three to six miles away, mostly on farms and in villages with relatives or connections, and they would not come to live at Wolverton even if cottages were provided for them.
Staff was about to be reduced and, taking into account the new accommodation provided at Stantonbury, Ramsbottom thought there was no need to provide additional cottages at Wolverton.
Nevertheless, in 1878, the Company built some 38 houses in Buckingham Street.
These were to be the last workmen's cottages built at Wolverton by the Company.
But in 1886 The Gables was erected to house the Superintendent of the Works and in 1894 two villas were built in Green Lane for the Works Managers.
When the town was first built, the Railway Company had great difficulty in locating a pure water supply.
For a time it seems water was pumped straight from the canal and/or from a well perilously close to it (see 1840 plan).
The L & NWR Loco Committee Minutes of 9 February 1847 state that water was to be supplied to tenants willing to pay an extra rent of 2p per week.
The Station Doctor (Dr Rogers) was overwhelmed by cases of skin diseases, liver disorders, pulmonary disorders and even cholera.
In the first six months of 1848, some 120 local cases were sent to the Middlesex Hospital.
Water from the well in the Works was found unsuitable for locomotives, and was thereafter supplied to the inhabitants!
(The engines were then fed from the canal.)
An analysis in 1848 laid the blame on the well.
The Company reacted quickly and a new well was sunk to the west of the line, midway between the Blue Bridge and the Station but this proved inadequate.
A new source of supply was obtained south of the Blue Bridge and to the east of the main line in the shape of a spring in 1855.
A water tank was also erected to store this water atop a house at the Station end of Ledsam Street and a bath-house opened on the ground floor.
The water from this tank supplied the cottages.
This was No 99 Ledsam Street and known as the Tank House.
The tanks at Green Lane were built c1887 and were linked to the Ledsam Street tank.
The Osborne Street tank was erected 1900–04, and in turn linked to the Green Lane tanks.
In 1948, the Bucks Water Board took over responsibility for the supply and water for the Urban District was obtained from Foxcote reservoir and the Thames Valley Water Table.
New Bradwell and Stantonbury's water supply in the first instance was from individual or shared wells.
The Company laid a main and supplied its own cottages from the tanks at Wolverton c1888.
In 1896, the minutes state ‘that seven owners of property have applied for a supply of water from the Railway Company, which will necessitate the laying of 230 yards of 3’ cast iron main at an estimated cost of £55, and there are several more houses along the proposed extension of the main which will probably soon want a supply'.
Yet it was not until the 1920s that all of New Bradwell had piped water.
The new Bradville Estate was supplied when built in the early 1930s, from the same source.
To achieve this a pump was installed beneath the railway bridge at New Bradwell Station.
From here the water was pumped to a tank atop of Stanton Avenue and gravity fed to householders.
There have been three Railway Gas Works at Wolverton and gas was supplied by the Company to all Wolverton and Old Wolverton as far as the Old Wolverton turn, to all of New Bradwell and the Bradville Estate, the former having its own gasometer positioned at the western end of Bridge Street alongside the canal.
It also supplied and maintained the gas street lighting.
Electric street lighting was introduced in 1939.
The Company Gas Works were taken over by the Gas Board in 1955, and closed completely  in 1970.
The Company supplied all churches and chapels in both Wolverton and New Bradwell with free gas, coke and water (with the exception of the Salvation Army, because it made street and public house collections), until nationalisation.
A gravity system of sewerage was in operation from 1838, with cleansing manholes not more than twenty yards apart (see 1840 and Drain Plan).
It passed under the canal and ran parallel to the Haversham Bank and down to the river.
New sewers were under construction in 1891, with the outfall works constructed near the canal between Wolverton and Stantonbury.
Built in 1871, and extended in 1880, the Mess Room in its final form could seat some 2,000 men.
Each man was issued with a number which corresponded with a seat number, at which was provided a coffee can, cup and cooking tin, all duly numbered too.
The kitchen with a small staff cooked or warmed up the men's food free of charge.
The aroma of all the different types of food was far from pleasant.
One single man lived in lodgings and his landlady was in the habit of putting in a pudding basin the lunch she had prepared for that day, for him to have warmed up on the morrow.
But on one occasion she had a visitor, to whom she gave his portion, packing some egg sandwiches in the pudding basin and covering it as usual.
At 7.00 next morning he placed the basin in his tin and handed it to the attendant, who put it in the hot  cupboard .
Come lunch time, and after some five hours of heat, he collected it, removed the plate, and 900 heads immediately turned round to see where the stench was coming from.
Needless to say, no lunch for him, as he retreated amidst hoots and laughter, carrying the offending object.
Until the ‘bus services became established in 1934, the men of Stony Stratford and New Bradwell had two unique utilities to overcome the hot lunch problem.
Stony Stratford men could have their lunch cooked at home and placed in a basket, labelled, and school children would then rush them to the top of the town and the tram would make an express run for one penny per lunch basket.
(The first ‘buses also provided this service for a short time.)
Meanwhile at New Bradwell, boys would rush home from school to collect lunch baskets, place them in hand trucks, and then run to the messroom (over one mile), so the meal was plated just before the men came out of work.
For this duty the boys received between 3d (1.5p) and 6d (2.5p) per week from each customer, depending on their generosity.
Even this job had its hazards; sometimes the truck tipped up and the gravy ran into the rice pudding, or otherwise and verbal and sometimes financial reprimands took place.
These procedures carried on until the 1939–45 war.
The Factories (Canteens) Order No 1993 of 1940 required provision of suitable canteens where hot meals could be purchased in factories where more than 250 persons were employed on Government Work.
The Wolverton Works immediately conformed.
Mr Westley, foreman of the Polishing Room was put in charge, and directly responsible to him was the Canteen Manageress, Miss Dolling.
There was also a mobile canteen, whose function was to supply urns of tea and light snacks, rolls, etc, at snap time, a snap or tea break being allowed by the same wartime act.
(Pre-1940, no breaks for food or drink were allowed in the Works.)
The canteen ran in this form, with a day and night shift throughout the war and after until around 1960, when the night shift was withdrawn through lack of support and a skeleton staff supplied tea and snacks to order to the Works night shift.
1970 saw another change when the canteen was taken over by a catering company, and vending machines for hot and cold drinks, and snacks were provided.
In 1877, the newly formed Wolverton Volunteers were No 6 company of the 1st Bucks Rifle Volunteers and consisted almost exclusively of men employed in the Works.
The company was at first commanded by a Captain Short, and later by Major H.M. Williams, who was also on the staff of the LNWR Carriage Department.
HQ was the Works, the drills taking place in one of the paint shops (No 45 on the 1906 map).
On 23 August 1879, the LNWR Company contributed £100 towards the cost of the practice butts that were built adjacent to the Stanton Low Church, St Peter.
The regimental signallers belonged to the Wolverton company and always obtained a high position among the home district signallers at the annual official examinations.
There was a strong and efficient band, all Wolverton men under the leadership of Bandmaster Brooks, and an ambulance squad of eight men, all of whom had qualified for the Geneva Badge.
In 1889, a cyclist section was formed of six members mounted and equipped in regulation kit.
Also during this year Captain H.M. Williams was selected to command the 1 st Bucks team of sixty men, to compete for a prize offered by Lord Wantage for field firing at the Home Counties Brigade Camp at Churn, and of this team (which won the  competition ) thirty-two were Wolverton men.
On the outbreak of the South African War on 12 September 1899, 86 members of the Wolverton company volunteered and saw active service.
A commemorative tablet has the men's names engraved and now hangs in the foreman's room.
In 1904 Wolverton absorbed the Stony Stratford company (No 7) and so became two companies strong.
At the beginning of hostilities against Germany on 4 August 1914, Wolverton companies F & G (later under the four company system they became part of C & D companies) were mobilised and the Battalion was formed complete at Aylesbury, before midnight.
It entrained for Cosham, the battalion's war station.
Entraining again on the 9th the battalion journeyed to Swindon, for a week's hard training.
Then they moved to Chelmsford by foot, where they stopped until they embarked for France on 30 March 1915, part of the 145th Infantry Brigade of the 48th Division.
Among the many places they saw action were Ploegsteert, Hebuterne, Somme, Le-Sars, Peronne, 3rd Battle of Ypres (Pilkem Ridge, St Julien, Vimy).
On 23 November 1917, the Battalion entrained for Italy and, after a six day journey, arrived at Marseilles and from there along the French Riviera to  Ventimiglia and on to Villa del Conte to become part of the XIXth Corps, taking over positions on the Piave, and then on the Asiago Plain.
They took a prominent part in the repulse of the Austrian attack in this sector in June 1918, and countered this attack by raids on Austrian positions, in which they took several hundred prisoners.
 Demobilisation commenced with the original TA men going first.
By the middle of March 1919, Lt Col Reynolds DSO, paraded the remnants of the Battalion, some 50 men, once again on the square in front of the Town Hall at Aylesbury.
For their service in Italy, the Bucks Battalion were the recipients of a diploma and the facsimile in bronze of a gold medal presented by the King of Italy.
Of all the infantry battalions engaged on the Italian Front, the 1st Bucks Battalion, the 1st Battalion Royal Welsh Fusiliers and the HAC were the three selected recipients of this honour.
The Battalion reformed in 1920, the Wolverton Company now designated ‘A’, their HQ the Drill Hall, Wolverton, completed at the end of 1914.
The last week in August 1939 saw the 1st Bucks Battalion, still members of the 145th Infantry Brigade and part of the 48th Division, just returned from the annual camp at Lavant, near Chichester.
Key parties of about ten of all ranks from each Company, were called up on 24 August.
A few days later the call came for general mobilisation.
The 1st Bucks was made up of four companies, Wolverton covering the north of the county.
Until 17 September, the companies concentrated in their local areas after mobilisation.
Captain J.O.
Jones, company commander of the Wolverton company (A Company) was posted to divisional HQ and Captain Parshall took Captain Jones' place at Wolverton.
The Battalion was formed complete at Newbury Race Course, each company making its own way to this rendezvous.
The billets were in the racecourse buildings.
The men slept ten to a box on stone floors and all companies were allotted loose boxes.
The Battalion was provided with a training area on Greenham Common an hour's march away.
Then Captain Parshall was found medically unfit for overseas so Captain R.K. Stevens took command of A company.
On Wednesday 17 January 1940, at about 16–00 hours, they sailed from Southampton on an ex-Liverpool Isle of Man packet for France.
On 18 January 1940, the 1st Bucks landed at Le-Havre.
The Battalion entrained en route to the Lillebonne district about twenty miles from Le-Havre, A company along with B  billeted at Gruchet-la-Vallasse, most men in open barns.
Four days here and the Battalion moved to the forward area, to a place called Wahagnies in the centre of a mining district, the transport being a French troop train with cattle trucks, each with the inscription Chevaux 8, Hommes 40.
They detrained at Libercourt and marched to their billets, A company in Wahagnies itself in schools and houses.
The enemy invaded Holland and Belgium on Friday 10 May.
After several postponements and days of waiting, the Battalion left for Belgium, the 48th Division congratulated by General Viscount Gort, C in C of the BEF, on their good traffic discipline.
At first light on 15 May, the Battalion was machine-gunned from the air.
The Battalion assembled at the Brussels-Waterloo road junction and went into position in a southern suburb of the town with the Victory Mound but half a mile away.
(The field of Waterloo has a special significance for the regiment).
After a march of nine miles on 16 May, the Battalion reached Joli Bois, three miles from the enemy.
During the morning they were attacked by dive bombers, and during the day French horse-drawn transport retreated through their lines.
The next day they withdrew under sporadic artillery bombardment.
During this withdrawal A company lost touch with the main body (one platoon failing to rejoin until after the survivors were back in England).
Enemy aircraft were strafing the column and the road was congested with refugees.
On 18 May B company and some of A reached the area of Ath, took a rest and feet were washed in the river and a meal started.
The rest of the Battalion arrived at intervals including some of the missing men of A company who had not been seen since Waterloo.
Chances of a good rest were soon dissipated.
At 23–59 hours the Battalion was ordered to move again.
On 24 May they were given yet another destination — Hazenbrouck, in the S-W corner of the semi-circle round Dunkirk where the 1st Bucks were to make their last stand.
On 25 May, they were continually strafed and bombed.
On Sunday they heard that some sort of evacuation was taking place at Dunkirk.
In the morning of the 27th, the battle began in earnest, all companies in action at 12–00 hours, when the enemy started a general attack.
By nightfall all the rifle companies had been over-run; some sections, and platoons from these companies extricated themselves at nightfall.
The 28th saw them surrounded by tanks and under heavy artillery and mortar fire.
At 13–00 hours a frontal attack was made by tanks who approached within 20 yards of company positions, firing at point blank range.
Still under heavy fire from artillery and mortars, and themselves down to a small amount of ammunition, the remnants of the 1 st Bucks stood fast until dark.
On the evening of the 27th, while extricating his platoon from a perilous position in houses in Hazenbrouck, Second Lieutenant Shewell showed great personal bravery and determined leadership and disposed of several snipers.
At one point the platoon was split in two.
By using his head Private W. Ray led the detached party past several German posts to rejoin his platoon commander.
Second Lieutenant Shewell was awarded the MC and Private Ray the MM, the first men from the Wolverton company to be decorated in the war.
Of those who fought at Hazenbrouck, ten officers and around 200 ORs succeeded in getting back to England.
The gallant struggle against overwhelming odds which the rifle companies  fought on the 27th and Battalion HQ Company continued until the evening of the 28th, will forever remain a landmark in the history of the Battalion and Regiment.
They received a rare compliment from the enemy themselves.
In a German broadcast it was stated that ‘the defenders of Hazenbrouck not only delayed the advance, but resisted in a manner truly worthy of the highest traditions of the British Army’.
The Battalion reformed at Hereford, then moved to Melksham, Okehampton and Uffculme, Ashburton, Newton  Abbott , Dartmoor and Brigg.
In 1942 the Battalion left the 48th Division and was transferred to the 54th, billeted at Walberswick and Southwold.
During 1943, the 1st Bucks was selected to form the nucleus of a beach group, a new formation designed to land vehicles and stores across open beaches in the early stages of a seaborne landing.
In April 1943, the Battalion moved to Troon in Scotland for training.
The 1st Bucks now formed part of No 101 Beach Sub-Area No 6 Beach Group.
During 1943, a large scale exercise was held in South Wales.
They were now part of the 3rd Division (composed of the 8th, 9th and 185th infantry Brigades), returned to Scotland for more training in amphibious landings, and then moved to Petworth in April 1944.
Marshalling began on 1 June, and then they embarked at Southsea and arrived at 19–00 hours, 6 June ('D' Day) on the Normandy Coast at Le-Breche.
After setting up and completing their work on the beaches, on 10 July, No 6 Beach Group was dissolved.
On 30 July, the Battalion was placed under the command of the 1 st Canadian Army and under the 6th Airborne Division for operations.
By the end of August many men had been sent as replacements to the 51 st Division, to the Black Watch and Seaforth Highlanders and some to the KOYLI.
The Battalion at this time was left with only five officers and 100 other ranks, and became a line of communication battalion.
On 3 October, Sergeant Fowler went to Wahagnies to try to locate the old band instruments left behind in 1940.
He went to his old billet and the old lady living there, after welcoming him warmly, said ‘You've come for the instruments of course’.
The floorboards of the house were ripped up, and there they were.
VE-day saw the release of those members of the Battalion taken prisoner at Hazenbrouck in 1940.
During their captivity the Wolverton men had many experiences, some macabre and some  humorous .
Doug Jones had at this time, been split from his mates of the Wolverton Company and was on a working party with a group of Queen Victoria Rifles men, detailed to drain some marshes in Poland.
Their prison was some stables at the rear of a large house, which incidentally, they had to secure themselves.
One of the QVR men was lousy and was separated, living alone in the tack-room.
On one occasion, he screamed for the guards, saying someone had stolen the contents of his Red Cross Parcel, leaving him only a tin of beans and of jam.
The officer in charge decided to turn out the lights for ten minutes to allow the culprit to return the goods.
Then, on went the lights followed by another scream from ‘Lousy Lou’— someone had relieved him of his tins as well.
Another rifleman had bartered some of his Red Cross parcel for a loaf of bread; ‘The conditions of living and surviving had made us all as cunning as foxes’, so this rifleman that night slept with it under his neck, but someone crept up and cut off both the ends.
After commencing retraining, the ex POWs, like most soldiers on a home posting, endeavoured to get home at weekends.
This meant starting back to barracks early on Sunday evening.
The landlord of The Morning Star at New Bradwell, was Major Ansell MBE (HG), who thought it unjust that they had to soldier on after their experiences.
So he wrote and signed chits for local lads, stating they were unfit to travel and thereby extending their weekends.
For a few weeks all went well, until three New Bradwell ex POWs, Ron Preston, Jack Henshaw and George Wood could not get a hire car due to petrol being rationed.
A local man offered to help.
He had, over many weeks, been siphoning petrol from a garage owner's tank and lorries; and the owner had, on this particular weekend, diluted the tank with water.
The petrol was duly siphoned, into a can, and the can put in a bin outside Ron Preston's house in Bridge Street.
Ron retrieved the can and ‘put it straight in the tank’.
Round the Old Road at Wolverton, the car spluttered and stopped.
Meanwhile, the police had found the abandoned car, and the wheels of the law began to turn.
On arriving home at lunch time Ron was confronted with the owner of the purloined petrol, who stated he had been advised to prosecute, but in view of them being ex POWs, he would take no action.
Back at camp, with Ansell's note of explanation, they were let off with a caution.
But this was the end of extra leave by courtesy of Major Ansell.
Meanwhile, the Battalion after VE day settled in at Menden, Germany.
Then in June 1946, the 1st Bucks Battalion was placed in that curious condition known as ‘suspended animation’ while stationed at Ghent.
The Battalion was finally wound up on 7 August 1946, and the Works lost its close association with the 1st Bucks, of some 69 years' standing, for in 1947, in the new TA formation, it became a Light-Anti-Aircraft Regiment, no part of which was raised at Wolverton.
The Market House opened in December, 1842, conveniently near the station and consisted of two storeys, both fitted up with stalls.
Outside there were covered stands for fish salesmen.
Market Day was Friday.
The original Market Hall (see map of 18 50) was used until the fire of 1906 caused severe damage.
After rebuilding it was a Gas Fitters Shop, and at present the ground floor houses the Railway Veterans Club and the second storey contains a gymnasium.
The market moved to the old school premises.
The Market Hall attracted tradesmen and stall holders from the surrounding district, Northampton and London, most coming by train; at the Station hand-trucks were kept for their use.
People also came to market by rail, from Newport, Buckingham, Bletchley, Towcester and the villages around, and of course, on foot.
Many women met their husbands from work at dinner time and did their weekly shopping, taking advantage of the cheaper prices at the market and some to ensure they got their housekeeping money before their spouses spent their wages on drink.
By the late twenties and early thirties, ‘bus travel had taken over most of this lucrative Friday traffic; Basfords of Towcester ran two ‘buses and The Buckingham Orange did two return journeys from Buckingham with Jelley's of Cosgrove, the latter two being taken over by the United Counties Bus Company in the mid-1930s.
Basfords continued their service until around 1950.
Added to this were other ‘bus operators and from around 1934 the United Counties ran services into Wolverton market from most of the surrounding villages.
The market continued to prosper in trade and custom in this form until the outbreak of the second war.
After the war it seemed to lose some of its attraction.
Before the war it had opened at 6 am and kept open until 6 pm to give the men a further chance of shopping.
In the 1960s the Railway Board sold the premises to the Wolverton Council.
On Saturday 2 June 1979, there was a fire and the market was closed for one week.
On 6 July 1979, the last market was held there and the following week, the first one in the Agora.
The development of the town of Wolverton was slow in the beginning due to the reluctance of the Radcliffe Trustees to sell land.
So, many of the migrant mechanics and artisans found housing in surrounding towns and villages.
This happened to such an extent that the Census Commissioners mentioned it in their returns.
These workmen, of course, all had to walk to work, and with a six o'clock start and 6 pm finish, it was a long day.
With the influx of Saltley Carriage men and their families in 1865, it appears that many could not find a home within easy striking distance of the works, and being town dwellers not used to walking, opted for life in the nearest town, Northampton.
The Company put on a special workman's train to carry these men morning and evening, picking up at Roade and Castlethorpe, the latter two serving as pick up points for Hanslope, Yardley Gobion and Potterspury men.
The men from these last three places, instead of walking some six miles to work could, in the case of the Hanslope men, walk two miles down the road to Castlethorpe Station.
The Yardley men came across a field, under the canal via a cattle walk, between Thrupp and Yardley Wharfs, crossing a plank at Castlethorpe Mill, and so to the  station.
The Potterspury men came through Furtho village, down the road past the Navigation and so to the station.
Before the introduction of the workmen's train, all the men from these two villages walked along the canal towpath to Wolverton, as did many afterwards who could not afford the fare.
Wolverton Works supplied this Northampton train, which went via Blisworth.
When the Wolverton Shed went in 1882 to Northampton, a works shunting engine did this service (manned by Bletchley Shed men) until the early 1920s.
Around the turn of the century men from Potterspury formed a club with a view to purchase a horse and brake to convey them to and from Wolverton.
The prime mover was George Dodson.
This group of men called their transport The Mail , and it was hauled by a mare they called ‘Polly Stuart–.
In the beginning they stabled them at Bakehouse Farm, on the A5.
After a short time the Duke of Grafton sold them the Rope Walk, a building where the old village craft had been carried out and where Ted Smith's coach garage is now, and so they moved.
At the Wolverton end, Polly was stabled in the Engineer's yard during the men's working period.
In 1920, this transport had a tragic end.
Travelling home one night in a violent storm, Polly was struck by lightning and had to be destroyed.
Polly's duties were taken over by a Groses ‘bus of Northampton.
Groses service to Wolverton Works continued until Ted Smith in 1927 bought a lorry used for general haulage during the day, and in the mornings and evenings placed forms within it for Wolverton Works men.
Later he purchased Buses and the concern is still in operation today.
During the same period, men of Loughton and Beachampton formed similar clubs and bought horse-drawn conveyances, stabling in the Engineers and Victoria Hotel yards.
The opening of the Newport Pagnell Branch Line in 1867 helped workmen living in Newport Pagnell, Linford and Bradwell, making their working day shorter.
Special coaches were kept at Newport.
These were not of the best quality; lighting in the first instance was oil, then gas, but on the introduction of electrically lit stock, the batteries were always run down or low in the winter, and described by one wag, a regular user of the service, as reminiscent of ‘a red hot hairpit’.
Some brought their own stubs of candles to read the papers.
The villages to the west, Stony Stratford, Deanshanger, Wicken, Calverton, Beachampton, Whaddon, Nash, Old Bradwell, Loughton and Shenley, still had to walk.
Mr Foxley who started in the works in 1906, lived at Shenley and had to arise at four in the morning so as to start work at 5.30 am.
With the increased number of workmen living in the expanding town of Bletchley, a Bletchley workman's train was put on and this picked up and set down at Loughton.
To board this train at Loughton Wolverton bound, one had to be athletic, as the platform consisted of a raised boarding about six inches high, on the down fast line.
On its return journey at 5.30 pm it ran back on the slow up line and into Loughton siding where there was a raised platform some 60ft long at coach footboard height, for milk churns to be loaded on the daily milk train.
Often, when running tender first, the driver omitted to stop and left the passengers stranded.
Sometimes there were short races between the Bletchley and Newport  workmen's trains as both were booked away from Wolverton at the same time.
On one winter's night, a local book-maker had a £5 bet with a colleague that the Bletchley train would beat the Newport one to the canal bridge.
All concerned were in collusion — signalmen, drivers, firemen and guards.
One of the punters approached the driver of the Bletchley train and said, ‘if you beat them to the bridge there is a £1 for you at Bletchley’.
The driver turned to his fireman and said ‘what are you waiting for, get that oil can and oil the rails’.
The fireman nipped through the bridge and round the front of the Newport train and liberally oiled the rails; it was dark, and beneath the bridge was full of smoke and steam (so he was unseen by his opponents) as both engines were blowing off.
The signalman gave them the right of way simultaneously, the Bletchley train flew away and the Newport one remained at a stand with wheels spinning on the greasy rails, the Bletchley passengers waving goodbye to the fist-shaking Newport workmen.
George, the driver of the Bletchley train, collected his pound on arrival at Bletchley.
In 1887, the Stony Stratford-Wolverton tramway was opened; this enabled the Stratford men to ride to work.
It was extended to Deanshanger in 1888, but this only lasted a year and then it was closed, as was the track down Creed Street to the Wolverton Goods Yard in 1893.
The Old Bradwell men walked across the fields to work, the original footpath (pre-1880) going through the coal yard and second Gas Works.
But with the construction of the main line deviation, completed in 1882, they were not allowed to cross the line.
To overcome this difficulty, the Company built a tunnel and extended the footpath between the canal and the Company's fence up to the foot of the new canal bridge, and built some steps up to Stratford Road opposite the then new station.
Even this journey had its hazards.
In 1886 J. Wooten, a labourer of Wolverton was coming to his work from Old Bradwell before 6.00 am on the morning of 8 January, during a heavy snow storm.
He walked into the canal which was thinly frozen over, remaining partly immersed till he was discovered by other men on their way to the Works.
He died of exposure, and his widow received the usual death allowance of £20.
On arrival outside the Works, the men could either go in the Mess Room and collect hot water to brew themselves a drink, purchase one from the attendant, or buy hot coffee and rum, from a horse drawn stall outside the main gate.
The Public Houses opened at 5.00 am until the 1914 war, when the licence laws were altered.
To get the men up in the morning, alarm clocks at this time being unknown, the Works in 1873 used a steam whistle.
The whistle blew at 4.45 am and at intervals until six, dismissed them and summoned them from breakfast and dinner, and finally in the evening at 5.30 pm.
At the turn of the century, cycling became popular.
Three young men from Hartwell, John Charles Kingston, Felix Smith and Bill Spriggs, unable to afford a bicycle each, clubbed together and bought one between them.
They then measured the distance between Hartwell and Roade Station and divided it into three equal parts.
The first man cycled to the first mark and left the cycle and hurried on, on foot.
The second man did likewise, the third man completing the journey to Roade Station, where they all met and caught the 5.30 am workmen's train to Wolverton.
A 54 hour working week was to remain until after the 1914–18 war, when, on l January l919, a 47 hour week was introduced.
This was worked from 7.55 am until 12.25 pm and 1.25 pm to 5.30 pm Monday to Friday, and Saturday morning, 7.55 am until 12 noon.
The whistle still summoned everyone to work; it blew first at 7 am then at 7.30, 7.45, 7.50 and the final one at 7.55 am then at 12.25 pm for dinner break and at 1.15 pm, 1.20 pm and 1.25 pm and again at 5.30 pm at the end of the day.
During the second war, the whistle was used as an air raid warning.
After the war the whistle recommenced until around 1965, when it was replaced by an electric siren (still in use today) which calls the men at start and finish times only, from the canteen roof.
The last steam whistle was made in the Works to the patterns of Mr S. Fossey of Old Bradwell, who was also an accomplished organist and piano tuner — he tuned this whistle to the ‘G’.
In 1913, the first ‘buses appeared in the district, operated by the London General Omnibus Company Limited, but these were withdrawn after the outbreak of hostilities on 22 November, 1914.
After the war in 1920, the National Bus Company set up in some strength and began to run various routes.
The Eastern National, in 1929, took over followed by United Counties who came on the local scene in June 1928.
Both these concerns were in the Tilling Group of Companies and in a splitting up of the area and districts with certain other companies, the United Counties took over most of the local services, with the Eastern National taking a minor role.
While these big groups were organizing, many private enterprises were getting on the road, operated by Messrs Bates, Jelley, Humphrey, Johnson, Ecclesfield, Brown and Page and Gardener.
From the early 1930s ‘buses ran to and from Wolverton Works morning and evening, from Nash, Whaddon, Beachampton, Calverton, Wicken, Deanshanger (two ‘buses), Old Stratford, Cosgrove, Yardley, Potterspury (who also had T. Smith's coach), Stony Stratford, Shenley, Loughton, Old Bradwell, New Bradwell, Hanslope, Castlethorpe, Haversham, Olney, Newport and Linford.
Added to this, lunch time services were run to Haversham, New Bradwell, Stanton Avenue, Old Bradwell, Stony Stratford, this latter place with special ‘buses to the London Road (Coronation Road) and the Water Tower (Augustus Road) and Old Stratford, which also served the lower end of Stony Stratford High Street.
The lunch time fare to these places was a penny each way.
These services were well patronised and lasted well into the 1960s.
On one occasion a New Bradwell man, having been unsuccessful in boarding the first two ‘buses to Bradwell at lunch time, expostulated ‘I'll get a seat on the next one even if I have to stand up’ needless to say he never lived that statement down.
From the early 1960s the pattern of getting to work again changed, due to car and motorcycle ownership becoming common-place, and the work force being more than halved.
Some ‘buses still serve some of the same places, but these are just part of the normal service.
Trains still bring workmen from Northampton and Bletchley, but these too are part of the regular service.
After electrification in 1966, the Bletchley train continued to pick up at Loughton, but not to set down at night.
The Loughton service ceased on 1 October 1972.
On 28 August 1972, the railway running department gave notice that the 05.57 ex-Euston, would not pick up workmen at Loughton from 1 October 1972, due to engineering work.
This engineering work was the laying in of two cross-overs, one at Wolverton and one just North of Bletchley.
On completion the railway found the workmen had discovered alternative transport and the Loughton pick up did not recommence.
The Works Fire Brigade of c1870, posing against the rear of the McConnell rail steamer of 1861, a rebuilt or converted loco tender; looking south, the workshop in the background is the 1845 works extension, or new loco shop, now 1987, Maxwell's Book Warehouse, the wooden building is a signal box.