

BUCKINGHAM PALACE.
For a people who pride themselves on their love of animals, and considering the age-old human dependence on animals for food and work and as pets, it seems strange that a college to train veterinary surgeons in this country was only established two hundred years ago in response to a plan proposed by a Frenchman.
The credit for founding the College goes to the Odiham Agricultural Society, but, as so often happens, it was the demands of war that gave the College the initial impetus.
In the following hundred years, between Waterloo and Sarajevo, the health of animals in agriculture and transport became the chief concern of the College.
The industrial revolution changed the scene dramatically and animals for transport gave way to horses kept for sport and pleasure while the success of veterinary surgeons in raising the health standards of agricultural animals ensured that their services would remain in demand.
It is an irony that in this mechanical age the Royal Veterinary College is probably as secure as it ever has been, while the scientific and professional challenges become ever more complex.
The College and its staff and graduates have made many significant contributions to the science and practice of veterinary medicine and I am delighted that this history has been written to coincide with its bi-centenary.
The story has its ups and downs.
Great practical achievements jostle with the expected financial and administrative problems but throughout it is a story of people doing their very best to improve the health and welfare of animals of all shapes and sizes and in all circumstances.
I hope that all who read this book will join me in wishing the Royal Veterinary College a successful and rewarding third century.
Philip
1990  
INTRODUCTION
I have prepared this history of the Royal Veterinary College, the oldest veterinary school in the English-speaking world, as a contribution to the celebration of the College's bicentenary in 1991.
In reading it, it may be helpful to bear in mind the generalization that the life of the College falls broadly into two epochs each lasting almost exactly one century.
In the first century of its existence the Royal Veterinary College was inadequately provided with staff and with funds, and was mostly concerned with diseases of the horse.
Forward-looking College principals in the third and fourth quarters of the 19th century—Simonds, Robertson, Brown —tried with some success to widen the curriculum to include domesticated animals other than the horse.
In 1892, with the appointment of McFadyean as dean (he became Principal in 1894) there began, on the foundations laid by his predecessors, a second century showing a remarkable transformation which led to a marked expansion of the numbers of teaching staff, to a greater development of the staff's research activities, and to the full incorporation of the College into the country's university system.
In 1906 the College became a school of the University of London, with recognised teachers and could prepare candidates for the university's BSc (Veterinary Science) degree as well as carrying out its basic function of training candidates for the diploma of membership of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons.
In 1949 the College achieved full status as an integral school of the university.
Training is now provided for the BVetMed degree, entitling graduates to be registered as members of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, which confers on them the title of veterinary surgeon and the sole right to practise as such.
The major line of development of the College has thus been its transformation from a teaching school attached to an equine infirmary, to a fully fledged university school in which teaching at undergraduate level and research of high standing encompass the whole range of domesticated animals, and where postgraduate courses meet the increasing demands of specialisation in such subjects as animal health, pathology and laboratory animal science.
This history is not intended as an exhaustive one.
Unfortunately a great deal of early archival material has been lost, particularly in the upheaval caused by the wartime evacuation of the College from Camden Town to Berkshire in 1940, but especially during the complete rebuilding of the College in Camden Town in the 1930s.
I would also stress that I do not claim any special archival expertise.
This history should be looked on as my attempt to explore the history of the College so as best to understand why it has become what it is today.
I have divided the chapters in a way reminiscent of the old histories of the Kings of England, and I often refer to the ‘reign’ of a particular Principal.
This biographical approach has its weaknesses, but it is one that an amateur often finds easy to handle.
The establishment of the College, and the early days of its life, were described by an anonymous writer in 1793 in An Account of the Veterinary College from its Institution in 1791; this is largely a transcript of early College minutes.
(The secretary, Mounsher, lost the original minute books on 10 May 1794.
He thought he had them with him in the coach when going to the College, but did not see them again.
He said the fair copies were bona fide and accurate.)
Towards the end of the 19th century, in 1894, former College Principal James Beart Simonds published in his old age a series of biographical sketches of some College teachers he had known.
A brief, and perhaps unduly euphoric historical note, probably written by J.G. Wright (then professor designate of surgery) was included in the brochure prepared for the opening of the present buildings in Camden Town by King George VI and Queen Elizabeth in 1937.
A detailed account of the first half-century of the history of the College, up to the foundation of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, which took over the College's examining functions in 1844, was given by Leslie Pugh (1895–1983) in his book From Farriery to Veterinary Medicine , published by Heffer of Cambridge in 1962 The books by Iain Pattison on the development of the veterinary profession, and on Principal McFadyean, are invaluable sources of information.
There is also much useful information about members of the College staff in the 19th century in Sir Frederick Smith's Early History of Veterinary Literature .
From these various works, from the College's minute books, and from veterinary periodicals, I have constructed what I hope is a reasonably coherent narrative of the College's life.
I have arbitrarily chosen to finish my biographical accounts in 1988, when the Principal, Dr Alan Betts, retired.
Throughout the book I have referred to the Royal Veterinary College simply as ‘the College’, when no possibility of ambiguity is involved.
Similarly, I have referred to the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons as ‘the Royal College’ where again the context makes the matter clear.
Ernest Cotchin.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The manuscript on which Ernest Cotchin had been working for so many years was unfinished and unrevised when he died in September 1988.
A few months after his death, I was asked to act as editor of this bicentenary history of the Royal Veterinary College, and I am proud to have been one of the team that has produced a book which I hope does justice to the author and to the College.
The story has been brought up to date with a challenging final chapter by Professor Lance Lanyon, Principal of the College.
Sherwin Hall has contributed introductions that add a historical perspective to parts II and III.
Professor Clifford Formston has vividly described the Hobday debacle, and the period when the College was based at Streatley on Thames.
I am particularly grateful for his generous help with photographs, historical records and advice.
I am indebted to the College librarian, Linda Warden (who compiled the index) and to the library staff for their unfailing help with records and pictures, to Anna John who typed the manuscript, to David Gunn for photography and to Benita Horder, librarian of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons' Wellcome Library for historical material and illustrations.
Many members of the veterinary profession sent the author information and photographs for inclusion in this history.
Their names were unfortunately not recorded, but their assistance has been greatly appreciated.
Valerie Carter  
Extract from minutes of the Odiham Agricultural Society, 19 August 1785.
(RCVS)
The First Veterinary Surgeons
THE FOUNDING OF THE COLLEGE
The establishment of the College in 1791 marked a crucial stage in the separation of the functions of farrier and  veterinarian .
Farriers were basically shoeing-smiths who had acquired a rudimentary knowledge of equine diseases, which led them to become ‘horse-doctors’.
Most of them, according to contemporary accounts, were still using the same crude methods and homely remedies that were popular 100 years before.
With the advent of the College, veterinarians increasingly took over the treatment of horses and cattle.
Students of the College called themselves veterinary surgeons, and in time this became an accepted designation.
Good evidence of the use and meaning of the term is contained in a report, in the second issue of The Veterinarian , of a meeting held on 22 July 1829 to consider the method of examination adopted at the College.
One of the speakers, a Mr Sibbald, who had studied at the College and obtained his certificate, said ‘My father was a farrier.
He was intimate with the greatest practitioner of his day, Layton, who was not a veterinary surgeon, but was farrier to the King.
The term ‘veterinary surgeon’ arose with the College.
There is honour attached to it.
I have obtained it, and I prize it.’
The process of separation and demarcation was not a rapid one, and considerable ambiguity in the use of the term ‘farrier’ and ‘farriery’persisted for many years after the establishment of the College, reflecting the degree to which the occupation of farrier and veterinarian overlapped.
As late as 1815, in his Treatise on the management of draught horses, especially those in the coal trade in London, Higgs was pleading for a clear detachment of the veterinary surgeon and the farrier from each other.
This was also eloquently urged by Taplin in 1803.
On the other hand, in 1806 no less a person than James Clark, farrier to the King in Scotland, in his First Lines of Veterinary Physiology and Pathology wrote that the healing art, and the art of shoeing, would and should necessarily continue as two linked aspects of a country veterinary practitioner's work.
Why the foundation of the London Veterinary College so notoriously lagged behind the foundation of the French, and then of other continental veterinary schools, remains unexplained.
There had for a long time been publicly expressed unease in the United Kingdom about the unsatisfactory training of people treating the diseases of animals, whether they were farriers in the sense of being shoeing-smiths acting as horse-doctors, or were medical practitioners — physicians, or more especially surgeons — who had, partly or completely, left human medicine for the less crowded and potentially more lucrative (if less socially acceptable) field of animal medicine.
In view of the number of working and pleasure horses in the kingdom, when the phrase ‘horsepower’ meant literally just that, and the concentration of dairy cows around and even within the metropolis, and also the growing number of pets in middle-class households, it is strange that the demands of so many animal owners, some wealthy or even extremely rich, had not led to the development of a proper profession competent to deal with animal diseases, just as the professions of physician, surgeon and apothecary had burgeoned to meet public demand at the end of the 17th and the beginning of the 18th centuries.
Formal veterinary instruction began in France in 1762, when the world's first veterinary school opened in Lyons, where a 24-year-old named Laurent Gaillard became the first pupil on 16 February.
It was established by Claude Bourgelat (1712–1779) with a grant of 50,000 livres from Louis XV.
This was soon followed by the establishment of the larger veterinary school at Alfort near Paris, thanks to the interest of Bourgelat's friend Henri-Leonard Jean-Baptiste Bertin (1719–1792) who was Louis's comptroller general of finance, and later a minister of state whose portfolio covered agriculture.
Bourgelat was clearly an intelligent man.
He was a friend of d'Alembert, and contributed to Diderot's seminal Encyclopedia (published in 35 volumes in 1750–1780) an article (1764) on equine maladies.
The year 1762 is one for all veterinarians to remember.
In that same year, the celebrated naturalist Buffon, echoing Burdon, felt advantages would accrue if some physicians should turn from human medicine to study veterinary medicine.
In a letter in the Gentleman's Magazine of 1790, ‘Philippos’, identified by Pugh as Granville Penn, who was to play a central role in the foundation of the London Veterinary College, wrote that he ‘had often lamented the failure of the plan which the late ingenious M Bourgelat had formed for establishing a veterinary school in England’.
It has been speculated by Smith that this idea might have been suggested to Bourgelat by the Earl of Pembroke (1734–1794), a cavalry officer in the Seven Years' War.
Had it succeeded, we would have been enriched by those labours which he afterwards devoted to his native country and which laid the first regular foundation for the science of veterinary medicine in Europe.
The deduction seems warranted that, prior to the establishment of the Lyons and Alfort schools, Bourgelat had a plan to establish one in England.
It is interesting, in view of later criticism of Edward Coleman's reported preference for the sons of farriers and grooms as students, that Bourgelat preferred his veterinary students to be young men of good morals and behaviour, vigorous and robust, and of souche terriere ; he only occasionally sought out men of more ‘exalted’ origin.
After the establishment of the French veterinary schools, other continental schools followed in quick succession.
Those founded before 1791 included Turin, Padua and Parma in Italy; Dresden, Hanover, Freiburg-im-Breisgau, Karlsruhe, Berlin and Munich in Germany, and schools in Vienna, Budapest, Copenhagen and Sweden.
The Berlin school deserves special mention.
In 1787 Frederick William II commissioned Count von Lindenau to establish a veterinary college in Berlin.
A physician, Naumann, was sent along with a farrier to see what went on at Alfort; Sick, a surgeon, again with a farrier, was sent to Vienna, and an apothecary, Ratzburg, was sent to Leipzig to fit himself for teaching botany and chemistry.
Had such an enlightened scheme been followed in London, it might have been more immediately successful than the one adopted.
The high promise of the Berlin school, officially opened on 1 June 1790, was unfortunately not immediately fulfilled, the teachers appearing somewhat lax in the discharge of their duties.
Meanwhile in 1766, Edward Snape, farrier to George III and to the second troop of Life Guards, published a proposal to establish in London what might be called a ‘teaching hospital’ for instruction on the diseases of horses.
This hospital was apparently established in Knightsbridge in 1778, but it survived only a short while, Snape having been left in the lurch by noblemen who promised financial support.
According to Smith, Snape must nevertheless be given credit for being the first to project, and actually found, a veterinary school in this country.
The same year saw the foundation of the veterinary school in Hanover.
This was done with government support, and our own King George III's name appears on the decree establishing the school, in his capacity as King of Hanover.
As Principal Buxton, Ernest Gray and others have noted, no account seems to have been taken in government circles in London of the plan for the Hanover school, although Vial, the College's first professor, does mention it in his  Preliminary Discourse .
The possibility of establishing a veterinary college in London with government money was one way its promoters considered financing it, but this was unfortunately dismissed in favour of raising funds from students' fees and subscribers' contributions.
This was to the fundamental and long-term detriment of the financial base of the College.
In 1776, John Mills FRS had joined those who deplored the absence of a veterinary school in this country.
He referred to the school at Lyons, and indeed knew Bourgelat personally.
It is thus amply clear that, while surgeons like Taplin and physicians like Prosser turned to the financially rewarding field of veterinary medicine, there was widespread dissatisfaction with the state of veterinary science in the United Kingdom.
Yet nothing was done until decades after the need was recognised.
Pugh suggests: ‘The explanation probably lies in the customary contrast between the benevolent despotism of the Continent and the laissez-faire regime of eighteenth century England’.
More prosaically, the army farrier was less in demand in England than on the oft-warring Continent, and our island country was only sporadically, even if at times seriously, exposed to the ravages of epidemic disease in its animal stocks.
David Everett, in Lines Written For a School Declamation , memorably observed that ‘tall oaks from little acorns grow’.
The acorn which resulted in the foundation of the College was obscurely and unwittingly planted when, in 1783, at a meeting on 16 May at the George Inn in the small market town of Odiham in Hampshire, there was established, on the proposition of William Terry of Yately, a ‘society for encouraging Agriculture and Industry in the said Town and its Neighbourhood’.
It is now generally accepted that this meeting was the first step on the unpremeditated road which led to the establishment of the London Veterinary College.
The chair was taken by Sir Henry Pawlett St John Bt of Dogmersfield and, in addition to Mr Terry, the others present were Thomas Hall of Preston Candover, Rev William St John of Dogmersfield, George Green of Weston, and George Small, also of Weston.
James Huntingford, an attorney of Odiham, was appointed secretary; he was later to become secretary of the London committee, an executive offshoot of the Odiham Agricultural Society which was eventually to undertake the actual institution of the London Veterinary College, of which he was the first secretary.
The list of 47 subscribers to the Odiham Society includes the name of Rev Thomas Burgess of Oxford, later to play a key role in the London committee of the society.
It was said of him that ‘the untiring perseverance with which he prosecuted his researches for evidence in any particular subject was inconceivable’.
Burgess (1756–1837) became Bishop of Salisbury in 1825.
He attended meetings of the London committee on 3 November 1790 and in 1791.
The Odiham Society continued to grow, having 100 members in 1784, owing to the devoted exertions of Huntingford.
On 7 January 1785 the society set out its principal objectives: to promote the good of the community by encouragement of industry and ingenuity; to excite a spirit of enquiry which may lead to improvements not yet known; and to fix knowledge and art upon the certain test of accurate experiment.
Three weeks later, Lord Rivers (later to be a vice-president of the College) was elected the Odiham Society's president.
From the minutes of the meeting of 15 January, it seems that the society was already in touch with correspondents all over the United Kingdom.
Matters developed slowly in the Odiham Agricultural Society.
On 19 August 1785 the following motion was proposed by Rev Thomas Burgess: ‘That Farriery is a most useful science and intimately connected with the interest of Agriculture; that it is in a very imperfect and neglected state, and highly deserving of the attention of all friends of Agricultural economy.
That Farriery as it is commonly practised is conducted without principle or science, and greatly to the injury of the noblest and most useful of our animals.
That the improvement of Farriery established as a study of the Anatomy, diseases and cure of cattle, particularly  Horses, Cows and Sheep, will be an essential benefit to Agriculture and will greatly improve some of the most important branches of national commerce such as Wool and Leather’.
(It is clear that Burgess in the term ‘farriery’ meant to include the treatment of the diseases of farm animals as well as of the horse).
Whereupon it was resolved: ‘That the Society will consult the good of the Community in general and of the limits of the Society in particular, by encouraging such means as are likely to promote the study of farriery on rational scientific principles.
That it be referred to the meeting in October to consider what means may be most likely to encourage the study of scientific farriery.
That it be referred to the same Meeting to open a voluntary subscription to forward such means as may be thought most likely to promote the study of scientific Farriery…’.
On 7 June 1786 the society noted that it still lacked information on which to base any specific resolution for the encouragement of scientific farriery and the matter was put aside.
Huntingford confirmed on 14 March 1788 that (for reasons not given) he had resigned the post of secretary, being succeeded on 14 April by Mr Raggett, another attorney of Odiham.
The society obviously accepted that the resigning secretary acted in good faith, for a month later it passed a vote of thanks to Huntingford for ‘his unremitting zeal in extending the extra connection of the Society, and in soliciting the correspondence of other Agriculture Societies and Individuals, and his Diligence in forwarding the attendance of Committees, in preparing the business of all meetings and in arranging the correspondence and other Communications to the Society’.
At that time, powerful support for the establishment of a veterinary college came from Arthur Young, FRS (1741–1820), the younger son of the rector of Bradfield, Suffolk (Speaker Onslow's chaplain).
He took a farm of 100 acres at North Mimms in 1766 —‘a hungry, vitriolic gravel’— leaving there in 1777.
Young contributed largely to Annals of Agriculture.
He travelled in France in 1788, 1789 and 1790 and founded the Farmers' Club in 1794.
Breakfasting at Bradfield Hall on one occasion, the agriculturalist Duke of Bedford found him surrounded by pupils from Russia, France, America, Naples, Sicily and Portugal.
In October 1787, Young (who was once bluntly described as the best writer on agriculture and the worst farmer) was shown round the Alfort veterinary school by the director, Chabert.
Young was impressed by the fact that the school had a farm, a facility lacking at the London College for over 150 years (it would be interesting to know if the College later unwittingly purchased his North Mimms farm).
He was also impressed by the school's four professors (in contrast, the London College was to start with only one professor).
Young wrote of the Alfort school that ‘the establishment does honour to the Government of France.
There are at present over 100 pupils from every country in Europe except England, a strange exception considering how grossly ignorant our farriers are’.
Again in 1788, James Clark of Edinburgh, in the preface to his Treatise on the Prevention of Diseases Incidental to Horses wrote: ‘In France, a regular academy for the Instruction of young Farriers has been instituted.
The attempt is laudable and worthy of imitation.
The Physician and Surgeon enjoy the greatest opportunities for receiving instruction in their professions, by a regular education.
The analogy between the diseases of the human body and those to which the horse is liable is very great.
Hence it must be obvious that the cure of those diseases must depend on the same principles as the former: from which it is likewise evident that a regular education is necessary to the Farrier’.
In June 1788 Charles Vial, the Frenchman who was to become the first Professor of the London Veterinary College in 1791, arrived in England with letters of introduction from Pierre-Marie Auguste Broussonet (1761–1807) to Sir Joseph Banks PRS (1743–1820), Samuel Foart Simmons MD, FRS (1750–1813) and Dr P.D.
Layard MD, FRS (1721–1802).
Sir Joseph, botanist and explorer, with an interest in plants of agricultural importance, was president of  the Royal Society for 42 years.
Dr Simmons was physician-extraordinary to George III, and was called to treat the King in his ‘mad’ periods.
Dr Layard, physician to the Princess Dowager of Wales, was the author of a book on Contagious distemper among horned cattle .
In September, Vial published proposals for the creation of an English veterinary school.
It is assumed that, having married an Englishwoman, he returned to France in December 1788 at the end of his six months' leave.
He was back in England by February 1789, when he directed and possibly assisted Edmund Bond in his dissection of the magnificent racehorse Eclipse which, like his grandsire Regulus, was never beaten.
At meetings in May 1788, March and June 1789, the Odiham Society, in its leisurely way, resolved to advertise its intention to educate two or more boys ‘at the great School of Farriery in the neighbourhood of Paris, where children from every part of Europe are taught the business of Farriery scientifically and practically, and solicit the contributions of the Public at large’.
The matter was to be brought more closely to the notice of ‘noblemen, gentlemen and farmers’ by a circular letter signed by the society's treasurer, Rev William St John, calling for subscriptions.
The name of Granville Penn first appears in the Odiham Society minutes of 5 August 1789, as a subscriber to this farriery fund.
While the Odiham Society has earned and received its fair share of credit, it must be concluded that this modest proposal, so long in incubation, was likely even if put into effect, to have had only a marginal impact on the situation it was meant to remedy—as the society soon realised.
In October 1789 Charles Vial announced proposals to deliver lectures in England on the veterinary art.
On the 9th of that month, James Clark of Edinburgh was elected an honorary and subscribing member of the Odiham Society.
This was the same Clark who had stressed that a regular education was necessary for a farrier.
Whether the preface to his treatise in which this comment was made was ever actually read by the society's members is not known, although they did order two copies of his ‘two publications on Farriery’.
The Odiham Society knew of Clark, and could have known of his views on the education of farriers, before it received copies of Vial's plan on 5 August 1790.
The 25 May 1790 Odiham minutes refer to a London committee, of which Huntingford was secretary, and which met at 10 Welbeck Street.
The meeting of the Odiham Society on 5 August 1790 was of crucial significance.
Among the seven people present (including the secretary, Mr Raggett) was Rev Thomas Burgess.
The society now moved from the rather passive position of regretting (as it did on 5 August 1789) that ‘there was no appropriate educational establishment in England for the desired improvement of farriery (in this context comprehending the medical treatment of horses, cattle and sheep) by a regular education in that science on medical and anatomical principles’, to a positive position of recommending such an institution as had been established in France, Germany and elsewhere on the Continent, as being necessary in this country.
They now recognised that their plan to send some intelligent lads for education in farriery to such continental schools would be at best a rather feeble stopgap measure, while in any case the revolutionary situation in France was not favourable to the original Odiham plan.
All the same, the plan to send two or more lads to Alfort was not yet finally abandoned, and subscriptions were still called for, to be sent to Odiham or to the London committee.
To that committee were nominated Lord Rivers (still president of the Odiham Agricultural Society), Granville Penn, the Earl of Dartmouth, Sir James Tilney Long, Sir Thomas Miller, Henry Maxwell, George Ross and Henry Peters, with Huntingford as secretary.
A further significant motion at the meeting on 5 August 1790 called for provision to be made under Parliamentary authority for placing the profession of farriery (as practised by shoeing-smiths) on a more respectable footing, by forbidding farriers from practising unless  licensed, by preventing, after a limited time, any person from practising farriery who had not served seven years' apprenticeship under a licensed farrier, and so on.
At this same meeting it was reported that Charles Vial had presented 10 copies of his plan of 19 March 1790, for establishing an institution to cultivate and teach veterinary medicine, for which thanks were to be transmitted by the secretary.
This plan is given in full in Appendix 3 of Pugh's book.
The salient features were:
‘An institution for the purpose of cultivating this art (of veterinary medicine) similar to those which have been established some years in France, Germany, Piedmont, Sweden, Denmark, etc. would afford an exhaustless fund of amusement to independent persons, as well as of precious instruction to all.
The means by which establishments have been effected in this country are: by Royal or Parliamentary institution…or by a general subscription…or by subscriptions of substantial sums…subscribers become governors or directors of their own establishment…this latter seems to be the proper method to be adopted in the present case…
A college…should provide a school…and the subscribers, becoming Governors of the new institution, should proceed to choose a President, Vice-Presidents, Treasurer, Secretary, and such other officers as should appear convenient…to institute their Veterinary Professor…that His Majesty, and His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales, be humbly prayed to take it under their joint patronage: and, the Master of the Horse, the President of the Royal Society, the President of the Royal College of Physicians, and the President of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufacturers and Commerce, should be each invited to a government of the college…
Our College would serve: to collect and deposit the variety of sound veterinary knowledge which floats dispersedly in the kingdom…to collect and arrange whatever the labours and experience of other nations have furnished on this subject; to improve on this extensive stock…correspondencies and communications should be encouraged…
Evening meetings, weekly, or more frequently…should be held; and, every year, the transactions of the college, including those of the school, should be published…
The members of the college should…be increased by ballot…and it may perhaps be advisable, to divide the members into three different classes, perpetual governors…annual governors…members…
The lectures should treat fully and amply of anatomy and physiology; of the veterinary pharmacopoeia; of chirurgical operations; and of the structure, geometrical proportions, mechanic powers, beauty, defects and age of the horse…
Lectures should also be read to students on botany and pharmacy, and on natural philosophy and chemistry…
Whenever a student should have regularly attended an entire course of study, and should have passed an examination before the college and its Professors, he should obtain a certificate…an infirmary, in which diseased horses and other cattle might be received…a forge for farriery would be equally necessary…
Finally, when the college has obtained its full consistency, it be incorporated by Charter…by the name of, The Royal Veterinary College’.
On reading this plan, one is left with a feeling of sadness.
The concept clearly was meant to establish a College in the broad sense of a learned foundation, whereas what emerged almost inevitably, from the actual circumstances of its establishment and funding, degenerated into what was to remain for a century basically and predominantly a horse infirmary.
On 5 October 1790 a letter from Clark of Edinburgh to the Odiham Society was read, in which he proposed the establishment of a veterinary school in that city, under his direction.
This school was to have been patronised by some of the first noblemen and gentlemen of the country, and Clark had the fullest assurance that the government would aid and support his venture.
(If government would support a veterinary school in Edinburgh, why did it not do so in London, or was it simply not asked?).
However, the proposed Edinburgh school was not established at that time, a fact which Clark attributed, somewhat obscurely, to ‘the political  situation’.
At the same meeting Vial was elected an honorary and subscribing member.
On 26 October Josiah Brookes, surgeon, FRS, was elected an honorary member of the society and a member of the London committee (his museum rivalled Hunter's).
On this committee, any three members of the Odiham Society were to form a quorum.
The fulcrum of action now shifted from the society to the committee in London.
The first minuted meeting of that committee was held in the Prince of Wales coffee house, Conduit Street, Hanover Square, on 3 November 1790.
Those present were Josiah Brookes and Rev T. Burgess, along with secretary Huntingford.
The minutes and resolutions of the Odiham Society respecting farriery, from meetings between 19 August 1785 and 26 October 1790, were read and ordered to be entered into the minutes of the London committee.
Then followed a list of members of the Odiham Society resident in London, including Granville Penn.
The list of honorary and corresponding members included gentlemen living in 30 English counties, and at a few places in Scotland and Wales.
These members included Robert Bakewell of Leicestershire, Rev Dr Priestley of Birmingham, Mr Raikes of Gloucester, and Arthur Young of Bradfield Hall, Suffolk.
There is also a list of 19 subscribers to the fund for the improvement of farriery which includes four members of the London committee (Rivers, Long, Penn and Maxwell).
One of the committee members active in founding the College was Granville Penn (1761–1844).
He was the grandson of William Penn, the founder of Pennsylvania, who purchased an estate in Stoke Poges Park in 1760.
Granville eventually inherited the estate and his connection with Stoke Poges may be of more than usual significance.
In Joan Wake's book The Brudenells of Deene one reads that ‘not the least of John, Duke of Montagu's many attractive qualities was a love for animals, which led him to maintain a hospital for sick dogs at his house in Ditton Park in Buckinghamshire’.
This was the second Duke, 1690–1745.
Ditton is a hamlet of Stoke Poges, and the park was owned by the Montagus from the end of the 17th century.
Perhaps Granville Penn knew of this hospital by tradition.
Having placed these matters on record in its minutes, the London committee proceeded to its own business:(i) a prize of 10 guineas was offered for the best description of not more than 20 cases of glanders;(ii) the circularisation of honorary and subscribing members, asking for their ‘communications on the veterinary art’.
The committee then adjourned to meet at the Blenheim coffee house, New Bond Street, on 1 2 January 1 79 1.
During 1790, while these meetings were taking place, an important series of letters appeared in The Gentleman's Magazine .
Three letters were written over the pseudonym of ‘Philippos of London’, two were signed by ‘Zoophilus of Birmingham’, one by John Elderton of Bath, one by ‘S’ of London, and one by J.H. (undoubtedly Huntingford).
Pugh attributed the Philippos letters to Granville Penn, and he considered him also to be the likely author of the Zoophilus letters (a possible alternative author might be Dr Priestley of Birmingham).
The object of these letters was to bring Vial's plan of 18 March 1790 to the notice of the influential readers of The Gentleman's Magazine .
It is not at all clear why the author(s) of the Philippos and Zoophilus letters chose to write under pseudonyms.
Nor is it clear in what way Penn (if he was indeed Philippos and/or Zoophilus) became interested in Vial's plan.
According to Pugh, Penn had seen and admired the veterinary schools in France, and had read Clark's treatise with approval.
Pugh suggested three ways in which Penn may have become aware of the Odiham Society's initiative before he became a member of the society.
He may have met Burgess at Oxford; Lord Rivers, who was also a graduate of Magdalen College, and was president of the Odiham Society, may have discussed the society with him; or Penn may simply have read the society's advertisement of its intention to send two lads to Alfort for training.
The letters are set out in Appendix 4 of Pugh's book and some are summarised here:
1.
Philippos, 5 March 1790.
The art of veterinary medicine had been, surprisingly, neglected  in this country, and consigned to the hands of incapacity and ignorance.
The art was a practical application of sure and scientific principles to the preservation of health in domestic animals, and to the cure of their diseases.
The science on which the art was grounded comprised the natural history, anatomy, physiology and pathology of those animals, together with those portions of the vegetable and mineral kingdoms providing either aliment or remedy.
Farriery was wanting in that fundamental science.
Veterinary schools had been established in France, Germany, Denmark and Sweden.
2.
Zoophilus, 7 September 1790.
Zoophilus had not been able to acquire a copy of Vial's plan but he put forward a plan of his own for an animal hospital, for a regular set of teachers forming a school, and provision for receiving living subjects in various states of disease.
The hospital, for instruction and for receiving cases, would be a large and handsome structure, erected by subscription at a little distance out of town.
It should have wards or stalls for larger animals, and pens for small animals such as sheep or dogs.
There should be a house or hall containing, besides dwelling-apartments for the servants and assistants, a common lecture room, an anatomical theatre and a museum, a laboratory, and a medicine-shop.
Lectures would be regularly delivered, and dissections made, twice a year.
Each course would last at least three months, and would cover one of five subjects—anatomy, physiology, pathology,materia medica and therapeutics.
The professors would have fixed salaries, the pupils' fees being added to the funds of the establishment.
Pupils would receive a certificate on completion of the course, and gentlemen in general should only call in certified practitioners.
Farriery, in the strict sense of the term, would be left to shoeing-smiths.
It was envisaged that such animal hospitals would be opened in all the principal towns of the kingdom.
The patronage and support of the medical profession, and of the great and rich, and protection from the Heir Apparent, would help meet the great expense of such an institution.
Subscribers would have the usual privilege of sending in one or more subjects for treatment, proportional to their subscriptions.
3.
Philippos, 21 October 1790.
The groundwork of the veterinary art was medical science; farriery was no art, but a mere practice, habit or routine.
The arguments in favour of the cultivation of veterinary medicine were principally two—the excellence of the art, and the importance of the subjects of its operation.
Farring, farriery or farrier were words of origin from the Latin, signifying the shoe and shoer of a horse.
Great Britain was almost the only remaining State which had not extended its protection to this important art.
The genius of the nation, remarkable for its activity and its jealousy; the general excellence of our education the universal influence of science; our experience in agriculture; and the number of horses and cattle, all these were earnests that would abundantly secure the success of the measure, if we should ever decide to adopt it.
It was announced that the un-named author [Vial]of the plan intended to deliver a course of public lectures in veterinary medicine that winter.
4.
Philippos, 11 November 1790.
The writer knew the author (still not named) of the plan (which was publicly available) and had occasionally acted as his interpreter.
The plan had been more laboriously considered than that of Zoophilus, and the school was to be formed under the protection of enlightened citizens.
The author describes himself as ‘a man of no profession, and following this and every other pursuit through a general and independent love of science, and a desire of substituting its just authority in every part of science to the offensive usurpation of ignorance and imposture’.
Why Philippos and Zoophilus failed to name Vial as the author of a plan to form a veterinary school is unknown.
Vial is said to have published his proposals for a veterinary school in September 1788, and also in October 1789, and he had issued his plan (perhaps as revised by Granville Penn) in March 1790.
He had sent 10 copies to the Odiham Society in August 1790, so his name was already widely known.
From the beginning of 1791 the London committee held a series of meetings at the Blenheim coffee house which led to the foundation of the Veterinary College on 8 April.
At the meeting of 12 January 1791 there were present Granville Penn (chairman), Sir William Fordyce, Rev T. Burgess, Vial and Huntingford.
It was resolved that ‘the immediate objects of the Society are to establish a Fund by subscription, for collecting by premiums [prizes]well-authenticated facts relating to the diseases in horses, cows and sheep, their treatment and cure: —for establishing an extensive communication with foreign veterinary societies: —for the speedy and general circulation of such memoirs on the diseases of horses, cows and sheep as may be communicated to the Society; —for providing an hospital for diseases in horses, cows and sheep: —and for promoting the science of Farriery by the regular education in it, on medical and anatomical principles’.
It was resolved to publish an advertisement in the Morning Post and English Chronicle soliciting subscriptions, and to circulate a letter, also soliciting subscriptions, addressed to noblemen, gentlemen and others likely to be interested in the improvement of farriery in its several branches.
Copies of the resolutions were to be sent to the society in Odiham, to subscribers to that society's farriery fund, and to members of the society resident in London.
It is clear at that stage the London committee envisaged funding its proposed activities by subscriptions, and that it intended to concern itself with the diseases of cows and sheep as well as horses.
At the next meeting of the London committee, on 28 January, Sir William Fordyce (chairman), supported by John Burgess, Mr Benezek, Vial and Huntingford, agreed on the terms of the proposed public advertisement.
Members of the Odiham Society resident in London ‘and all friends of the Institution’ were requested to attend the next meeting.
The minute book contains a list of subscribers (presumably to the London committee's funds) including Lord Rivers and Granville Penn, and three gentlemen were nominated as members —Edward Topham (1751–1820) proprietor of The World , Peter Benezek and Reuben Smith.
The committee already had prematurely exalted views of its importance, for it deferred to the next meeting the question of how to apply to the King for royal patronage—patronage of an institution which had no actual existence.
Penn, Topham, Burgess and Benezek were asked to deal with any proposals that might be made to the committee regarding a building that would be suitable as a hospital, and Messrs Shepperson and Reynolds of Oxford Street were appointed (for what immediate purpose is not clear) booksellers and stationers to the institution.
Consideration of rules and regulations was deferred to the next meeting.
At a meeting on 11 February, Granville Penn (chairman) supported by William Fordyce, Dr A. Crawford, John Gretton, William Stone and James Huntingdon, again deferred consideration of the rules and regulations, and of the patronage, to the next meeting.
It was reported that an offer had been made of leasehold premises in Oxford Street, between Rathbone Place and Newman Street, lately occupied by Mr Burr, stable-keeper, consisting of a dwelling house, yard, nine coach houses, 14 stables containing 51 stalls, and a covered ride.
This was held for an unexpired term of six years ‘from Christmas last’ at £140 per annum; it was offered (fortunately unsuccessfully) by the new proprietor, Mr Collier, for £600.
Certain noblemen and gentlemen from the topmost ranks of society were named as subscribers, including the Marquess of Titchfield and Sir T.C. Bunbury, steward of the Jockey Club.
The committee was seriously convinced of the benefits that must result from an institution to cultivate and teach veterinary medicine; the object of this committee's concern, and that of Vial, were one and the same; and it was greatly to be desired that the two plans—that of the Odiham Agricultural Society and that of Vial—(which may be termed the Alfort plan) should be consolidated into one.
Since several gentlemen had already subscribed towards furthering Vial's proposals, Penn, Stone and Gretton were asked to discuss with Vial the best way of amalgamating the two plans.
On 18 February 1791 Granville Penn (chairman) supported by Rev Mr Cook, John Gretton, William Stone, Edward Topham and Huntingford, received information from Vial (who had been confined to bed with a cold and fever, and had been unable to meet the committee's delegation) that he supported the amalgamation of the two plans, and that he would consult his patrons and subscribers accordingly.
Then followed a resolution naming the London committee ‘The Veterinary College, London’, and separating it from its parent, the Odiham Agricultural Society.
‘This meeting, having taken into consideration the proceedings of former meetings, and being informed that many respectable persons delay giving their names as subscribers while the proceedings of the committee are subject to be reported to the Odiham Society, and are under the controul [sic]thereof, find it expedient to detach themselves from that Society, the work on which they are engaged being of so considerable importance, the reformation and improvement of Farriery, requiring that it should be confined to that purpose and use alone, and be under the sole management and control of its own members.
It was resolved that from this day forward they shall be called by the name of the Veterinary College, London.
That Vial be appointed Professor of the College.
That the Transactions of the College be published annually, and a copy thereof delivered, gratis, to each subscriber’.
A general meeting would be held at the Blenheim coffee house on 8 April to appoint a president, vice-presidents, directors, and other officers.
Annual members would subscribe two guineas per annum, and life members 20 guineas.
Advertisements of the above resolutions were to be published in the press, including The Times and Topham's World , and copies were to be sent to members of both Houses of Parliament, to other noblemen and gentlemen, and also to high sheriffs, to be laid before grand juries (composed of men of substance) at the ensuing assizes.
The secretary was ordered to write to the Odiham Society, recording these changes.
At a meeting on 25 February (Stone, chairman, with Crawford, Vial, Huntingford), the following advertisement was reported published in the World : ‘Veterinary College, London.
For the Reformation and improvement of Farriery.
The public are respectfully informed, that the Committee appointed by the Odiham Agriculture Society to consider the best method of improving the Art commonly called Farriery, have, in pursuance of that design, and feeling themselves unable to act with due energy and effect in the capacity of a Committee, found it expedient to detach themselves from that respectable Society, and to erect themselves into the present form.
The object of the Institution is, to reform, and bring into a regular system, that important branch of medicine which regards the treatment of diseases incidental to horses and other cattle, and which has hitherto been neglected and much abused in this country…
M. Vial, for some years Professor of Veterinary Medicine in the Royal School of Lyons, and of Comparative Anatomy at Montpellier, a gentleman well-known for his anatomical skill and knowledge in every part of this Art, is appointed Professor to the College’.
Vial accepted the office of Professor, and reported that his ‘friends and subscribers’, the Earl of Morton, Earl of Grosvenor and Lord Belgrave, approved of the union of the two plans, Odiham's and Vial's.
The College having been named, the secretary was directed (it might be thought, somewhat late in the day) to draw up statutes for its constitution and organisation.
Meetings were now held every week.
On 4 March (Topham, Crawford, Stone, Huntingford, Vial) further noblemen and gentlemen became subscribing members.
On 11 March (Penn, Vial, Huntingford) the Duke of Northumberland was nominated for membership, and thanked for his ‘bounty’ of 50 guineas.
Vial was asked to draw up regulations for the school and infirmary, keeping in mind the example of the foreign veterinary schools.
These College regulations, based closely on those in the French veterinary schools, although reduced in number and somewhat ameliorated, set out for resident pupils a pretty strictly regimented way of life, against which they occasionally rebelled.
A week later, on 18 March (Topham, Penn, Vial, Huntingford) Dr Daniel Peter Layard became a honorary member.
The Earl of Pembroke had intimated to Vial his intention to become a member of the College.
Other members nominated included the Duke of Montrose (Master of the Horse).
Sir George Baker, Sir Joseph Banks and John Hunter were elected honorary and subscribing members.
At a meeting on 25 March (Penn, Crawford, Stone, Topham, Vial, Huntingford) further members were nominated, including James Burton, later architect to the College.
The secretary was directed to write to the Master of the Horse, asking leave to nominate him as president of the College at the forthcoming general meeting.
At a meeting on 1 April (Stone, Gretton, Penn, Topham, Vial, Huntingford) it was reported that the Master of the Horse had declined ‘as such’ being president.
The secretary was therefore directed to write to the Duke of Northumberland, asking permission to nominate him as president.
The Prince of Wales and the Duke of York gave in their names (but not their money) as ‘Subscribers and Promoters’.
The statutes, and Vial's scheme for the internal order and regulation of the College, were read, and sent forward to the general meeting.
Finally, the great day dawned.
The first general meeting of the College was held at the Blenheim coffee house on 8 April 1791, under the chairmanship of Granville Penn, supported by Sir William Fordyce, Wm Stone, E. Topham, G.M. Ascough, J. Gretton, G.F. Steward, W.G. Brown, Dr A. Crawford, Dr Wm Drew, Richard Burton, James Burton, Francis Steward, John Baynes, Mr Grosvenor, Mr Peake, Mr Rivers, Mr Reuben Smith.
The Duke of Northumberland was unanimously chosen to be president.
Eight vice — presidents were appointed: Earl Grosvenor, Earl Morton, Earl Orford, Lord Rivers, Sir George Baker, Sir T.C. Bunbury, Sir Wm Fordyce, and John Hunter.
Twenty directors were appointed for the current year, including Granville Penn and Rev T. Burgess.
A permanent committee for the current year comprised Dr Crawford, Dr Drew, Penn, Stone, Topham, Gretton and Baynes.
Messrs Ransom, Morland and Hammersley acted as treasurer.
A small audit committee was elected and the appointments of Vial as Professor and Huntingford as secretary were formally confirmed.
A number of overseas honorary and corresponding members were appointed, most from France.
Granville Penn presented to the College 44 publications on the veterinary art and science.
The statutes for the constitution and organisation of the College, and Vial's plan for its internal order and regulation, were unanimously approved.
A choice of dates is available from which to reckon the life of the College: 1 8 February 1791, when the London committee decided to call itself The Veterinary College, London, and 8 April 1791, when the president, vice-presidents and directors were elected and the statutes and regulations were approved.
The date generally chosen is 8 April 1791.
On the coat of arms over the main entrance of the College in Camden Town the dates shown are 1785–1937: the latter refers to the year in which the new Camden Town buildings were royally opened.
Why the date 1785 was used is uncertain; it was said by Professor J.G. Wright to commemorate the meeting of the Odiham Agricultural Society when the first mention of the idea of improving farriery was made, but the strong possibility remains that it was originally meant to be 1875, the year the College received its Charter of Incorporation and adopted its coat of arms, and that someone corrected what was wrongly assumed to be an error.
On 8 April 1791 the College had no pupils and no land or buildings.
It had only one professor.
Its origin, and its method of financing, almost inevitably led to it becoming effectively a horse infirmary.
The received opinion among veterinary surgeons who have given any thought to the role of John Hunter in the early life of the Veterinary College agrees with the statement expressed in 1831 by Youatt, that Hunter was the ‘life and soul’ of the founding and development of the London Veterinary College.
Edward Coleman, second Professor (Principal) of the College, said Hunter was one of the best friends the College ever had.
Pugh may be nearer the truth.
He points out there is no evidence that Hunter was connected with the College before he was nominated an honorary member in March 1791, and that he did not attend any meetings of the College before December 1791.
Pugh feels that Hunter's responsibility for the early affairs of the College has been overrated.
He had given up lecturing in 1790, apparently due to the angina which troubled and eventually killed him.
His contributions were nevertheless important.
He lent prestige to the young veterinary profession by telling Moorcroft that he would, if he were a young man, follow a veterinary career himself.
He served as a vice-president of the College.
He treated Vial leniently in his committee's report, but failed to press for the early appointment of the necessary second professor.
By getting his colleagues to admit pupils to their lectures after Vial's death, apparently waiving the customary fee of 10 guineas, he helped the College over a difficult patch, but may unwittingly have set an unfortunate precedent which suggested that preclinical veterinary teaching could be done as well in a medical as in a veterinary context.
The George Hotel, Odiham, meeting place of the Odiham Agricultural Society from 1783–1791.
LEFT: Hugh, 2nd Duke of Northumberland, first president of the Veterinary College.
RIGHT: Thomas Burgess DD FRS, initiator of the move within the Odiham Society which led to the foundation of the Veterinary College.
Letter from Vial to the Odiham Society, to whom he had sent 10 copies of his plan for forming a veterinary college.
(RCVS)
BENOIT CHARLES MARIE VIAL
Professor 1791–1 793
The College's first Principal (or Professor, as he and his more immediate successors were called) published his first proposals for a veterinary school in England in 1788, but it was not until two years later that he made contact with the Odiham Agricultural Society.
In April 1791 he was appointed Professor of the London Veterinary College—a college in name only.
From the start, the College was hampered by shortage of funds, an inappropriate site, and a lack of suitable staff.
A lucrative system of ‘subscribers’ was introduced; shortly before Vial died there were 900, but only 14 students were enrolled.
His early and unexpected death was a cruel setback which left the College floundering in indecision over the choice of a suitable successor.
Vial (1750–1793) was sometimes known as Vial de Saint Bel.
In August 1769, eight years after it was opened, he enrolled as a student at the veterinary school in Lyons.
About 1773 he became junior professorial assistant to the professor of anatomy at Alfort veterinary school.
He left this position in circumstances which are unclear, having incurred the strong displeasure of M Bourgelat, the inspector-general of veterinary schools.
After a spell in private practice, Vial was made equerry to Louis XVI and chef de manège of the Lyons riding academy, a post he apparently held for some years, but could not retain.
Vial made many attempts to be reappointed at Alfort after Bourgelat died in 1779, but was unsuccessful.
On the advice of M Broussonet MD FRS, perpetual secretary of the Royal Society of Agriculture in Paris, he took the momentous step of obtaining six months' leave of absence to visit England.
He had, he claimed, been superseded in a promotion which he thought he had a right to expect from the Master of the Horse.
Vial arrived here in June 1788, armed with letters of introduction (without which no serious traveller went abroad) to Sir Joseph Banks, Dr Simmons, Dr Layard and others.
His stated object was to examine the different breeds of horses and cattle, and to observe the condition of rural economy in this country.
Broussonet had also suggested he should put forward proposals for the creation of a veterinary school in England, an idea possibly prompted by the visit to the Alfort school of Arthur Young a few days earlier.
In 1788, his published proposals for forming a veterinary school here having met with no success, Vial married an English lady ‘of great accomplishments’, and returned to Paris with her, his knowledge of the English language no doubt showing some improvement as time passed.
In due course, finding that national discontents and factious habits of thinking were spreading rapidly in that city and throughout France, he obtained leave to visit England again, under the pretext of buying horses for his sovereign's stud.
Fortunately for him, but more so for this kingdom, he was in this country at the onset of the Revolution and the destruction of the Bastille.
In this first commotion he lost his guardian and friend, M de Flesseille, ‘who fell the second victim to that unjust, indiscriminate vengeance, of the enraged people’.
Vial thus lost his annuity from Flesseille, and he was deprived of his other appointments.
His patrimonial estate (if it ever existed) was confiscated because, as he claimed, he was now an  émigré  ', having failed to return to France in the prescribed period.
On his return to England, Vial was available to guide the dissection of the racehorse Eclipse, obtaining (in true Vial fashion) many noble and zealous patrons in the process, including Lords Grosvenor, Morton and Belgrave.
This was probably the most famous and least useful dissection of a horse ever undertaken.
The following account is largely drawn from Sherwin Hall's article in Veterinary History (Summer 1984).
Bred by the Duke of Cumberland (1721–1765) at Windsor, by Marske (a third generation descendant of the Darley Arabian) out of Spilette (a granddaughter of the Godolphin Barb on the sire's side) Eclipse was born on the day of a solar eclipse, 1 April 1764.
After the death of the ‘Butcher’ Duke on 31 October 1765, the stud was sold and the yearling Eclipse was bought by a Leadenhall merchant and grazier, one Wildman, for 75 guineas.
Eclipse's first race was a Fifty Guinea Plate at Epsom in May 1769.
In 18 races, Eclipse was ‘first, the rest nowhere’, being either unbeaten, or walking over.
Eclipse, put to stud in 1770, was now owned by Denis O'Kelly of Canons, Edgware, who had bought a half-share for 650 guineas after Eclipse's second race at Ascot in 1769, buying the other half for 1100 guineas.
O'Kelly died in 1787, and Eclipse died of a ‘violent colic’ 14 months later, at 7 pm on 27 February 1789.
Vial was invited to supervise the autopsy, which was performed (whether in part or as a whole is not clear) by Edmund Bond (later to be the first pupil to obtain a certificate from the medical examining committee of the London Veterinary College in 1794).
Also present were Bracy Clark and his elder brother, Henry.
Bracy Clark (1771–1862) was the brilliant son of a Quaker living in Chipping Norton.
Leaving school at the age of 14 to study medicine, he was apprenticed to a surgeon in Worcester.
His elder brother, Henry, urged Bracy to go to the London College, which Bracy entered in 1792, gaining his certificate in 1794.
He had been elected a fellow of the Linnean Society in 1793.
After a two-year tour of the Continent, he returned to England in 1799 and started a veterinary practice at 17 Giltspur Street, mainly among brewery horses and those of a similar type.
He devised a set of heavy draft horse casting hobbles which are now outmoded but still bear his name.
Bracy Clark was a prolific writer.
One critic said that no man, perhaps, ever wrote so learnedly or so much, to so little purpose.
His hobbies were horse-shoeing and cricket—he established the first cricket club in Worcester.
When he retired from practice, probably in 1828, he and others produced a veterinary periodical called the Farrier and Naturalist , which was devoted to attacks on Professor Coleman, and ran for three years.
He was elected vice-president of the Royal College in 1857.
Clark's paternal grandmother, Margaret Bracy, was the last representative of a family long settled in Long Compton in Warwickshire.
A family of cow doctors worked in this region for over three centuries; this family is now represented by Dr John Walker, who has a veterinary practice in Hook Norton, near Long Compton.
The dissection of Eclipse was continued until only the skeleton, still with its ligaments, was left.
Vial pronounced the cause of death to be (unspecified) disease of the kidneys, with violent inflammation of the bowels.
He claimed he had taken the measurements of Eclipse during life, and wished to satisfy his curiosity by trying them on the dead subject.
His objectives were to give a guide to the better choice of an animal; to establish the true conformation of the racehorse, setting a standard for an ideal animal to achieve maximum speed, and at any given time to discover whether the breeds had improved or degenerated.
The peculiarity of the proportions (published in French and English in 1791 in an essay dedicated to the Prince of Wales) is that the measurements are not given direct but are based on the head, divided into 22 equal parts (according to Percivall, Eclipse stood 16l/2 hands high and the head measured 22 inches).
Joseph Gamgee says that Vial's measurements were thoroughly at variance with the skeleton as he knew it.
A few years after the dissection, it is believed that Philip O'Kelly, brother of the deceased Denis, gave the skeleton to Bond, who kept it in his premises in Upper Brook Street until his death.
At some time Bracy Clark had lent £500 to Bond, and his widow, unable to discharge the debt, gave the skeleton to Clark and it remained in his study until shortly before his death.
The Royal College of Surgeons offered him 60 guineas for it, but he sold it to John Gamgee in November 1860 for 100 guineas.
It was taken to the New Veterinary College in Edinburgh by John's father, Joseph, and there it was first mounted as a complete skeleton.
Presumably it was brought to London when John Gamgee moved his college there as the short-lived Albert Veterinary College.
In 1871 the Gamgees gave the skeleton to the Royal College in Red Lion Square.
The request by the National History Museum for the loan of the skeleton in 1902 was turned down, but it was eventually presented to that museum when the heavily criticised RCVS museum was closed in 1921.
In 1983 the skeleton was transferred to the National Horseracing Museum at Newmarket.
In 1790 Vial made contact with the Odiham Agricultural Society and he was appointed Professor at the London Veterinary College on 8 April 1791.
It has been said that Vial was quite unsuited for the post of founding Professor.
Delabere Pritchett Blaine (1770–1845), a medical man, had been recommended to assist Vial by demonstrating anatomy and helping with the translation of Vial's lectures.
The recommendation came from Dr Heighton, whom Blaine had assisted in making dissections and physiological experiments to illustrate the union of divided nerves and the nature of the interposed substance.
In 1802, a few years after his short service with Vial, Blaine said the latter was an ingenious man, who probably understood the manège , and who was indefatigable in promoting the interests of the College.
It was a matter of surprise to Blaine that the College was ever established at all, with Vial as its head.
Youatt, in 1839, wrote that the appointment of Vial as Professor was a flagrant and irreparable error, for he knew nothing of the diseases of cattle and their treatment.
More recently, the appointment of Vial has been attributed to the influence of Granville Penn, who seems to have taken the Frenchman uncritically at his own valuation.
Vial did not apparently introduce for some time any regular system of instruction which would have concentrated the labours of the students.
Soon after it was founded, the College ran into financial difficulties because of an improper management of funds.
The death of some, and the secession of others of the College's founders and original supporters was bound, Blaine felt, to trouble Vial's mind, which was not well equipped to struggle with disappointments.
However he considered that Vial ‘was a man of such good natural abilities that when his mind was at ease, he had so much application that his deficiencies, had he lived, might have been in a great measure made up’.
As regards Vial's personality, Bracy Clark noted that he was polite and easy in his manners, and often a stickler for etiquette and punctilio, believing, reasonably enough, that his office as Professor of the College required it.
He was recognised to be highly jealous and irascible.
He was always on the watch for an affront, which he would often imagine even when it had not been intended, an easy thing for a Frenchman at a politically sensitive time.
This irascible trait naturally served to increase his enemies.
Even suspecting the pupils of plotting against him, Vial, according to Bracy Clark, would spy on them and eavesdrop, yet he was apparently much beloved by some.
His vanity was exemplified by his taking a house at 36 Little St Martin's Street (once Sir Isaac Newton's, and later rented by the celebrated Dr Burney and his daughter Frances, Madame D'Arblay, author of the once popular novel Evalina ) which was far beyond his means.
Vial's scanty publications have been analysed at length by Smith, who pronounced: ‘In summing up Vial's practical knowledge one is compelled to estimate it as not very wide.
He seems to have had a good acquaintance with the theory and practice of shoeing, though we cannot admit his claim to originality.
He is, excepting in one respect, admirable on glanders.
His knowledge of sprains is not good…
He understood the various causes of colic, but his practice was dilatory and generally out of date’.
An anonymous writer (possibly Simonds or Hunting) in the Veterinary Record of 1891 said that Vial was undoubtedly a man of intelligence and force of character.
He had immense difficulties to overcome, partly because of the average Englishman's prejudice against foreigners (especially perhaps the French) and partly because of the then prejudice of society against a science—veterinary medicine—which was not yet established as respectable.
The anonymous author goes on to say that while Vial was not a highly educated veterinarian, even for those times, he was far in advance of the general practitioner in this country, who had usually no training whatever in anatomy or medicine.
Had his life been prolonged, the writer thought it probable that he would have left a deeper mark on the science of the profession.
What did Vial look like?
The familiar doll-like figure in the engraving (said to have been taken from a portrait in the possession of Mrs Vial) is stated by Bracy Clark to bear little resemblance to Vial.
He was described as a tall, bony man with much black hair, a dark complexion, a deep jaw, prominent cheekbones, dilated nostrils, and altogether an open and manly countenance.
The College having been founded, it was necessary to give it premises and students.
It was also necessary formally to sever its links with the Odiham Agricultural Society so, on 19 April 1791, a letter was sent to the Society, saying that the College would not now persist in the Odiham plan of sending youths to France to be trained.
The Society responded gracefully on 3 May, transferring its farriery fund and relevant papers to the College.
The Professor's salary, and that of secretary Huntingford, were fixed at £100 per annum.
A month later, it was resolved that a proper place should be provided for the Professor's dissections and lectures, and advertisements were placed accordingly in publications including the Morning Post and the Daily Advertiser .
Several premises were then brought to the notice of the College.
Mr Carr's at Brompton; Mr Saunder's of East Smithfield; premises in Tottenham Court Road; Mr Haygarth's ground near the end of Gray's Inn Lane; Mr Jacob Leroux's of Somers Town; Mr Cook's near Draper's Gardens.
None was thought suitable.
A significant step was taken on 6 September 1791 at a meeting at the Crown and Anchor tavern in the Strand.
The following memorandum was presented by Vial, and read by the secretary: ‘When the Members of the Veterinary College were occupied by objects to which I was in no wise competent I was absolutely silent—but now that it is a question to chuse [sic]a convenient situation for the establishment of the College, I think it a duty incumbent on me to give my advice on this important point.
‘A healthy situation should be the first object that ought to fix the attention of the Society —because there is no person but is very well convinced that a marshy and low Ground exhales very unwholesome and putrid vapours which affect the bodies of individuals that may be exposed to their action either through the pores or attracted by the breath, or otherways by the Food and Drink—if these particles will affect healthy bodies, their effect must be much more pernicious on diseased animals, therefore the Veterinary Infirmary should not be established in an atmosphere continually charged with particles destructive to health.
Independent of this physical cause there exists always one more or less contrary evil to the cure of maladies in any Hospital whatever which results from the great number of sick assembled in one place, the bodies of which occasion emanations which alters more or less the wholesomeness of the air, but this cause may in some manner be done away with by the great cleanliness of the Stables and fumigations that might be performed from time to time…
‘It will now be necessary to observe that animals are more frequently attacked by epizootic, endemic and contagious diseases than the human species because we are protected from these casualties by our Houses, Clothing and manner of Living, in short by all the precautions that  reason dictates, whilst animals are deprived of all these recourses and are constantly exposed to dangers which we avoid by the above-mentioned precautions, besides their food and drink is constantly the same, which often is the cause of a fermentation in their blood which generally terminates in stubborn and fatal diseases.
‘It would be useless to enter more largely on this subject to demonstrate the absolute necessity of chusing the most healthy situation for the establishment of the Veterinary College.
We must not add to the execution of this plan — physical obstacles to moral difficulties, for it will be enough to fight through prejudice and ignorance.
‘I will now beg leave to make some observations on the distance of the Veterinary College from the Town—first—because the Society has no rival to dread in an establishment of this nature—secondly—whether the Infirmary is situated a Mile further or nearer it will not prevent people of sense from sending their Horses there—thirdly—the resident pupils being distant from places of dissipation, it will protect their morals and they will employ their time in study.
It may perhaps be objected that the distance may prevent the pupils of the Hospitals from attending the Lectures of the Veterinary Professor—I will first answer to that —that it would be dangerous for the progress of the Veterinary science to give them too free admission into the College—because it might give a disgust to the residing pupils from their application to the Veterinary Medicine and many of them would change their mind and apply themselves to the anatomy of the human body, thinking that it would be more honorable for them to cure the human species than Animals, this happened in France and the best Veterinary pupils are now Physicians and Surgeons to the human species—this prejudiced ideal would inculcate itself into the minds of young men, the more so as the Veterinary Science is still in its Infancy in this Country, and in an abject state, for this reason it would be equally dangerous to permit residing pupils to attend medical or anatomical lectures, of the human body, or to frequent Hospitals: Therefore a certain distance from the Town would be more useful than otherwise for the progress of the Veterinary Science.
‘For to obviate the inconveniencies that might result from the too frequent communication with the out pupils the Professor will demonstrate to the latter only what might be useful to them as Surgeons and Physicians to the human body, such as the most important demonstrations of comparative anatomy as likewise experiences [experiments]on several animals, which could not be attempted on Man without imminent danger, and lastly, a comparison between epidemical and epizootic diseases—therefore the out pupils ought to be considered by the Society [College]as a separate Class: the consideration of which ought not to have any influence as to the situation of the establishments.
‘As the intention of the Society is to form Veterinary Physicians and Surgeons intended to be dispersed throughout the Kingdom to exercise usefully their art, the Professor will teach the residing pupils only the most important difference between the two medicines—that of the human body, and that of Cattle—he will confine himself strictly to the teaching of the Veterinary Science.’
(Note the phrase ‘Veterinary Physicians and Surgeons’.
This is an early use of the implied term ‘Veterinary Surgeon’, which was not established as a title until about 1796 when it was introduced as an army designation).
‘It will be useless to observe to the Society that it is of the greatest importance to procure a place as soon as possible, if the Professor is not enabled to begin his Lectures by Christmas (1791) the establishment will be put off for one year—the Zootomy being strictly the first part he is to begin to teach to the pupils, which everyone knows could not be attempted in the Summer — and it would be feared too long a delay might hurt the success of the establishment.’
It was ordered that this memorandum should be entered in the minutes, but there is no indication that it was considered or discussed.
Vial urged that the College could be located, with benefit and without detriment, some way (say two miles) out of London.
Yet the first indications that London was soon to show explosive growth were already present, and it did not need much foresight to see that it would not be long before any green-field site chosen near London for the location of the College would soon be engulfed in bricks and mortar, which would sweep away hay- and grazing-fields, market gardens and brickfields alike.
There is no surviving record that Vial, or indeed anyone concerned, had made a detailed study of what would be needed to establish a College with adequate ensured finance, premises and staff, nor is there any indication that his interest extended beyond the horse, to include other domesticated animals.
At the same meeting at which the Vial memorandum was read, on 6 September 1791, a letter to the secretary from Messrs Kirkman and Hendy (who were present) was produced: ‘Sir, In consequence of your Advertisement we beg leave to inform you, that we have contracted with Lord Camden for about 100 acres of building land, near [Old]St Pancras Church, abutting on the Turnpike Road leading to Kentish Town, which is intended to be called Camden Town conceiving the situation eligible for your truly valuable Institution we request you will lay this our proposal before the Society—We hold this Land under his Lordship for 99 years from Michaelmas last, the three first subject to no Ground Rent, our proposal is, that Lord Camden does and he will under our direction grant the Society a lease for 99 years from that time, the three first subject to no rent but for the remainder of the term an Annual Rent of thirty pounds per acre, should this proposal meet with approbation, the Society have only to direct their Surveyor to make out any quantity of land and in what position they conceive will best answer their purpose’.
(Charles Pratt, 1714–1794, Attorney General and Lord Chancellor in the reign of George III, was in 1765 created Baron Camden of Camden Place in Kent.
He derived his title from his seat at Chislehurst, formerly the residence of the historian William Camden, author of Britannia .)
The letter concluded: ‘We will only add this land is on an eminence with plenty of fall for water with a small Rivulet running through the same, is not subject to any Tax for paving, cleansing and lighting but is lighted and watched at the expense of the Turnpike Trust and the Kings Tax in the parish of Saint Pancras is only two pence in the pound — these circumstances so favourable to building need no comment.
We are Sir Your obedient Serv Kirkman & Hendy, Upper Gower Street, Bedford Square, September 6th 1791.’
This is a somewhat disingenuous letter.
The eminence referred to is not a striking local geographical feature, and the ‘small Rivulet’ is presumably the Fleet River, which was so often flash-flooded as to give the area towards Battle Bridge (Kings Cross) the name of ‘Pancras Wash’.
The line of Pancras Way (once known as Longwich Lane, then as King's Road) follows the pack-horse track on the banks of the river Fleet.
It has always seemed a bit of a mystery that the College chose its present Camden Town site.
Kirkman and Hendy, the Earl of Camden's agents, may merely have responded to the College's advertisement, but another explanation for their involvement seems possible.
Pugh lists Horatio, Earl of Orford, as a foundation member of the Society for the Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce (called later the Royal Society of Arts) along with others who were members of that society and also foundation members of the College in 1791.
At the same time, the College minutes (said to be a bona fide copy of the lost original) show that the Earl of Orford was elected a vice-president of the College on 8 April 1791.
The difficulty is that the Earl of Orford, who did not die until 5 December 1791, was named George, while his uncle who succeeded him as fourth Earl was named Horatio, although he disliked this name, and called himself Horace Walpole instead.
This famous author of 3,000   ‘incomparable’(Byron) letters, among other largely dilettante activities, showed by a letter written to Sir Horace Mann on 8 June 1791 that he knew of the 1788 Kentish Town Act, which freed the Earl of Camden to build 1,400 houses in Kentish Town.
Although there is no evidence that Horace Walpole (who died on 2 March 1797) ever attended College meetings it is pleasant to think that he may have formed the undiscovered link between Lord Camden and the as yet unlocated Veterinary College.
Engraving published in 1795, showing Vial demonstrating to a shoeing-smith in front of the Veterinary College, with ‘Ignorance’ in flight on the left.
On 13 September, at a house taken for the College near the Elephant & Castle tavern, close to St Pancras Church (which became Old St Pancras Church when St Pancras New Church was built by the Inwood brothers in 1819–1822) the proposal from Messrs Kirkman and Hendy was approved.
The area of ground selected was described somewhat imprecisely as: ‘All that piece of ground situate north of Fig Lane [now Crowndale Road]St Pancras extending northwards from thence 650 feet on average abutting Eastwards on the Church path leading to Kentish Town and is in a parallel breadth 270 feet abutting Westward on other Ground intended and agreed to be used as Garden Ground by the said Messrs. Kirkman and Hendy or the Undertenants and no buildings to be erected thereon which shall raise more than 12 feet above the present surface and nearer than 80 feet to the ground hereby lett and that they will reserve a Street or way 60 feet wide at the least at the northern extremity of the said ground and that the said Messrs. Kirkman and Hendy do engage to lett to the Veterinary College a piece or any part of their ground at any time within twelve months which they the College shall determine upon a ranging line with the north extremity of the piece already described at and after the rate of £30 per acre nett which are the same terms as the ground described and mentioned are lett at and also at and upon the same reservation of the pepper corn Rent.’
Present at this meeting was James Burton, the Scottish developer, who was to be concerned with erecting the early College buildings.
At the same meeting Vial was asked to move into the house, and to procure such temporary assistance as necessary to prepare for reading lectures in October.
On 20 September 1791, trustees for taking up the Camden lease were appointed.
Taplin offered (unsuccessfully) to become superintendent general of the College, combining the offices of clerk and steward.
An offer of the skeleton of a horse, by a Mr Longbottom, was declined.
Students were to be taken in as boarders, having been recommended by a respectable person who knew them or their families.
The admission fee was 20 guineas, and board and lodging were 30 guineas per annum, for a course planned (on paper at least ) to last three years.
Age limits of 15 and 22 years on entry were fixed.
On 27 September Mr Burton was asked to prepare, in conjunction with Vial, a plan for a building for the College, and to superintend any temporary erection or alteration in the premises engaged for the College.
James Burton has been acclaimed as ‘the most important London builder to appear since Nicolas Barbon’.
By 1800 he was involved in the development of the Bedford estates and the Regent's Park terraces.
Soon, a watchman was provided for Vial's house and the College land, at nine shillings a week, and labourers were paid £5 8/6d for clearing the bed of the Fleet.
A Mr Portier was offered five guineas to translate the first part of the Professor's lectures on ‘The Bones’.
On 1 November it was decided to hand copies of the proposed College regulations to stagecoach proprietors for distribution.
Notice boards were set up on the College house, and at the corner of the road.
On 8 November Mr Jones of Stamford offered himself as a pupil, as did Mr Bloxam of Alcester.
On 22 November Mr Nash of Pampisford (near Cambridge) asked for information on pupillage.
Mr Burton produced his plans on 6 December.
Vial had by now postponed his lectures to Wednesday, 4 January 1792; they were given in the College house to four pupils.
The course, intended to occupy three years, was manifestly beyond the power of one single  professor, no matter how well qualified.
The subjects of the first year of this proposed course would be anatomy, physiology, conformation and external diseases; in the second year, surgery,materia medica , pharmacy and botany as relating to veterinary medicine; in the third year, pathology, epizootic diseases, treatment and prevention of disease, hospital practice and shoeing.
There was growing pressure on the College to receive the diseased horses of subscribers, but as yet no stables were ready.
A resolution of 22 March 1792 provided for the erection of temporary stabling for 50 horses, to which were to be added later a lecture theatre and a dissecting room.
An additional piece of land was taken from Messrs Kirkman and Hendy, making a total of six acres, lying between the new College Place on the west, the Fleet on the east, Crowndale Road on the south and College Grove to the north.
To raise funds for the buildings, it was resolved that ‘friends of the Institution should be requested to lend money on interest at three per cent per annum—the principal to be repaid as soon as funds of the College were found sufficient for that purpose’.
On 26 April 1792 it was agreed that Messrs Howell and Russell should build the stables for £2,850.
The Professor was told he was allowed to see diseased horses of subscribers only between one and three o'clock, and he was also told to avoid giving an opinion on any proposed purchaser of horses.
To this meeting the Professor presented a surprising memorandum in which he stated that he had been calumniated both with respect to his private character and his professional abilities, and requesting that committees should be appointed immediately to enquire into the matter and report.
A committee, comprising John Hunter and 15 (eventually 17) professional gentlemen was appointed to examine Vial (one year after his appointment) as to his abilities in the office of veterinary Professor.
The Earl of Morton (one of Vial's earliest patrons in this country) and 12 other gentlemen were appointed to deal with the calumny aspect.
The reports from these committees were presented at a special general meeting on 17 May, as follows:
1.
‘Veterinary College May 9th 1792—At a meeting (held at the Crown & Anchor Tavern in the Strand) of a committee of Physicians and Surgeons appointed at the request of the Veterinary College, for the purpose of investigating the medical and chirurgical abilities of Mr C.B. Vial the professor of the above Institution, Present: John Hunter, Esq., Sir George Baker, Bart., Doctor Crawford, Doctor Packwood, Everard Home, Esq., Mr Cline, Mr Vaux, Mr Peake and Mr Thos.
Sheldon, The following Resolutions  wre unanimously agreed to:The treatment of Horses and other Animals (serviceable to mankind) divides itself, in the Opinion of the Committee into three Branches—similar to the treatment of Man—that is to say—internal and external diseases—We know that, in the practice of Medicine, where we have our Intelligence from patients; both Professions are too much for one Man to undertake and much less to practice and teach.
We think, therefore, that it is absolutely necessary in order to carry on the Business of this Establishment, as perfectly as possible, that two such Characters should be appointed—and we, in consequence suggest, that altho’ each be as much as possible qualified in both Departments, yet if one were to devote himself to one Branch and the other to the other branch — the College would be much more usefully directed—for, if one Professor were fully qualified for both—yet so arduous a task could not possibly be executed by one Man only.
The Committee after minute Examination, do recommend Mr Vial as properly qualified for one of the professors—and they do further observe that if the Members of the College coincide in this Opinion, they are ready to investigate the merits of any other Candidate.
John Hunter, Chairman.’
2.
‘Veterinary College, London.
Crown & Anchor Tavern, Strand 17th May 1792.
At a meeting of the Committee appointed to enquire into the Complaints made by the Officers of  this Institution.
Earl of Morton in the Chair.
That it appears to this Committee that the Secretary (Mr Huntingford) has propagated reports injurious to the character of the Professor and that his conduct appears highly culpable in having spread such reports after he had reason to be satisfied that they were groundless.
‘That it appears to this Committee that the conduct of the Secretary has been highly culpable in inspecting and exposing the contents of papers of a private nature belonging to the professor which had by accident fallen into his (the Secretary's) hands.
‘That it appears to this Committee that the conduct of the Secretary has been highly improper, in suppressing a Letter addressed to the general Committee.
‘That this Committee having inspected various Documents produced by the Professor Mr Vial, are satisfied of their Authenticity and of the fairness of his Character—and that he did actually hold in France the situations of professor of the Veterinary School and of Ecuyer du Roi at Lyons and of professor of comparative anatomy at Montpellier.
Morton, Chairman, Heathfield, James Murray, John Julius Angerstein [1735–1823, whose collection of pictures formed the basis of the National Gallery], Alexr.
Hendy, John Baynes, John Ingilby, J. Butt, Wm.
Baker, W. Walcot.’
The special general meeting then resolved ‘that from the report of the medical Committee consisting of John Hunter Esq.
Chairman &c. this meeting is perfectly satisfied that Mr Vial is properly qualified for the Office of Veterinary Professor in this College.
Resolved that this meeting concurs in Apinion [sic]with the said Committee—that it will be necessary to carry on the Business of this Institution as perfectly as possible, that there should be two Professors appointed & that as soon as the proposed plan for the College is executed, which, from the Encouragement already given, 'tis hoped will be speedily accomplished—The members will avail themselves of the Offer made by the Committee and refer the Merits of Candidates for the second professorship to their investigation.
Resolved that, from the report of the Committee consisting of the Earl of Morton, Chairman, & c this meeting is perfectly satisfied with the Character & Conduct of the Professor Mr Vial and is of opinion that the conduct of the Secretary Mr Huntingford is highly culpable in having propagated reports injurious to the Professor Mr Vial after he had reason to be satisfied the [sic]were groundless.’
Mr Stone then left the chair, and was succeeded by Mr Walcot.
‘Resolved that in consequence of the report of the Committee last mentioned and the charges now exhibited against the said Secretary—this meeting is of the opinion that his conduct has been highly injurious to the Interests of the College and that he be immediately dismissed.’
The secretary was then called in, and after a serious address from the chairman, he was informed of the resolution of the general meeting, and that he was dismissed from the service of the College.
This was not welcomed by all the students, some of whom left the College after the secretary's dismissal, causing it to issue an advertisement calling on clients not to employ them as farriers.
From these reports, it seems that Huntingford at least was not satisfied that Vial was all he claimed to be.
Hunter's committee clearly thought that Vial on his own could not conduct the course, while Morton's committee appear to have accepted Vial's claims regarding appointments which apparently he had never held.
There is a curious statement in the minutes of the general meeting, that William Stone left the chair before sentence of dismissal was pronounced on Huntingford.
Stone was arrested on a charge of high treason on 3 May 1794 and was taken to the Tower of London.
He remained imprisoned and untried for nearly two years, eventually being found not guilty after a trial on 28 January 1795.
On 10 May 1794, Huntingford wrote to the Speaker of the House of Commons (who had himself been elected a vice-president of the College) as follows: ‘Honble Sir, I should not have taken the liberty of troubling you on the subject of the Veterinary College did not the recent business of Wm Stone who stands charged with High Treason prove the cause of his exerting himself to my  prejudice in favor of M Vial the late Professor, to be that he might establish a French Connection in that Institution in order that he might through the channel carry on his correspondence with the enemy.
I am much induced to believe that from an examination of the foreign correspondence of that Society (of which W. Watson of Bartlett's Buildings is sollicitor)[sic]some traces might be found which might lead to discover some of Mr. Stone's accomplices.
I have the honor to be with great respect and esteem Honble Sir Your most Obedient humble Servant, J. Huntingford’.
Thus Vial got the support he asked for, and Huntingford, to whose untiring efforts the establishment and early functioning of the College was in very great measure due, was ignominiously dismissed.
At the end of May 1792 the College decided it had no further occasion for the service of Blaine, who had been assisting Vial as demonstrator in anatomy.
Blaine says he was let go because he had found Vial in error on anatomical matters.
William Mounsher was appointed College secretary in succession to Huntingford on 1 July, when a smith was also appointed.
At the end of July, the College decided to build lecture and dissecting rooms and enclosing walls.
In August, the forge was open for the reception of subscribers' horses, at one shilling per shoe.
Among the 913 subscribers in 1793 were Members of Parliament, lords, knights, doctors, clergymen, dukes, earls, viscounts, marquesses, one margrave (of Anspach), barons, military men, and a number of fellows of the Royal Society.
The names of women subscribers appeared in 1793 and later years.
In 1793 there were Mrs Wood of Lime Grove, Putney; Mrs Codrington of Davies Street, Berkeley Square; Lady Elcho of Queen Anne Street, Westminster; in 1822, Mrs Boucherett at J. Angerstein's House, Pall Mall; Miss E. Corbett of Wimpole Street; Lady C. Denys at the Pavilion, Hans Square; Lady Mary Eyre of Mortlake; Mrs J. Franks of Charles Street, Berkeley Square; Countess Glengall, Lower Grosvenor Street, Mrs Arabella Rainley, Chesterfield Street; Mrs Rougement of Clapham; Mrs Shepherd of Wimpole Street.
It is clear that these women subscribers lived in the best parts of London.
An important move in September 1792 was the appointment of a medical experimental committee, consisting of Sir George Baker, Sir William Fordyce, Dr Crawford, Dr Scott, John Hunter, Mr Cline and Mr Houlston.
Their task was to suggest experiments that might be carried out in the College, and to act as an examination committee for awarding certificates after pupils had completed the course.
Edmund Bond (the dissector of Eclipse) became a resident pupil.
A young entrant was Mr Eldred, aged 15, of King's Lynn.
Another resident pupil admitted was Bracy Clark of Worcester.
A residence was acquired for the secretary, and a water supply was sought from the Hampstead and New River Companies.
There was extensive building work—the excise duty on 441,515 bricks is recorded as £23 18/4½d.
The infirmary for the reception of diseased horses was opened on 1 January 1793, the first horse being led in by Bracy Clark.
Percivall, in his 1834 introductory lecture, says one of the first operations performed by Vial at the College was the excision of two redundant or accessory feet which grew from the fetlocks of the forelegs of a foal.
Vial operated on one leg at a time.
In the first operation, which he performed ‘with considerable anxiety’, fearing that the superfluous digit communicated with the fetlock joint, he was assisted by John Hunter.
Hunter, seeing Vial remove the part without preserving a flap of skin to cover the wound, advised Vial, the next time he operated, to provide for this.
The consequence of this ‘friendly and useful’ advice was that the parts healed in half the time after the second operation as they did after the first.
It seems that Hunter's observations on thrombosis in veins were supplemented by noting the local effect of phlebotomy in the horse.
At the time there were some 900 subscribers to the College (a number seldom subsequently exceeded) and 14 pupils.
The staff consisted of the Professor (Vial) secretary (Mounsher) collector (Reuben Smith) an assistant to the Professor (Prosser, engaged in November 1792) a porter, three smiths and five grooms.
There were about 50 diseased horses in the infirmary.
There was an interval at the beginning of 1793 when lectures had to be suspended—owing to the ‘very disagreeable and offensive state of the dissecting room’ —until the new theatre was ready in June.
In March, George Dance Junior (1741–1825) was asked to examine the College's buildings regarding their solidity and the quality of the materials used.
A week later Dance reported satisfactorily, and he subsequently received five guineas for his trouble.
In May, Burton was asked to make a path in lieu of the church path to Kentish Town which crossed the College grounds.
At that time, too, the Professor complained (not for the first time) about the students' conduct.
In July 1793—over a year after the Hunter committee had made its recommendations—Mr Butt gave notice that he would be asking the next general meeting to consider the propriety of appointing another professor to help Vial, whose duties were beyond the competence of any one individual.
However, the death of Vial shortly afterwards threw everything into confusion.
To quote the memoirs: ‘…on Sunday the 4th August 1793, after having finished the morning duty he always performed in person, of visiting, prescribing for, and superintending the dressing of the wounds of the horses in the infirmary, he sat down to continue his treatise on the outward conformation of the horse, a work he intended for publication: in a short time he informed Mrs. Vial that he felt himself extremely ill complaining of cold to a degree of shivering, attended with a violent headach [sic], and great thirst.
She administered to him some wine diluted in water.
By this finding himself relieved, he again resumed his studies until the hour of dinner, when the disorder again attacked him so violently that it produced a fainting fit, which held him till the evening; he went soon after to bed, and passed a very uneasy, restless night.
The next day Dr Crawford was called to him.
Under the care of this gentleman he remained near a week; when, not finding that relief he hoped for, Dr Scott was requested to assist Dr Crawford, but with no better success, for notwithstanding the united efforts of these eminent physicians, the fevers and faintings encreased [sic]till they ended in delirium and death on the 21st, being seventeen days after the first attack’.
According to Smith, the illness was described in the language of the day as a putrid fever with buboes on the face and body, which caused Dr Crawford to compare it to the plague.
(Subsequent opinion—Hunting, Smith—is that the disease was glanders).
No one was to be allowed to approach the body, although Bracy Clark, with the assistance of a London artist (though to be Flaxman, 1755–1826) took a plaster of Paris death cast of his face.
Many years later, in 1861, at a meeting in the Freemasons' tavern on 23 February, the proposal was made that a marble bust of Vial should be made for the Royal College.
The whereabouts of Flaxman's death mask was not known, and nothing came of the suggestion.
Vial was buried (at the expense of the College, as a mark of respect) in the chapel in the Savoy—Vial's wife was of the Lutheran faith.
The service, which cost £49 7/, was conducted in German and attended by staff, governors and pupils.
Smith could not trace Vial's tomb; the chapel was later pulled down, and the bodies buried there were transferred to the Great Northern Cemetery in New Southgate where, on the western side, shaded by yew trees, huge vault slabs cover the remains of the dead removed from the Savoy chapel in the Strand.
The death of Vial left his widow in parlous straits.
For many years the College did not provide pensions for members of staff, let alone dependents.
Mrs Vial was given a grant of ten guineas to purchase mourning dress, and was made, for a very short time only, a grant of 60 guineas per annum.
In July 1794, the students presented a petition to the College for some assistance for the distressed widow.
Lord Heathfield (1750–1813) was actively involved in founding the Veterinary College and (later) what was to become the Royal Army Veterinary Corps.
From a painting by Jacques-Laurent Agasse (1767–1849) whose works include several made at the College.
RIGHT: John Hunter FRS (1728–1793), elected vice-president of the Veterinary College in April 1791.
BELOW: Old St Pancras Church, with the Adam and Eve Inn on left.
Frontispiece of ‘the Sportsman, Farrier and Shoeing-smiths New Guide, being the substance of the Works of the late Charles Vial De St Bell, Professor of Medicine at the Veterinary College or Hospital for the Diseases of Horses’.
INTERREGNUM
August 1793-February 1794
Following the death of Vial it was decided, on 24 August 1793, to leave the infirmary in charge of the pupils.
They were placed under the supervision of a senior student, Richard Lawrence of Birmingham, who was to have one guinea a week and board and accommodation at the expense of the College.
On 3 September a letter was received from William Moorcroft offering his temporary services, it was not followed up, on the ostensible grounds that it was a private letter addressed to Sheldon and not to the College committee in general.
It was now once again resolved that two professors should be appointed, and the medical committee was asked to arrange a plan for their appointment and to define their duties.
On the Sunday following, John Hunter chaired a meeting at the Crown & Anchor tavern, those present being Houlston, Crawford, Cline and Scott.
Accepting that eventually two professors would be necessary, the meeting felt that in its then poor financial state the College might have to make do with one professor plus one subordinate teacher.
In the event, two professors—Moorcroft and Coleman—were appointed, but only for a brief period.
Nine days later, on 17 September 1793, Hunter said that Fordyce, Baillie and Home would receive pupils recommended by the medical committee at their lectures.
Later, students could attend lectures at the Royal Institution by Michael Faraday (1791–1867) who was himself the son of a blacksmith farrier.
A letter had been received from E. Coleman, surgeon, of Palsgrave Place, Temple, but this was held in abeyance until 7 January 1794, A week later, Clark of Edinburgh, who had been offered the post of professor, was asked to make his mind up, whereupon he declined the appointment.
Having looked again at Coleman's letter of the previous September, the committee had some discussion with him, and eventually proposals prepared jointly by Coleman and Moorcroft were referred to a meeting, which they both attended, on 10 February 1794.
On the 17th the medical committee (Cline, Crawford, Sandeman and Houlston) interviewed the two candidates separately.
Coleman apparently refused the offer of the professorship unless Moorcroft became his colleague, and the two were appointed joint professors of the College on 18 February (proposed by Stone, seconded by Perkyns).
As we learn from Alder's book,Beyond Bokhara , William Moorcroft (1767–1825) was born in Ormskirk, Lancashire, the illegitimate son of Anne, daughter of Richard and Dorothy Moorcroft.
Mother and son lived with her father.
In the early 1780s William became a pupil of Dr John Lyon, one of the surgeons at Liverpool infirmary.
While still a pupil there he was selected, along with Mr Wilson, reputedly the ablest farmer of the day, to investigate an epidemic disease in horned cattle; this is a curious echo of the student days of Vial.
Moorcroft was subsequently encouraged by John Hunter to acquire a training at the veterinary school in Lyons.
Lyons was chosen because it was believed to offer a more practical training than Alfort  (especially in the control of cattle plagues) and was presumably a safe distance from revolutionary Paris.
He was enrolled on 8 March 1790, paying six months' fees in advance, and completed his training on 7 March 1 791.
The Lyons course was scheduled to last four years, but few pupils stayed much more than a year.
His Lyons school record says of him: ‘A model of work and application, sharp and intelligent; he possesses remarkable knowledge for his years, has rapidly acquired our language and technical information’.
Moorcroft returned to England in 1791, and in the spring of 1792 he began to conduct a veterinary practice.
As Smith commented, it is incomprehensible that Moorcroft does not appear to have been considered for appointment as the first Professor of the London College.
In 1789 Moorcroft, of Russell Court, Half Moon Street, surgeon, had become a member of the future Royal Society of Arts.
He was sponsored by William Houlson, surgeon, of Chancery Lane.
He was presumably known to at least some of his fellow members—who themselves became foundation members of the Veterinary College — in particular the Duke of Northumberland, first president of the College; Granville Penn, active in the establishment of the College, who became a member of the Society of Arts in 1788 and was in 1791 a steward; the Earl of Morton (one of Vial's patrons); Thomas Pitt FSA, subsequently to be one of the most assiduous attenders of meetings of the College governors, and last, but not least, Arthur Young, a member of the Society of Arts since 1769.
In this context, Thomas Eccleston of Scarisbrick Hall is important; he is described as active in scientific farming and agricultural improvement, and seems to have treated Moorcroft as a son.
On 20 January 1789, Eccleston concluded a letter to the editor of the Transactions of the Society of Arts with a postscript: ‘Mr Moorcroft is a young man of the greatest abilities, and has agreed to turn his thoughts from the practice of physic and surgery, entirely to that of farriery in every branch, provided he can meet with sufficient and certain encouragement in the establishment of a Veterinarian School.
If you can point out any method likely to raise a subscription for such a purpose, you will confer a singular favour on all in the farming line’.
Moorcroft and Coleman were appointed joint professors after an interregnum of seven months, but only a few weeks later, on 4 April, Moorcroft resigned.
His reasons have been variously stated to include a wish to avoid undue interference by his College work with his private practice, and temperamental incompatibility with Coleman, who was only two years his senior.
It is also said that Moorcroft was shocked to find that his co-professor was wholly ignorant of all veterinary matters; yet Moorcroft and Coleman had negotiated the terms of their joint appointment, and it is inconceivable that Moorcroft could have remained unaware of his future colleague's lack of veterinary knowledge.
Moorcroft's letter of resignation refers to his ill health, but speaking 40 years later, Coleman said: ‘I could see no ill health [in Moorcroft]at all.
He also pleaded interference with his duty to those by whom he was employed in a private practice of considerable extent, but his time at the College had been clearly specified—two hours for consultation by subscribers with sick horses on three days a week, with little or no call upon him for attendance at uncertain hours.’
(Moorcroft would also have had to prepare public and student lectures.)
‘I confess I felt myself rather ill-used.
I felt it would be presumptuous, perhaps dishonourable, for me, so little versed in veterinary matters, to superintend the interests and growth of the infant school’.
Ill-health does not appear to have been a long-lasting problem, for, with John Field, Moorcroft soon established a flourishing practice, eventually with stabling for 63 sick horses, in Oxford Street, and a further 20 stalls at a branch in Hammersmith.
It has been estimated that in 16 years he acquired a fortune of £40,000, despite apparently losing a lot of money in a project for the commercial manufacture of seated cast-iron horseshoes.
Moorcroft was employed to manage the East India Company's stud in Essex, and to select breeding stock for their stud in Bengal.
In 1808, at a salary of £3,000 a year, he became  superintendent of the stud in India, where he was successful in controlling diseases and improving management (he is said to have introduced the cultivation of oats into India).
He considered that the breeding of the company's horses could be improved by, for example, crossing Turkestan sires with Hindustan mares.
He also became interested in the breeding of goats to provide wool for shawls.
This led him to numerous adventures in penetrating to Kabul and beyond, which have been described by Smith, Barber-Lomax, and especially Alder, who studied much of the terrain, in enthusiastic detail.
Moorcroft, the first Englishman to cross the Himalayas, is something of a hero for veterinary historians, and the Veterinary History Society has marked the site of his practice in Oxford Street (now Littlewoods store) with a commemorative plaque.
He was an outstanding veterinary surgeon, and obviously a man of enormous enterprise, daring courage and strong will.
According to one account, Moorcroft caught a fever and died near Ladakh (now in north-western Afghanistan) in 1825, while Smith says he was murdered on 27 August 1825, ‘doubtless by the ‘cup of medicated tea’ that he had so frequently described as being his destined end'.
Of Moorcroft's veterinary knowledge and skills, Smith has written at length.
Of his short time as joint professor at the Veterinary College, no certain information has survived.
A contemporary magazine report of a horse infirmary near Coventry reflects some light on the College in Moorcroft's time.
In the Sporting Magazine for March 1794, there appears a ‘picturesque view of Palfrey's Infirmary’ said to be about a quarter of a mile west of Coventry.
The account describes the ‘hospitals and open stables for the reception of diseased and sick horses in the first stage of their complaints’…‘more pure stables, which are taken up by horses in physic, or patients whose complaints are not contagious’…stocks where ‘all operations are performed without the trouble or hazard of casting…a perfect skeleton of a horse, to refer to in cases of lameness, fractures, etc…various paddocks, some with and some without water for the better accommodation of horses of different descriptions, whose complaints require open air, or grass, for their perfect recovery’.
The report concludes: ‘In short, we believe it to be the most complete undertaking,(the Veterinary College excepted) of the kind in the kingdom’.
Newspaper announcement, June 1794: ‘The public are most respectfully informed that Mr Edmund Bond (late a Pupil of the Veterinary College) has undergone an Examination before the Medical Committee, and the following is a Copy of their Report: These are to certify that Mr Edmund Bond has attended the Veterinary College as a Resident Pupil for Eighteen Months, and having been examined by us, we consider him as qualified to practise the Veterinary Art.
H.Cline, M. Baillie, E. Home, A.P.
Cooper, H. Abernithy, W. Houlston, E. Coleman, Professor Wm Mounsher, Sec.
N. B. Mr Bond resides at present in Epsom.
Hyder Hearsey's painting of Moorcroft (extreme left) and himself in Tibet, 1812.
William Moorcroft, the first Englishman to cross the Himalayas, was professor at the College in 1794.
EDWARD COLEMAN
Professor 1794–1839
When Moorcroft resigned in April 1794, Coleman also proffered his resignation but was persuaded to continue in office.
The recommendation by Hunter's committee that two professors were desirable was forgotten.
Restricted finances allowed only one appointment, that of Coleman, who became sole Professor at the age of 28.
The College was hampered by shortage of funds throughout Coleman's 45 years as Professor.
Veterinary historians still differ sharply about the effect his long spell in charge of the College had on the emerging profession.
Coleman, a surgeon with no veterinary training or experience, drastically reduced the length of the course of instruction.
The buildings remained inadequate and the establishment was under-staffed.
To augment the tuition at the College, students had to traipse all over London to attend lectures at medical schools, and to hear additional veterinary lectures on private premises in the evening.
To gain experience in practical work, they went on their own initiative to slaughterhouses or the knacker's yard; horses were still almost the only animals seen at the College.
Yet by the 1830s, some 50 students a year were gaining their qualifying diploma (after an oral examination, conducted exclusively by medical men) and the profession was steadily gaining recognition and status.
Soon after Coleman was appointed Professor, he was given two assistants: Sewell, who was later to succeed him as Principal, and Stockley.
William Stockley (1776–1860) was one of the six foundation students of the College, becoming a resident pupil in January 1792 on the recommendation of Lord Rivers.
His certificate was dated 5 July 1794.
He was assistant to Coleman until September 1795, and in that year, with the support of Lord Heathfield, he was sent to a regiment of cavalry to test the utility of introducing veterinary surgeons into the army and to justify the granting of public funds to the College.
Two conflicting assessments of Edward Coleman have been made—a favourable one by Principal James Beart Simonds, his one-time pupil at the College, in a biographical sketch published in his own old age, and an unfavourable one by Sir Frederick Smith in his History of the Royal Army Veterinary Corps .
Smith said bluntly that Coleman's long life was an unmitigated evil (has anyone ever lived such a life?).
This extreme view was not even sustained by Smith himself, although it has been repeated at intervals by people who should have known better.
Coleman, of course, is ‘indifferent to blame or praise, bribe or threat’.
But, since he was Professor (or, as we would now call him, Principal) at the Veterinary College for over 45 years, and Principal Army Veterinary Surgeon for nearly 43 years, and since in these positions he inevitably greatly influenced the development of our College and profession, an attempt at a balanced re-appraisal seems worthwhile.
Smith expressed his typically extreme view that the appointment of Coleman was the greatest calamity the veterinary profession ever experienced.
Coleman, he wrote, a struggling surgeon ‘condescended’(why condescended?)‘to come to our only veterinary college and to teach that of which he had absolutely no knowledge or experience’.
However, Coleman's reported disclaimer at that time should be remembered: ‘I am come to learn and not to teach’.
Youatt said the bust of Coleman by Sievier (among whose other works is the bust of Edward Jenner in Gloucester cathedral) was a lifelike portrayal.
The presentation to Coleman of the bust took place on 10 March 1835, and was suggested by two Lancashire practitioners, Byron and Hollingworth.
Coleman, whose three surviving daughters sat opposite him, was noticed to be in some pain (he suffered from gout in his later years).
A number of copies of the bust was made.
One is in the College, one was presented to Astley Cooper and one, with the toga'd bust in reverse, is in the Royal College historical library.
At the College there is an engraving of Coleman as a younger man, probably under 40, which is reproduced on the magnificent certificates of the London Veterinary Medical Society.
Thomas Mayer, with fellow students Youatt and Turner, founded the London Veterinary Medical Society at the College in 1813.
It met every week from 7–9pm at a tavern in Marchmont Street, and was said to have ‘risen like a phoenix’ from the ashes of an earlier society.
In 1814 Sewell became its president, and a little later Coleman, who had earlier declined an invitation to be president, became its patron.
The history of the society up to 1828 appears to have been almost entirely lost.
In that year, a separate society of practitioners was formed, which did not become amalgamated with the College's society.
This practitioners' society functioned until 1835, when it was dissolved because of poor attendance by its members, while the College's society continued to exist.
Richard Vines was its librarian, but he was removed from office after six years and, after he had openly burned his certificate of membership of the society, he was voted to be a non-member.
In March 1836 a group of student members demanded that Vines be restored to the society, and formed themselves into a committee of management, upon which all the officers resigned.
The society apparently ceased to exist in 1837.
However, on 12 September 1836 a number of practitioners met at the  Freemasons ' tavern, and decided to unite practitioners and students in a new association.
The Veterinary Medical Association so formed, familiarly known since then as the VMA, received permission to hold a meeting in the College theatre on 22 November 1836.
Coleman was elected patron, Sewell chairman, Morton secretary and Youatt treasurer.
The disruptive activities of Richard Vines (1794–1865) were in accord with his reputation as a trouble-maker.
He qualified at the College in 1824, being rather older than most of the students, and was appointed demonstrator in anatomy by Coleman.
He was something of an experimentalist, being particularly interested in glanders (he claimed success in some cases from treatment with cantharides) and in the circulatory system.
Rush's paper in March 1836 to the Veterinary Medical Society on The Blood Circulation in the Foetus and Adult, and the changes it undergoes during Respiration was challenged by Vines as an unacknowledged copy of his own work.
Vines, as a non-member, was directed to retire from the meeting, but he was apparently responsible for some insurrection among the student members.
Vines resigned from the College in 1838, setting up private practice at 13 Great College Street, the third house up from the College.
He died there in April 1865, aged 71.
Over the years, the VMA gradually became a students' association and at the first general meeting of its 45th session, on 19 October 1880, John H. Steel, the secretary and librarian, announced ‘the Veterinary Medical Association, while having wide sympathies with its members who have become qualified practitioners, is now the Students’ Society of the largest British Veterinary School'.
Less than two years later the students asked the new Principal, Professor Robertson, for help in forming a medical society —one in the government of which students, being constituent parts of the Society, should have a voice and vote'.
Thus was founded the Royal Veterinary College Medical Society, later known as the RVCVMA, and now the RVCMA.
In 1936, despite considerable controversy among veterinary historians about when the association was founded, the  RCVMA decided to celebrate its centenary.
The association was resuscitated in 1976, after a lapse of 10 years, by Professor Richard Penny, Ruth Layton being elected the first ‘new’ president.
Ten years later, in May 1986, the RVC Medical Association celebrated its sesquicentenary.
The occasion was marked by the unveiling of a commemorative plaque in the hall of the College in Camden Town by Professor Clifford Formston.
In 1834, the pseudonymous Paul Pry observed of Coleman, now ‘stricken with years’, that ‘Time has laid his temples bare And turned to white his once dark hair.’
According to the same writer, Coleman was a little below middle height.
His features were irregular, but gave a strong impression of intellectual energy.
Unfortunately most of what we know about Coleman is related to the last decade or so of his life.
He had then become an object of often severely critical interest to the Veterinarian , the journal founded in 1828 by William Percivall to reform, it said, certain alleged abuse in the College.
Coleman had a powerful personality, and Smith admitted that he was also a man of great charm, adding (on unstated evidence) that ‘he had all the cleverness of a woman at turning that advantage to account’.
In old age, he quietened somewhat —'I; want only social comfort and good feeling'—but he was not afraid to meet his critics on occasion.
In the face of many attacks, he continued imperturbably on his way—the dogs barked, but the caravan moved on —and this steadfastness seems to have aroused his critics to further ineffectual fury.
In temperament, Coleman appears to have been somewhat mercurial, and he could be despondent, as he was understandably at the time of his wife's illness.
Bransby Cooper (Sir Astley's nephew) who knew Coleman personally for many years, said it seemed impossible not to love one so agreeable, kind-hearted, and blessed with all those qualities which endear man to man.
Coleman lived on cordial terms with his assistant, William Sewell, for over 40 years.
He charged Sewell with the maintenance of discipline in the College (which led to Sewell recommending the expulsion of only one pupil, although some students paid too much attention to tavern and skittle-ground).
Smith, true to form, condemned this entirely usual and reasonable delegation of disciplinary authority to the second-in-command as being Coleman's method of avoiding any loss of popularity with his students.
This popularity was undoubtedly great, and their affection was fully reciprocated by Coleman.
He frequently referred to the students when they were at College, and for long after, as his ‘children’.
Sir Benjamin Brodie, in an obituary address to the Royal Medicochirurgical Society (of which Coleman had been a member) said he though Coleman's intellect was of a high order, and even gave indications of genius.
‘He had obtained little knowledge from books, but he had been an original observer, and had reflected much on all he had observed, and drew his own conclusions.
Hence it was that in many subjects he was behind the knowledge of the day.
However, he had a peculiar knowledge of his own, and could give information such as no one else could impart.’
Coleman's superior natural talents were admitted by his bitterest critics, and there are many tributes on record to his powers as a teacher.
He delivered up to 90 lectures in a session in the College theatre.
If this resembled (as seems likely) in the closing years of Coleman's life what it had become in 1846, when an anonymous member of the Royal College visited it, the word theatre was a grandiloquent description of an ignoble room.
At the time, we are told by  ‘MRCVS’ that the College buildings were low and plain, and bleak even to bareness, suggesting a warehouse, barracks or mews rather than a seat of learning (the brick front facing College Street was not stuccoed until much later).
The main entrance was through an archway, the folding gates of which were kept closed, necessitating entry even for horses through an inconvenient wicket gate.
Under the archway one of a pair of glass doors led to a room, estimated (wrongly?) by MRCVS as being about 10 feet long and six feet wide; this was the combined consulting room for the Professor and the College library.
The un-named visitor thought the whole scene, complete with students buying oranges and nuts from an old man under the archway, was one of ‘painful vapidity’.
(Incidentally, oranges and nuts seem to have occupied in the social life of those days the place soft drinks and ice cream occupy today, being consumed in great quantities even in the most dignified circles.)
The students had no room in which to wait between lectures, but it was suggested to MRCVS that students who lodged near enough might go home if they wanted to, or more usefully spend their non-lecture time in the dissecting room or in the stables, although the Bell & Crown inn, with a good fire, was close at hand.
Along a short passage, the visitor came to the locked theatre door (the same door whose creaking had sometimes disturbed Coleman in his introductory lectures, when old students who had come to pay their respects, arrived after he had begun).
The theatre was estimated to measure about 10 feet in height, 15 in breadth, and 20 in length (can these measurements be correct — classes sometimes numbered 70 or more students?).
The theatre had two windows, between which was a table.
In front of this table were four rows of benches, slightly raised one above the other.
The lecturer stood between the table and the wall—the worst possible position.
The room was badly ventilated, and the floor was strewn with nut shells and orange peel.
It is reported that the window blinds had been indecently defaced  with coloured chalk.
It sounds most depressing.
Supplementing this account of the College shortly after the Coleman regime comes one written late in life by Principal Simonds, describing the College and its environs in 1828–1829, when he was a student there.
He notes that: ‘the Institution was built in a Quadrangle Form, having now in the centre a large lawn or grass plot surrounded by posts and chains, and that between the Buildings and these a broad Pathway had been left, partly paved with stones…used chiefly for testing the freedom from lameness of Horses sent for examination prior to purchase; as well as for ascertaining the progress of those under treatment in the Infirmary for lameness arising from various causes.
‘In the central part of the Lawn, a Mound, planted with trees and shrubs, concealed from view a large Water-tank, protected by a strong iron grating.
From this source the water—needed by the whole Institution—is drawn, the supply to the tank being furnished by the New River Company.’
(This tank, filled with concrete, still exists beneath the main hall of the College in Camden Town).
Simonds goes on to describe the general layout in some detail, including ‘a long stable, well lighted (by windows and oil lamps) and ventilated.
It is filled with horses mostly affected with lameness.
At the furthermost end of it, a door opens into the Upper Paddock.
We…turn to the right and find a long line of Loose Boxes extending to the Forge…
Passing out of the entrance to these boxes into the Quadrangle, we observe a residence on the opposite side corresponding in elevation to that of the Forge.
It is the one in which Assistant Professor Sewell resides.
We now walk along a covered way called the Ride, designed for exercising Infirmary Patients, and also for testing for freedom from disease or otherwise of the Respiratory Organs of horses prior to purchase.
Reaching the end we observe that, adjacent to the Assistant Professor's house, another series of Loose Boxes…are erected.
These with some stalls intervening, we saw reached to the furthermost end of the main building, a wall separating them from the Museum and also from College Street.
‘Returning now to the Long Stable, we enter the Upper Paddock, and first observe a hot-water apparatus, so arranged as to supply practically a constant supply.
Here a wide entrance, guarded by boarded doors from the street provides for the bringing in of Corn, Hay, Straw, & c …receptacles for soiled litter and stable sweepings are provided.
On the north side of this Paddock a low wall separates it from some buildings occasionally used for canine patients, but chiefly as a Storage…
Erected on its south, east, and west sides we also observe several lean-to Infirmary Sheds…
From the Upper we enter (eastwards) the Middle Paddock, which is also surrounded by similar Sheds; at the north-west corner…a brick-built Loose Box, for the reception of Equine patients suffering from glanders and other special diseases.
From Middle Paddock we pass (still eastwards) into the Lower one…
Here the Dissecting-room…also a similar detached Loose Box…
The Fleet Ditch here forms the boundary of the College ground…we, Students, in my days, now drawing near to seventy years since, too often left the study of Anatomy, during the absence of Mr Vines, to try our powers as Athletes by jumping over, not, however, infrequently into, the Ditch—unto a narrow road on the other side—the frontage to some half-dozen cottages.
This road we also notice leads from King's Road [Pancras Way]as a back entrance to Professor Coleman's residence and garden, and to his stable, coach-house and kennel for his dogs — which, however, we understood he rarely used except in the shooting season.
‘His [Coleman's]House, doubtless was the one originally occupied by Vial, there being no other in the immediate neighbourhood of sufficient size for his family and resident Students.
Being situated on the opposite side of the Fleet, it was approached from the College buildings by a strongly-built Rustic-bridge which spanned the river just in front of the Forge at the north end of the Ride…
It may here also be explained that after the main source of the Fleet was diverted, the portion of it which originally formed the boundary of the site granted for the building of the College, became a stagnant Ditch, which in process of time dried up, and that, with the addition of gravel and earth, a dry path from the College to the Professor's house was thus constructed.
There being now no necessity for the bridge, it was removed…about the year 1834.
A Gate was now fixed at the entrance to the garden, which as a rule was kept locked —a necessary precaution.
.. when so many young men were located near thereto.
‘The Professor's garden, however, was not only protected originally on the College side by the Fleet Ditch, but by a Thorn-planted Hedge, which extended onwards to the Bridge in Fig Lane [Crowndale Road]thus also enclosing the ‘Green’ at the back of the Elephant & Castle Inn.
About the same date [1834]a range of Loose Boxes and Stalls were erected in the Lower Paddock near to the Ditch.
The reserved ground around them, together with some addition subsequently gained by filling up of the Ditch, thus provided for a back entrance to the College from King's Road.
This entrance was protected by a boarded fence and gate sufficiently wide to admit carriages.
Professor Sewell had a square building erected, open on each side, so that operations, requiring the casting of the patient, could be performed under shelter in any state of the weather'.
(Morton occupied Coleman's house after the latter's death, until he retired in 1860.
The house then reverted to its owners, who erected a wall separating their premises from those of the College).
The environs of the College in 1828–1829 are described by Simonds in A ramble from the Royal Veterinary College to Battle Bridge and back .
He starts by entering College Grove.
‘First on our way (east) we crossed the old Fleet Ditch by a wooden bridge, rather rudely constructed.
Looking to our right we recognised the Cottages with the road in front of them close to the ditch; also our Professor's stable, coach-house and dog kennels, with the back entrance from the road to his garden…we were soon in King's Road [Pancras Way]which we found to be well studded with trees on each side…to our left the Country residence of Counsellor Agar [builder of Agar's Town]…we turned to the right and first took notice of the front of our Professor's house with its large garden protected from the pathway and road by a brick wall.
A little further on we passed the Elephant & Castle Inn [in Pancras Way, near to the workhouse of 1809]kept by Mr Wrench, who is reported to be very strict in his management of the Inn.
Many of the students go here to dine, and are also accustomed to assemble together in the evening.
Father Wrench, however, as he is sometimes called—will never allow more than a proper quantity of either ale, wine or spirits…
We here crossed to the other side of the road, near to the Workhouse, and soon passed (on the left) a row of small houses called Cook's Row, and a little further on another row—Church Row—at the  northern end of which stood the Adam & Eve Inn with its attached Tea gardens.
The place looked inviting, nevertheless we do not enter’.
The site of these gardens is now St Giles-in-the-Fields burial ground, north of Old St Pancras Church, which is built on a natural or embanked hillock.
The tavern, we learn from Walford, originally had attached to it some extensive pleasure grounds.
Simonds notes that ‘Nearly opposite to St Pancras Church stood a Toll-Bar, and to prevent horsemen avoiding payment, some posts were erected on the footpath, between which we had to pass.
No demand, however, was made on us by the gate-keeper, the authorities being so liberal as not to charge persons for walking either on the roads or footpaths.
‘Being quit of this obstruction, we were soon on the Bridge…
We learned, however, that highway robberies in past days were very common in the district of both Camden and Kentish Town; and on more than one occasion we had heard Professor Sewell state that a Hampstead stage coach…was stopped and the passengers robbed near to St Pancras Church…
With further reference to the Toll-gate, it may be stated that the general traffic on the road, even in 1828–9, was but little, and that scarcely on any occasion was the Keeper required to sit up late.
An exception to this has to be mentioned, viz., that Professor Coleman was accustomed, unless prevented by some special cause—to visit Sir Astley Cooper in the evening of one day in the week during the winter half of the year, to indulge in a game of whist.
Thus, his return was often late, much to the annoyance of the Gatekeeper.
To soften his feelings, however, we learned that the Professor from time to time gave him a fee which far exceeded the amount of the toll…just by the Bridge, turnstiles admitted foot-passengers to pass by different paths, intersecting the large extent of open ground, some of this led to Somers Town, Red Lion Street, etc…here and there, especially at the lower portion of the [College]ground, walls were standing, some of them being eight or ten feet high.’
(Part of the wall facing College Street, at the lower limit of the pathology building, has unaccountably survived.)
‘…for many years after the time named in this Ramble, Great College Street—beyond the terrace of houses extending to the entrance of Messrs. Goodall's existing premises—was totally impassable even as a footpath in the winter.
At length, however, the Parish authorities saw fit to properly put this also into repair, and extend the Street to Camden Road.’
Paul Pry described an introductory lecture given to nearly 80 students (20 per bench) in the closing years of Coleman's life.
The Professor, he tells us, was some time in making his appearance, but suddenly the noise and bustle of conversation were stopped by his entrance.
His walk, attitude and gestures were those of a self-confident man, a little addicted to be indifferent to others, and far more disposed to lead than to follow.
He lectured on the anatomy, physiology and pathology of the horse, and clearly took enormous pleasure in communicating knowledge.
Those who heard him lecture remarked on the way he seized on and illustrated the most interesting parts of his subject, so that he was intelligible to the novice and listened to with pleasure by even the best informed, generally leading his class unresistingly to the desired conclusion.
His lectures on the eye, the foetal circulation, and especially on the foot, would never, it was claimed, be forgotten by those who had the good fortune to hear him.
In the elucidation of disease and its treatment, while the patient was standing by, Coleman was said to be even more successful.
The two, sometimes three, hours spent in the College quadrangle when, we are told, the Professor would courteously listen and give an intelligible answer to every question, and when the instruction he communicated was stamped on the memory by the good temper and joke and repartee with which it was accompanied, these were periods which an old student liked to call to memory, for they were hours pleasantly and usefully passed.
The rest of the College, like the theatre, seems in Paul Pry's day to have run to seed.
The museum, said to be about 30 feet long, was the largest room.
A few years after Coleman's death it contained dried specimens under an accumulation of discoloured varnish, plus an incomplete horse skeleton, but there was no catalogue.
The pupils were said to have no right of entry into the museum (nor, it was said, did they have access to a certain ‘necessary article’).
The stables were well built but badly ventilated (surely not be expected in Coleman's time, for he was the arch-exponent of adequate ventilation) a duct-blocking luxuriant vine having been trained against the outside wall of some loose boxes.
There were three dissecting rooms, containing carcasses of donkeys purchased wholesale.
On an open piece of ground with no privacy, the donkeys were destroyed, horses slaughtered, and operations performed.
It is alleged that, through the hedge, the local boys and girls could see ‘the most disgusting sights’.
Even so, the College buildings, although in a damp locality and a badly chosen situation, were thought to have ‘capabilities’ if the spirit and inclination for improvement existed.
The animals coming into the infirmary were almost entirely horses.
In 1828, for example, there were admitted 869 horses, one ass and 16 dogs.
Many of the horses were lame.
The College pharmacopoeia consisted largely of aloes, calomel, copper sulphate and croton oil.
No regular warning was given to students of the time of operations.
There appears to have been some slackness in staff discipline in that teachers were often late for, or even absent from, lectures.
What on Hunter's initiative had been a saving grace for the College on Vial's death—the admission of veterinary students to lectures by surgeons and physicians—later became a source of complaint.
Students spent a lot of time travelling (walking and even running) from one lecture to another in various parts of London, and it was increasingly demanded that they should find within the walls of the College all that they required, or that they should at least pay a fee that would entitle them as of right, rather than for charity's sake, to enter medical lectures.
For some time, however, teaching was supplemented, with the College's approbation, in three main fields.
Charles Spooner, from 1834, gave anatomy lectures at his house in College Street.
Morton gave lectures on chemistry and materia medica in the evenings; Youatt lectured in Nassau Street on animals other than the horse, with the blessing of London University.
One of the major preoccupations of the young veterinary profession was a search for public recognition of its respectability, the gaining of which has now been crowned by the secular apotheosis of James Herriot.
Right from the start, the College included men of the highest aristocratic or professional standing among its governors and subscribers.
The Prince Regent is reported as a subscriber on 2 May 1811, having expressed the view that the College ‘held forth the expectation of much public benefit’.
In 1818, on the death of the Duke of Northumberland, the Duke of York became president.
Since then, the College has enjoyed continuous royal patronage, the title of the office having been changed from ‘president’ to ‘patron’in 1956, following the different system of government resulting from the College's new Charter.
The Duke of Gloucester, appointed in 1932, became the last president and first official patron of the College, and the Duke of Edinburgh agreed to become patron in 1975 following the Duke of Gloucester's death.
ABOVE: Eclipse, by George Stubbs, reputedly the only painting of this famous horse to have been made from life.
BELOW: ‘Geometrical Drawing representing the exact proportions of the late Famous Eclipse’ from the Essay published by Vial, 1791.
The casual unauthorised assumption of the word Royal into the College's title is generally thought to have occurred in about 1828.
George IV became patron on 27 May 1827 and the College minutes, which referred to the Veterinary College on 25 May 1828, used the title Royal in June.
However,The Lancet referred to ‘the Royal Veterinary College’ as early as 22 December 1827.
The Farrier and Naturalist for 1828 has a frontispiece showing the Royal Veterinary College.
In the early part of the April issue, it refers to the Veterinary College, but in the later part to the Royal Veterinary College.
Curiously enough, an unidentified author (William Nesbit?) in the second (1818) edition of Authentic Memoirs, biographical, critical and literary, of the most eminent physicians and surgeons in Great Britain , included Coleman as ‘Royal Veterinary Professor’ and refers to the College as ‘the Royal Veterinary College, Pancras’(for many years of its life, the College was known as the St Pancras School, the term ‘Camden Town’coming into use much later).
Coleman claimed that his greatest contribution to the young veterinary profession was that he played a major role in securing that from 1796 appointments as veterinary surgeons (a term used by the Standing Board of General Officers) in the cavalry, and eventually (1805) in the artillery, were by commission rather than by warrant.
Even so, Coleman did not attempt the then unachievable, and claim equality with the medical profession.
He said bluntly that he was a great advocate of a proper observance of status and rank.
The veterinary surgeon should not claim a higher place for his profession than the public thought it had earned, and was willing to give it.
Human surgery and medicine would always be superior to a profession where the education was less expensive, the difficulties of the courses of instruction were fewer, emoluments were smaller, and the sanctity of life was not a determinant of treatment.
Smith, who has set out Coleman's army career in detail, concurred with the opinion of F.C.
Cherry (who succeeded Coleman as Principal Army Veterinary Surgeon on Coleman's death, thus blighting the hope of assistant professor Sewell that he might follow Coleman in that post) that Coleman was ‘the greatest enemy that the profession has ever had in its highest ranks’.
This is frankly unbelievable.
Coleman would have had to be a man of superhuman cunning and stupidity to have served for over 40 years fighting the very thing he was engaged in creating.
It is obvious that Smith's assessment is coloured by his self-revealing remark that ‘Coleman had never done a day's soldiering in his life, and for that reason alone was incapable of leading and directing’.
In A History or the Royal Army Veterinary Corps , Smith has described Coleman's relationship with the establishment and development of the army veterinary service.
It appears that on 19 February 1796 the Deputy Adjutant-General of Artillery reported to the Board of Ordnance on a disease affecting artillery horses in Kent.
The board directed Coleman to investigate the disease, and he diagnosed the condition as glanders.
In his report, Coleman suggested that the ‘prodigious loss of horses was due to expert advice not having been sought when the outbreak started’.
Representation was made to the board that an appointment securing Coleman's attendance would quickly pay for itself.
Coleman, in a letter of 17 February, proposed that an infirmary should be prepared in part of the Woolwich stables, where he could attend once or twice a week.
He also suggested that a College pupil should be in residence at Woolwich, to remain there until the farriers were ‘sufficiently instructed in the treatment of disease’.
The assistant was John Percivall, who qualified in 1795.
On 3 March the Adjutant-General of the army directed a standing committee of general officers to report inter alia whether the instruction at the College was such as to furnish the means of improving the present practice of farriery.
The committee reported, and it was agreed on 24 May that a veterinary surgeon should be attached to each regiment of cavalry.
It was hoped that medical men would be attracted to take the College course, and then be  commissioned as veterinary surgeons in the cavalry.
The first and only veterinary surgeon appointed to the army in 1796 joined the 11th Light Dragoons on 25 June that year as a warrant officer, but was commissioned the following year.
He was John Shipp, the elusive subject of devoted study by Dr Ernest Gray.
In the artillery, veterinary surgeons served on warrants issued by the Master General of the Ordnance, receiving the right to commissions in 1805 when Thomas Peall (who qualified in London in 1796) and others addressed the Commander-in-Chief about this anomaly.
(It was this Thomas Peall who, while still at College in 1795, produced glanders in an ass by placing the discharge from a farcy ulcer inside the nostrils).
By commission dated 21 September 1796 Coleman became Principal Veterinary Surgeon to the cavalry, and was also appointed veterinary surgeon to the artillery in a civil capacity, holding these posts until his death.
His duties included the preparation of a handbook of Instructions for the use of farriers attached to the British Cavalry and to the Honourable Board of Ordnance .
There was a second edition in 1803, bearing Coleman's name.
The first edition, dated 1796, apparently contained the notorious instruction, in the treatment of ‘staggers’, of having the ‘hair clipped off the pasterns as high as the fetlock, and boiling water poured on the part twice a day’.
Coleman had been lecturing to officers of the army medical staff at Woolwich, and Dr Rollo and the officers of the medical staff signed a memorial, suggesting Coleman's appointment as veterinary surgeon to the Ordnance.
‘Coleman's duties with the Ordnance were to examine for soundness all ‘recruit’ horses, advise on the treatment of disease, inspect at outstations, bringing in such cases as he thought necessary for treatment at Woolwich, to lecture occasionally to the officers, artillery cadets and farriers, and to direct the shoeing.’
Smith wrote that Coleman ‘improved the health of army horses beyond recognition…what we have to thank him for more particularly is the lessons he taught on the prevention of disease’.
In five years, Coleman had provided 44 veterinary surgeons (how many were medical men is apparently not known).
Coleman received the right to supply the cavalry with drugs and surgical appliances, but he lost this contract later.
Smith said that Coleman was a dictator and monopolist, ruling with an iron hand in military and civil life.
Certainly, Coleman and no other was the route of entry into the College and into the army veterinary service.
His only potential rival—William Dick of Edinburgh—was too far away to be effective.
In the autumn of 1817 Dick (son of a smith and farrier in Edinburgh) came to the Veterinary College, rooming in Somers Town.
He attended Coleman's lectures, and obtained his diploma on 21 January 1818 after three months' study.
He set up his school in Edinburgh and in 1838 graduates of that school were made eligible to serve as army veterinary surgeons.
None was admitted so long as Coleman was alive.
Smith, well in character, says ‘It is difficult to find sufficiently restrained language to express the wickedness of this attitude’.
A report on the unsatisfactory nature of the examinations at the Edinburgh School a little later suggests that Coleman may have had much right on his side.
John Gamgee gave a considered opinion of Coleman in 1855: ‘Coleman was by education, character and deportment, a fair example of an English gentleman…
By the urbanity of his almost patrician deportment, Coleman tended greatly to raise the standard of the profession in public esteem, and he powerfully contributed to obtain for veterinarians the grade of commissioned officers in the army.
By his intimate connection with the greatest men of the day in the medical profession, he obtained for his pupils the privilege of their teaching free of expense, and thus it is that a considerable number in the ranks of our profession are pupils of Abernethy, Astley Cooper, Charles Bell, Brodie, Faraday and Brand.
By imparting his enthusiasm to his pupils, impressing them most earnestly with the importance of their calling, he sent them out into the world with a store of self-respect which greatly contributed to uphold  their position, and gave them an impetus to endeavour to raise its standard, which was often crowned with the most happy success’.
However, Gamgee was not all praise.
He stated that ‘experimental committees, public reports on the workings of the institution, legal injunctions of the council, were soon assigned to the ominous alphabet of dead letters…he enjoyed the privileges of undivided authority, nay, of despotism and great wealth’.
According to Smith, Coleman had an inordinate love of money.
He quotes Gamgee: ‘He toiled for lucre and not for the advancement of veterinary science’.
It is worth noting that some men in veterinary practice at that time became far richer than Coleman (who was worth £47,000 at his death).
Coleman got his fees and salary from the College, a daily retainer from the army, and for a time money from the sale of drugs provided for the College and the army.
He said he got no money from private practice.
Coleman would probably have claimed that one of his greatest contributions to veterinary practice was the ventilation of stables.
The initial defects of his system, depending on the introduction of fresh air at a high level and its extraction at a low level, were corrected by Karkeek of Truro.
Karkeek, who died aged 55 in 1858 following an accident to his gig, qualified on 1 December 1834.
He was a prolific writer of learned articles in the Veterinarian of which he was for a time co-editor, and his classical education is reflected in his thoughtful commentaries.
As Percivall noted in 1843 ‘One of the Professor's projects was crowned with signal success; and for this his name must be handed to posterity with no ordinary eclat—I mean his introduction of Ventilation into stables and other places used as the habitations of horses and cattle.
Before his time, it was the practise of grooms…with a view of keeping their horses as warm as possible by the exclusion of air, to close up every chink and cranny through the wall or boarding of the stable, not omitting even the keyhole…
The first to assent to the Professor's new doctrine were the Cavalry…‘
Coleman's passion for fresh air never left him.
He noted that two shirts were warmer than one overcoat, and he obviously enjoyed his open air sessions on the clinic rounds in the College yard.
Bransby Cooper says that ‘I have sometimes suffered from the Professor's love of cold air; for if ever he could manage at his parties to have a window left open unperceived, he was delighted; and many a time when I have dined with him I have said ‘Pray, Mr Coleman, have your ventilators shut or I shall be blown out of the room’, at which he laughed and had the direction of the current changed by stealth so as to apply the breeze upon some other visitor less sensitive than myself'.
Bransby Cooper continues: ‘I was with my dear old friend twenty-four hours before his death; I call him my friend, for such he always was.
He was pallid, and with every mark of approaching dissolution, excepting loss of spirits.
He was lying on a bed, placed between two open windows, his head being without any cap or covering of any sort, while his grey locks were literally floating in the wind, for, although in July, it was cold and blowing weather.
Acquainted as I was with his peculiar notions on the subject, I could not help saying, ‘My dear sir, you must be cold, thus exposed’, and he said ‘No, I have plenty of clothes on my bed, a large fire in my room, and with this pure air passing freely to my lungs, I shall live a few hours longer: but to-day, I think, is my last.
The scene of life, Bransby’, continued he, ‘is drawing to a close: although my career has been a most happy one, I feel much less regret than I expected in leaving it, for I have full confidence in the mercy of God.’
' (The last phrase is omitted in Smith's quotation of this passage, which omission somewhat alters its significance.)
‘His enunciation proved prophetic, for in less than twenty-four hours he was no more.’
Coleman was buried at St James Church, Hampstead Road, where was laid also the animal and genre painter, George Morland (1763–1804).
Coleman's will, dated 1 July 1839, provided for the founding of a Coleman prize: ‘Also, I give to the Royal Veterinary College, at the expiration of three years from my decease, the sum of one hundred and sixty-six pounds thirteen shillings and fourpence, 3 per Cent.
consolidated Bank Annuities, with the dividends thereon accruing and to accrue, due at and from that time only, at and after my decease, for the purposes hereafter declared concerning the same’.
He directed that the governors of the College should ‘apply the interest and proceeds thereof annually for ever in the purchase of a Medal to be given Annually to the author of the best dissertation on the Anatomy, Physiology, or Pathology of the foot of the horse, or the principles and practice of shoeing horses (to be decided by Examiners, viz. either Veterinary examiners or Veterinary surgeons, to be appointed by the Governors at their annual meeting)’.
He gave detailed instructions for the procedure to be followed if no suitable dissertations were submitted, concluding: ‘But if no such dissertations, worthy, in the opinion of the said Examiners, of any such reward as aforesaid should be offered for seven years, then a Medal, to be purchased with the said accumulations, shall be offered for the best dissertation on any Veterinary subject thought worthy by the said Examiners of such reward, but at all times the Foot of the Horse is to be the subject preferred, and next to that the nature, causes and treatment of Glanders, and the diseases of the Eye in horses: And if there should be no successful dissertation at the end of seven years, then the amount of the said accumulations shall be disposed of by the said Governors in such manner as they in their discretion may think proper, so as they are applied for the promotion of Veterinary Science’.
The will was proved at London on 21 August 1839.
Nothing about the medal seems to have happened until a meeting of the governors on 2 August 1848.
They resolved that, if the money was now obtainable, it should be applied to assist the funds of the journal designated at that time the Veterinary Record (not connected with the present journal of that name) which was edited by professors of the College.
This seems somewhat cool behaviour, considering that the governors appear to have done nothing to put the medal up for competition.
Then, on 9 July 1859 (11 years later) Professor Spooner was asked to report to the governors on the state of the fund, and to ascertain who were the current trustees.
On the following 18 October, he was asked to consult with his staff colleagues and such other veterinarians as he might think fit, ‘with regard to the terms upon which the funds bequeathed by the late Professor Coleman for the advancement of Veterinary Science can be best appropriated…‘
On 17 January 1860 Spooner was asked to transfer the legacy from the bank into the names of the treasurer (J.W. Bosanquet), M.B. Behrens and Spooner.
It was resolved to purchase silver and bronze medals, and an embossed certificate of merit.
Notice was to be given to the pupils that prizes would be awarded for the best essay on the eye of the horse, embracing its anatomy and physiology, and also the laws of light applicable to vision, the chemical composition of the humour, and the pathology, treatment and results of the disease known as constitutional ophthalmia.
It was agreed that the face of the medal should show the head of Coleman, and the first awards were made that year.
In 1861, the subject was the anatomy and physiology of the skin in domesticated animals, including the pathology and treatment of the disease termed mange or scab.
In the course of time, the Coleman prize became awarded as a result of examinations posing pathological and practical subjects relating to the foot of the horse, the principles and practice of shoeing, the diseases of the horse's eye, and the disease known as glanders.
More recently the prize, a silver medal, is awarded on the result of a written examination on some aspect of veterinary science relating to the horse in health and disease.
Coleman published little in his long life—all his works came out within nine years of his appointment as Professor.
They did, however, include the first number of Veterinary Transactions , containing observations on the effect of treatment of wounds of joints and other circumscribed cavities.
Published by order of the general meeting of subscribers to the College, London, 1801, Smith described it as ‘…a very poor product for seven years’ work: it was the first and the last'.
The College has been much criticised for failing to produce more than one volume of the Transactions that were required annually by the original constitution.
Two factors may be pleaded in mitigation.
The College was woefully under-staffed; the preparation of a worthy volume of transactions would require not only staff to do the work that would be reported, but also staff to write up the material.
Secondly, Coleman may have been one of the numerous band of teachers, at present out of fashion, who put their main energies into what after all may be considered the prime function of a teaching institution—teaching.
(A university school must be a place of research, but it should not be overbalanced by this, and it ought to have plenty of room for scholarship too.)
A countervailing factor was the great tendency at that time to preserve secrecy over the College's lectures and practice, lest practitioners ‘steal’ knowledge to their advantage and to the College's detriment.
The criticisms that have been levelled at Coleman on educational and other matters have included assertions that he admitted unsuitable pupils; unduly shortened the course of instruction; concentrated that instruction solely on diseases of the horse; allowed undue medical interference in the development of the profession, particularly in respect of the examining committee, solely composed of medical men; barred veterinary surgeons from becoming subscribers to the College, and thwarted attempts by the profession to obtain a charter.
Those who formulated the rules for admission to the College, who were afraid they might deter men from coming forward to train for membership of a still infant profession, limited the requirement for admission to an ability to read and write well—quite a severe restriction at the time—plus personal recommendation.
The original regulations of the College stated that candidates for entry must not be under 15 nor over 22 years of age, and that preference would be given to those youths who had received the elements of a good education.
Early pupils were mainly youths who had just completed general schooling, and medical students, who may have served some years of apprenticeship to a surgeon, and to whom the contrast between an overcrowded surgical profession, and the developing veterinary profession, favoured the latter.
Other entrants had been apprenticed to farriers, druggists, and so on, or were following their fathers in practice.
It was a constant complaint that Coleman lowered the standing of the young profession because of the unsuitable pupils he admitted.
It is however impossible to believe that among these—bearing in mind that each applicant had to be sponsored by some reputable person —there were, as some claimed, barbers, man-milliners, tailors, shoemakers, mercers, mutton pie men, rat catchers, razor-strop makers, razor grinders, a druggist's porter, insolvent debtors, and in general, the out-at-elbow fraternity.
That blacksmiths and the sons of blacksmiths and grooms were admitted is indisputable—perhaps the most famous example was William Dick, founder of the Edinburgh veterinary school.
Smith claimed that, although Coleman invited medical men to attend the College with the promise of an early diploma, these educated people were not looked on with favour, for they were able to see through Coleman's ‘shallow and fatuous system’.
Apart from the absence of any selection board, and any other substantial barrier to student entry, Coleman had some sense on his side.
He constantly proclaimed that the sons of blacksmiths and grooms made the best veterinary surgeons—a general proposition supported by Percivall in 1842—although he denied that he ever said surgeons made the worst.
A remark by Behrens suggests a  modification of the statement that is extremely significant: ‘The late Professor Coleman used to observe that where talent was united with an early knowledge of the horse, the sons of these men (namely farriers and grooms) proved the best veterinarians’.
The farrier's son would recognise spavin, splint and stringhalt in the living horse although he did not know their nature.
Such students, it was said, would listen with mingled pleasure and wonder to the professor's lectures and would perform their task with the greatest cheerfulness.
On the other hand, the student with previous medical training might grasp the rationale of these conditions, but he could not recognise them, and might well soon find his task a dirty drudgery.
Coleman was blamed for reducing the period of three years as originally fixed for the course of instruction in Vial's time, to as little as three or four months, so that some men were sent out into practice at 19, 18, or even 17 years of age (as a contrary example, Coleman's nephew, E.C.
Dray, was a student for nine years).
The durations prescribed by the Royal College when it became responsible for the curriculum and examination have steadily increased.
The two-year course was introduced in 1844 and endured for 32 years.
From 1876–1885 there was a three-year course.
The four-year course, started in 1885, was replaced in 1932 by the five-year course which has lasted into the university degree era, with occasional variations.
We have no evidence that Vial provided, or indeed could have provided, a three-year course (apart from that, he was at one point rebuked by the governors for not paying enough attention to his teaching duties).
Even at the then much praised Alfort school, their four-year course was found to be too long.
It was held that about half this time would serve except in cases of great idleness or stupidity.
Moorcroft spent only one year on the Lyons course, planned to occupy four years.
Students at that time could apparently choose when they wished to be examined (after the continental custom) as there was no fixed examination schedule as we know it.
The examination committee records in London show that the majority of students were examined after nine or 18 months' instruction, and even then they stood a chance of being referred back for a further period of study.
The student could leave at any time he wished and take up unqualified practice, usually permanently, but sometimes temporarily.
It was further agreed that a three-year course would be too expensive, especially as entrants might have served a part or the whole of a long apprenticeship beforehand.
The first College certificate was granted on 22 April 1794 to Edmund Bond, after 18 months' instruction while a resident pupil.
Bond was examined at 8.00pm on the Tuesday evening in the Crown & Anchor tavern in the Strand by Cline (in the chair), Baillie, Abernethy, Home, Houlston and Cooper, with Coleman in attendance and W. Mounsher as secretary.
He received his certificate which stated: ‘These are to Certify that Mr Edmund Bond has attended the Veterinary College as a resident pupil for 18 months and having been examined by us, we consider him as qualified to practise the Veterinary Art’.
Henry Cline was surgeon at St Thomas's Hospital and teacher of anatomy.
Dr Baillie was lately teacher of anatomy, and physician to St George's Hospital.
John Abernethy was surgeon to St Bartholomew's Hospital, and teacher of anatomy and surgery.
Houlston was a surgeon in Chancery Lane.
Everard Home was surgeon at St George's Hospital, and Astley Cooper was surgeon to Guy's hospital and teacher of anatomy and surgery.
The certificate was signed by Coleman a mere 18 days after Moorcroft's resignation.
On 5 July certificates were granted to Richard Lawrence, John Mills, Richard Thompson, John Field, Bracy Clark and William Stockley.
On 12 March 1795 certificates were granted to F J. Nash, William Wilkinson, J. Atfield and James Jones.
It is recorded somewhat ruefully that, after years of struggle, when the Veterinarian had won its fight to get the course lengthened, students who had previously been apprenticed for three  or four years to a practitioner claimed they at least ought to be able to leave the College after 12 months, and not have to stay the same period—two years—as the non-apprenticed.
We would need to know far more about the actual course of study students had been following, albeit briefly, under Vial, before we could accept that Coleman maliciously reduced it, and that his motive, as claimed by Smith, was mercenary self-interest (the 20 guineas student's fee going into his pocket).
In 1844, after Coleman's time, the course at the Edinburgh ‘Dick’ School was apparently a mere five or six months' duration.
Pugh pointed out that the greater the output of veterinary surgeons, the swifter the development of the new profession.
Perhaps in the light of the demand for veterinary surgeons in the Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars, we could interpret Coleman's efforts favourably as a ‘crash programme’, already anticipated by Vial.
In five years from 1796, Coleman furnished 44 veterinary surgeons to the army.
Another criticism levelled at Coleman was that his teaching neglected animals other than the horse, contrary to the original constitution of the College.
A further charge was that practical and theoretical instruction, even on diseases of the horse, was limited and in some cases erroneous.
When he came to the College, Coleman was presumably almost totally ignorant of veterinary matters (although he may have been studying the subject during the ‘interregnum’).
The restricted range of animals he saw at the College, and the limited nature of their diseases, inevitably meant that his experience was narrowly based.
This arose from the unsatisfactory location of the College, which was on the edge of a rapidly expanding urban area increasingly remote from any true farm practice.
There is a vigorous defence of Coleman by Mayer: ‘The energies of Coleman's mind were more exclusively devoted to anything bearing upon the horse: and no wonder, for the College, constructed as it was and is, can only be adapted for the reception of that animal.
Consequently, it alone, of all our domesticated animals, has absorbed the whole attention, until very lately, of the professors of that establishment.
In Mr Coleman's early career, and even until within a very few years, the veterinary art, so far as regards its application to cattle, sheep, swine, dogs, etc., was in the lowest state of barbarism and degradation.
We cannot, therefore, feel surprised that Professor Coleman, beset by so many obstacles in that particular branch of our art, and having arrived at an advanced period of life, could not fling himself into its pursuit; nor was it reasonable to expect it from him’.
An observer noted that ‘the day is happily gone by, the dark age has passed over, when the village farrier had a clyster-pipe and bladder in one pocket, and a roll of tow emerging from another, and brandishing his twitch as a weapon of offence and defence, is the only person to whom our domestic animals are entrusted’.
It is not particularly surprising that Coleman, a redoubtable big fish in a very small pond, although giving great attention to his early cases, later assumed a sometimes unjustified confidence, and came to believe, or at least teach, that the diseases of the horse were few as compared to those of man, and that he could carry all the drugs necessary for veterinary practice in his waistcoat pocket.
Smith says Coleman's opinions were final and never underwent revision.
This hardly tallies with the sentiments expressed in a letter in the possession of the College in which Coleman, writing on 24 February 1813, gracefully declined an invitation to become President of the London Veterinary Society: ‘Gentlemen, I received your letter, and it gives me great pleasure to see so much zeal for the improvement of the veterinary art in Gentlemen, whom any & every Teacher might well be proud to call his Pupils—I shall most willingly grant the use of the College Theatre for the examination and discussion of such points as may be considered by you most important for the advancement of the Veterinary Science…you rightly observe that a number of minds concentrated on one object cannot fail to improve any art far beyond the reach of any  individual and I have no doubt that the Public will ultimately derive great benefits from your united exertions.
You do me great honor in proposing me as your President, & if I did not feel that my acceptance of this favour would tend much to defeat the laudable object of your pursuit I should most certainly gratify my own ambition, & have the pleasure to preside at your meetings.
But Gentlemen for your deliberations to be useful they must be free—your opinions must not be shackled by authorities; & I know that were I present your candor and delicacy towards me would be such, as to prevent that freedom of discussion and investigation, which is absolutely necessary to obtain a knowledge of facts.
Many opinions I formerly entertained are now given up & probably many of my present opinions will share the same fate—I wish them to be closely and fully (as I know they will fairly) examined without any regard to the author & therefore I cannot by my presence aid your cause.
Be assured however that if I can in any manner contribute to the success of your efforts, either by the proposal of questions for discussion, or subjects for Papers or giving my opinions on any part of the Veterinary Art which you may think proper to investigate I shall at all times feel myself honored by the request, & I am persuaded that Mr Sewell will be most happy to (? add) his exertions in any way congenial to your wishes.
I have the honor to be Gentn.
With great esteem Yr most faithful & Obdt.Sert.
Edw.
Coleman’
Practice was largely limited to horses by the peculiar constitution of the College, whereby subscribers of the richer sort sent their animals in for free treatment and received drugs at half-price.
No coach- or cart-horses, subject to hard work and gross negligence and ignorance were likely to be presented.
Further, no instruction was possible on racehorses, hunters or hackneys, or on stud practice.
The Royal Agricultural Society of England later made great, continuous, and finally successful efforts to remedy this undoubted narrowness in the syllabus.
The College was underfinanced.
Subscriptions and students' fees were not adequate to provide a properly staffed establishment, and the choice made of this method of financing the College, in preference to direct government funding (which would have had to be much greater than the government grants received from 1795 to 1813) was to hamper the growth of the College well into the present century.
Almost as soon as it was begun, the College became virtually bankrupt, and it had to be taken firmly under control, notably by Lord Kinnaird, Byron's banker friend.
So bad was the situation that on one or two occasions half-hearted explorations of the possibility of selling off the College land and buildings were made.
In 1828, for example, when Coleman was sadly in need of an operating theatre, the various builders' estimates were so high that the project was abandoned ‘for the time being ’.
Lack of finance inevitably meant that the College was understaffed.
Astley Cooper claimed (incorrectly) that the constitution of the College would not allow more professors to be appointed, although it is difficult to imagine that a course, ideally lasting three years and covering the health and diseases of all species of domesticated animals, could have been undertaken by a professor, an assistant professor and a demonstrator.
The content of the Coleman course is shown by near-verbatim notes taken at different times by students, and preserved in the College and at the Royal College.
However absurd these may seem in some respects, we have to read them in the light of the knowledge then available.
Large areas of science we take for granted were unknown, and even unsuspected.
T.W. Mayer Jr was to write in 1837: ‘Pathology…exhibits considerable progress, though it has not yet attained that perfection which is desirable’.
In 1839, Pritchard referred to ‘colourless globules in pus like those observed in the blood’.
Coleman's lectures can be read even today with pleasure as well as interest.
His thoughts often centred on the foot of the horse, and he wasted no time in his introductory lecture  before remarking on the correlation of structure and function that was exhibited by the frog of the foot.
His next interest was comparative anatomy, and he soon referred to the ‘celebrated Dr Hunter’.
He addressed his students as ‘Gentlemen’, and drew them into his subject by the use of ‘we’ and ‘you’(a contrast with McFadyean's ‘one’that fits in well with the relationships between these two different teachers and their classes.)
He had the good lecturer's habit of referring back to the previous lecture, and looking forward to the next, so that the course flowed smoothly on.
He used homely but thought-stimulating examples.
In his discourse on indigestion in the horse, he posed the question, why did ploughmen seldom suffer from indigestion, while members of the higher classes were prone to this?
He was an advocate of warm water as a means of reducing inflammation.
He was not slow in pointing out that some facts had to be taught, and learnt, for which there was not, nor sometimes was there ever likely to be, a satisfactory explanation.
Coleman's lecturing skills were not confined to his College students.
Apart from his lectures at Woolwich, he delivered a course of lectures on the horse at Guy's Hospital in 1817.
In Europe the veterinary schools, which were state-funded, had four or even six professional men as teachers, but even there criticism was not lacking.
At Alfort, for instance, the professors were constrained to reply to the same charge as was levelled at Coleman—that of neglecting animals other than the horse.
They pointed out that near large towns horses were, in any case, more numerous than cattle, and that diseased cattle would be sent to slaughter rather than to the veterinarian.
Farm animals could not be led to the school, and their illnesses were often too rapid in course to permit of their transport.
However, Alfort tried to some extent to offset the disadvantages of its location.
A considerable number of cattle were kept in pastures belonging to the school, along with sheep and pigs.
In the late 1830s, the idea of buying a farm as a field station for the London College was mooted but not pursued —again for lack of funds.
Even allowing for the restricted staff, there appears to have been some lack of organization of the lecturing programme in Coleman's later years.
Teachers were constantly late or even absent, without proper provision for a deputy.
There was a lack of instruction in shoeing, and operations classes were poorly organised.
Coleman seems to have been rather silently supported by Sewell as assistant professor.
Cherry noted, as a most extraordinary circumstance, that Sewell had given a demonstration which actually lasted nearly 10 minutes ‘which might be short and sweet: if it was intelligible, it was the first time’.
Coleman's introductory lecture began late in November, and students had to stay in London in the heat of the following summer, when in those pre-formalin days they cut up carcasses at some hazard to their health.
The students dissected donkeys rather than horses and even Coleman used donkey material to demonstrate horse muscles.
Donkeys were the typical animals of costermongers, and were cheaper than horses.
Any horses that died in College went to ‘old Cross’ for salvage to reduce the charge to clients, and it was pleaded that a proper post-mortem examination ought to be made of all these animals.
Richard Cross was a knacker in Camden Town.
He supplied dead horses and asses for dissection, and also dealt in dead cows.
(Someone suggested that ‘old Cross’ even lectured on morbid anatomy from these carcasses.)
There has possibly been some exaggeration in this matter of concentration on the horse.
Coleman's view was that a sound basis of training in diseases of the horse would enable the veterinarian to acquire equal skill in the diseases of other species.
If he failed at first, he would know better next time.
Coleman once referred to ‘heartbreaking’ letters which he heard had been written by practitioners who had gone unprepared into country practice, but he said ‘I have no compunctious visitings in the matter’.
Coleman's first class numbered 14, but later classes sometimes exceeded 70 students.
By the 1830s, some 50 students yearly were awarded a diploma.
At that time the animal population  of the country was around 1 ½ million horses, five million cattle, four million pigs, 30 million sheep and two million dogs.
The students were examined, before being awarded their diploma, by a committee consisting of prominent medical men (plus Coleman and Sewell, the latter serving as treasurer and secretary).
The examination, held at the Freemasons' tavern, was entirely viva voce and the complaint was made that the candidates did not even have to cast a horse, or operate on a dead one, still less on a live one which might have  benefited .
The arrangement of having medical men only as examiners, which grew to be a prime cause of discontent in the profession, started as a reasonable plan.
When the College was in its early years, certain outstanding medical men signed the diploma awarded to successful candidates.
Although the diploma was called ‘a scrap of paper’ by Baron Vaughan it was a guarantee that students had received a superior education, raising them far above the status of the farrier.
The diploma (at an examining fee of three guineas) was, Coleman claimed, signed by people known to all Europe, and this would undoubtedly carry great weight in the country town in which the qualifying student might go to practise; local medical men would see that the certificate must refer to men with whom they might safely associate.
Unfortunately the arrangement, however justified originally, went on too long.
Coleman tried to obtain veterinary representation on the examining committee, but all efforts failed until after his death.
The medical examining committee met at the Crown & Anchor tavern up to 31 July 1809 and thereafter at the Freemasons' tavern until at least 1821.
At first the students achieved a certificate on qualifying, but this was called a diploma from 24 June 1808.
Certificates were mentioned again on 29 April 1819, but diplomas appeared on 7 July 1819.
Coleman always claimed that the examination conducted by the medical committee was not a farce, but that unambiguous questions were fairly put, and no student was ever failed because he dissented from his teacher's views.
It is recorded in 1810 that two ‘six months pupils were advised to study a little longer’.
On 29 December 1812 Thomas Mayer, a seven months resident pupil, received his certificate.
Some students felt they had been rather hard pressed in relation to their knowledge of chemistry, but Coleman rightly said that a properly educated gentleman could be expected to understand the general principles and applications of chemical science.
He adopted the same line in his lectures on the foetal circulation—this was a subject of little practical importance, but it was one of which a properly educated man should have some appreciation.
The College in Coleman's reign took a long time to recover from the difficulties of its early days.
It was built in an unsuitable situation and given an inadequate constitution.
It was severely under-funded, and it quickly became a horse infirmary primarily, and a teaching body secondarily.
Meeting the demand for veterinary surgeons for the army, while raising the social status of the young profession, did nothing to support the needs of agriculture.
Coleman, when he was appointed, was uninformed on veterinary matters but, as Moorcroft's resignation was not followed by the appointment of a veterinary successor, he was left inadequately supported.
His staff was much too small to give a reasonable teaching course, and the absence of serious opposition that might have been provided by another English veterinary school meant there was no great stimulus to change.
Further, Coleman was appointed without time limit and, since his friends held the key positions in the councils of the College, due reform was delayed.
On the whole, it can be said that Coleman, in the circumstances, served the College, the profession and the country, well and that a balanced assessment, tending neither to adulation nor to denigration, is indicated.
Smith's unfavourable opinion, which does not seem justified in respect of Coleman's professional career, is expressed in what seems to be is an inexplicably biassed manner.
In Mayer's fine words: ‘I hope we shall no longer hear Mr Coleman reflected upon for not accomplishing impossibilities.
I shall ever esteem the man and revere his memory: and although I feel myself incapable to do full justice to his merits, yet posterity will’.
LEFT: Edward Coleman.
BELOW: The oldest certificate known to the College, issued to George Baldwin, a resident pupil for two years, on 27 October 1795.
RIGHT: William Percivall, who founded the Veterinarian in 1828.
ABOVE: William Dick's notes on ‘Mr Coleman's Introductory lecture’ made while a student at the College.
BELOW: The College quadrangle, as pictured in The Farrier and Naturalist , January 1828.
LEFT: William Dick, who qualified at the College in 1817 and founded his own school in Edinburgh in 1823.
RIGHT: Major-General Sir Frederick Smith (1857–1929), a student at the College from 1873–1876, later director general of the Army Veterinary Corps.
(RCVS)
LEFT: William Sewell.
RIGHT: William Youatt, who frequently quoted the advice given to students at the College by Sir William Blizard in 1828: ‘Remember, gentlemen, that your reputation and success must be founded on the union of science and humanity’.
BELOW: Plaque donated by the Veterinary History Society, marking Thomas Mayer's surgery in Newcastle-under-Lyme.
(JC)
Birth of the Profession
WILLIAM SEWELL
Professor 1839–1853
The death of Coleman was the end of an era.
He had held sway at the College for 45 years, for 40 of which he had been assisted by his faithful subordinate William Sewell who now, at the age of 58, was to succeed his master as Professor.
No doubt Sewell would have maintained the old order but there were forces outside the College working for change.
In 1828 William Percivall had founded the Veterinarian as a journal for the emerging profession.
It included scientific and clinical articles, abstracts from foreign journals, news items and editorials.
One of its objectives was the reform of the London College, which it pursued in a generally persuasive and constructive way.
The Farrier and Naturalist had also been founded in 1828 and it too was critical of the College, but its style was one of personal attack on Coleman.
Another important event during Coleman's long reign was the opening of a veterinary school in Edinburgh by William Dick in 1823.
Dick had qualified from London in 1817 but his new school was too remote from London to affect Coleman's autocracy and there developed two monopolies, the old one in London and a new one in Edinburgh.
An incredible example of the attitude in London can be seen in the response to a request from practitioners that they, like anybody else in the land, should become subscribing members of the College.
The governors adamantly excluded veterinary surgeons from becoming subscribers because they ‘might learn some of the secrets of the College’ thus ‘becoming more skilful and successful’and ‘might interfere with the interests and lessen the profits of the College’.
By the time Coleman died it was said that the number of veterinary surgeons practising in the three kingdoms fell little short of 1,000.
It was a critical mass.
With Coleman gone, the practitioners lost no time in taking the initiative.
Thomas Mayer and his son, Thomas Walton Mayer of Newcastle-under-Lyme, sent to every veterinary surgeon in the United Kingdom the draft of a memorial addressed to the governors of the London College, with the ultimate objective of gaining a Charter of Incorporation ‘to protect us from illiterate and uneducated men, and to afford us the same privileges and exemptions which other professional bodies possess’.
This was followed up by a deputation to the governors on 10 June 1840, led by Thomas Turner.
The reply from the governors, dated 3 July 1840, was addressed to Messrs Mayer and Son.
It said that the governors ‘do not see the immediate necessity for applying to the Crown for a Royal Charter to be granted to this Institution’ but that ‘every facility’would be given to the veterinary surgeons ‘for procuring an Act of Parliament to prevent certain grievances complained of by the Memorial, which could not be relieved by a Charter’.
Thomas Walton Mayer was undeterred.
He became the secretary of a standing committee of veterinary surgeons dedicated to petitioning the Privy Council for a Royal Charter  ‘conferring upon the graduates of the Royal Veterinary College and the College of Edinburgh the title of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, upon the same plan and constitution as the present Royal College of Surgeons’.
On 22 March 1841 Thomas Turner, chairman of the committee, sent a memorial and petition to the Marquis of Normanby, Secretary of State for the Home Department.
The memorial read:
‘Feeling the necessity that exists for a better regulation in the management of our profession and for a more organised system of educating and examining its practitioners, we have condensed in the annexed Petition the principal substance of our wants and to which we most humbly but most anxiously solicit your Lordship's kind attention’.
The petition was not successful but a deputation to Sir James Graham, Home Secretary, in April 1842 received some encouragement and an amended petition and a draft of a Charter of Incorporation was submitted to him on 24 March 1843.
In a letter to Sir James Graham on 23 March 1843 Thomas Turner wrote: ‘During the period that has now elapsed [since the deputation was received ‘some months since’]favourable circumstances have arisen and resulted in a complete union between the heads of the Veterinary Colleges of London and Edinburgh and the profession at large and I am enabled to state that the accompanying petition and draft Charter have received the signatures of the several Professors of the said College…’
On 27 July 1843 Her Majesty was ‘pleased to refer this Petition.
together with Draft of Charter thereunto annexed to Mr Attorney and Mr Solicitor General…’
On 24 November the lawyers replied ‘respectfully to state our opinion that Your Majesty may properly grant a Royal Charter’, but it was not until 14 February 1844 that Thomas Turner was able to report to the standing committee of veterinary surgeons that their determined efforts had been rewarded and that the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons had been incorporated.
The success of the second petition had turned on the fact that it included the signatures of the professors of the two schools—Sewell, Spooner and Simonds for London and Dick for Edinburgh—but no sooner had the Charter been granted than the two schools were in dispute with the Royal College.
The contention continued for four years and the underlying reason for it was pique.
The schools had never imagined that the practitioners would be successful and, when they were, the schools were annoyed to realise that they had lost their monopoly powers.
The details of the antagonism were complex, devious and not always consistent.
There is an account of them in Pattison's history,The British Veterinary Profession 1791–1948 .
The governors of the London school were incensed.
They lost no time in petitioning the Home Secretary ‘complaining that their privileges had been infringed upon by the Charter granted to the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons and praying for relief’.
The petition was signed by ‘W. Sewell.
On the part of the Governors’; Sewell was doing the governors' bidding.
A copy of the petition was sent to the Royal College and in the reply to Sir James Graham, dated 27 July 1844, Thomas Turner, the President, felt confident that he was able to ‘prove the aspersions made in the two petitions to be entirely groundless’.
The petition did not succeed, but the governors did not give up.
On 28 May 1845 Joseph Berent, chairman of the committee of governors, sent the Home Secretary a draft of a proposed charter for the veterinary school.
As before, a copy was sent to the Royal College with a suggestion that the 1844 Charter should be amended because Sir James Graham was ‘disposed to attach weight to the representations’.
The Royal College resisted the compromise and the Home Office did nothing.
The governors were still waiting for action one year later.
On 11 May 1846 W.M. Wilkinson, their lawyer, wrote to the Home Office to ask what was happening: ‘The Governors of the Veterinary College at Camden Town are anxious that the Charter for which they have petitioned Her Majesty or such modification thereof as you may approve   should be granted without further delay, as great inconvenience and loss to the Institution is arising from the want of such Charter.
‘It is now clearly ascertained that the present chartered body will not accept the terms which is understood have been proposed to them and for the information of the Governors of the Royal Veterinary College I shall feel much obliged by your informing me whether or not a Charter will be granted to them.’
Cartoon ‘Upon the improv'd mode of cropping’— one of a series published in 1792 as part of a campaign by farriers to ridicule the Veterinary College.
Professor Dick in Edinburgh was also much displeased with the Charter and in 1848, after four years of recrimination, the sponsors of his school, the Highland and Agricultural Society, joined with the governors of the London school to petition yet again for another charter.
Thinking this would be successful, Dick then declared independence from the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons.
He was not acting illegally, as no Act of Parliament gave statutory force to the terms of the Charter of 1844.
The London governors were by now contemplating extreme measures but they could not persuade the Royal Agricultural Society of England to provide support of the kind Dick was getting in Scotland and their veiled threats in the petition were likewise unsuccessful.
The official report said:
‘The petitioners remark that ‘the Royal Veterinary College of London is the private property of the subscribers thereto who may continue or close the same at their discretion; that it is only from their desire to advance the veterinary art that they have allowed their institution to be employed as a College of instruction; and that thereby the veterinary profession in this country owes even its existence to their establishment’.
‘I scarcely know whether these remarks are intended as the mere superfluous assertion of an abstract right, or whether they are intended to imply a covert threat, that if the petitioners are dissatisfied with the answer to their application, they may resort to the extreme course of closing that useful place of veterinary education.
Many reasons occur why it is improbable that they would take such a step which both students and professor would have cause to regret…’
Again, the petition was rejected.
Harsh words and animosity persisted for a year or so but by 1851 there was a thaw in relations between the London school and the Royal College.
In 1852 the breach was healed by the election of Professor William Sewell as president RCVS.
William Sewell was born into a Quaker family in Essex in 1781.
He was apprenticed to Professor Coleman in 1796 when aged 15, and received his certificate from the College on 30 March 1799 (for some unknown reason, this certificate disappeared for good that very same evening).
He became assistant to the Professor and demonstrator of anatomy, at £25 per annum, plus coals for his sitting room.
On I January 1803 he was appointed assistant professor at 100 guineas per annum.
After Coleman's death, Sewell was appointed Principal and Professor on 23 July 1839.
He suffered from ill health in 1840, and again in 1842 and 1844.
In 1852 he relinquished his teaching duties on grounds of poor health and was appointed to the sinecure posts of director of the College, secretary and resident governor.
Late in life he married a member of the Wilkinson family (whose firm had for many years been solicitors to the College).
His wife predeceased him in 1841, leaving no children.
In a black-edged letter to the College Veterinary Medical Association, Sewell declined an invitation to their dinner.
‘Between the cup and the lip it has pleased the Great Disposer of events to visit him with the greatest of all afflictions in the bereavement of his most affectionate wife.
Her heart was full of benevolence to our own species, and most sensitively alive to suffering animals, and might in truth be called as a member of the society to which she belonged, the Animals’ Friend.’
William Sewell died in the College of pneumonia on 8 June 1853, aged 72, and was buried at Highgate cemetery.
As a young man, Sewell appeared to some observers to be eccentric and reserved, but at the same time he was looked upon as a steady, attentive and exemplary apprentice.
He was tall, slim and dignified, and showed no anger even when provoked.
He was not scholastically talented, and was said by some of his students to be a poor lecturer: ‘Never was there a more irregular course of lectures, so that we scarcely knew what he was talking about’.
He was also said to be unpopular with some members of the profession, although he was elected president of the London Veterinary Medical Society.
Sewell was free in his criticisms of others, including his fellow teachers, but he generally failed to state his own experience and opinions clearly.
On one occasion he even offered ‘money back’ to anyone dissatisfied with his lectures.
Sewell was a dedicated surgical operator, although he was sometimes greatly inconvenienced by the disorderly conduct of students crowding and jostling each other for even a glimpse of what was going on.
He successfully performed vesical lithotomy in the horse, and also amputated the equine penis.
He practised subcutaneous periosteotomy for the relief of pain due to exostoses, and he was well aware of the value of post-mortem examinations as a check on his surgical successes and failures.
In his 57 years at the College, he undoubtedly gained a great deal of clinical knowledge, which he unfortunately carried with him to the grave.
He is one of the select band of teachers (including Dick and Macqueen) of whom it was said that they could tell if a horse was lame, merely by listening.
Sewell made one significant anatomical discovery.
In 1803 he demonstrated the presence of the central canal of the spinal cord, studying it in the horse, ox, sheep, pig and dog.
In the Veterinarian of 1831 we read ‘A letter on a canal in the medulla spinalis of some quadrupeds.
In a letter from Mr William Sewell to Everard Home, Esq., F.R.S.
(Copied from the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society , A.D. 1808): Sir, According to your request, I send you an account of the facts I have ascertained, respecting a canal I discovered in the year 1803 in the medulla spinalis of the horse, bullock, sheep, hog and dog: and should it appear to you deserving of being laid before the Royal Society, I shall feel myself particularly obliged by having so great an honour conferred upon me.
Upon tracing the sixth ventricle of the brain, which corresponds to the fourth in the human subject, to its apparent termination, the calamus scriptorius, I perceived the appearance of a canal, continuing by a direct course into the centre of the spinal marrow.
To ascertain with accuracy whether such structure existed throughout its whole length, I made sections of the spinal marrow at different distances from the brain, and found that each divided portion exhibited an orifice with a diameter sufficient to admit a large sized pin; from which a small quantity of transparent colourless fluid issued like that contained in the ventricles of the brain.
The canal is lined by a membrane resembling the tunica arachnoidea, and is situated above the fissure of the medulla, being separated by a medullary layer: it is most easily distinguished where the large nerves are given off in the bend of the neck and sacrum, imperceptibly terminating in the cauda equina.
Having satisfactorily ascertained its existence through the whole length of the spinal marrow, my next object was to discover whether it was a continued tube from one extremity to the other: this was most decidedly proved, by dividing the spinal marrow through the middle, and pouring mercury into the orifice where the canal was cut across: it passed in a small stream with equal facility towards the brain (into which it entered), or in a contrary direction to where the spinal marrow terminates.
By many similar experiments, I have since proved that a free communication of the limpid fluid, which the canal contains, is kept up between the brain and the whole extent of spinal marrow.
I have consulted the most celebrated authors on comparative anatomy, but do not find any such structures of those parts described; and as it is not known to you, I may presume that it has not been before taken notice of.
I have the honour to be, sir, your obedient faithful servant, Wm.
Sewell’.
Sewell also described the trachealis muscle of the horse.
Another discovery he claimed was that of a cure for glanders: one horse had remained ‘cured’ for four years after treatment with what was popularly known as ‘Sewell's Blue Broth’—three ounces of copper sulphate in a quart of water.
More significantly, he showed that glanders was a disease of the lungs, and that lung nodule material would produce glanders in another horse.
Sewell had been made responsible to Coleman for maintaining discipline among the students.
A particular problem in and after his time were the ‘meat fights’ in the dissecting room.
Sewell lived in a house in College, and it is pleasing to note that in 1807, £50 was set aside by the College for furnishing two ground floor rooms in his house, and for applying oil paint to floor, architrave, dado and skirting, in white, and to the walls in a light French gray.
Like other teachers, he was allowed to keep a horse in the stables.
Sewell was not completely College-bound.
He visited certain continental veterinary schools in 1815 and 1816, but did not submit his report on these visits to the governors until June 1818.
The report, which was subsequently sent out to subscribers, has been compared to an auctioneer's catalogue, and dismissed as uninformative and useless.
However, considering that –Sewell characteristically was uncommunicative and that the College's general policy was not to give away information helpful to others, the report does have some interest.
The defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo on 18 June 1815 had opened up travel on the Continent, and Sewell, fully realising that his visits were cursory, seems nevertheless to have enjoyed them.
In November 1815 he was in Lyons, carrying a letter of introduction from Sir Thomas Webbe (a College subscriber) to the mayor of that city.
He was introduced to M Bredin, the director of the veterinary school, and made repeated visits, noting the museum, infirmary, forge and botanical garden.
Lectures were given on botany and chemistry (subjects not covered in the London College at that time).
The anatomy theatre, in which lectures on medicine and surgery were also delivered, held about 100 pupils, and adjacent to it were a dissecting room, yard and paddock.
Here and elsewhere, Sewell was keen to note details of flooring and ventilation, and he took care to collect horseshoes, books and instruments.
Next, Sewell carried letters of introduction from M Bredin to Alfort where M Huzard was inspector-general of the French veterinary schools.
Alfort was described at that time as four miles from Paris, and Sewell spent a whole day at the veterinary school.
The buildings and arrangements were generally superior to those at Lyons, and special mention is made of the museum and the library — there was even a resident librarian.
Lectures were given on agriculture, rural economy, and medical jurisprudence; Sewell considered the latter subjects worth adopting in London.
He obtained the usual samples of horseshoes, some novel instruments, and books on subjects relevant to the veterinary art.
In July 1816 Sewell set off for Vienna, Berlin and Hanover.
He arrived in Berlin in late August and spent some hours inspecting the College.
The detached building housing the anatomy theatre, museum and dissecting room was praised, and the theatre's similarity to the one in the London Veterinary College and that in St Thomas's hospital (which Sewell had visited when it was still in Southwark) is noted.
A riding-house was attached to the school for use of government-financed pupils intended for the army.
Special mention is made of ‘the most powerful Electrical apparatus that, probably, was ever constructed’, which was said to have been employed successfully in various diseases, such as‘paralytic attacks, tetanus or lockjaw, cataract & gutta serena (paralysis of the optic nerves)’.
Visits were also made to the royal stables and barracks.
Sewell received some ‘useful instruments for relieving sheep and cattle when afflicted with an over-distension of the stomach, from gas being evolved called Hoven’.
In Hanover, Sewell was introduced to Professor Havemann, whose plans to visit England in 1777 and in 1796 unfortunately came to nothing (the missing link, possibly, in a chain that  might have set the Hanover veterinary school, founded in 1788, rather than Lyons or Alfort as an immediate model for the London Veterinary College).
The infirmary and stables had become dilapidated during the wars, having been occupied by enemy cavalry, and were empty.
The royal stables near the school could hold 2–300 horses.
Sewell obtained more horseshoes in Holland, which had no veterinary school, and praised the royal stables at The Hague.
In Brussels, the method used to drain one large stable housing about 200 horses was also noted favourably.
It is hard to know why this report has been so severely criticised by Smith and others.
Sewell at least must have benefited by the visits, and the varied material he brought home, including books as well as horseshoes, would surely have been put to use in the Veterinary College.
Joseph Gamgee recorded that on his return from the Continent, Sewell said ‘I have seen more lame horses while posting from Harwich to London than I have met with in all my journeys and during my inspection of veterinary schools and public places in France, Switzerland, Germany and Belgium’.
(Gamgee himself found that 42% of 2,664 horses in this country were lame, but only 9% of 286 horses in Paris.)
For his journeys abroad, and his neurectomy study, Sewell received a gratuity in 1819 of £300, plus a salary increase of £50 per annum.
Later, the College permitted him to be the veterinary examiner for the East India Company.
As befits a Quaker, Sewell was a humane man.
He thought the firing of horses should be prohibited by Act of Parliament, and he condemned the practice of nicking horses' tails.
From 1818 he popularised the practice of neurectomy for alleviating foot lameness, performing the operation several hundreds of times.
Naturally, he took a great interest in horse-shoeing, and horseshoes seem to have been a main interest in his continental journeys– He had a great fondness for the application of setons, particularly in cases of lameness—a curious lapse for such a humane man.
After the death of Coleman, one of the main problems was how to widen the scope of instruction at the College, until then restricted to horses, and embrace the diseases of other animal species, particularly cattle and sheep.
(It is surprising to read in the Veterinarian of 1841 an article on the diseases of cats, and still more surprising to see the statement in the issue of 1850 that many practitioners were restricting themselves to dog practice).
In 1827 Sewell, in his introductory lecture, said he would not, in his lectures on surgery, confine himself to the horse.
This in effect meant the delivery of only a handful of other lectures: circumstances ensured that no teacher at the College could expect to become knowledgeable on the diseases of farm animals, which practically never came into the College infirmary for attention.
Although some practitioners advocated the purchase of a farm, where students could learn about the practicalities of management and disease, nothing came of it.
The members of the Royal Agricultural Society of England (founded 1838) were invited to submit diseased animals to the College, but this met with an almost complete lack of response.
Sewell tried in 1841 to establish a cattle infirmary at Thomas Flight's famous dairy (formerly Laycock's) in Islington, housing some 600 or 700 cows (there were thousands of cows in London until the railways facilitated milk supplies from the country).
This plan did little to provide clinical material.
The most students could hope to see were cases of diseased udders, feet and skin; there were few parturitions.
It is questionable whether the spaying of cows was widely practised at that time, but it is well known that London dairymen were only interested in a continuous milk supply.
Cows were spayed in full milk and when eventually the supply was uneconomic, the animal was fat and ready for the butcher.
Approaches to other institutions were peremptorily rejected by their proprietors.
It was proposed that the College should attempt systematically to buy in diseased animals, perhaps appointing a special member of staff for that purpose, but nothing came of this, nor of a linked suggestion that students' fees should be increased to allow relevant staff increases.
It is no exaggeration to say that the task of providing classes of students with adequate and representative material to illustrate a course on the diseases of farm animals is still one of the most intractable problems veterinary colleges face today; few have solved it satisfactorily.
Although Sewell claimed in 1840 that the governors were fully satisfied with his ability to teach cattle pathology, his inadequacy was so patent that drastic measures were needed.
Fortunately, the Royal Agricultural Society of England, prompted no doubt by William Youatt, a member of its veterinary sub-committee, eventually proposed the creation of a chair of cattle pathology at the College, to be funded by the Society.
William Youatt (1776–1847) was born in Exeter, the son of a surgeon.
In 1811 he was a pupil of Delabere Blaine in Nassau Street, becoming Blaine's partner in 1813.
In 1828, he was editor of the Veterinarian .
Youatt became owner of the Nassau Street infirmary, where he lectured on diseases of the dog; he also gave lectures at University College.
He was veterinary surgeon to the London Zoological Society, and made a loan of his magnificent library of over 400 volumes to the Veterinary Medical Association library at the College.
On 6 October 1840 Sewell reported an annual grant of £200 from the Royal Agricultural Society of England to finance lectures on the anatomy and treatment of the various disorders of cattle, sheep and other domestic animals.
Society members were to get free treatment of their animals, but would pay for their keep.
The plan aroused much interest and in 1842 James Beart Simonds was selected as lecturer from half a dozen candidates.
This appointment was apparently  predetermined , and it caused some offence in the profession.
A Mr E. Friend complained (as did Mr Tombs) that he had not been informed that his application was unsuccessful.
Simonds, who was to give three to five lectures a week, admitted that, coming from practice in Twickenham, he was not an experienced teacher, and had never lectured to such an audience as attended his inaugural discourse.
In 1843 Mr Read of Crediton  suggested attaching a farm to the College, where every kind of stock-farming, manuring, buying and selling, could occasionally be left to the judgment of the senior students.
Although Sewell failed to secure appointment as Principal Army Veterinary Surgeon on Coleman's death, he was veterinary surgeon to the London and Westminster Light Horse Volunteers from July 1805 and was presented as such at one of Prince Albert's levees in 1850.
With the death of Coleman, the way was cleared for Edinburgh-qualified veterinary surgeons to receive regimental appointments.
In Sewell's time the course of instruction, lasting generally for two sessions of nine months each, was given in the cooler months of the year, the brief viva voce examinations qualifying for entry to the Royal College's diploma examinations being held in the unsuitable surroundings of the Freemasons' tavern.
The students were given three lectures a day (Simonds was strongly against any more lecturing than this) and it was estimated that 50 to 60 horses were available for examination each day.
In 1846 Edward Mayhew resigned as anatomical teacher at the College.
He had been appointed demonstrator in anatomy in his second year as a student, a remarkable achievement.
He left after a dispute with the deputy professor, Charles Spooner, who may have been jealous of Mayhew's popularity with the students.
Indeed, when he left, the students presented Mayhew with a microscope so that he could carry on ‘with his investigations of structures, a subject of vast importance, but hitherto untaught and little known in the Veterinary College’.
Mayhew continued to give private lessons, and set up in practice near Paddington Station.
He subsequently published several works on the treatment of dogs, as well as the popular Illustrated Horse Doctor and The Horse's Mouth: Shewing the Age by the Teeth which he illustrated himself.
In 1844 it was reported that College graduates had gone to South Africa, South America, Egypt and Australia.
At that time, more veterinary surgeons held commissioned rank in the East India Company than in the Queen's service.
From 1844 to 1873, the Royal College curriculum consisted of two sessions, followed by a single oral examination, in (i) chemistry,materia medica and pharmacy;(ii) anatomy and physiology of the horse;(iii) pathology and treatment of the horse;(iv) anatomy and physiology of the ox and other domesticated animals.
Prior to 1884, the various veterinary schools imposed their own preliminary examination in general education.
When the Charter was granted in 1844, graduates of the London and Edinburgh schools became members of the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons, although they did not obtain exclusive right to the title ‘Veterinary surgeon’.
W.J.T. Morton was the first to receive the diploma of membership, on 15 May.
Sewell, Spooner and Simonds became members of the council of the Royal College.
There was at first some confused skirmishing over the actual terms of the Charter—the College's solicitor, Mr France, had apparently not seen some amendments and had agreed to others from the practitioners' side without fully informing either the College professors or William Dick.
More trouble arose over the decision by Dick to submit his students to examination, not by the Royal College, but by the Highland and Agricultural Society.
Eventually, matters were resolved, and Sewell, after a 3–11 defeat in an 1850–1851 election, was unanimously appointed president of the Royal College in 1852–1853.
Sewell has been overshadowed by Coleman, in death as in life.
He was a devoted and loyal colleague who was too old and set in his ways when he became Professor to introduce major developments, but signs of change were seen, coming to fruition in his successor's reign.
As a tailpiece, the author's study window overlooks a link with the history of the College—the home of Joseph Green, one of the medical men forming the examination committee.
Joseph Henry Green FRS (1792–1864), twice president of the Royal College of Surgeons, died at The Mount (now St Martha's Convent school) at Hadley Green, Barnet, 13 January 1864.
His mother was a sister of Henry Cline.
In 1818 he joined Astley Cooper as joint lecturer on anatomy and physiology at St Thomas's Hospital.
In May 1819 he was unanimously chosen as a member of the board of examiners of the Veterinary College, succeeding Cline.
In 1840 he delivered the annual oration in memory of ‘the immortal Hunter’.
When the Royal College of Veterinary Surgeons received its Charter in 1844 Green, along with other members of the board (Paris, Stanley, Liston, Richard Bright and Bransby Cooper, Astley's nephew) sent in his resignation with every wish for the future success of the Royal College.
These members, with the exception of John Ayrton Paris, recently elected president of the Royal College of Physicians, agreed to serve on a temporary mixed board of medical and veterinary examiners.
Green's memorial tablet is in the church of St Mary the Virgin at Monken Hadley, only a few miles from the College's Hawkshead campus.
ABOVE: Students dissecting at the Royal Veterinary College, London, drawn by Edward Mayhew for his Illustrated Horse Management , published 1864.
BELOW: One of numerous gifts he received, this silver vase was ‘presented to Professor W. J. T. Morton by his private class pupils, session 1846–7, in admiration of his talents; as a token of their gratitude for his unwearied assiduity; and as a mark of their unqualified esteem and respect’.