

Brief problem-oriented treatment
It was pointed out in Chapter 4 that most patients who take overdoses or injure themselves do not require psychiatric inpatient care because they are able to take responsibility for themselves or have sufficient support available.
Many of these patients will be offered further help of one kind or another.
This chapter is primarily concerned with an approach to the care of overdose patients which is brief and focused on helping the patient to solve his own problems.
The same principles apply in the management of many patients who injure themselves, but because such patients may also require other forms of help they are dealt with separately in Chapter 8.
Most self-poisoning patients are reacting to crises in interpersonal relationships.
Therefore, the treatment approach is based to a large extent on the principles of crisis intervention (Caplan 1964; Brandon 1979; Ewing 1978; Bancroft 1979).
The inexperienced therapist often feels that he lacks knowledge of sophisticated treatment techniques.
He need not feel this, for crisis intervention is based on relatively simple common-sense principles.
The approach described here was developed on the basis of the experience of an emergency psychiatric service in a general hospital in which both psychiatrists and non-medical staff (nurses and social workers) carry out assessments and treatment (Hawton et al .
1979).
The principles are equally applicable in many other therapeutic situations, not just those involving patients who have taken overdoses.
The approach is particularly likely to be suitable for patients who are seeking help for social and personal problems, and should therefore be useful for many situations encountered by social workers, general practitioners, and those involved in marital counselling, bereavement counselling, and the care of adolescents.
Most overdoses are taken when individuals are finding it difficult to sort out their life problems in a clear way.
For this reason, the  approach to treatment must, above all else, be a clear one; that is, one which helps the patient separate out each of his problems and plan ways of dealing with them.
Some patients want no further contact with the would-be therapist after the initial assessment, or agree to see him only a few times.
In most cases, therefore, short-term intervention with realistic goals should be the aim.
They are five stages to management and these are closely interrelated.
They are:
1.
Assessment of the problems associated with the overdose, of the overdose itself, and of how the problems might be overcome.
2.
Problem-solving.
The provision of appropriate help to enable the patient himself to resolve the crisis and eventually overcome his problems.
This approach can be integrated in conjoint and family therapy as well as in individual therapy.
3.
Preventive measures.
To help the patient prevent or cope with subsequent crises without resorting to self-poisoning.
4.
Termination.
5.
Follow-up.
ASSESSMENT
This was dealt with thoroughly in Chapter 4.
It is sufficient to remind the reader here of some of the points pertinent to the form of treatment to be described.
First, a rational plan of action can only be arrived at after the patient's problems have been identified .
Their nature and duration must be defined precisely .
Careful and accurate description of the problems is necessary before deciding what help is appropriate and what the patient needs to do to overcome his difficulties.
The problem list is likely to be most useful if it has been jointly formulated by the patient and the therapist (p. 70).
Secondly, the therapist must be aware of the patient's coping resources and supportive relationships .
Thus, he should have investigated how the patient has coped previously.
This is probably best accomplished by asking the patient to describe difficult situations he has experienced (such as death of a parent, break-up of a relationship, or loss of a job) and the ways in which he managed to resolve them.
The therapist must also determine whether the patient feels able, with support, to tackle his present difficulties, and whether another person (such as a partner, confidant, social worker, or general practitioner) is available who might give help now, or to whom the patient could turn if necessary.
Thirdly, a firm plan of subsequent treatment is often only possible when information has been gathered from the general practitioner, relatives, friends, and other involved agencies as well as the patient.
The plan must depend upon the patient's wish for help and on what is feasible.
Fourthly, from the outset it is important to be sure that there is agreement with the patient about what is planned.
The contract ideally should include:
1.
Which of the patient's problems will be tackled.
2.
The type of changes in the problems that will be aimed at.
3.
Who else, if anyone, will be involved in treatment and who the therapist will keep informed about the patient's progress.
4.
practical arrangements, including the proposed number of treatment sessions, the likely duration of sessions, their timing and where they will occur.
In addition, any arrangement concerning open access to the therapist (p. 105) should be discussed.
5.
The responsibilities of the patient, such as to attend sessions, to be frank about progress, and to work actively at his problems; and of the therapist, including to keep arrangements made, to listen, to ensure confidentiality, and to help the patient find solutions to his difficulties where possible.
Finally, other people involved in the patient's care should be clear about what is happening.
Confusion for both patient and helpers will otherwise result.
PROBLEM-SOLVING
Introduction
In describing the essential ingredients of the problem-orientated approach there is a danger of giving the impression that treatment is usually uncomplicated and straightforward.
Unfortunately, in practice this is often not so.
Because of the nature of deliberate self-poisoning and the type of individuals involved, some patients may be reluctant to adopt a problem-solving approach to their difficulties, perhaps preferring rapid, if in the long-term unhelpful, solutions, such as dealing with tension by abusing alcohol or drugs, or by making hasty major decisions.
However, clinical and research experience has convinced us that if therapists maintain a problem-orientated approach as central to their work this enables them to keep their interventions focused on the most important issues for each patient.
Therapists should also be flexible so that they can modify their therapeutic approach according to patients' needs.
Ideally, the aims of this phase of treatment are to help the patient obtain:(i) resolution of the crisis which precipitated the overdose;(ii) alleviation of his social and personal problems; and (iii) a greater ability to cope with similar situations in the future.
The emphasis throughout this approach to treatment is on encouraging the patient to develop the skills to solve his own problems.
The therapist helps to set goals and suggests means of attaining them, but tries whenever possible to put responsibility on the patient.
Dependence often develops, but need not necessarily be discouraged unless it persists when the patient has managed to overcome most or all of his problems.
Who should be involved in treatment sessions?
If a patient's problems centre on a relationship with a partner or family member(s), and if the relationship is to continue, it is usually essential that these people are included in the treatment sessions.
The therapist will otherwise receive a one-sided and often unavoidably distorted view of the relationship, and it is less likely that worthwhile change will be achieved.
A case example in which this problem is illustrated is provided later (p. 123).
The application of the problem-solving approach in conjoint and family therapy is discussed towards the end of this chapter.
Frequency and duration of treatment sessions
It is usually appropriate to see patients one to three times per week at first; sessions after this can be spaced out to provide continuing support as changes are consolidated.
Few patients need help for more than three months; many require only two or three sessions.
In a recent study of outpatient counselling of overdose patients, the average number of treatment sessions after the initial assessment was three, with a range of between one and eight sessions (Hawton et al .
1987).
The frequency of sessions should be determined by the  patient's needs and not by a rigid (e.g. weekly) schedule.
At the same time it is important not to respond to any minor stress or new problem with an immediate appointment unless really necessary, telephone contact is often a useful alternative.
However, if frequent visits are planned, the dangers of dependence on the therapist should be borne in mind.
Treatment sessions do not usually need to be longer than 1 hour.
Often 30–40 minutes is enough.
Where should treatment occur?
It is important for hospital-based therapists to realize that many self-poisoning patients fail to keep outpatient appointments.
This is not always attributable to ‘poor motivation’.
It may result from inconveniently timed appointments or travel difficulties; or it may be because the patient lacks clear understanding of what will happen if he does attend.
Treatment at home has advantages for some patients, although it requires more of the therapist's time in travelling.
The drop-out rate is far lower, and patients often find it more acceptable.
It is easier to involve other family members and useful information may be gained by seeing a patient in his home.
It is also more likely that patients, and their partners, will see how treatment is related to their everyday lives, and they will be able to act on the feelings more immediately and carry out the tasks arising from the session.
In outpatients, on the other hand, the therapist has more control; at home patients can, if they wish, arrange distractions which make treatment difficult or even impossible.
There is no evidence that home-based treatment results in better outcome than outpatient care (see Chapter 9 and Hawton et al.1981 a ).
Nevertheless, if it is doubtful that a patient will keep his first appointment, or if more information about his home circumstances is required, it may be helpful to start therapy at home and continue in outpatients.
A further possibility, where this is available, is to arrange for the patient to attend a psychiatric unit as a day patient.
Here treatment can be instigated employing the same sort of principles as used with outpatients.
Treatment along similar lines in groups can be a means of making the maximal use of therapists' time (Temple and Catalan 1977).
Group treatment can also provide an opportunity for  patients to share experiences and learn from each other.
The use of groups in the management of self-poisoning patients warrants further investigation.
Patients refusing or dropping out of treatment
Patients sometimes refuse treatment that the therapist thinks potentially helpful.
In that case the therapist should reconsider whether he has really offered appropriate help and whether the patient has understood what would be involved; for example, the goals to be pursued and the duration of treatment.
If no further contact can be made the general practitioner should be informed.
If appropriate, open access may be offered (see p. 105).
The same should be done when a patient drops out of treatment, except that, in this case, it is usual to offer another appointment, reiterating the therapist's willingness to help.
Therapist's attitude
This is important in the treatment of self-poisoning patients because, as has already been noted, they are at times regarded with hostility by hospital staff (p. 22), and by relatives and friends (p. 23).
It can be extremely helpful if the therapist tells the patient that he is concerned about him, although caution must be exercised not to step outside a professional relationship nor to encourage over-dependency.
The patient's self-esteem can be enhanced by reminding him of positive aspects of his personality or previous accomplishments.
The therapist should also reward any positive changes by expressing satisfaction and by indicating their potential long-term benefits.
Role of the general practitioner
Treatment plans should be discussed with the patient's general practitioner at an early stage and his views taken into consideration.
In many cases it is particularly important to discuss the  reasons for not prescribing psychotropic drugs.
Some general practitioners will prefer to carry out treatment themselves, but may welcome the therapist's advice on management.
THE COMPONENTS OF TREATMENT
The principal components of the problem-solving approach to treatment are summarized in Table 11.
Although preventive measures are an  integral part of the approach, and therefore included in the list, they pose particular problems in the management of self-poisoning patients and are therefore considered in a separate section.
The Table does not include various non-specific measures which are part of any treatment procedure of this kind.
Listening, providing support, and general encouragement are the most important of these.
General approach to problem-solving
Central to problem-solving is a general approach in which the therapist tries to help the patient draw on his own resources to overcome his problems.
The principles that the therapist and patient should adhere to are as follows.
Define the problem(s) to be tackled
Problems can be divided into those requiring a choice between alternatives (e.g. shall I take this job; shall I leave my spouse?) and those requiring the attainment of specific goals (e.g. how can I do my job better; how can I improve the relationship with my spouse?).
Sometimes this stage is straightforward because the problems are obvious (e.g. inability to pay a debt; a specific sexual dysfunction).
Very often it demands considerable time and careful exploration to help the patient decide precisely what his problems are.
This is more likely when, for example, the difficulties concern the general aspects of a relationship, or non-specific dissatisfaction a person may experience with his current lifestyle.
Establish suitable clear goals
The goals should be realistic (i.e. attainable in a relatively short time) and specific .
This stage can also sometimes be straightforward.
Thus, a reasonable goal related to a problem of boredom in an adolescent because of lack of interests might be to join a local youth club.
However, selection of goals often can be extremely difficult.
The therapist can usually help by suggesting a series of possibilities and then having the patient consider each in turn.
The patient's engagement in such exploration may sometimes be facilitated by including a clearly inappropriate possibility that he can easily reject.
He may then find it easier to start considering more likely possibilities.
Clarify the steps necessary to obtain these goals and the likely consequences
In doing so, the therapist should help the patient consider all reasonable alternatives.
It is often worthwhile looking at methods the patient has previously tried to use for the present problem to see whether, with modification, these might be tried again.
In addition, successful methods employed in the past to solve other problems should be investigated.
It is most important that the patient considers the likely consequences of different ways of trying to achieve goals.
By this means the most appropriate course of action often becomes apparent.
For example, a man who wished to make certain grievances clear to his boss decided that this was best approached, in the first instance, by writing to his boss because he  realized that, were he to try to do this face to face, he would find it difficult to express himself without losing his temper.
At this stage, the patient often sees more clearly the appropriate course of action, whereas previously he was in a turmoil of indecision.
Agree what the patient has to do before the next session
The steps should be chosen primarily by the patient; the therapist should discuss ways of carrying them out.
It is important that the tasks agreed upon are absolutely clear.
This  makes misunderstandings, as well as evasion, less likely.
Examples of such tasks are: an adolescent girl who has been having unprotected sexual intercourse with her boyfriend agrees to go to her local family planning clinic to seek contraceptive advice and to avoid having intercourse until contraception has been arranged; a student with difficulty getting down to revising for an important examination decides that he must make a list of what he needs to do — his therapist suggests he also arranges the topics in their order of importance.
Quite often a patient remains undecided at this stage about which goal to pursue.
This often applies where a patient is faced by alternative choices.
In such circumstances a useful task can be for the patient to draw up a list of pros and cons of the two alternatives.
This is likely to facilitate subsequent decision-making and can provide useful material for discussion at the next session.
Review progress in detail
At the next session, after enquiring about the patient's well-being, the therapist should clarify precisely what happened when the patient attempted his task(s).
Appropriate praise and encouragement should be offered for any progress the patient has made.
This is likely to be most important early in therapy when his self-confidence may be low.
If the patient has successfully carried out the task that was agreed he should now be helped to plan what to do before the next session.
Thus, for example, the student with difficulty revising, having drawn up his plan of action, agreed to work on the first item on his list and not to be side-tracked into attempting other items at the same time.
When a patient has failed to do what had been agreed the therapist must encourage him to explore in detail the reasons for this.
The therapist should in particular look for, and assist the  patient to recognize, attitudes which have prevented the achievement of tasks.
Ways of helping patients modify their attitudes are discussed below.
Sometimes a patient will have failed to carry out his task because it was inappropriate or too demanding.
Then the therapist needs to help him explore alternative approaches to the problem, or find some way of breaking the task down into more manageable steps.
Modification of attitudes
It has already been noted that obstructive attitudes can prevent progress in therapy, and that such attitudes can usually be identified by carefully analysing the patient's attempts to achieve goals and the reason for failure.
Helping the patient to modify such attitudes may sometimes be necessary before he is able to change his behaviour or effectively pursue tasks necessary to achieve his chosen goals.
This is usually the most difficult part of treatment.
Attitudes which are often encountered include those associated with low self-esteem (e.g. ‘It's no use trying because everything I attempt fails’, or ‘I don't deserve to succeed’).
Sometimes such attitudes are secondary to a patient's current mood state; in other cases they are long-standing and firmly established.
If the latter then considerable difficulty may be encountered in trying to help the patient change his attitudes.
Probably the most effective means is to find a task which is sufficiently simple that the patient can carry it out and thereby begin to experience success.
Another approach which is complementary to this is to encourage the patient to examine the questions and assumptions that prevent him getting started on anything.
There are two further approaches to modifying attitudes.
The first is confrontation .
Thus, it may be desirable to draw a patient's attention to any inconsistency between his expressed attitudes and his actual behaviour (e.g. a therapist pointed out to a patient that the latter insisted that he wished to tackle some problem in his home yet arranged to go out every evening with his friends).
The second is interpretation .
This is difficult to define satisfactorily, but in the context of brief therapy it involves the therapist suggesting to the patient the possible motivation underlying his behaviour, with the objective of increasing understanding as a step towards behaviour change (e.g. overeating may be explained in terms of a  patient's need for comfort at times of loneliness so that the patient may be more able to tackle the problem).
The patient should be encouraged to try to find a suitable explanation first, before the therapist considers providing one of his own.
In order to get a patient actively involved in considering explanations for his behaviour it can be useful to offer him several possibilities to examine, especially if these include one or two explanations which are clearly unlikely and which he can easily refute.
Facilitation of communication
Many overdose patients are unable to discuss their needs and emotions with their partners or families.
The resulting frustration may be, in part, why they have taken an overdose.
Improvement in communication is therefore an important goal.
Communication problems may occur in the exchange of information and the expression of emotion .
Joint sessions with the partner or close relatives are often the best means of dealing with these problems.
Faulty communication patterns can be directly pointed out, and steps towards improving them can then be recommended.
Examples of emotions that may need to be expressed are:
1.
Grief , where loss has occurred, either through death or separation.
Because of cultural, family or personality factors many people may suppress their grief, but allowing grief to be expressed often reduces its intensity or duration.
2.
Anger , which may not be expressed because of personality factors, such as excessive control, or fear of the consequences.
In a continuing relationship the expression of anger sometimes needs to be encouraged by the therapist to allow the partners to improve other aspects of their relationship.
If anger follows the break-up of a relationship, the therapist may encourage its expression and explain that it is a normal and healthy reaction.
Contracting
The patient may improve his chances of achieving a goal by entering into a contract with himself or someone else.
Thus in a self-contract he may make a contract such as‘if at the end of the  week I have gone without a drink, or lost x lbs in weight, I can buy myself…’.
In a couple or family contract the patient and his partner, for example, may undertake to do things on a reciprocal basis (e.g. a husband agrees to organize weekly social outings for  he and his wife, while she agrees to tell him when she is feeling distressed, rather than keeping her feelings to herself).
However, couple contracts are more likely to succeed if they are not directly reciprocal.
Thus, the partners should decide what each needs to do to improve the relationship and then attempt to make these changes, without the behaviour of one being entirely contingent on whether or not the other partner does what was agreed.
Contracting may be effective because it makes evasion difficult, facilitates communication, and offers rewards to the patient.
The therapist's role is to instigate contracts and to encourage their implementation [see Chapter 8 of Stuart (1980) for further details of contractual therapy with couples].
Providing information
A therapist will often need to provide patients with information on the basis of his professional knowledge (e.g. explaining the side-effects of psychotropic medication).
This is usually done in order to reassure the patient (e.g. explaining that it is customary for a person's interest in sex to be impaired when depressed).
It is also quite common for a therapist to provide information in order to correct misinformed beliefs (e.g. a patient was allowing an early, unwanted pregnancy to proceed because she thought that abortion was likely to make a woman sterile).
Advice
Although a therapist should avoid being too directive, as this is likely to encourage dependency and may discourage a patient from developing his coping skills, it is quite often appropriate to offer advice.
Thus he might suggest that a patient makes contact with a helping agency (e.g. a Family Planning Clinic, Citizens' Advice Bureau, Cruse, Shelter, Friend, Gay Switchboard).
He may need to advise how to obtain legal help or financial guidance.
Advice on the use of money may also occasionally be necessary.
Drug prescribing
In the management of self-poisoning patients being considered here, it is seldom necessary to introduce psychotropic drugs.
Indeed, more often it is necessary to consider stopping psychotropic drugs already prescribed.
Such drugs often have been inappropriately prescribed and also have been used in the overdose (p. 40).
Psychotropic drugs should only be prescribed for good reasons.
For example, if there is evidence of significant depression which is severely limiting coping ability.
When antidepressants are prescribed, the therapist's role is largely to provide support until the patient's mood improves sufficiently for him to tackle his problems himself.
Problems in personal relationships are unlikely to be altered directly by medication.
However, if such problems are secondary to a mood disturbance in one or other partner, considerable improvement may occur after the introduction of appropriate medication.
A patient may be so anxious that he cannot begin to act in a way which would resolve his problems.
A tranquillizer may help to reduce anxiety so that the person is better able to start tackling his problems, but the drug should only be used for a short time (up to 2 weeks), and should be withdrawn once improvement in coping ability has begun to develop.
There are, however, very few indications for tranquillizers in people who are experiencing personal and interpersonal problems.
Brief counselling is at least as effective as medication in most people facing such problems (Catalan et al.1984 a ).
Insomnia may profoundly impair coping and need treatment in its own right.
If hypnotics are prescribed, enough tablets for only a few nights should be given at any one time and the medication stopped once the period of distress is over.
The reason for prescribing this medication, and the plan for its use should be explained to the patient and agreed upon before a prescription is supplied.
Good collaboration between non-medical therapists and their medical colleagues should mean that the former can suggest the introduction or withdrawal of medication.
However, definitive decisions about such measures must rest with medically qualified personnel.
Referral to other agencies
It may help to refer the patient to other agencies (e.g. social services, a psychosexual problems clinic, self-help groups).
These agencies can offer forms of help that usually cannot be provided by the therapist (e.g. obtaining rehousing, meeting other people with similar interests).
The patient may be referred to such agencies either during or at the end of treatment.
A small minority of overdose patients have psychological difficulties for which a problem-solving approach will be insufficient, except in helping resolve the current crisis.
These include individuals with long-standing problems of low self-esteem, especially when these have their origins in unsatisfactory or unhappy experiences during their early development.
In such cases some form of longer-term individual or group psychotherapy may be beneficial, although the therapist must be convinced that the patient has sufficient motivation and ability to explore psychological phenomena before making a referral for psychotherapy.
A brief period of problem-orientated counselling will often help clarify whether such a referral is appropriate.
Similarly, patients with long-standing depression or chronic anxiety, including those with panic attacks, may be helped by cognitive therapy (Beck et al.1979; Beck and Emery 1984).
This approach, while including elements of problem-solving, focuses particularly on the thinking style and negative self-ideas that perpetuate affective disorders.
Setting limits to treatment
Patients sometimes make demands on a therapist which exceed what can reasonably be expected of a therapeutic relationship and which do not appear likely to help solve their problems.
When a therapist becomes aware that such a situation is developing it is most important that he discusses this with the patient and sets very clear limits on the relationship.
The following case summary illustrates a situation where this was necessary.
Janet, a 14-year-old schoolgirl, had taken an overdose of paracetamol in circumstances which suggested low suicidal intent.
At first the therapist was not clear what Janet's problems were, despite interviewing her parents and her year tutor at school.
However, when seen again as an outpatient 2 days later, she  admitted the overdose had been related to feeling rejected by a master at school with whom she was infatuated.
She was now fearful about returning to school, but agreed to discuss this with her tutor.
Over the next 2 weeks she telephoned the therapist two or three times a week complaining of a variety of physical symptoms and demanding to be seen straight away.
In addition she had made suicide threats to a friend, who also telephoned the therapist.
During the next two sessions, Janet revealed several difficulties in her relationship with her parents.
Despite some improvements having occurred in her problems, she continued telephoning the therapist, making threats of suicide and demanding to be seen.
The therapist regarded this behaviour as resulting from Janet's dependence on her and fear of losing her support.
This was discussed at length with Janet, after which it was agreed that the therapist would see her for the next 2 months at fortnightly intervals and that no more than one telephone call per week would be acceptable.
The arrangement was also discussed with her parents.
It was made clear that if Janet were to break this agreement the therapist would discontinue contact with her.
Janet tested the therapist's determination during the first week by threatening to take an overdose if a second telephone call was not accepted.
Thereafter, she complied with the arrangement.
In addition, she stopped acting out, both at home and at school, and the therapy sessions became more productive.
Working with couples and with families
In view of how often overdoses result from relationship problems it is not surprising that the most effective treatment of self-poisoners often occurs in conjoint therapy with the partner or in family therapy.
In either of these approaches, problem-solving should be a major element.
When working with couples, the therapist's role is to help the partners identify the problems that they face as a couple and then to encourage them to tackle those that appear soluble using the approach that has already been described.
Contracting (p. 98) is a useful core-element in conjoint work.
Particular attention should be paid to facilitating communication between the partners, especially in the treatment sessions.
The presence of the therapist can encourage partners to express their anxieties, needs, and wishes to each other, whereas previously they may have found  this extremely difficult or even impossible.
Discussion of each individual's understanding of the overdose can be a potent means of initiating such communication, as well as allowing expression of feelings about the act (p. 23).
Clearly, the therapist must avoid taking sides in such discussion.
Family therapy will be of most use with young self-poisoners (Richman 1979), although occasionally it can be appropriate with adult attempters, especially if the attempt has brought to light disturbed family dynamics and other family members are willing to participate in treatment.
The principal aims of family therapy are usually:(i) the modification of interactions, especially communication patterns, between family members;(ii) fostering support between family members; and (iii) improving the family's problem-solving behaviour.
As with other therapeutic approaches, family therapy includes several phases.
In the first phase the therapist will be assessing the structure of the family, current communication patterns, how family members either support or undermine each other, and the ability of the family to address problems.
It is always necessary for the therapist to emphasize the strengths as well as the weakness of individual family members and of the family as a whole.
The therapeutic contract will be of utmost importance, and will include the specific goals of therapy, who will attend treatment sessions, and how many sessions will be involved.
A limited contract for a few sessions, at least in the first instance, is always preferable.
Encouraging the family to discuss a particular current issue that it is facing is often the best way of assessing the factors noted above.
Once the therapist is confident of his assessment he can point out ways in which communication might be improved or how family members can support each other more.
The aim will then be to encourage the family to try and modify their interactions within the therapy session, before practising this at home.
Similarly, the therapist should help the family formulate a step-by-step approach to problem-solving with regard to a particular problem, and then encourage them to try out these steps at home, reporting back at subsequent sessions on their progress and any difficulties that they have encountered.
A crucial clement in family therapy involves encouraging the autonomy of family members in working out their own solutions to problems and taking responsibility for their own actions, the  therapist acting largely as an independent facilitator.
Avoidance of unwittingly taking-sides with individual members is essential.
While this approach might appear to be the treatment of choice for many adolescent self-poisoners, in practice, family therapy is often difficult to establish because of the reluctance of some family members to become involved.
Sometimes this is because of fear of ‘psychiatric’ treatment (Taylor and Stansfield 1984).
Often, however, this reluctance appears to reflect the severity of the disturbance in the family.
PREVENTIVE MEASURES
Treatment should include preparing the patient, couple, or family for future crises.
Implicit in the use of the problem-solving approach described above is the aim of helping people acquire coping skills which can be used not just to solve the current problems but also to deal with some of those that may occur subsequently.
However, there are special difficulties inherent in treating overdose patients.
The first is that the act of self-poisoning may have been rewarding in so far as any subsequent positive changes could be seen as resulting from the act itself.
Secondly, as previously discussed (p. 40), self-poisoning is often impulsive, and it is difficult to devise ways of combating this impulsivity.
Despite these difficulties it is essential that the therapist should try to incorporate preventive measures in his treatment.
The following are strategies which can be employed.
The reasons for the overdose should be discussed with both the patient and his partner or family.
The aim is to enable the patient to understand the effects of his behaviour on other people and at the same time to help others understand their role in the behaviour.
It is often better to leave such exploration until the patient's difficulties are beginning to resolve because by then the patient may be more willing to consider, for example, that his act was based on hostile and manipulation motives.
However, the ventilation of feelings about the overdose, especially those experienced by the partner or other family members, should be encouraged early in therapy, otherwise they may impede progress.
Open discussion of self-poisoning as a method of coping .
The therapist should indicate other less disruptive methods of obtaining help and bringing about change.
However, these methods must  have some appeal to the patient.
Such measures become all the more important when the overdose is a repeat.
Presenting the patient with hypothetical, but realistic crisis-provoking situations similar to those which he has experienced and then examining in detail other ways of dealing with them apart from self-poisoning.
The patient might rehearse in imagination the most constructive alternative so that he may readily adopt it if a crisis occurs.
The patient's partner should be involved in such discussion, if appropriate, but particularly if the main problems that led to referral centre on this relationship.
Open access by telephone to an emergency service may be offered if such a facility exists locally.
This might be based on a psychiatric clinic or a voluntary agency such as the Samaritans.
Some patients are helped by knowing this is available although they may never use it.
In each case the therapist should discuss how to make use of the open access facility.
Depending on his assessment of the patient, the therapist may judge that he should be encouraged to use open access only as a last resort; in other cases it has to be accepted that the patient and his relatives may benefit if they can use this facility often.
The following example illustrates how open access can be used.
Mary, a 26-year-old woman with two children aged 1 and 3, had divorced her husband 6 months before her overdose and gone back to live with her parents.
Two months later her gall bladder had been removed, but she continued to experience abdominal discomfort.
Three months later she left her parents and went to live with her boyfriend Peter.
She took her overdose after a row with him.
Mary would not allow Peter to be involved in treatment.
However, she agreed to see the therapist is an outpatient, and to use open access by telephone if in the meantime she felt unable to cope with her difficulties.
After keeping the first appointment she failed to attend two further treatment sessions, telephoning the therapist after the second to say she felt better.
However, the therapist did not think that the situation had improved and therefore offered further open access.
Mary telephoned the therapist 2 months later because she felt unable to decide whether to return to her ex-husband or to stay with her boyfriend.
She attended another treatment session to discuss her difficulties further.
However, she said she would now prefer to try to cope without coming to the hospital but would  also said she was sure she would not take a further overdose.
She contacted the therapist on two occasions because of continuing uncertainty about which relationship to pursue.
The therapist thought Mary appeared to benefit from these telephone contacts and had not abused the availability of open access.
The chronic repeater
Patients who repeatedly take overdoses pose considerable management difficulties.
The problem-orientated approach is not usually effective with such patients.
When a patient seems to be developing a pattern of chronic repeats, it is recommended that all staff engaged in his or her care meet to reconstruct each attempt in order to determine whether there appears to be a motive common to each act.
A patient for whom such a motive was found was described earlier (p. 19).
If this is the case then the motivational aspects of the behaviour should be discussed further with the patient in order to explore alternative means of achieving the objective of the attempts.
However, the impulsive nature of such repeats, which is often related to alcohol abuse, can make alternative measures, which appear practical to the therapist, totally inappropriate for the patient.
In this case the treatment team may have to accept that the best it can offer is long-term support and encouragement, with treatment sessions being non-contingent on repeats.
If a repeat does occur the immediate response should be a brief interview sufficient to make a satisfactory assessment, especially with regard to suicidal intent.
Repetition with increasing suicidal intent can be a forewarning that the patient is likely to make a fatal attempt (Pierce 1981).
Brief admission for psychiatric impatient care may then be indicated.
TERMINATION
The end of treatment must be planned from the start.
The therapist should prepare the patient for termination by making it clear from the first interview that a relatively short period of treatment is planned.
Nevertheless, the therapist should always deal with termination by finding out how the patient feels about treatment coming to an end.
Some patients will be relieved because of the independence and sense of accomplishment that termination  brings.
Others may be fearful that they will not be able to cope without the support and guidance of the therapist.
Such patients may be helped by being reminded of what they have accomplished during treatment.
As discussed earlier (p. 101), a patient thought to require further or more prolonged help may be referred for another kind of treatment.
The patient's general practitioner should be informed that treatment is ending.
He may also welcome advice on how he might continue the therapeutic process and deal with any further crises.
FOLLOW-UP
Termination of treatment may be facilitated by the patient, couple, or family being offered a follow-up appointment 1–2 months later.
Apart from providing a sense of continuing support, a follow-up interview allows the therapist to assess the progress since the end of treatment, and offer praise and encouragement if appropriate.
It also provides an opportunity for the therapist to re-evaluate the need for either additional or alternative treatment.
Finally, it enables the therapist to assess the effectiveness of his own clinical skills and, hopefully, to improve them in future.
CONCLUSIONS
In this chapter a therapeutic approach that can be used with a large proportion of patients who take overdoses has been described.
It does not require a great deal of specialist training other than in counselling skills and is based on common sense.
Apart from its use with attempted suicide patients it is readily applicable to many other situations where patients require help with social or personal problems, and can be integrated into conjoint and family therapy, as well as in the treatment of individuals.
The approach is primarily focused on helping patients resolve the crisis that has led to an overdose and on tackling their longer-term problems, largely using their own resources to do so and thereby developing greater ability to cope with stresses in future.
Regular supervision meetings with an experienced therapist, or case demonstrations, can assist therapists to develop their skills in the application of this problem-orientated approach.
In the next chapter the treatment approach is illustrated by a description of cases in which it was used.
Examples of brief treatment of overdose patients
INTRODUCTION
This chapter is devoted to the description of clinical cases in order to illustrate the practical use of the techniques of assessment and brief problem-orientated treatment that were described in Chapters 4 and 5.
Similar principles were applied to the assessment of each case.
First, the circumstances surrounding the overdose were elucidated and the patient's mental state assessed.
Other people who could provide corroborative or extra information were interviewed.
In each case a detailed problem list was establish, and the therapist also tried to understand the reasons for the behaviour.
The final stage of assessment was the negotiation of a treatment contract, including which of the patient's problems were going to be tackled and the practical arrangements for treatment sessions.
In describing subsequent treatment, the contents of each treatment session are summarized.
The aim is to illustrate the feasibility of a brief and practical approach to treatment based largely on common sense.
Examples are provided of the use of medication, including stopping such treatment when it does not appear to be helping a patient.
The importance of collaborating with the patient's general practitioner is emphasized.
In some of the cases new problems, not identified at the outset, emerged during the course of treatment.
The use of preventive measures is also illustrated.
The five cases have been chosen to provide examples of different types of problems commonly found among self-poisoning patients, all of which may be tackled using a brief treatment approach with problem-solving as its central theme.
The first and third cases both involve individuals who had recently experienced the break-up of a relationship with a partner.
In these examples the therapists  endeavoured to help the patients come to terms with the loss and at the same time tried to assist them to tackle the other problems they were facing.
The second case provides an example of a disturbed marital relationship where the therapist helped the partners work together to solve their problems.
The fourth case, apart from illustrating the typical problems of an adolescent self-poisoner, is also included as an example of treatment which did not have a very good outcome, probably because the therapist did not involve the patient's parents from an early stage.
The final case, which illustrates the difficulties that unemployed attempters often face, also provides a typical example of the use of brief problem-orientated treatment.
All five cases are based on actual patients.
However, as elsewhere in this book, details of each case, including the patients' names, have been modified in order to ensure anonymity.
CASE 1 — AN IMPULSIVE OVERDOSE
This first example illustrates an impulsive overdose taken by a woman who had experienced a recent loss and had been unable to discuss her problems with her family.
During the relatively short treatment, the therapist helped the patient to begin discussing her feelings with her family.
Time was also spent exploring the consequences of the overdose and finding alternative ways of coping with similar problems in the future.
Background
Liz, a 25-year-old single woman, had been living on her own for the previous year in a flat above a small craft shop that she ran together with her mother.
During this time, Liz had taken much of the responsibility for the day-to-day running of the business, while her mother had been staying at home to look after her husband who was in poor health.
Six months before her overdose Liz terminated the relationship with her boyfriend of two years' standing after she discovered he had been going out with another girl.
Since then she had tended to spend more time on her own in the flat and to stay with her parents at weekends.
At the same time she had become less interested in the shop and was failing to keep the books and correspondence in order.
Circumstances of the overdose
Liz had spent the weekend with her parents as usual.
On Sunday all of them had attended a cousin's wedding.
Late that evening Liz returned to her flat, where she felt lonely and miserable, particularly when she remembered how happy everyone had seemed earlier in the day.
When she went to bed she found it impossible to sleep, and started thinking about her ex-boyfriend and about the paperwork that awaited her the next day.
Just before midnight she got up and swallowed two aspirins with some water which she hoped would calm her down.
After a few minutes she decided to take another two tables and then continued taking two at a time until she had swallowed about 30.
Forty tablets remained in the bottle.
She then went to bed feeling more relaxed, but after a while felt unwell and was soon sick.
This happened several times during the night.
At 6.00 a.m.
Liz telephoned her parents and told them she had been sick, but did not mention the overdose.
About an hour later her mother arrived and, when Liz explained what she had done, telephoned for an ambulance.
Assessment
When the therapist interviewed her later on the same day, Liz felt very embarrassed about the overdose and about being in hospital.
She said she had not wanted to die but that she had taken the tablets to calm herself down in order to get some sleep.
She was able to give a good account of herself and was reasonably cheerful during the interview, except when she talked about her boyfriend and about the distress she had caused her parents.
Her suicidal intent as measured by the Beck Suicidal Intent Scale was low (total score = 3).
Liz was prepared to allow the therapist to talk to her parents, but she did not want her to tell them about her problems concerning the shop, preferring to discuss these with them herself.
The therapist thought the overdose was not a serious suicidal attempt but appeared to be an impulsive act to escape from her feelings of loneliness and worry about the shop.
There was no evidence of her having a psychiatric disorder, although it was clear that she had become somewhat withdrawn and had lost confidence in herself since the break-up of her relationship with her boyfriend.
Liz's parents were interviewed by the therapist.
They were an elderly and well-meaning couple who appeared very protective towards her.
They were worried about her being alone in the fiat and had wondered whether she was pregnant or had taken drugs.
Initial problem list
The following problem list was compiled by Liz together with her therapist:
1.
Problems coping with the shop, particularly in dealing with bills and accounts (for the last 6 months).
2.
Difficulty accepting the break-up of the relationship with her boyfriend (for the past 6 months, worse in the last day).
3.
Inability to discuss problems 1 and 2 with her parents (for the last 6 months).
4.
Social isolation (for the last 6 months).
5.
Loss of confidence in herself:(i) self-blame concerning breakup of relationship;(ii) unsure about ability to establish another relationship;(iii) feelings of having let her parents down (6 months).
Initial contract
Liz and her therapist arranged to meet initially three rimes and then decide whether further contact was necessary.
Liz felt the main problem was finding a way to talk to her parents about her difficulties with the shop.
She wanted to do this on her own and the therapist suggested that the first session took place 2 days later to assess her progress.
The therapist discusses these plans with Liz's general practitioner, who was in agreement with the arrangements made.
Treatment
Session one
Liz came back accompanied by her parents, but wanting to speak to the therapist on her own first.
She explained that she had not been able to bring herself to discuss things with them, although she had managed to speak to her married brother, who had been very supportive and helpful.
Her parents were still concerned about her  and she had asked them to accompany her for this first appointment.
Liz asked the therapist to talk to her parents on her behalf, but the therapist suggested she herself did it with the therapist's support.
A joint meeting followed where Liz discussed her difficulties with her parents.
They had already suspected what the problems were, and Liz and her parents soon started to discuss ways in which they could deal with the backlog of paperwork.
It was agreed that Liz would talk to her brother again and make use of his advice.
Session two
A week later Liz appeared much more cheerful and explained how she was now catching up with her work.
She had been thinking about her future and discussing it with her parents, and all of them had decided to sell the shop.
Liz had continued to live at home with her parents, but she was now thinking about going to stay with her brother and his wife for a few weeks.
The therapist pointed out to Liz that she seemed to be trying to get away from both the shop and the flat, and Liz then talked about her life with her boyfriend and that she felt she needed to start afresh.
At this point she burst into tears and blamed herself for the break-up of their relationship.
Her feelings about it were discussed and in particular her sense of failure and bitterness towards him.
The therapist encouraged her to look at herself in a more realistic way, and particularly to try to identify her good points and qualities.
The therapist also raised the problem of Liz's social isolation, and together they explored ways of re-establishing her social life.
Liz agreed to contact some old friends that she had not seen since before the break-up of the relationship with her boyfriend.
Session three
Two weeks later Liz had moved in with her brother and sister-in-law and seemed much happier in herself.
She had re-established contact with her friends and had been out on one occasion in the previous week.
She was able to talk about herself in a more positive way, and this she attributed to having felt useful and capable when helping her sister-in-law around the house.
On one occasion Liz had felt miserable while thinking about her ex-boyfriend, but she had spoken to her sister-in-law and soon felt much better.
She  continued to go to the shop and had managed to clear the backlog of work and correspondence.
The possibility of further meetings was discussed and it was agreed to have one more session in a month's time in order to evaluate progress.
Session four
Liz came back looking happier and more confident.
She said that people had commented on how she seemed to be back to her usual self, and that things seemed to be going very well with her brother and sister-in-law.
She had started to look for another job, as it seemed that it would be possible to sell the shop within the next few weeks.
Her social life seemed to be quite full, and she had gone out with a young man on a couple of occasions.
Although Liz did not feel this was a serious relationship, she felt more confident about the future and about her ability to form other relationships.
The therapist directed the conversation back to the overdose and its effects.
It was clear that things had improved considerably in recent weeks and that this could be seen as a consequence of her having taken the tablets.
The therapist pointed out that the changes that had taken place in her life were the result of her having discussed her problems with her family and having taken the necessary steps to solve them.
Liz was asked to imagine how she would respond if she was faced with the same problems again.
Liz suggested the following ways of dealing with her problems.
1.
Doing something about it early when the problems began to develop, rather than later, when they had become fully established.
2.
Talking to someone about how she was feeling and not bottling up her worries.
3.
Making sure that she remained in contact with people and not socially isolated.
No further appointment was made, but Liz was offered open telephone access to the psychiatric unit in the event of future difficulties.
Summary
This example illustrates how the therapist helped the patient take an active part in clarifying her problems and finding means of solving them.
One important objective of counselling was to  improve communication within the family, which was achieved in the first session when the therapist took a supportive but firm approach and encouraged the patient to talk to her parents then.
At the end of treatment the therapist thought that Liz would probably experience further problems in the future and so discussed with her possible ways of dealing with new difficulties.
CASE II — CHRONIC MARITAL PROBLEMS
This case illustrates the management of a patient who had taken an overdose in the setting of long-standing marital difficulties, and where there were added problems concerning a child.
The importance of fully involving the patient's partner in assessment and subsequent treatment is very clear.
A problem-solving approach was employed which included the use of contracts to enable the couple to reciprocate efforts at improving their relationship.
Background
Charles, aged 45, had become increasingly frustrated about the deterioration in his relationship with his wife Ann.
Both had been having affairs and there had been several brief separations.
Despite Charles's own affairs, he could not tolerate his wife seeing other men.
He had been violent towards Ann on several occasions.
She had a poor relationship with Susan, Charles's 14-year-old daughter from his previous marriage.
Circumstances of the overdose
On the day of the overdose Charles and Ann had a row before he went to work, and later Charles came home to find his wife had left him.
He was able to find her and bring her back home where he pleaded with her to stay.
When she refused he took an overdose of his barbiturate tablets in front of her.
She tried to ignore what he had done.
However, when he later became drowsy she telephoned for an ambulance to take him to hospital.
Assessment
Upon recovery from the overdose, Charles said he had not cared  whether he lived or died at the time of taking the tablets, but wanted to show Ann how desperate he was feeling.
His score on the Beck Suicidal Intent Scale was 4 (this suggests low intent).
During the assessment Ann was interviewed.
She made it clear that she wished their relationship to continue, but could nor tolerate Charles's violent outbursts.
She also felt very angry with him for having taken an overdose.
The therapist did not think Charles was depressed nor suffering from any other psychiatric disorder.
There appeared no reason to suspect suicidal intent; rather, the therapist understood the overdose as being intended to evoke sympathy from Ann, to make her feel guilty about leaving home and to put pressure on her to return.
Initial problem list
1.
Charles's violent behaviour towards Ann (6 years).
2.
Mutual jealousy, particularly concerning affairs they had both  held in the past (4 years).
3.
Very little social life together (6 years).
4.
Charles's receiving barbiturate medication (unnecessarily) for insomnia (9 months).
5.
Unsuitable accommodation — a small caravan (6 years).
Charles and Ann agreed with the therapist that this was a reasonable summary of their difficulties.
Initial contract
The therapist arranged with the couple that they would attend between four and six conjoint sessions as outpatients during the next 3–4 weeks in order to explore ways of improving their relationship, particularly their lack of social life together, and of helping Charles control his physical aggression.
Immediately after the assessment interview the therapist telephoned their general practitioner, and informed him of his assessment and proposed management.
their general practitioner agreed both to discontinue prescribing Charles' barbiturates and not to give him any further medication.
Treatment
The therapist realized that some changes in the couples' situation would have to occur within a few days if another crisis were to be avoided.
The approach he adopted was intended to produce practical changes as soon as possible.
Session one
This took place 4 days after Charles had been discharged from hospital.
A Salvation Army officer friend had arranged for Ann to spend a few days away from home to help her resolve her feelings about the crisis before starting to tackle the difficulties in her marriage.
Since her return the couple have felt more positive about their relationship and no violent behaviour had occurred.
After a couple of nights when he had difficulty in getting to sleep, Charles had slept well.
During this session further exploration of their difficulties had led to the identification of two additional problems:
6.
Ann's continuing need for attention and reassurance (4 years).
7.
Her frequent thoughts of self-poisoning and the risk of her taking an overdose (3 months).
She had taken an overdose 8 years previously.
After the therapist encouraged the couple to think of ways of being positive in their behaviour towards each other, Ann agreed to wear more attractive clothes, and Charles to show her more consideration and affection by praising her appearance, and expressing positive feelings towards her.
Thus, the couple had agreed upon a simple contract.
The therapist helped them to agree to carry out mutual tasks which were that they would spend one day out together during the next weekend and visit a friend together on another day during the week.
Ann had been taking an antidepressant for 6 months without much benefit.
In addition there was a small risk of her taking an overdose.
Therefore, the therapist suggested she should stop this medication.
He then discussed this with the general practitioner and gradual reduction of the antidepressant was initiated.
Session two
No aggression had occurred since the previous session a week  earlier.
The couple had carried out all their agreed tasks and Ann had begun to reduce her medication.
In this session Ann talked of her deprived early life and her first marriage, which ended when her husband walked out.
She accepted the therapist's simple interpretation that this probably in part explained her excessive need for attention and reassurance from Charles.
The couple agreed on a further weekend outing together.
Charles was to play tennis with Ann and she was to let him know when she was feeling upset.
She also agreed to tell him each evening about the sort of day she had had while he was at work.
The therapist hoped this would further improve their ease of communication.
Ann was to stop her medication completely.
Session three
Charles and Ann had been out several times together, there had been no aggression, and they were being more affectionate.
Ann had met an old boyfriend, and she and Charles had been able to discuss their feelings about this without animosity.
She had stopped her antidepressant.
Their therapist expressed his satisfaction with their progress, and pointed out how their efforts were leading to a more rewarding relationship and a general sense of well-being for both of them.
The couple agreed to continue going out socially together, and the therapist agreed to write to the local housing department to back up their application for council accommodation.
Session four
The couple were now enjoying a regular social life together, which included going to the cinema, walking, and visiting friends.
However, there was still some unresolved mistrust on both sides.
They agreed to continue their efforts to improve their social life and to discuss openly any disagreements or suspicions which cropped up.
Session five
The housing department had approved their application for council accommodation.
The goals of the previous session had been achieved.
Ann was less demanding and feeling less suspicious of Charles.
The couple were helped to explore constructive methods  of dealing with future crises without resorting to self-poisoning.
They agreed to try to express any feelings of animosity at an early stage, rather than harbouring them until they exploded.
They also promised to use their friends in the Salvation Army as supports at times when they thought they could not cope by themselves.
A further problem was identified.
8.
Ann's intolerant and excessively strict treatment of Charles's daughter Susan (4 years).
Ann was helped to see that this problem originally resulted from displaced resentments about Charles's infidelity.
She was then able to suggest ways she might improve this relationship.
Session six
When seen for their final treatment session, 7 weeks after the overdose, the couple's improved social life had been maintained.
Ann had been able to show more tolerance towards Susan.
Charles and Ann had freely discussed their feelings about each other.
Treatment was terminated and open access to the therapist by telephone offered in case they were unable to cope with future crises.
They made contact with the therapist 3 months later when they were unable to resolve a disagreement.
They were seen for one further session during which it was possible to help them reach a suitable compromise.
Summary
The importance of looking for reasons to explain aggression or demanding behaviour is well illustrated in this case.
Once Ann had been helped to understand that she felt insecure in her relationship with Charles as a result of earlier experiences, she and Charles were then able to commit themselves to a contractual approach to problem-solving.
The necessity for assessing the usefulness of psychotropic medication after self-poisoning was apparent for both partners in this case.
For neither of them did the medication appear to have been helpful and, in collaboration with their general practitioner, it was therefore stopped.
Finally, the importance of sometimes.
involving other people who can provide support was well illustrated by the role of the Salvation Army friends.
CASE III — MARITAL BREAKDOWN
In contrast to the management of a couple with problems in their relationship, different therapeutic needs are posed by the patient who has suffered the break-up of a relationship.
The patient described here took an overdose not long after her marriage somewhat unexpectedly came to an end.
The therapist's main task was to help the patient grieve over her loss and adapt to living without a partner.
In doing so he also had to try to relieve her symptoms of depression and help her gain control over her alcohol intake.
Background
Margaret was aged 44.
She had been married for 19 years and had four children (aged between 12 and 17 years).
She had been working full time in a local factory for the past 8 years and usually enjoyed good relationships with her friends.
In Margaret's opinion the marriage had been moderately happy until 3 weeks before the overdose when her husband suddenly left home and went to live with a close friend of hers.
She subsequently discovered that they had been having an affair for several months.
Circumstances of the overdose
After her husband's departure, Margaret had been feeling very miserable and frustrated, was having difficulty concentrating at work and had been avoiding her usual social contacts.
She feared she would not be able to support her children.
Her sleep had been very disturbed.
She had seen her general practitioner a week after the separation and he had prescribed a tranquillizer.
However, her feelings of hopelessness increased over the next 3 weeks and late one night, after she had been drinking alone, she took an overdose of the tranquillizer mixed with paracetamol and then went to bed.
She woke the following morning and took more tablets.
Her son discovered her in a drowsy state an hour later.
Upon recovery in hospital she said she had intended to kill herself.
Her Beck Suicidal Intent Scale score was 11 (moderately high).
The therapist interviewed her eldest son and telephoned her general practitioner.
When interviewing Margaret, the therapist found her to be moderately depressed, but to an extent in keeping with her problems.
He thought she had shown moderate suicidal intent in taking the overdose, particularly because she took it at night when unlikely to be discovered and repeated the act on waking in the morning.
However, he also thought she might have been trying to demonstrate the extent of her distress to her family and possibly to her husband.
Admission to a psychiatric unit was not thought necessary because she was able to make realistic plans concerning how she would cope during the next few days, and support was available from her children.
Initial problem list
1.
Loss of husband.
2.
After husband's departure:(i) failure to cope with children;(ii) failure to cope with full-time job;(iii) loss of social contacts.
3.
Uncertainties about her financial circumstances and legal position.
4.
Feelings of frustration, anger, and lack of energy.
5.
Reluctance to ask for emotional support from either relatives or friends.
6.
Insomnia.
The duration of all of these problems was 3 weeks.
Initial contract
Margaret agreed to be seen at home by the therapist initially for three sessions, to help her express her feelings of grief about the loss of her husband, and to explore ways of coping with her practical problems.
The first session was arranged for 4 days later.
Her general practitioner was agreeable to this plan.
Treatment
Session one
Margaret had returned to work by this time, but there had been no real change in her other problems.
She talked about her husband and seemed to blame herself for his leaving.
This discussion led to  her becoming tearful and she was encouraged by the therapist to allow full expression of her distress.
He explained that in allowing herself to cry she was showing a normal reaction to her loss and that this would lead to earlier resolution of her feelings than if she bottled them up.
She agreed to continue working and took the therapist's advice to contact a solicitor to deal with the legal aspects of the separation.
She also said she would try to communicate more openly with her close relatives and friends.
Because her sleep was still disturbed and her consequent lack of energy was making her job and domestic chores more difficult, the therapist said he would advise her general practitioner to prescribe a mild hypnotic, but that this would be for a strictly limited period.
Session two
Immediately after the previous session, Margaret had felt better, especially after starting to take the hypnotic.
However, there had been some deterioration in her mood over the previous 2 days.
This was due to two further difficulties.
First, her solicitor had seemed unsympathetic and, secondly, her husband had written to let her know he wished to sell their house.
On one occasion she had drunk a lot of alcohol, which had made her feel worse.
Margaret was encouraged to continue pursuing her enquiries with the solicitor.
She agreed to avoid alcohol, and because the next session was not for a week, to telephone the therapist in 3 days time to inform him of her progress.
This she did, at which stage she had managed to go without drinking, but had not yet been to see her solicitor.
Session 3
Margaret had been coping a little better and her sleep pattern had returned to normal.
She had been experiencing considerable feelings of grief about her husband and had been able to cry on occasions.
In addition she had talked with relatives and friends about her difficulties.
The session was largely spent in helping her further to express her feelings of distress over the separation.
Because her social isolation was made worse by her inability to drive she agreed, before the next session, to take the therapist's advice to arrange driving lessons.
Sessions four, five and six
During these sessions she was further encouraged to express her feelings of grief.
A dramatic change took place when she met and had a row with her husband.
After this she ceased to blame herself for the breakdown of their marriage, but instead expressed considerable anger towards her husband.
Her mood improved significantly as a result.
On most nights she had been able to sleep without taking the hypnotic.
Margaret had started driving lessons, was making progress with the solicitor, and spending the occasional evening with friends.
In addition, as the therapist had suggested, she had contacted the local Citizens' Advice Bureau to find out about evening classes.
Session seven
This took place 3 weeks later.
In this final session Margaret was encouraged to explore possible ways of coping at times of further crises.
She thought she would be able to telephone friends, whom she now realized were very keen to help her.
Her mood was back to normal, although there remained some problems over her finances, and the legal situation was not entirely sorted out.
Treatment was terminated and the general practitioner advised that the hypnotic could now be stopped.
Margaret continued to cope fairly well during the next year.
Occasionally she became upset when reminded of her former marriage.
She had been able to cope with the sale of her house.
However, on the anniversary of her husband leaving home she drank heavily and took another overdose that night.
The overdose did not appear to have involved serious suicidal intent.
When seen in hospital she was far less depressed than on the first occasion and did not feel she needed further help.
Therefore she was discharged.
Summary
The therapist was moderately successful in trying to help this woman experience a normal grief reaction after the loss of her husband.
In addition, he was able to encourage her to tackle her other problems in a practical and sensible way.
Nevertheless, despite considerable improvement in her social circumstances, she took a repeat overdose one year later.
This illustrates a point discussed later (p. 181) that repeat overdoses often do occur despite  apparent improvement in patients' social circumstances.
In contrast with the previous case, where it was thought necessary to stop medication at the beginning of treatment, this woman clearly benefited from the introduction of a hypnotic for a brief period of time.
Insomnia can severely undermine a person's ability to cope with other problems, including the stress of grieving.
CASE IV — AN ADOLESCENT WITH FAMILY PROBLEMS
Adolescents who take overdoses have considerable problems in their relationships with their parents.
In the case described here, poor communication between an adolescent girl and both her mother and father resulted in mutual distrust.
This case also illustrates the difficulties which can be encountered in carrying out treatment with adolescent self-poisoners.
Background
Pamela, aged 15, came from a family of four.
Her father had a chronic heart condition as a result of which Pamela had come to feel that she could not discuss problems with him.
She had become increasingly alienated from her mother and they were rowing a great deal.
This was partly due to her parents' disapproval of her boy friend.
In addition, Pamela was concerned that her school work had deteriorated despite the considerable efforts she was making.
She thought that her parents overestimated her ability to do well academically.
She had a brother, aged 20, who had recently become engaged.
Pamela had never felt close to him.
Circumstances of the overdose
On the day she took her overdose, Pamela had been taking her end-of-term examination in Biology and English, but thought that she had done very badly.
She had arranged to see her boyfriend secretly that evening, but her mother suspected this and followed her.
Pamela saw her mother trailing her and returned home without seeing her boyfriend.
There she had a row with her mother after which she went to her bedroom, wrote a note saying how much she loved her boyfriend, and took an overdose of approximately 30 aspirin tablets and cut both her wrists superficially with a razor.
Her mother came up to her room a short while afterwards and found Pamela in a very distressed state with the empty bottle in front of her and blood on her clothing.
Assessment
When seen the next morning in hospital, Pamela said she had not cared whether she lived or died when she took the overdose, but had hoped that it would show her parents how upset she was feeling about her school work, and that it might also persuade them to change their attitudes to her boyfriend.
Her score on the Beck Suicidal Intent Scale was 14 (fairly high).
She did not appear to be unduly depressed and now said that she thought the act had been rather drastic, but did not regret it.
Although she was not suicidal the therapist agreed that she might have been feeling as if she wanted to die at the time of the overdose.
The therapist also understood the behaviour in terms of Pamela's need both to show her parents how desperate she was feeling, and to try and change their behaviour towards her.
When Pamela's parents were interviewed they spent a lot of time emphasizing how necessary they thought it was to discipline Pamela.
They said she overestimated how great their academic expectations for her were.
The therapist suggested that many of the problems that had arisen were due to poor communication between Pamela and her parents, and that this had led to a sense of mistrust on both sides.
She only saw Pamela and her parents together very briefly at this stage.
Initial problem list
1.
Poor communication between Pamela and her parents (1 year).
2.
Parents' intolerance of Pamela's relationship with boy friend (1 month).
3.
Pamela's lack of confidence in her academic ability and her feeling that she was letting her parents down (10 months).
Initial contract
The therapist agreed to see Pamela as in outpatient in 5 days' time  to provide her with a further chance to talk about her difficulties and also to provide her with support.
She thought that Pamela might benefit from having the opportunity to discuss her worries with someone outside the family.
They agreed to meet for three or four sessions, after which a session would be held with her parents in order to assess progress and to help Pamela further improve her communication with them.
The plan was discussed with Pamela's general practitioner, who was in full agreement.
Treatment
Session one
During this session, 5 days after her discharge from hospital, Pamela talked further about her worries.
She reported that since she had left hospital her parents had been more sympathetic towards her.
However, she felt that this was artificial and did not reflect their real attitudes.
She had been out with her boy friend on one occasion and her parents had tried to be more accepting of her relationship with him.
She had also passed the exam that she feared she would fail.
The therapist suggested that possibly she tended to set herself standards that were too high and also underestimated her own ability.
Pamela agreed that this was probably so.
A further problem was identified at this time.
4.
Pamela only had a few friends (1 year).
Pamela agreed that she would benefit from having new friends and said she would find out about youth clubs that existed in her area.
She also said that she would ask her parents whether they would be happy about her going to a youth club with her best friend.
This seemed a way in which she could begin to discuss things more openly with them.
Session two (8 days later)
Pamela had found out about two local youth clubs, one of which seemed particularly suitable for her.
She agreed to attend this club the next week with her friend.
The therapist encouraged Pamela to make a list of ways in which she would like her parents to change in terms of providing her with greater freedom.
She agreed to do this before the next session  so that it could be discussed further and then used later in the conjoint session with her parents.
Session three (1 week later)
Pamela had joined the youth club and found it enjoyable.
However, she had encountered difficulties in drawing up a list of ways in which she would like her parents to be more tolerant.
During this session the therapist discussed with Pamela the reasonableness of her attitudes.
For example, Pamela was surprised that her parents were concerned when a boy she had just met at a discotheque brought her home in the early hours of the morning.
She seemed unwilling to acknowledge that this might not be wise and would be bound to cause her parents concern.
The therapist tried to get her to look at such situations from her parents' viewpoint.
She also asked Pamela to try again during the next week to draw up a list of ways she would like her parents to change.
Session four (1 week later)
Pamela said she had not done much thinking about her parents' attitudes.
During this session the rapport between her and the therapist appeared to have deteriorated, and the therapist thought this was because Pamela was beginning to see her as aligned with her parents.
The therapist suggested this to Pamela, who agreed that this might be so.
However, she also agreed to attend a conjoint session with her parents the next week.
Session five
Both parents attended with Pamela.
They seemed angry with the therapist although were not saying this openly.
Pamela also appeared angry and seemed to wish the therapist to speak for her, which the therapist resisted.
Instead she pointed out what she thought was happening in the session and the need for all of them to look at the problems in a constructive way.
She said she thought the parents needed to be clear about what limits they felt they had to place on Pamela's behaviour.
She pointed out that they rarely seemed to express affection towards Pamela and that this might be making her feel insecure.
The therapist also suggested that Pamela should tell her parents more about what she was doing; for example, what time she planned to come home in the evening.
Some time was spent in discussion of the ways in which Pamela  and her parents understood the reasons for the overdose.
It was seen by the father solely as manipulative behaviour aimed at him and his wife.
Pamela saw it more in terms of her need to show her parents how distressed she felt.
The therapist encouraged them to consider the possibility that the act might be understood in terms of both these motives and that this highlighted the need for improved communication between them.
Finally, the parents were asked to make clear their attitudes towards Pamela's boyfriend.
They reassured Pamela that they did trust her, but added that they hoped she would feel more able to be open with them about her social life.
The parents did not want to attend any more sessions and treatment was therefore terminated.
Summary
This case provides an example of relatively poor use of brief treatment.
It is clear that the therapist should have endeavoured at a much earlier stage to involve the parents in treatment, preferably by means of conjoint sessions with Pamela and her parents together.
Although the therapist was probably correct in initially providing a chance for Pamela to express her worries to someone outside the family, she should have progressed as soon as possible to helping Pamela and her parents tackle together the problems surrounding their communication and lack of mutual trust.
If the therapist had approached the problem in this way she may well have avoided alienating herself from both the patient and her parents and thereby becoming largely ineffective.
CASE V — A YOUNG MAN WITH PROBLEMS COMPLICATED BY UNEMPLOYMENT
As discussed earlier (p. 31), it is likely that unemployment can contribute to attempted suicide by precipitating or exacerbating domestic, social, and financial problems.
The case described here illustrates brief counselling with a young man who had recently lost his job, and who was experiencing family and other problems.
Background
Tony was a 19-year-old single man living with his father and his  father's girl friend.
Her 20-year-old son, Michael, who worked as an engineer, also lived in the house.
Tony had been unemployed for 9 months, after the roofing firm he had been working with for a year had gone into liquidation.
At first he had tried to look at the newspapers regularly to search for job vacancies and had sent application forms to prospective employers.
However, for the last 6 months or so he had ceased to make regular efforts to find a job.
The consequent reduction in his income had meant that he could not afford to run a car any longer, and therefore he had been seeing less and less of his girlfriend, who lived 15 miles away.
One month before the overdose, she told him she wanted to end the relationship and he had reluctantly accepted this.
Circumstances of the overdose
Tony took the overdose on Sunday night, at around the time when his father, his father's girl friend and her son were due to come back from the pub.
Tony had decided not to go out with them, as he felt self-conscious about having to borrow money from his father to pay for drinks.
He had drunk three glasses of home-made wine and had been trying to watch a film on television, but was unable to get interested in it.
After attempting to speak to his ex-girl friend on the telephone and finding she was out he decided to have another drink, and then started to think about taking some tablets which his GP had prescribed for him at the time when his girl friend had left him.
Tony's GP had prescribed the medication for his sleeping difficulties, but he had only taken it on two occasions, finding the tablets to be of little help.
He had one further glass of wine and then took 16 nitrazepam tablets, leaving four in the bottle.
He then returned to the sitting room and sat in front of the television where he was found asleep by his father and the others when they returned 40 minutes later.
They found it difficult to rouse him and on seeing the bottle of tablets on the floor next to him, called an ambulance to take him to hospital.
Assessment
When Tony was seen in hospital by the therapist on the following morning he denied having wanted to kill himself, but claimed he  was fed up and could not see any way out of his present difficulties.
He was clearly embarrassed about what had occurred, but at first was unwilling to say much about what had happened.
However, he opened up and discussed his problems with the therapist, at times bursting into tears.
His score on the Beck Suicidal Intent Scale was 5 (low intent).
When Tony's father was interviewed he said he felt angry with Tony for having taken the tablets, especially as his girl friend, Pat, had been with him when he found Tony unconscious.
He also expressed irritation about the way Tony seemed to have let himself go in the last few months, since he had become unemployed.
Pat was more sympathetic, but also admitted that she had become irritable with Tony now that he was spending so much time at home.
After encouraging them to express their feelings, the therapist then explained how the change in Tony's behaviour and attitudes might be understandable in view of his current situation.
The therapist did not think that Tony was suffering from a psychiatric disorder, or that there was a risk of suicide, or of a further act of self-harm in the near future.
Initial problem list
Tony and the therapist agreed on the following problem list.
1.
Problem coping with the break-up of his relationship with his girl friend (1 month).
2.
Unemployment, with consequent feelings of futility and hopelessness (9 months).
3.
Deterioration of relationship with his father, his father's girlfriend, and son, Michael (4 months).
4.
Social isolation (6 months).
Initial contract
Tony and the therapist arranged to meet four times during the next month.
Tony did not want to involve his father or the rest of the family on a regular basis, but he was prepared to consider asking them to join the sessions at some stage, if necessary.
The therapist informed the general practitioner of the plans.
Treatment
Session one
The first session took place 1 week later.
Tony said he had felt happier after discharge from hospital and that his father had been less critical and more supportive during the last few days.
His father had even telephoned his ex-wife to tell her about what had happened and she had then spoken to Tony, who had not heard from her for some months.
Tony talked about his ex-girlfriend and then remembered how upset he had become when his parents split up when he was 14.
At the time he had started to play truant at school and his academic progress had been disrupted.
The therapist pointed out the parallels between the two situations: how he had reacted badly to the break-up of his parents' marriage, and now similarly to the end of his relationship with his girlfriend.
Tony appeared to recognize a link between the two situations, which he had failed to appreciate until then.
He added that he now felt more detached from his former girlfriend, and that he was already beginning to regard their relationship as belonging to the past.
Returning to the problem list, he felt the main problems he now had to deal with were his lack of job and his social isolation.
After discussion with the therapist, Tony agreed to start searching for another job more systematically; he proposed to look at the local newspapers twice a week for possible job vacancies.
He also agreed to start contacting some of his old friends whom he had lost touch with when he became unemployed.
Session two
Tony came back 10 days later looking happier, and reported that he had checked the newspapers regularly and had sent off several applications for jobs.
He had been offered one interview, but had decided against it because, if he obtained the job, it would have meant travelling a long distance every day.
However, he had continued to look regularly at the newspapers for other vacancies.
He had also telephoned an old friend, who had invited him to a birthday party the following weekend, which he was looking forward to, although with some apprehension.
He commented on how much nicer towards him the family seemed to be, including Michael, who had been telling him about his own problems at work.
Tony also mentioned how he had visited a local centre for  the young unemployed which he had seen advertised in the local newspaper.
At first he had felt a little out of place, but had finally arranged to play football once a week with other members of the centre.
Session three
This took place 2 weeks later.
At first Tony looked less happy than before, and said he had become somewhat despondent about his lack of progress in finding employment.
However, he had persevered with the task and accepted it could be a while before he would find the kind of job he wanted.
He reported having enjoyed the weekly game of football with other members of the youth unemployment centre.
He had gone out to the pub a couple of times with some old friends and was thinking of taking out a young woman he had met.
However, he was anxious about getting closely involved at present.
Tony said he did not feel the need to come to see the therapist again, as he felt that he would now be able to tackle his difficulties without support.
The therapist encouraged Tony to look back at what had and had not changed, and stressed the efforts Tony had made to bring some structure and pleasure to his weekly routine, and to pursue his search for a job.
Tony felt that one important factor had been the change in his father's attitude so that he now seemed to understand how he felt.
The therapist asked Tony to suggest how he would try to cope with similar problems in the future.
Tony said he would not allow himself to get into the same state and that he would talk to someone about how he was feeling, probably his father or even his mother, and that he would try to do something active about his problems, rather than just giving up.
Summary
This case illustrates the sense of hopelessness that may develop in the unemployed, especially when finding a job appears to be in almost impossible task, and how this may create other problems, particularly when a major life event occurs, such as the break-up of an important relationship.
The therapist's interventions, while relatively simple, contained several important elements of problem-solving.
These included being prepared to listen and acknowledge  Tony's difficulties, helping his father and girlfriend view them in a more understanding way, after allowing them to ventilate their feelings, clarifying the nature of Tony's problems and helping him focus on those which he could do something about.
The therapist's role was then largely one of encouraging him to  pursue tasks relevant to the problems and providing him with support while he was doing so.
This case typifies how the brief problem-solving approach can be used in clinical work, not just with attempted suicide patients, but with many other people in crisis situations.
CONCLUSIONS
These five case examples have been described in detail to help the reader develop a clear understanding of the principles of assessment and brief problem-orientated treatment presented in the two previous chapters.
Clinical experience has shown that the treatment approach can be used with approximately 30–40 per cent of patients referred to the general hospital after attempted suicide.
It is also very well suited to the management of many patients with social and interpersonal problems who have not made attempts, but who are regularly encountered by psychiatrists, general practitioners, and social workers.
Psychiatric inpatient care of attempted suicide patients
INTRODUCTION
Although psychiatric inpatient care, either in a psychiatric hospital or in a psychiatric unit in the general hospital, is only necessary for a small proportion of attempted suicide patients (see Table 10), this group is particularly important because it includes the patients likely to be at greatest risk of subsequent suicide and some who pose particularly difficult management problems.
Therefore, the whole of this chapter has been devoted to discussion of this aspect of care of attempted suicide patients.
Indications for psychiatric inpatient care
The types of patients likely to require psychiatric inpatient treatment were discussed in Chapter 4.
To summarize, broadly speaking there are three main categories of such patients.
1.
Those with serious psychiatric disorders, especially depression with serious suicidal ideation or significant impairment of insight.
Also patients with schizophrenia, organic states, and some suffering from alcoholism.
2.
Those at risk of suicide.
The characteristics of such patients were described previously (p. 66).
This group includes ‘failed suicides’.
It overlaps to a large extent with the first category.
3.
Patients who require a short period of removal from stress.
These include patients whose coping resources are temporarily exhausted, those who require further assessment, and patients for whom the mobilization of additional help is necessary before they can begin to cope with their difficulties.
The following case example is of a patient who was admitted to a psychiatric hospital because of reasons which placed her in both categories (1) and (2).
Margaret, a 58-year-old housewife, was admitted deeply unconscious to a general hospital after having taken a very large overdose of a mixture of tranquillizers, antidepressants, and paracetamol, together with half a bottle of vodka.
She spent 5 days in the intensive care unit before recovery.
On the day of the overdose, after her husband and daughter had gone to work, she had finished writing a suicide note which she had started a week before.
After leaving the letter in a drawer she had gone to a nearby town and booked in at a hotel.
Having asked that she should not be disturbed she had taken the overdose in her room.
When her husband and daughter returned home they had been distressed at not finding Margaret.
Eventually, they discovered the suicide note, which mentioned the name of the hotel.
The police were contacted and they managed to find her.
During the assessment interview Margaret claimed she took the overdose intending to go to sleep and never wake up again.
She was evasive when asked if she still felt like killing herself.
However, she admitted that she had felt very miserable for 3 or 4 months.
Recently, she had started thinking the future was hopeless and that she was no longer able to look after her husband and daughter properly.
Her thoughts seemed slow and she complained of lack of energy and difficulty in staying asleep at night.
The therapist judged that Margaret had made a very serious attempt to kill herself, that she was severely depressed and a continuing suicide risk, Although Margaret felt that nothing could be done to help her she agreed to be admitted to a psychiatric unit.
For a few patients, compulsory admission to a psychiatric inpatient unit under an order of the Mental Health Act will be deemed necessary.
Description of the types of patients for whom this might be indicated, and guidance on how to proceed were provided in Chapter 4 (p. 75).
In addition, a summary of those sections of the Act concerned with admission of patients to hospital, or detention of patients already in hospital, which are relevant for attempted suicide patients was provided in an Appendix to that chapter.
THE NATURE OF PSYCHIATRIC INPATIENT TREATMENT
The phases of inpatient care and the forms of treatment available in the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric unit setting will now be  considered.
The discussion will be confined largely to general principles of treatment which should be applicable in most hospital settings, because a comprehensive description of all aspects of treatment is beyond the scope of this book.
In addition, the specific details of treatment are bound to be influenced by the particular orientation or general approach of each individual unit or ward.
Initial period of admission
Every patient admitted as a psychiatric inpatient should be given a clear explanation beforehand of the purposes of the admission.
The patient is then far more likely to respond favourably to the proposal than if the reasons for it are left vague.
The therapist should enquire about any children, other dependent relatives, or pets that the patient may have and assist him to make appropriate arrangements for their care.
The patient may also require advice on how to inform his employer about the admission.
The patient's family doctor must be made aware that the admission is taking place.
Preferably, the decision concerning admission should be taken in conjunction with him.
In their concern to help the patient, hospital staff sometimes show an unfortunate tendency to recommend the early introduction of antidepressant therapy.
Usually, it is preferable if there are a few days of further careful assessment of the patient before such steps are taken.
Apart from providing an opportunity for observing and talking to the patient, and thereby learning more about his problems and mental state, this initial period also has other purposes.
First, further information about the patient can be obtained by interviewing relatives and acquaintances and from enquiry of any other hospitals where the patient has been treated.
Secondly, the patient has time to develop confidence in staff members and other patients.
Thirdly, changes in a patient's state are particularly likely to occur during this phase.
Apart from being welcomed by the patient, such changes may also be very informative for staff.
For example, quite often the mood of a patient who is severely depressed on admission will lift remarkably after admission.
This does not mean that the admission was unjustified.
However, it does suggest that the patient's distress beforehand was more likely to have been related to environmental stresses than an endogenous illness.
During this initial period it will be necessary to use whatever methods appear appropriate to deal with the patient's distress.
The main approach will be through fairly frequent and prolonged human contact.
This does not just mean interviews with a therapist, but also appropriate contact with nursing and other ward staff.
The main role of the therapist at this stage will be to listen and to further his assessment by careful questioning.
At the same time, realistic encouragement should be given to ensure that the patient remains hopeful about his eventual outcome.
For the patient showing extreme distress, a tranquillizer may be indicated.
Small doses of phenothiazines (e.g. chlorpromazine or thioridazine) are often the most appropriate.
Because sleep is likely to be disturbed and insomnia can considerably worsen a patient's distress, it will often be helpful to prescribe an hypnotic.
In either case the patient should be reassured that this is only a temporary measure.
Problem-orientated approach to care
The work of the clinical team is likely to be greatly assisted by use of a simple problem-orientated approach.
Such an approach has several advantages.
Through careful disentanglement of the patient's problems the action that is required to tackle his difficulties often becomes clearer.
The process of clarification necessary to define the problem list can itself sometimes be helpful to the patient.
Thus, seemingly infinite difficulties may be distilled into a few tangible problems.
The problem list facilitates communication among staff members and helps clearly identify exactly who has agreed to do what and when.
This is particularly useful when several staff members are involved in the patient's care.
In addition, once the problem list is established together with the courses of action which have been agreed upon, review of the patient's progress, for example during ward rounds, is made relatively easy.
Where the case is a complex one, subsidiary aspects of care are unlikely to be overlooked.
Finally, the problem-orientated approach encourages clarity of thinking and planning which are essential ingredients in good patient care.
Sometimes it is incorrectly assumed that listing patients' problems precludes inclusion of psychiatric diagnosis.
The use of a problem-orientated  approach assists a therapist to get away from a purely medical or diagnostic approach because problems of a personal, social, medical, and psychiatric nature should all be included.
If a patient has a psychiatric disorder this must be included in his list of problems, although sometimes the secondary effects of the illness are more important problems than the illness itself.
A simple form of problem list found in clinical practice is shown, together with a case illustration, in Table 12.
Further  examples were provided in summary form in Chapter 6.
The problem list is most useful when it can be easily displayed at team meetings.
There are several means of doing this.
One is to have the list written out on a large piece of paper, which can be hung in a prominent position.
Another is to record it on a transparency sheet, which can then be displayed by means of an overhead projector on a screen or blank wall.
The latter has the advantages that the list can easily be amended and the transparency can be kept in the patient's notes.
Subsequent treatment
After the initial period of assessment and support it should be possible to formulate a treatment plan.
The plan will vary according to the types of problem identified and the therapeutic approaches favoured by the staff in the ward.
However, two broad, general approaches to treatment are available:psychotherapeutic and physical .
Psychotherapy
It is not pertinent here to discuss all possible psychotherapeutic approaches that might be used and their indications.
Instead, the general principles of counselling the attempted suicide patient in the inpatient setting will be described.
The necessity for careful assessment and clarification of the patient's problems, and the therapeutic implications of such a procedure, have already been noted.
Being prepared to listen while a patient expresses his concerns and distress is another important aspect of therapy.
However, the therapist should also gradually try to help the patient look constructively at ways of tackling the problems .
Thus, the aim with most patients should be to move eventually from assessment and support into a problem-solving approach as described in Chapter 5.
Clearly, the patient is likely to be too distressed for such an approach early on in the admission.
During the course of counselling, patients who bottle up their feelings are often helped by being encouraged to express these emotions.
The therapist can help such ventilation or expression of  emotions by indicating that it is normal and appropriate both to have and to show such feelings.
These are likely to include extreme sadness and anger.
The therapist should be clear about his purpose in encouraging expression of bottled-up emotions.
He may, for example, be aiming to help facilitate a patient's grief reaction after a loss, such as the break-up of his marriage.
Another objective might be to help dissipate a patient's emotions sufficiently for him to be able to contemplate constructive approaches to tackling his problems.
It is also important that the patient be provided with realistic encouragement .
The therapist should be alert to the possibilities of a patient losing all hope.
This is a time when the risk of suicide or another attempt is likely to be high.
Therapeutic interviews at this stage need not be long; frequent, brief interviews (e.g. 20–30 minutes) are preferable to less frequent, but longer sessions.
It can be useful to have one member of staff clearly designated as the patient's primary therapist .
This person should whenever possible be the one who takes responsibility for counselling sessions.
The patient should be aware of this, otherwise he is likely to turn to several members of staff to discuss his difficulties.
This may result in his experiencing conflicting approaches and being given contradictory advice.
This will in turn lead to confusion on the part of both staff and patient and is likely to hinder progress.
In a setting where a multidisciplinary approach is practised, the primary therapist can be from any of the professions in the team.
However, it is vital that the therapist, whatever his or her profession, has received satisfactory training in such counselling.
Regular supervision should preferably be available.
In addition the therapist will need to discuss the progress of the counselling with the rest of the team.
For patients with relationship difficulties, other approaches are likely to be indicated.
Many patients will be having problems with their partners and for them conjoint treatment will often be appropriate.
Others will have difficulties in relationships with other members of their families, in which case family therapy may be indicated.
Although both conjoint and family therapy requires specific skills, such as avoiding taking sides, the general principles are similar to those already discussed.
Conjoint therapy was considered in more detail in Chapter 5.
Physical treatments
Only the main principles involved in the use of physical methods of treatment during inpatient care of attempted suicide patients will be considered.
The reader who wishes to have more detailed information on the various forms of physical treatments available should refer elsewhere.
Crammer et al.(1982) have written a particularly useful guide to physical methods of treatment in psychiatry.
Because most attempted suicide patients have symptoms of depression, the most common decision concerning drug therapy will be whether to prescribe an antidepressant .
The importance of not prescribing antidepressants immediately on admission has already been emphasized.
It is all too easy to attribute changes in mood to drug therapy when in fact they have been the result of removing the patient from a stressful environment and providing him with support.
The decision of whether to prescribe an antidepressant should be made on the basis of whether the patient shows ‘biological’ features of depression which predict a good response (e.g. early morning wakening, diurnal mood variation, and weight loss due to impaired appetite); whether, in the case of severe depression, one can afford to wait for the delayed response of an antidepressant; and the extent to which environmental factors seem largely to explain the symptoms.
If an antidepressant is indicated, it should be used in a full therapeutic dose and continued for an appropriate period of time.
This is likely to be several months after full recovery.
Availability of the medication should be under careful control in view of the dangers involved in overdosage.
An antidepressant should never be the sole form of treatment a patient is receiving, even if his illness appears to be entirely of an endogenous variety.
Such a patient will need support and encouragement, particularly during the two to three weeks before antidepressant effects are likely to occur.
Most patients will also require counselling for social and personal difficulties.
Patients who experience recurrent depressive episodes of an endogenous nature, including those who also show hypomanic or manic mood swings, are likely to benefit from lithium carbonate therapy (Davis 1976).
However, the primary use of lithium is for  the prevention or reduction in intensity of subsequent episodes.
It is of limited or no benefit for a current mood swing.
Although Barraclough's (1972) suggestion that as many as a fifth of the suicides in a series he studied might have been prevented by the wider use of lithium would be difficult to substantiate and is probably an overestimate, the fact that the lives of as many as 16 per cent of patients with manic-depressive illness may end in suicide (Pitts and Winokur 1964) suggests that lithium is likely to have an important role in the prevention of suicide in some patients.
Because of the potential side-effects and risks of lithium carbonate (e.g. toxicity, hypothyroidism, and renal impairment), as well the non-response of some patients, other drugs with possible prophylactic effects in patients with recurrent affective disorders are currently under investigation.
These include carbamazepine (Post 1982) and sodium valproate (Puzynski and Klosiewicz 1984).
At present there is no substantive evidence for their efficacy and lithium carbonate is still the first choice.
Sometimes, a long-term antidepressant (e.g. amitriptyline or imipramine) may help prevent depressive episodes in people with recurrent unipolar affective disorders.
The use of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) in carefully selected patients can rapidly relieve severe depression (Royal College of Psychiatrists 1977; Kendell 1981).
ECT is likely to be indicated in severely depressed patients who show biological features of depression, especially if delusions or retardation are present (Brandon et al.1984), and in whom it is felt that delay in relieving symptoms is unjustified.
This would particularly apply where the risk of suicide is judged to be high.
Recent evidence (Johnstone et al.1980) suggests that the superiority of ECT over placebo treatment might be short-lived, but supports its use for immediate relief of symptoms.
It is recommended that either antidepressant medication (Perry and Tsuang 1979) or lithium (Coppen et al.1981) is introduced at the same time as commencing ECT to reduce the risk of relapse after the course of ECT is completed.
The virtual outlawing of the use of ECT in some States in the USA has deprived suicidal depressed patients of an extremely effective and sometimes life-saving treatment.
It is ironic that this prohibition occurred at the same time as several well-designed research studies were clearly demonstrating the efficacy of ECT.
Phenothiazine treatment will be required for the patient with an acute schizophrenic illness.
The patient will also require supportive therapy, and his family is likely to need considerable help in understanding the illness and coming to terms with it.
Relapse of schizophrenia seems to be more common in patients subject to extensive criticism or over-involvement by other family members (Vaughn and Leff 1976).
Therapy aimed at amelioration of these behaviours can reduce the risk of relapse (Leff et al.1982, 1985) especially if combined with family-orientated problem-solving (Falloon et al.1982).
The patient who is suffering from alcoholism should preferably be admitted to a specialized treatment unit, if there is one available locally, so that expert help can be provided.
An initial period of ‘drying-out’ may be necessary, with careful supervision and management of withdrawal symptoms.
Treatment directed specially towards either stopping or reducing drinking on a long-term basis is very often thwarted by a patient's denial of the extent of the problem or by lack of motivation to do anything about it.
Most patients who are suffering from alcoholism have considerable personal and social difficulties in addition.
In some cases these may be amenable to the problem-solving approach described in Chapter 5, once drying-out has been completed.
Brief admission
Some patients benefit from brief admission to a psychiatric inpatient unit.
The type of patient for whom this is indicated is one in an acute state of distress who is temporarily entirely unable to cope with his current problems.
Typically, he will have just encountered a major and overwhelming life event, such as loss of a spouse through death or separation, be in a state of ‘shock’ and have resorted to self-poisoning or self-injury as an acute reaction to the event.
Although probably not suffering from a serious psychiatric illness, he is likely to feel confused, angry, and (above all else) hopeless.
Such a ‘crisis admission’ might last from 2 days to a fortnight.
Unfortunately, there is sometimes resistance among staff on  inpatient units to admitting patients who may not be suffering from psychiatric illness, but who for a brief period of time need to hand over responsibility for their well-being to the inpatient clinical team.
Often part of the resistance to the idea of brief admission is that the routine administrative procedures on a ward are geared to more long-term admission.
It is most important that the purposes of such an admission are made clear to the ward staff beforehand.
The brief admission can serve several purposes.
First, the patient's state of distress can be relieved by the support and care of staff and, where necessary, the use of tranquillizing or hypnotic medication.
Secondly, it allows time for further interviews with relatives or friends in order to complete assessment of the patient's problems and likely supportive relationships.
Thirdly, it provides an opportunity for careful planning of subsequent management, which is likely to consist of brief problem-orientated therapy as described in Chapter 5.
The following case example illustrates a situation where such an admission seemed appropriate.
David, a 45-year-old married man employed on the production line of a car factory, was admitted to a general hospital after an overdose of 30 sleeping pills.
A week before the overdose his wife Mary had left him and taken their two children with her.
David tried to see her to persuade her to change her mind, but she refused any further contact with him.
When he again tried to speak to her at her friend's home where she was staying, Mary called the police and they persuaded him to leave.
The next day he went to work, but found he could not concentrate and returned home without telling anyone.
After taking an overdose he told his neighbour what he had done and she called an ambulance.
During the assessment interview David was very distressed.
He said he knew the tablets would not have harmed him and admitted that he had taken them to make his wife see how much he needed her.
In the week since she had left he had slept poorly and spent much of the night pacing around the house.
His general practitioner had prescribed the hypnotic 3 days before the overdose.
He had not been eating properly and had been drinking more than usual.
The therapist did not think that the overdose had been associated with serious suicidal intent, nor that David was suffering from a psychiatric illness.
However, there seemed to be a risk of a further overdose because it was clear that this one had not produced the  desired effect.
The therapist agreed to see David daily for the next few days in order to provide him with support.
David said he would contact a solicitor to find out what his position was with regard to access to his children.
He also agreed to talk to his father, who had helped him a good deal in the past.
No hypnotic was prescribed in view of the risk of a further overdose.
David was encouraged to return to work the next day because this seemed to be the one positive aspect of his current situation.
After being seen daily for 3 days David started to accept that his wife was not going to return home.
This resulted in his becoming more distressed and unable to cope with either his work or looking after himself at home.
His father confirmed his account.
David was therefore offered inpatient care for up to 10 days to provide him with intensive support.
It was agreed that he might return to work from the hospital when he felt better able to cope.
Occasionally, a patient requires repeated crisis admissions.
The patient's history usually reveals long-standing difficulties in coping with stressful events and the use of maladaptive coping mechanisms, such as resorting to alcohol, regressing to a very dependent and helpless state, or inertia.
Repeated self-poisoning or self-injury may also have occurred.
It may have to be accepted that recurrent brief admissions are a necessary part of the long-term care of such a patient.
Although these are likely to help prevent suicide, the risk of such a patient killing himself usually remains high.
With this type of patient it is often necessary to take considered risks rather than treatment being entirely determined by suicide threats.
The patient may develop a dependent relationship with one member of staff.
This can be another necessary part of management.
It is important that if this staff member should leave, his departure should be anticipated as early as possible and the patient helped to accept it, otherwise it is very likely to provoke another crisis and further admission.
Patients of this kind can be a considerable burden on staff.
The rest of the team need to support the individual staff member who has the main therapeutic role.
Sometimes a patient who is regarded as being totally dependent on hospital resources can cause a surprise by fairly suddenly changing, becoming relatively independent, and abandoning previous maladaptive coping behaviours.
This is most likely to occur if the patient develops a supportive relationship with a partner, close friend, or voluntary worker.
Patients at special risk of suicide
The inpatient care of patients recognized as being at very high risk of suicide poses particular difficulties.
This problem has become more obvious as hospitals have increasingly adopted the policy of having open wards.
Observation and care of the patient at risk of suicide therefore needs to be very carefully planned and coordinated.
In most psychiatric units it is now usually considered inappropriate to have one member of staff constantly accompany a patient at risk.
This reduces availability of staff for other purposes.
In addition, the resulting sense of confinement and intense observation may increase a patient's feelings of hopelessness.
It has even been suggested that such observation, especially if associated with low morale among staff, may actually increase the risk of suicide (Kobler and Stotland 1964).
On an open ward, the best arrangement for patients at risk is to have one area designated for their observation and management.
This intensive care area should provide some degree of physical security by having the number of exits reduced to a minimum, preferably only one.
It should also have a very high staff to patient ratio, with at least one staff member always present, even during changeover from one shift to another.
This is a time when the risk of a suicide act may be greatest.
Another time of risk is when there is a crisis on another part of the ward which distracts staff attention.
Some hospitals employ a set of policy rules for such patients whereby a particular level of precaution is nominated for each patient according to the extent of risk (Morgan 1979).
The levels of precaution differ in the amount of freedom the patient is allowed and the intensity of observation.
The level of precaution is regularly reviewed in the light of the patient's progress.
Whatever approach is taken to the patient at special risk of suicide it is most important that all members of staff involved in the patient's care are absolutely clear about the current policy at all times.
If they are not the risk of a tragic outcome is more likely.
Understandably, some nursing staff, especially those who are more junior, feel very uncomfortable in the role of providing the vigilant observation needed for patients at risk of suicide.
It may be helpful, therefore, to ensure that all staff on the ward take a turn  working in the intensive care area.
However, the advantages of such an arrangement must be weighed against the potential disadvantages of there not being particular nurses who get to know the at-risk patients really well.
If some staff do feel uncomfortable in this role they should have the opportunity to discuss their feelings with other members of the team.
They may be helped by being reminded of the long-term benefits of such observation.
Attempted suicide and suicide in hospital
It is well recognized that, despite careful precautions, self-poisoning and self-injury do occur among psychiatric inpatients (Hawton 1978).
This is sometimes a source of surprise and anger to those unfamiliar with inpatient care, yet when one examines the reasons more closely there is little cause for surprise.
First, many patients in hospital have taken overdoses or injured themselves in the past.
As many as a third of a consecutive sample of psychiatric hospital inpatients in one study were found to have such a history (Hawton 1978).
Secondly, admission to a psychiatric unit has presumably been the result of distress which in many cases will persist after admission.
This is the time when self-poisoning or self-injury are most likely.
Finally, there is the strong possibility that a contagion effect will operate in this setting.
Patients at risk may be more likely to take an overdose or injure themselves if aware both of such behaviour by others and the increased attention from staff and patients which usually results.
This may partly explain why self-poisoning and self-injury among patients sometimes occur in ‘epidemics’(Hawton 1978).
If an outbreak of self-poisoning and self-injury starts on a ward, the staff need first to try to understand why it is happening.
Sometimes one, possibly two patients, appear to be central to the outbreak and should, if possible, be moved to another setting.
Open discussion of the phenomenon with all patients on the ward is recommended.
Unfortunately this behaviour is not confined to non-fatal attempts; suicides also occur in hospital (Levy and Southcombe 1953; Hawton 1978; Crammer 1984).
Indeed, the risk on acute psychiatric units has been estimated at over 50 times the risk in the general population (Fernando and Storm 1984).
Contrary to suicide patterns in the general population, younger patients may be most at risk, but in keeping with suicide in the general population, men are more at risk than women.
The greatest risk in men is found in those with affective illnesses or schizophrenia; in women the highest risk is in those with affective illnesses and/or personality disorders (Copas and Robin 1982).
A history of attempted suicide is a particular risk factor (Roy 1982; Fernando and Storm 1984), although, as noted above, this applies to at least a third of hospital patients.
It has been suggested that alienation from others (both staff and patients) on the ward often precedes suicide (Morgan and Priest 1984).
The hospital environment might also be conducive to certain forms of suicide [e.g. a high building (Salmons 1984), adjacent railway track (Langley and Bayatti 1984) or river].
The week following admission appears to be the time of greatest risk (Copas and Robin 1982).
Suicides in hospital patients are tragic events, causing distress to staff and other patients.
Some patients may feel extremely insecure and show anger towards the staff.
The staff in turn are likely to experience guilt and a profound sense of failure.
Sometimes the act has been carried out in a hostile fashion that causes maximum distress to the staff.
The main danger in the staff reaction is that there might be a severe loss of morale which can affect the care of other patients.
The following approach to the management of the consequences of a death by suicide of a patient while in hospital is recommended.
First, the event should be openly discussed with patients on the ward so that they can air their anxieties and be given support.
Secondly, the staff on the ward will themselves need assistance in coping with their own feelings about the tragedy.
The team leader is usually the most appropriate person to provide this, and can probably best do so in the setting of group discussion with staff members.
Finally, a ‘psychiatric post-mortem’ might be held some weeks later when staff feel less distressed.
This would consist of a meeting of staff, preferably with a chairman not directly involved with the work of the team, in which staff members would be encouraged to contribute information concerning the patient and his circumstances which would enable a full picture of the events leading up to the suicide to be established.
The aim of such a meeting would not be to see whether any staff members have particular responsibility for the event but to try to develop a shared understanding of why it occurred.
This information may be helpful when the team is faced with the care of similar patients in future.
Care on discharge
A carefully planned programme of subsequent care should be arranged before a patient is discharged from psychiatric inpatient treatment.
Clearly, the range of possible plans is very diverse.
One patient might attend the ward as a day-patient, another may be seen with his partner for marital therapy, another may continue in individual problem-orientated therapy, and so on.
It is important to remember that whatever type of subsequent care is to occur, the period after discharge may be a time of particular difficulty.
Many of the stresses that led to admission may be encountered again.
This may be made worse if the patient feels stigmatized because he has been a psychiatric inpatient.
For depressed patients there appears to be an increased risk of suicide immediately after discharge from hospital (Pokorny 1964).
CONCLUSIONS
Although the proportion of deliberate self-poisoning or self-injury patients who require psychiatric inpatient care is fairly small, this group is of special importance because it includes those most likely to have serious psychiatric disorders, those at special risk of suicide or further attempts, and some patients who pose very difficult management problems.
A case has been made for brief admission of patients who may not be suffering from psychiatric disorders, but who are in a state of particularly severe crisis.
Clearly, the decision to admit a patient to hospital must be taken only after very careful consideration.
When a patient is admitted to a psychiatric inpatient unit the clinical team should avoid the temptation to commence specific treatments immediately, especially those of a physical nature.
Better management is likely to result from a period of careful observation and assessment, with considerable support being provided at this time through frequent contact with nursing and other ward staff.
A simple problem-orientated  method of assessment can facilitate both management and communication between start members.
In units which employ a multidisciplinary approach, each patient might be allocated one member of staff (a ‘primary therapist’) who has the main responsibility for dealing with the patient's problems.
This should avoid conflicting advice or approaches.
Above all else, it is  important that psychiatric inpatient care is based on a carefully coordinated policy, especially for patients at particular risk of suicide.
If a suicide should occur in hospital it is recommended that attention is paid to dealing with the resultant feelings both of patients and staff.
Self-injury
The vast majority of patients referred to general hospitals because of acts of self-harm have taken overdoses.
There is also a very important smaller group who have deliberately injured themselves in some way.
The size of this group varies in different centres according to the method of detection of self-injury patients.
In Edinburgh (Kreitman 1977) and Bristol (Morgan et al.1975a), patients with self-injuries have constituted approximately 5 per cent of the total number of attempted suicide patients identified on the basis of general hospital referrals.
However, the number of self-injuries identified in Edinburgh through referrals to the Regional Poisoning Treatment Centre may have been an underestimate of the total number of cases referred to hospital (Kreitman 1977), and, in addition, a high proportion of patients with self-injuries may not be referred to hospital at all (Kennedy and Kreitman 1973).
In Oxford, particular care has been taken to try to identify all cases of self-injury coming to the general hospital, irrespective of whether they have been referred to the hospital psychiatric service.
Of over 4000 consecutive general hospital referrals for self-poisoning and self-injury during the 5 years from 1980 to 1984, 13 per cent involved self-inflicted injuries.
The types of injuries and the methods used vary widely, as is illustrated in Table 13.
Similarly, the patients who injure themselves do not form a homogeneous group, but include individuals who can to a large extent be classified into three subgroups on the basis of the type of injury inflicted and the associated degree of suicidal intent:
1.
superficial self-cutting,usually of the wrist or forearm, associated with little or no suicidal intent.
2.
Serious self-injury,such as deep cutting — which may endanger major blood vessels, nerves, and tendons — and shooting, hanging and jumping from buildings, all of which are usually associated with serious suicidal intent.
3.
Self-mutilation , which may result in disfigurement. this usually occurs in individuals with psychotic illnesses, such as schizophrenia, and may or may not endanger life.
These three groups will now be considered in more detail, although most attention will be paid to the first group because this includes by far the majority of self-injury cases.
SUPERFICIAL SELF-CUTTING
Incidence
It is unclear how common self-cutting is.
Although at least 80 per cent of patients referred to the general hospital in Oxford after self-injury have cut themselves superficially, it seems likely that many more episodes of deliberate self-cutting occur than are identified through general hospital records.
For example, superficial cutting occurs quite often in psychiatric inpatient settings, sometimes in epidemics (Simpson 1975), and the vast majority of such episodes do not necessitate general hospital treatment (Hawton 1978).
Some  cases of self-cutting which reach casualty departments are misidentified as accidental lacerations.
Therefore, the full extent of this behaviour is uncertain.
Nevertheless, there have been several studies of patients who cut themselves which are very informative for the clinician (Clendenin and Murphy 1971; Rosenthal et al.1972; Simpson 1975).
Characteristics of people involved in self-cutting
The typical self-cutter has been described as a young, single, attractive female who repeatedly cuts her wrist or forearm.
However, the extent to which this is a typical case has been questioned (Clendenin and Murphy 1971; Weissman 1975).
Reference to Table 13 indicates that almost as many males as females are referred to hospital after self-cutting.
The Table also shows that cutting usually involves the wrist or forearm, which has resulted in wrist-cutting being treated as a distinct syndrome (Rosenthal et al.1972).
It is doubtful whether this is a useful approach to the problem, especially for clinical purposes.
Although most patients who cut their wrists have experienced psychiatric symptoms, they do not fit into any one category of psychiatric diagnosis.
Many have considerable personality difficulties, and the most commonly applied diagnosis is ‘personality disorder’.
Unfortunately this diagnosis is often used non-specifically; it also tends to promote a sense of therapeutic nihilism.
In the USA the DSM III diagnosis of ‘borderline personality disorder’(p. 35) would often be used for such individuals.
Many self-cutters have depressive symptoms, but the highly transient nature of these does not suggest serious depressive illness.
The picture is often one of violent and rapid mood swings in response to stress.
The stress is usually an actual or perceived rejection, which activates the individual's underlying sense of worthlessness.
A very interesting association appears to exist between cutting and eating disorders, which were found in 15 (65 per cent) out of 23 cutters studied by Rosenthal et al.(1972), and in 18 (75 per cent ) out of 24 patients reported by Simpson (1975).
The eating disorders include compulsive overeating and severe anorexia, both being found in some patients.
Cutting may occur at the time of binge-eating.
Many self-cutters also abuse alcohol or drugs (Simpson 1975).
Another interesting finding is that many of these patients have worked in the medical field; they are particularly likely to be or have been nurses (Simpson 1975).
At present there is no explanation for this.
Background
Cutters often come from broken homes, although perhaps no more often than attempted suicide patients in general(Rosenthal et al.1972).
Deprivation of parental warmth and physical contact have been emphasized by other workers (Simpson 1976).
Some patients have a history of hospitalization and surgery before the age of 5, and in some cases such events have occurred before the age of 18 months (Rosenthal et al.1972; Simpson 1975).
A greater number than would be expected have spent long periods in plaster casts because of bone injuries, or for correction of congenital malformations.
Disturbances of menstruation are also commonly reported (Rosenthal et al.1972; Simpson 1975).
These include negative reactions to the onset of menstruation, dislike of menstruation, and menstrual irregularity (this last feature may be the result of an eating disorder).
There is dispute as to whether cutting is more likely at the time of menstruation (Simpson 1976).
There is less doubt about the occurrence of sexual problems.
Confusion of sexual identity and lack of enjoyment of sexual relationships are often found (Rosenthal et al.1972; Simpson 1975; Gardner and Gardner 1975).
Some workers have emphasized the difficulty most of these patients experience in expressing their emotional needs (Simpson 1976).
Others, using questionnaires to evaluate personality traits, have suggested that many cutters have obsessional personalities (McKerracher et al.1968; Gardner and Gardner 1975).
In animals, disturbances of neurotransmitters can cause behavioural changes which may include self-mutilation.
Because of this, and because there are rare human disorders in which self-mutilation may be a feature (e.g. Lesch-Nyhan, deLange, and Tourette's syndromes), and which may result from neurotransmitter changes, it is possible that neurotransmitter disturbances may contribute to self-cutting.
Furthermore, absence of pain during cutting (see below) raises the possibility that endorphins have a role  in the phenomenon.
However, at present these suggestions remain purely speculative.
The act of cutting
Cutting is typically of the wrist or forearm, and the cuts are usually multiple.
They vary from superficial scratches to full-thickness lacerations, but almost invariably draw blood.
The cuts are usually made with razor blades or broken glass.
Other forms of self-mutilation may be seen in the same patient.
These include cuts elsewhere on the body, such as the legs and genital areas, and cigarette burns and bruises.
Most cutters engage in the behaviour on several occasions, some cutting themselves hundreds of times altogether (Rosenthal et al.1972).
Common precipitants for the behaviour are actual or threatened loss or abandonment, or an impasse in a personal relationship (Simpson 1975).
The act is usually preceded by feelings of anger, self-hatred, and sometimes depression.
The predominant sensation is one of tension, which steadily mounts until it becomes unbearable.
The patient will usually seek out solitude at this time.
Immediately before cutting, a sense of numbness or emptiness may be described.
In some cases, depersonalization (a sense of detachment between mind and body) or dissociation (a disturbance of conscious awareness) seem to occur.
The cut may be made with little or no apparent awareness, the patient suddenly discovering that she has cut herself and at the same time experiencing a sense of relief.
The sight of blood seems to be an important component of the process, and it often provides the patient with the sense of relief which may be mingled with feelings of disgust or guilt.
Most patients rarely report experiencing pain during the act of cutting.
The cut often rapidly reduces tension and brings a sense of returning to reality.
The tension-relieving effect of cutting may be extremely important when one is considering therapeutic strategies to counter the behaviour.
Only very rarely has the patient carried out the act with suicidal intent in mind.
Self-cutting is sometimes a problem in inpatient psychiatric units, especially those catering for adolescents, where it may occur in an epidemic fashion (Simpson 1975; Walsh and Rosen 1985).
Learning through modelling and competition between patients are likely to be important factors in such epidemics.
Case example
Jenny, a single girl aged 27, had experienced an unhappy childhood.
Her parents got on badly, and she described her mother as extremely cold and rejecting.
She had always been an anxious individual and during her teens she went through periods of compulsive overeating alternating with dieting.
She also showed obsessional traits, including rituals concerned with dressing, washing, and general checking.
Her general practitioner had at one time treated her unsuccessfully for this with an antidepressant.
Jenny had formed relationships with several boyfriends, but these usually ended because she became over-dependent.
She had never derived any pleasure from sex, which she regarded with a mixture of lack of interest and revulsion.
At the age of 20 she took an overdose when she thought a boyfriend was about to desert her.
She was offered psychotherapy, but this proved ineffective and it was concluded that Jenny lacked insight into her problems.
From the age of 22 she had cut herself on many occasions.
The cuts were always superficial and usually consisted of between 20 and 40 neat parallel scratches on her wrist and forearm.
The behaviour was similar on each occasion.
Jenny once explained, ‘It's a ritual and must be done correctly’.
She experienced a sense of detachment before cutting herself, and the act seemed to relieve feelings of anxiety and tension which usually arose from problems in her relationship with her boyfriend.
At the same time, cutting acted as a kind of punishment which, because of her sense of worthlessness, Jenny felt she needed.
Management
There is general agreement that the management of patients who cut themselves, especially those who often repeat the behaviour, can be difficult and that there is a need for the development and evaluation of new forms of treatment.
At present, only general guidelines to management can be provided, based largely on the characteristics of the behaviour which have been described.
Two lines of approach appear to be most hopeful.
The first involves teaching the patient alternative means of dealing with the feelings of tension which precede cutting, and the second involves psychotherapeutic measures aimed at improving the patient's self-esteem, and her ability to communicate feelings and needs.
These  are not necessarily alternative methods of management; success is probably most likely where both are utilized.
The use of tranquillizers of either the major (e.g. phenothiazines) or minor groups (e.g. benzodiazepines) does not usually appear to be helpful.
Methods of reducing tension
The aim here would be to enable the patient to recognize the common precipitants of the feelings which precede cutting and then to take appropriate action to prevent these feelings mounting up to the state of extreme tension which is associated with cutting.
Before suggesting methods of countering the development of tension, careful assessment of the antecedents to cutting should be carried out.
These include the events which precede it and the way in which the patient's feelings develop.
Detailed analysis of this kind should enable the most appropriate method of tension reduction to be chosen for each individual patient.
For this approach to succeed, the patient must want to gain control over her feelings, and be motivated sufficiently to practise the techniques that are suggested.
This is very important because the act of cutting usually has immediate effects on tension and is also likely to evoke responses from other people which may serve to strengthen the urge to cut.
One approach to tension reduction is to teach the patient methods of self-relaxation.
The use of progressive muscle relaxation exercises, as in the Jacobsen technique (1938) commonly employed in systematic desensitization, is a possible method.
For these to be effective the patient would need to practise them repeatedly to be able to bring about fairly rapid relaxation when tense feelings were beginning to occur.
An audio-tape recording in which the exercises are described can be a useful adjunct to teaching the patient this method, provided the therapist has first demonstrated the procedure to the patient, and the technique has been learned adequately.
Relaxation alone is unlikely to prevent cutting in most cases.
The patient may also benefit from learning methods of distraction which can be used to interrupt the flow of negative thoughts which often accompany the build-up of feelings of tension.
These would include practising counter-thoughts in which alternative ways of viewing the situation are entertained, and switching to prerehearsed thoughts of circumstances in which the patient has felt particularly relaxed.
Another approach would be to help the patient find other means of discharging tension.
Vigorous exercise is one.
Venting feelings through non-harmful means, such as punching a rubber object, is another.
The use of rubber bands on the wrist which can be flicked to produce pain, but no damage is a further possibility.
Rosen and Thomas (1984) have suggested that repeatedly squeezing a small rubber ball in the hand until this produces considerable discomfort in the wrist and forearm can also help.
These are techniques which require development and evaluation.
It is unlikely that any one method would suit all patients and therefore it is best to discuss with the patient alternative approaches to find out which seems the most likely to succeed.
One further method of tension reduction which is of interest has been described by Graff and Mallin (1967).
They found that in some patients, self-cutting could be prevented by the provision of physical contact by a therapist, such as in putting an arm round the patient.
This might be useful for the psychiatric inpatient who cuts repeatedly, although the limits of therapist-patient contact would have to be very clear.
Psychotherapy
In the management of the self-cutter who often repeats the behaviour it is sensible for one therapist to establish a relationship with the individual.
This will prevent conflicting messages and advice being given.
However, the therapist will benefit from being able to discuss the case with other members of the team or a supervisor in order to be given support and guidance.
The psychotherapeutic management of the self-cutter is difficult and challenging, but in many cases well worth trying.
This should include an attitude of acceptance on the part of the therapist towards the patient's problems and behaviour, while at the same time limits will need to be set in terms of what the therapist is able to provide and tolerate.
The goals would include development of the patient's self-esteem through encouraging the positive aspects of personality, and helping the patient to communicate needs and feelings verbally.
Clearly, good rapport between patient and therapist will be necessary, but the patient will also have to develop confidence in the therapist.
The pursuit of analytical insights into the reasons for cutting is probably unhelpful (Simpson 1976).
However, a cognitive therapy approach to helping the patient  understand and reappraise her feelings of worthlessness may be worth trying (Beck et al.1979).
This involves helping the patient develop alternative and less self-blaming ideas about how other people behave towards her, and examining with her the origins and validity of her underlying sense of worthlessness.
In addition to the measures described, the therapist should also endeavour to help the patient start to adopt a problem-solving approach to current difficulties along the lines described in Chapter 5.
Outcome
There is hardly any information available concerning the long-term outcome of patients who cut themselves.
In one study of a small group of wrist-slashers it was found that more than half were well, or had shown improvement, 5–6 years later (Nelson and Grunebaum 1971).
However, there were other patients whose lives had ended in suicide.
These were very disturbed patients who perhaps do not fit into the group under discussion here.
Nevertheless, clinical experience suggests that the risk of eventual suicide even in ‘typical’ self-cutters is often high.
SERIOUS SELF-INJURY
Probably most serious attempts at suicide in which some form of self-injury is inflicted result in death.
Nevertheless, as can be seen in Table 13, a small proportion of patients admitted to the general hospital after self-injury have used very dangerous methods (e.g. jumping from buildings, jumping in front of vehicles, hanging, and drowning) and yet have survived.
In addition, there are a few patients who have survived after inflicting deep cuts, usually of the throat and neck.
Patients in this group are likely to be older males.
Serious suicidal intent is usually involved in their acts (although, as discussed earlier (p. 17), even shooting may occur when there appears to be ambivalence about dying).
Many are suffering from severe depressive illnesses, often with persecutory ideas or delusions.
Some are alcoholics.
Case examples
A 57-year-old man, who had been forced to retire from work  because of chronic ill health, was admitted to hospital having made severe lacerations of his neck with a knife.
He had been discovered unconscious in his kitchen by his son-in-law.
The deep cuts had missed the major blood vessels and nerves in his neck, but had caused considerable blood loss.
Upon recovering, he admitted he had been extremely depressed since the death of his wife from cancer a year earlier and now did not think he had anything to live for.
He agreed to be admitted to a psychiatric unit where, after 2 months' treatment with psychotherapy and antidepressants, he appeared to improve considerably.
However, after discharge from hospital he remained isolated despite efforts that were made to encourage him to develop social contacts through joining community clubs.
Five months later he was found dead in his garage, having hanged himself.
Because most patients who inflict serious self-injuries are suffering from psychiatric disorders and are usually at high risk of making another attempt, the principles of management are largely those described in Chapter 7 where psychiatric inpatient care was considered.
The clinician should be alert to the possible repetition of a serious attempt in hospital.
In addition, it should be remembered that the occurrence of suicide in such patients while in the general medical ward is not unknown.
Occasionally, serious self-injury has particularly dire consequences when the injury itself causes permanent physical deformity.
This is not unusual where a method such as jumping from a building has been employed.
In addition, deep lacerations may result in disfiguring scars.
The deformity or disfigurement may be an added cause for depression and regret it having failed in the attempt.
SELF-MUTILATION
Although not entirely distinct from the previous two categories, there is a small group of patients who turn up in casualty departments having inflicted mutilating injuries on themselves is a result of a serious disturbance of mental state.
Included in this group are schizophrenic subjects who have injured themselves as a consequence of a delusional belief (for example, that part of the body was evil), or because of an hallucination (such as one in which voices tell the subject to harm himself).
The target for the injury is  not infrequently the genital area (Kushner 1967), although other parts of the body, including the eyes, can be involved.
Self-mutilation of the genitals very occasionally occurs in transsexual patients in an attempt to initiate sex change.
One such patient, a man of low intelligence, aged 39, was admitted to hospital after almost completely removing one of his testicles with a razor blade.
At first he gave the somewhat fatuous explanation that he thought he would find it easier to ride his bicycle without his testicle (the other testicle was small due to atrophy).
On closer questioning it was found that he had been harbouring strong transsexual feelings for some while and that the injury resulted from an urge to initiate a sex change.
The management of patients who mutilate themselves while in a disturbed state will include treatment of the disorder that has led to the disturbance and will invariably have to be initiated in the psychiatric inpatient setting.
CONCLUSIONS
Deliberate self-injury is far less common that deliberate self-poisoning among referrals to the general hospital.
Nevertheless, within the group of patients who injure themselves three subgroups can be discerned.
The first, and by far the largest group, is made up of those who cut their wrists and arms.
In many cases this seems to be a means of tension reduction, and management must be directed partly towards developing alternative means of dealing with feelings of tension and partly to helping alleviate the ideas of worthlessness, as well as other problems, often experienced by such patients.
The second group comprises patients who inflict serious injuries on themselves with considerable suicidal intent.
The third group includes patients who mutilate themselves, usually in the context of a serious psychiatric illness.
Members of clinical teams which manage attempted suicide patients should be familiar with the special problem of patients who deliberately injure themselves, and not just deal with them as if the behaviour was the same as self-poisoning.
Practical organization of services
INTRODUCTION
The problem of deliberate self-poisoning and self-injury has placed enormous pressure on the stiff (physicians, nurses, psychiatrists) and services (casualty and emergency departments, medical admission units, psychiatric and social work departments) involved in the care of patients who take overdoses or injure themselves, and this has been one of the factors that has promoted a re-examination of previously accepted policies for the management of attempted suicide patients.
However, the new approaches are not simply a response to administrative or organizational problems.
They reflect changes in the population of attempters, with a possible decline in the proportion of patients suffering from formal psychiatric illness while, instead, interpersonal conflicts and social problems play a prominent part in most cases.
They are also indicative of more general changes in the role of psychiatrists and other professionals, such as social workers and psychiatric nurses, in the direction of better collaboration and sharing of skills between the different professional groups.
As a result, the alternative models proposed to deal with the needs of the large number of patients brought to general hospitals after suicide attempts have included a reassessment of the role of psychiatrists, physicians, and non-medically qualified therapists.
In the United Kingdom, the current policy for attempted suicide patients is contained in guidelines issued by the Department of Health and Social Security (DHSS 1984).
Before describing the current guidelines in detail, it is worth reviewing the policy changes that have taken place over the last two decades.
Attempted suicide ceased to be a criminal offence with the implementation of the Suicide Act in 1961.
In the words of the circular issued by the Ministry of Health (1961): ‘Attempted suicide is in the future to be  regarded entirely as a medical and social problem….
Hospital authorities are therefore asked to do their best to see that all cases of attempted suicide brought to hospital receive psychiatric investigation before discharge.’
A comprehensive review of the problem of attempted suicide and its management was carried out a few years later by a committee chaired by Sir Denis Hill.
Amongst other recommendations, the Hill Report (Central and Scottish Health Services Councils 1968) advocated the establishment of poisoning treatment centres in district general hospitals to which all cases of deliberate self-poisoning should be referred, no matter how serious the medical condition of the patients.
Also, it recommended that psychiatric emergency cover should be available every day of the week, and that a psychiatric history and examination be completed for each patient as soon as possible.
Social work help should be provided on a similar basis, and there ought to be continuity of care after discharge.
The report recognized that in hospitals without a psychiatric unit the initial psychiatric and social evaluation might have to be undertaken by staff from the local psychiatric hospital.
One such poisoning treatment centre was developed in Edinburgh, and Matthew et al.(1969) have described its structure and functions.
Reservations were soon expressed, however, about the necessity for psychiatrists to carry out the assessments in view of the relatively small number of patients who suffered from psychiatric illness and the pressures on already stretched psychiatric resources (Crammer 1969).
The need for regional and district poisoning treatment centres was also questioned, and Lawson and Mitchell (1972) showed how an acute medical unit without special facilities could meet the recommendations contained in the Hill Report.
The value of one of the principal recommendations, the provision of psychiatric care to attempted suicide patients, remains controversial, and it has only recently been subjected to controlled evaluation (Hawton et al.1987).
Early evidence supporting psychiatric intervention came from non-randomized, retrospective studies (Greer and Bagley 1971; Kennedy 1972), and more work is required to establish which patients are likely to benefit from psychiatric care.
The question of the efficacy of psychiatric intervention is discussed more fully in Chapter 10.
The official recommendation on psychiatric referral tended to be disregarded in practice.
Thus, patients were not always being  admitted to hospital and, when admitted, had not always been referred to a psychiatrist.
In hospitals without a psychiatric unit, patients usually had to wait several days before being seen by the psychiatrist, occupying medical beds and often antagonizing the medical staff by their presence.
In the meantime, the number of suicide attempters referred to hospitals has continued to present an organizational challenge.
It is against this background that the new approaches to the psychiatric management of attempted suicide and the new official policy have to be considered.
In 1984, a multidisciplinary working party which included representatives from psychiatry, general medicine and surgery, paediatrics, nursing, social work, and psychology, carried out a review of developments in the management of ‘deliberate self-harm’(attempted suicide), and made recommendations which were backed by the Department of Health (DHSS 1984).
One of the main recommendations was the acknowledgement that non-psychiatrists (general physicians, social workers, and psychiatric nurses) could undertake the psychosocial management of attempted suicide patients.
The report also emphasized the need for adequate training and supervision of personnel working in this area.
Detailed advice about the organization of local services is contained in the report, together with the recognition of the needs of children and adolescents who harm themselves.
The recommendations concerning the management of young suicide attempters echoed the views of the Royal College of Psychiatrists (Royal College of Psychiatrists 1982).
The clinical and research developments which have led to changes in the official policy will now be described.
ASSESSMENT
Who should assess suicide attempters?
Assessment has traditionally been regarded as the responsibility of psychiatrists, but in recent years the role of non-medically qualified personnel has been examined.
Newson-Smith and Hirsch (1979b) compared assessments by social workers and psychiatrists in terms of recognition of psychiatric disorder, evaluation of motives, physical illness, and recommendations for immediate management.
They found there was good agreement between both groups, although social workers tended to be more cautious in their judgements.
Thus, for example, they were more likely than the psychiatrists to diagnose psychiatric disorder or recommend inpatient care.
Newson-Smith and Hirsch concluded that social workers could safely and reliably assess attempted suicide patients.
In addition, the social workers in their study appeared to be more aware than the psychiatrists of the relevance of interpersonal and family problems, a clear advantage considering the importance of such social difficulties for these patients.
It was therefore suggested that social workers should be involved in assessment of attempted suicide patients, the psychiatrist being available to deal with emergencies and for consultation with the social worker if necessary.
An alternative system involving nurses has also been described and evaluated (Catalan et al.1980a,b ).
The investigation took place in a psychiatric unit in a general hospital, where a multidisciplinary team of nurses, social workers, psychiatrists, and general practice trainees is involved in the psychiatric management of attempted suicide patients (Hawton et al.1979).
Doctors (psychiatric and general practice trainees) and nurses had been given special instruction in the assessment of deliberate self-poisoning patients.
The adequacy of their assessment was investigated by having independent judges make ratings of transcripts from audio-tape recordings of their assessment interviews.
The type of treatment offered, repetition of deliberate self-harm, and the attitudes of the patients and their general practitioners to the involvement of nurses were also examined.
The study did not show any major differences between doctors and nurses, indicating that nurses who are specifically trained to assess attempted suicide patients and who work in a team where there is a psychiatrist available for consultation and supervision can be given responsibility for the initial assessment of these patients.
A common factor in the two studies concerning assessment by non-medically qualified staff is that the social workers in the first study and the nurses in the second had a special interest in dealing with attempted suicide patients.
Their enthusiasm for such work is likely to have played an important part in the results.
Another departure from the Hill Report recommendation on psychiatric assessment has been developed in Cambridge (Gardner et al.1977, 1978).
In a prospective randomized trial, Gardner and  colleagues compared medical teams (junior physicians and general nurses) with psychiatrists in terms of the type of treatment recommended after assessment, the diagnoses made, and rates of further self-harm or suicide.
The physicians and the nurses had been given instruction in the principles of psychiatric evaluation and there were regular meetings with a psychiatrist and psychiatric social worker during the trial.
No differences between medical teams and psychiatrists were found, and the authors suggested that the official policy should be changed to allow physicians to decide in all cases whether a psychiatric opinion was required.
The involvement of physicians in assessment is certainly an interesting development and one that requires further investigation in view of its possible limitations.
However, the study was not designed in a way that would allow the conclusion that physicians were as accurate as psychiatrists in their diagnoses and recommendations.
In addition, it is not known how easy it would be to apply these findings to other hospitals where psychiatric training is less adequate and there is a rapid turnover of junior medical staff.
It is also uncertain whether already overworked physicians would welcome this development; the evidence from a survey of the views of doctors and nurses working in accident and emergency departments suggests that this would not be the case (Ghodse 1979).
Physicians' attitudes to attempted suicide patients are to a large extent negative (Patel 1975; Ramon et al.1975) and certainly less sympathetic than those of psychiatrists or nurses (Ramon et al.1975; Hawton et al.1981 b ).
Nevertheless, this approach has been included in the Department of Health guidelines (DHSS 1984) with the recommendation that it is essential that each new intake of junior medical staff receives adequate psychiatric training in the assessment of attempted suicide patients, and that the physicians have regular access to psychiatrists to ensure that clinical standards are maintained.
The role of general practitioners in the assessment of deliberate self-poisoning has so far received very little attention.
Although most patients who are brought to the attention of their doctors after an attempt are referred to hospital, a proportion are dealt with by general practitioners (p. 10).
Presumably, this is more likely to happen when a small number of tablets is involved but the poor correlation between medical seriousness of an attempt and suicidal intent (Fox and Weissman 1975) would indicate that this practice  should not be encouraged.
On the other hand, the general practitioner's knowledge of the person's background and current circumstances could make him invaluable both in furthering the understanding of the attempt and in the provision of appropriate help.
The Department of Health guidelines (1984) have recognized the involvement of the general practitioner in the assessment of patients who harm themselves, although the vagueness of its recommendations has been criticized (Kessel 1985).
Before general practitioners are expected or encouraged to take on new duties their willingness to become more involved should be established, and easy access to experienced therapists for training and consultation should be available.
TREATMENT
Who should treat attempted suicide patients?
The management of patients who require psychiatric inpatient care after a suicide attempt remains the responsibility of psychiatrists, but recent work has shown the value of involving non-medical staff in treatment of those who do not require admission.
Gibbons et al.(1978a) demonstrated that treatment by social workers using a standardized task-centred approach (Reid and Epstein 1972) was more effective in terms of improving patients' social problems than traditional care recommended by psychiatrists, although only for female patients (Gibbons 1979).
In a study comparing outpatient with domiciliary treatment, non-medical therapists (one nurse and one social worker) were found to be as effective as psychiatrists (Hawton et al.1981a).
In a prospective, randomized trial, non-medical therapists (psychiatric nurses) have been found to be more effective than general practitioners in the management of female patients and patients with dyadic problems (Hawton et al.1987).
Other authors have reported the use of mental health workers and volunteers (Termansen and Bywater 1975), and nurses, social workers, and community workers (Welu 1977) as therapists.
A conclusion that can be drawn from all these treatment studies is that when dealing with patients who do not require inpatient care, treatment by well-trained non-medical staff (social workers and nurses in. particular) is at least as effective as treatment given by psychiatrists.
In the case of patient suffering from formal  psychiatric disorder or requiring psychiatric inpatient treatment, the involvement of psychiatrists will continue to be necessary.
Where should patients be treated?
Patients requiring inpatient psychiatric care will usually be admitted to the psychiatric unit in the general hospital or to an acute bed in the local psychiatric hospital.
Day-patient attendance can often be a very useful alternative, particularly when the patient is still experiencing serious difficulties in the absence of adequate support and when frequent contact is required.
Day-patient care allows close monitoring of the patient's state while encouraging exploration and development of better ways of coping with problems, which can be enhanced with group therapy techniques (Temple and Catalan 1977).
In patients who do not need hospitalization, early intervention and easy access to the therapist can be provided using a flexible outpatient system, including direct telephone access.
Involvement of the same therapist in assessment and follow-up is likely to increase attendance rates (Hawton et al.1979).
Routine domiciliary treatment does not seem justifiable, because of the expense and practical difficulties involved, but domiciliary treatment of selected cases, for example some working-class patients with marital problems, may be helpful.
TRAINING AND SUPERVISION
Staff involved in the psychiatric management of attempted suicide patients should receive appropriate training and supervision (DHSS 1984).
These will have much in common with the kind of training that is given to therapists working in other settings, but should also include instruction relevant to the problems presented by attempted suicide patients.
Training in assessment of patients
During training, particular attention should be paid to psychosocial assessment in view of the nature of the act and potential problems associated with it, such as risk of suicide, risk of repetition, and presence of psychiatric disorder.
This was dealt with fully in  Chapter 4.
A therapist who undertakes the assessment of these patients should have sufficient factual knowledge about the problem of attempted suicide and should also have interviewing skills that allow him both to put patients it ease and obtain valid information.
In our experience, instruction manuals and tutorials covering topics related to attempted suicide are an effective way of imparting factual information.
Interviewing skills can be acquired and developed by placing individual trainees under the supervision of an experienced therapist who, over several weeks, monitors the trainee's progress.
To begin with, the trainee sits in and observes the therapist's assessments; later their roles are reversed, so that the trainee can be given feedback about his performance.
Audio-recordings of interviews can also be used to examine specific problems concerning communication between patient and trainee (Catalan et al.1980a).
Supervision of therapists
After the initial period of training there should be adequate supervision by senior psychiatrists or other experienced therapists, preferably on a daily basis.
New patients should be discussed in detail, particularly if the therapist is not medically qualified and there is a possibility of the patient suffering from psychiatric disorder.
In hospitals where several therapists are involved in assessing patients, a daily meeting of those concerned and the psychiatrist can be the best form of providing supervision and psychiatric cover.
There should be opportunities for discussion of patients' subsequent management on a regular basis with experienced therapists.
This can be accomplished by weekly or fortnightly review sessions, either with staff members individually, or in a group with other therapists.
In addition to discussion of management problems, these sessions can be used to tackle some of the tensions and frustrations that can arise in teams of this kind, which are dealing with a rapid turnover of patients with acute problems, or problems that sometimes seem intractable, and where drop-out rates may be high.
CONCLUSIONS
There is no single, universally accepted type of service that is known to be more successful in the management of attempted suicide patients thin any other.
Local circumstances and availability of personnel and resources are likely to affect the organization of such services as much as any policy statement about the care of patients.
Poisoning Treatment Centres may have a special advantage (Kreitman 1980), but only one such centre currently exists and it is unlikely that more will be developed in the near future.
Psychiatric units in general hospitals, on the other hand, are becoming a common feature, and here a multidisciplinary team of psychiatrists, psychiatric nurses, and social workers is very appropriate for the management of attempted suicide.
In some hospitals, psychiatric staff and medical teams may develop a system of joint management like that described by Gardner and co-workers.
In hospitals without a psychiatric unit, the assessment of patients could be carried out by trained hospital staff, such as psychiatric nurses, social workers, and junior medical and psychiatric staff, under the supervision of a senior psychiatrist from the local psychiatric hospital, or by trained psychiatric nurses and social workers from the local psychiatric hospital working with psychiatrists, who would visit the hospital on a regular basis.
Psychiatrists should continue to be involved in the assessment and management of these patients alongside other professionals.
In addition, junior psychiatrists should be able to get adequate experience of the care of attempted suicide patients to improve their skills both in the management of patients with psychosocial problems and, in particular , the evaluation of suicide risk.
Whatever approach is adopted, it is clear that a comprehensive service for the management of attempted suicide patients should be staffed by personnel interested in working with such people and their problems.
In addition, personnel working in this field must have received adequate training in the assessment procedure, and in the management of interpersonal and family problems.
Instruction manuals, tape-recordings of assessment interviews, and interviews carried out under the supervision of experienced therapists over several weeks could be used for the training of new therapists.
Adequate supervision by senior psychiatrists should be available, preferably through daily meetings where all referrals can be discussed before discharge from hospital.
Similarly, staff should be able to discuss their subsequent management regularly with an experienced supervisor (Black and Pond 1980).
A good service may cost more in terms of staffing, but would contribute to a reduction in medical-bed occupancy by providing early assessment.
It would also lead to a better use of the skills of social workers, psychiatric nurses, physicians, and psychiatrists.
Finally, it would be more likely to promote positive changes in the quality of life of patients and their families.
Prevention of attempted suicide
INTRODUCTION
Suicide attempters are usually experiencing considerable personal unhappiness and social difficulties which often improve after their attempts (p. 46).
However, no one has seriously challenged the view that attempted suicide should be regarded as an inappropriate way of coping with problems.
This is not only because of the risks to the health of the attempters and the distress to families and friends, but also because of the implications for the health services in terms of use of limited resources.
For all these reasons, it is clear that attempted suicide should be discouraged as a way of coping.
In this chapter, preventive measures will be discussed and examined, first with regard to primary prevention,or preventive work aimed at people who have not yet attempted suicide, and then in terms of secondary prevention,or prevention of further episodes of self-poisoning or self-injury.
It could be argued that the best way of dealing with attempted suicide would be to prevent its occurrence in the first place; but this is not an easy task, and one that often extends beyond the reach of the clinician.
Secondary prevention, on the other hand, should always be a concern of the therapist involved in the management of patients who have already made attempts.
PRIMARY PREVENTION
There is no single and all-important cause of attempted suicide.
On the contrary, a variety of interpersonal, social, and psychological factors may contribute to it.
As discussed in Chapter 3, a good deal is known about the circumstances associated with suicide attempts.
For example, it is known that attempts usually follow acute and serious interpersonal conflict, that chronic difficulties and social  problems are common, and that a large proportion of patients have taken steps to gain help from their family doctors before the attempt.
The diversity of factors and problems suggests that no single preventive measure is likely to be relevant to all patients, and that effective prevention will have to include different procedures at the various stages in the chain of events leading up to the suicide attempt.
There are several measures which might reduce the chances of a suicide attempt in an individual at risk.
These include making available emergency access to help, identification and adequate management by health and social agencies of those at risk, control of the means used to cause self-harm, modification of public attitudes to coping with problems in general and attempted suicide in particular, and measures aimed at improving the material and social circumstances of the population at risk.
Provision of services offering immediate help to potential attempters
The Samaritans in this country and the Suicide Prevention Centres in the United States are examples of emergency services providing 24-hour telephone access and other facilities for patients at risk of completed suicide.
However, no services have been developed explicitly for the prevention of suicide attempts .
Evidence of the efficacy of the Samaritans in reducing suicide mortality is contradictory.
Bagley (1968) found a fall in the rate of suicide in cities with a Samaritan branch when compared with matched cities without Samaritans, where suicide rates increased.
However, replication of the study, including matched control cities selected by three different methods, failed to show any differences (Jennings et al .
1978).
In the United States, three studies have failed to demonstrate any reduction in suicide rates with the development of Suicide Prevention Centres (Weiner 1969; Lester 1974; Bridge et al.1977).
However, in a recent study a substantial decline in suicide rates among young white females (under 25 years of age) was found in areas in which crisis centres were established, compared with a considerable increase in those in which such developments had not taken place (Miller et al.1984).
Young white females are by far the most common users of crisis and suicide prevention facilities, and  so these findings support the possibility that crisis centres do have a preventive effect.
The stated aim of these programmes is to prevent suicide.
It is doubtful, however, whether they would prevent attempted suicide.
Holding (1974) monitored the numbers of suicide attempters admitted to the Edinburgh Poisoning Treatment Centre in the weeks before, during, and after the screening of an 11-episode weekly television programme illustrating the work of the Samaritans.
While there was a marked increase in referrals to the Samaritans during and after the showing of the series, there was no change in the number of suicide attempts during the relevant periods.
These results are consistent with the findings of Chowdhury and Kreitman (1971), and Kreitman and Chowdhury (1973a), who found attempted suicide patients and Samaritan clients to be different in many respects — the Samaritan clients, for example, including a greater proportion of men, and more socially isolated individuals.
It has been shown that most suicide attempters are aware of the existence of agencies where they could obtain help, such as the general practitioner, social workers, or the Samaritans (Kreitman and Chowdhury 1973b); in fact, a significant proportion of attempters had been in touch with one or more of these agencies in the weeks preceding the attempt (Bancroft et al.1977).
Despite this, they had not used these potential sources of help instead of taking an overdose or injuring themselves.
Kreitman and Chowdhury (1973b) found that the most common reason given for not getting in touch with a helping agency was that the overdose was seen as a way of relieving strain or going to sleep.
Other reasons commonly given included criticism of the services, that the problems were too personal for discussion, and that the person wanted to die.
A proportion of patients admitted the overdose was aimed at influencing a partner or other person in close proximity.
These findings suggest that, at the time of the act, helping agencies were regarded as irrelevant to what the person wanted to achieve, or unhelpful on the basis of previous experience of them.
Nevertheless, Bancroft et al.(1977) found that more than half the attempters felt they had needed some form of help before the act, and that the most common type of help wanted was someone to talk to.
The overall impression resulting from these findings is that emergency services specifically designed for potential attempters might be of benefit to some, but the impulsive nature of the act, and  the fact that the attempt often appears to be carried out with a particular purpose not related to help-seeking, but aimed at someone in close proximity, reduces the chances of preventing suicide attempts by this method alone.
More success might be expected from measures directed towards offering help at an earlier stage when the patient is less distressed, for example when the patient gets in touch with the general practitioner.
Identification and adequate management of people at risk
It would be reasonable to expect that the extension and development of community psychiatric services would lead to a reduction in the rate of suicide and attempted suicide, but there is little evidence that this is so.
Walk (1967) suggested that the introduction of a community psychiatric service in Chichester may have reduced the suicide rate in elderly female patients.
However, Nielsen and Videbech (1973) failed to find any effect on the suicide rate of the introduction of a community service to an island population.
Koller and Slaghuis (1978) mentioned the development of community health centres in Hobart, Tasmania, at the time when the rates of attempted suicide were decreasing, but did not indicate any causal connection.
One interesting example of community-based services is the Craigmillar experiment in Edinburgh described by Ebie (1971).
The Health, Welfare, and Advice Centre was established to co-ordinate the work of a variety of voluntary agencies and statutory social services in an area characterized by severe social problems and high rates of attempted suicide.
The Centre was very popular and attracted many people with similar demographic characteristics, including marital and social difficulties, to those who attempt suicide.
The suicide attempt rates, however, remained essentially unchanged, although in other areas the rates of suicide attempts continued to increase (Kreitman 1977).
This finding is encouraging, but the results should be interpreted with caution as the control areas were not matched in terms of the pre-existing levels of social problems and attempted suicide.
The general practitioner has a potentially important role in the prevention of attempted suicide.
The high proportion of suicide attempters who visit their general practitioners not long before making attempts has already been noted (Chapter 3).
Hawton and Blackstock (1976) found that during these visits the doctors had, in  most cases, detected symptoms of psychological distress, including anxiety and depression, and were also aware that the patients were contending with social and relationship difficulties.
However, the majority of patients were prescribed psychotropic medication; this was often the very same medication that was used in the subsequent overdoses.
Of course, it should not be assumed that prescribing of psychotropic medication for such problems actually causes patients to take overdoses.
It is in fact possible that some patients, especially those with marked symptoms of anxiety or depression, benefit from drugs and are better able to cope with their problems as a result, but the size of this group is not known.
However, it can be argued that prescribing of psychotropic drugs when marital and social difficulties are pre-eminent might encourage the patient to believe that such problems are due to‘illness’ and therefore not surmountable by his own efforts.
He may feel that his doctor has prematurely terminated his assessment of his problems, thereby increasing his sense of helplessness and discouraging further discussion with the doctor.
Finally, it might reinforce the notion that taking tablets is the way to deal with stress, and it also provides the means of taking an overdose.
Patients have been known to report that the idea of taking an overdose had not crystallized in their minds until they received a prescription from their doctor.
Minor tranquillizers, in particular, have been the subject of much criticism in view of the extent of their prescribing in general practice, their doubtful efficacy and the risks associated with their use (Catalan and Gath 1985).
There is evidence that brief counselling by the general practitioner can be as effective as minor tranquillizers for patients with mild to moderate symptoms of anxiety and depression associated with social difficulties, without the risks involved in the use of minor tranquillizers.
Brief counselling, consisting of exploration of symptoms and social difficulties, reassurance and advice, need not be time-consuming and is generally more acceptable to patients than psychotropic drugs (Catalan et al.1984a, b).
Although many patients are prescribed psychotropic medication, only a small proportion of these will go on to take an overdose.
Therefore, it is important to try to identify the factors which might assist general practitioners to recognize those patients who are at special risk of attempted suicide.
In a prospective study of general practice prescribing involving more than 40 000 people over a 2-year  period, Skegg et al.(1983) found that only three in a thousand of those who had received psychotropics went on to take an overdose of the drugs within the following 12 months.
The highest rates of self-poisoning were among those who received antidepressants and minor tranquillizers.
Women were found to be more likely than men to poison themselves after receiving psychotropics, and patients aged between 15 and 29 years had the highest rates.
These findings are consistent with the epidemiological evidence available (Chapter 2), and could assist general practitioners to identify individuals at risk.
It is also well recognized that overdoses are often associated with threatened or actual disruption of a marital relationship, or a relationship with a boyfriend or girlfriend.
Patients (especially mothers) who have such poor relationships with their children that abuse or neglect are suspected are also at special risk.
It has been suggested that the presence of feelings of hopelessness may be a more sensitive indicator of attempted suicide risk than depression itself (Minkoff et al.1973, Beck et al.1975a, h).
Therefore, the doctor should ask the patient about his feelings about the future and his ability to cope.
The danger of attempted suicide among patients with epilepsy, especially males, has already been discussed.
A history of alcohol abuse or a tendency to impulsive behaviour should also alert the doctor.
These are some factors to be taken into account; clearly, further work is needed to identify other risk factors which might alert the general practitioner to the possibility of an attempt.
Knowledge of such factors is important because if a doctor is worried that a certain patient is likely to take an overdose, it would be better to explore the patient's difficulties and share this anxiety with the patient instead of avoiding discussing the issue or prescribing psychotropic drugs.
When patients who did not contact their general practitioners before their attempts were questioned about why they had not gone to their doctor, it was found that many were reluctant to trouble him, some had found him unhelpful in the fist, and others thought he was unlikely to be helpful or might even be unsympathetic (Hawton and Blackstock 1976).
This suggests that patients might be discouraged from taking overdoses if their general practitioners were seen is more willing to discuss psychological and social difficulties, or if other mental health professionals were available in health centres.
Recognition of those individuals likely to make attempts is only part of the process of prevention.
This would have to be followed up by provision of appropriate help.
Some general practitioners may be willing to offer individual counselling or marital therapy themselves.
Others might prefer to refer patients to special agencies for such help, including social workers, counsellors attached to practices, marriage guidance counsellors, and so on.
Because of the immediate nature of such patients' problems it is important that whatever form of help is offered should be available without too much delay, and for this reason health-centre-based therapists may be of particular value, as has been shown in the case of psychologists (Robson et al.1984) and social workers (Shepherd et al.1979).
This does not mean that  psychotropic drugs have no role in the treatment of patients who might attempt suicide.
However, they should be prescribed only where there are definite indications.
Thus, antidepressants should be prescribed in adequate therapeutic doses (Johnson 1973) where there is clear evidence of underlying depressive illness, not where depression seems to be entirely symptomatic of social problems.
Tranquillizers should be prescribed only for short periods to help patients through crises where their levels of anxiety are such that their coping ability is grossly impaired.
Such patients are uncommon in general practice; they are more likely to be seen in psychiatric outpatient clinics.
Hypnotics should be prescribed, preferably for short periods only, where insomnia secondary to distress is undermining in individual's resources, such as during a severe grief reaction.
The role of psychotropic medication in such cases should be made clear to the patient, particularly where medication is only a means of assisting coping behaviour rather than dealing with patients' fundamental problems.
Automatic prescribing of psychotropic drugs, which commonly occurs (Freed 1976), should be avoided.
Many suicide attempters are known to receive repeat prescriptions for psychotropic drugs from their general practitioners, often including combinations of several drugs (Prescott and Highly 1985).
This group of patients should be reviewed periodically to establish whether medication is indicated or whether alternative approaches should be used.
Better control of drugs, toxic preparations, and firearms
About 60 per cent of self-poisoners take psychotropic drugs that have been prescribed for them in their overdoses (Hawton et al.1977).
The pattern of self-poisoning with prescribed drugs largely reflects general prescribing patterns of psychotropic medication.
This was borne out very clearly in the parallel decline in barbiturate prescribing, and both non-fatal overdoses (Barraclough 1976) and suicides (Jones 1977).
On the other hand, psychotropic drugs such as minor tranquillizers and antidepressants are now being prescribed on a large scale by general practitioners (Skegg et al.1977), and this probably contributed to some extent to the increase in overdoses of these substances.
Opinions vary as to whether more cautious and rational use of these drugs by general practitioners leading to a reduction in prescribing of tranquillizers and antidepressants would result in a decline in the number of suicide attempts (Kreitman 1977).
A positive correlation has indeed been reported between the number of prescriptions for psychotropic drugs issued by general practitioners in England and Wales and the rate of deliberate self-poisoning, and it has been estimated that a reduction of 1000 psychotropic prescriptions would be associated with 3.8 fewer admissions as a result of deliberate self-poisoning (Forster and Frost 1985).
The introduction in 1985 of a restricted list of preparations available on the NHS in the United Kingdom, if accompanied by a drop in the number of prescriptions for psychotropic drugs, may have an affect on the rates of self-poisoning with such drugs.
However, making prescribed drugs less easily available is unlikely to help most patients unless it is accompanied by discussion of their problems or referral to appropriate agencies.
It could indeed be argued that if adequate counselling is not provided some of these patients might then turn to potentially more dangerous drugs such as aspirin or paracetamol and use them in overdoses.
More than one-third of self-poisoners use preparations which can be bought over the counter (Proudfoot and Park 1978).
Control of the availability of non-prescribed drugs might therefore be another means of prevention.
This is a complex problem.
Overdoses of three drugs are most common among teenagers (Hawton and Goldacre 1982), who are less likely than adults to have visited their general practitioner before the attempt (Hawton  and Blackstock 1976).
In these cases, prevention might have to be in terms of limiting sales from chemist shops.
Kessel (1965) has suggested a limit to the amount of tablets that could be dispensed at a given time, and in some areas chemist shop assistants are instructed to refer customers to senior staff when large amounts of tablets are being requested.
The use of special blister packaging of tablets or individual wrapping in foil to delay their ingestion in the case of impulsive overdoses has also been suggested (Fox 1975).
General health education about the toxic and long-term effects of drugs could also be relevant here.
Gazzard et al.(1976) used a questionnaire to ask patients who had taken overdoses of paracetamol about their knowledge of the effects of this substance and found that only 11 per cent knew about the possibility of severe hepatic complications that can occur after an interval of several days.
None of the patients interviews said they would have taken paracetamol had they been aware of this danger.
The information was collected after the attempt and it is not clear whether patients would have acted as they claimed they would but, taken at face value, the findings support the case for better health education and warning about the effects of drugs.
It has been suggested that educating people to keep a minimum of tablets in the home would help to reduce the risk of impulsive overdoses (Kessel 1965).
One survey showed that most households contain prescribed medicines, but that these drugs are used regularly in only half of the cases (Leach and White 1978).
The most commonly found types of medication were drugs acting on the central nervous system.
These findings lend support to the view that persuading people to dispose of unused or rarely used medicines stored in the home might play a part in reducing the numbers of impulsive overdoses of these substances.
In the United States, concern has been expressed about the contribution of firearms to suicide.
As noted earlier,(p. 17), between 1953 and 1978 the age-adjusted rate of suicide by means of firearms increased from 4.9 to 7.1 per 100 000 population, while rates for other methods remained unchanged (Boyd 1983).
There is also evidence that the suicide rates found in different States are associated with the strictness of the gun control laws (Lester and Murrell 1980).
It would therefore seem sensible to conclude that greater control over the availability and sale of firearms would make an important contribution to the prevention of suicidal behaviour.
Modification of public attitudes and education concerning life crises
Attempted suicide appears to have become an acceptable way of expressing distress among some people, and has therefore been likened to a fashion.
The use of propaganda to make this behaviour unfashionable again has been suggested (Stanley 1969), but no health education programme has ever been put forward to this purpose and it is difficult to know whether such an approach would be feasible.
One possible drawback could be that some people might decide to take an overdose as a result of learning about it through the media or public discussion, even if the behaviour had been presented as an inappropriate way of coping.
It is reasonable to expect that public attitudes and beliefs about attempted suicide will affect its incidence.
Sale et al.(1975) interviewed a random general population sample of females over the age of 15 in Hobart, Tasmania, and found that overdoses and self-injuries were regarded as potentially lethal in most cases.
In addition, suicide attempts were usually regarded as implying a wish to die and the existence of mental illness, while less acceptable reasons, such as manipulation of others, were infrequently considered.
One interesting finding was that people who reported personal contact with suicide attempters were more likely to have hostile attitudes towards attempted suicide.
This would suggest that a spontaneous decline in the incidence of attempted suicide might be expected as greater numbers of people come into personal contact with someone who has attempted suicide and public attitudes towards attempters become more negative.
Sale et al.(1975) have suggested that increased public education about the facts of attempted suicide, as opposed to commonly held beliefs, might contribute to the development of less favourable attitudes, which in turn might lead to a reduction in suicide attempts.
The use of educational programmes for schoolchildren and adolescents to develop their ability to deal with problems and rehearse future ways of coping have also been advocated (Morgan 1979).
In the United States, imaginative programmes have been developed to heighten the awareness of teachers and pupils in relation to adolescent suicide, with the objective of preventing it (Ross 1986; Ryerson 1986).
Such an approach is of considerable interest, although there are many methodological problems involved in establishing its efficacy.
Improvement in material and social circumstances
The knowledge that attempted suicide is more common among those of lower socioeconomic status and in socially deprived areas, and that attempts often occur against the background of financial and employment problems, suggests that prevention will to some extent depend on political and social factors.
Measures directly towards the amelioration of these conditions might be expected to contribute to the prevention of attempted suicide, although other factors — such as the availability of drugs, cultural attitudes, and the level of services available — might have a more immediate effect.
SECONDARY PREVENTION
The obvious meaning of secondary prevention in relation to attempted suicide is reduction in the likelihood of further attempts.
In addition to, secondary prevention could also be applied to the alleviation of social and psychological difficulties which might lead to attempts.
Naturally, one would assume that these two aspects of secondary prevention go hand in hand.
It is surprising, therefore, to find that there is often a disjunction between the two (Kreitman 1979).
Thus, prospective studies concerning different forms of treatment have demonstrated benefits for social and psychological functioning, but not for repetition rates.
Such studies are discussed below.
Retrospective investigations of the effectiveness of psychiatric help for attempted suicide patients have provided encouraging results, but the drawbacks of retrospective research, including poor matching of comparison groups especially with regard to subtle factors like motivation for treatment, cast doubts on the validity of the findings.
In the first of these studies, Greer and Bagley (1971) found after an 18-month follow-up that patients who had received no psychiatric attention before discharge from hospital after attempts repeated more often (39 per cent) than those who had received either brief psychiatric contact (26 per cent repeated) or more prolonged psychiatric contact (20 per cent repeated).
These findings persisted when variables found to correlate with repetition  were controlled for across the three groups.
In a second study, Kennedy (1972) found that repetition after 1 year was less common in patients admitted to the Edinburgh Regional Poisoning Treatment Centre (12 per cent) than in those who made attempts and were not referred to the Centre, irrespective of whether the latter were referred to psychiatrists elsewhere (38 per cent repeated) or not (37 per cent repeated).
Patients admitted to the Centre received prompt assessment and, where indicated, psychiatric aftercare (Kreitman 1977).
When the groups were matched for those with and without a history of previous attempts, the difference between patients admitted to the Centre and those who were not persisted.
Unfortunately, these encouraging results have not been substantiated in prospective studies of special forms of treatment, although it is worth noting that no proper, prospective controlled study in which patients have been randomly assigned to either a treatment or a no-treatment group has been carried out.
This is probably because of the ethical and practical considerations.
Prospective studies of intervention have been confined mostly to comparison of one form of treatment with another.
Chowdhury et al.(1973) in Edinburgh concentrated on patients who had already made repeat attempts.
A special aftercare service was set up — staffed by psychiatrists and social workers — which consisted of weekly outpatient clinics, domiciliary visiting where necessary, and an emergency call service.
Efforts were made to contact patients who did not keep appointments.
Patients allocated to normal care were given outpatient appointments to see a psychiatrist or social worker, but non-attenders were not pursued.
After 6 months no significant difference was found between repetition rates of patients in the experimental group (24 per cent) and those who received normal care (23 per cent ).
However, patients in the experimental group, particularly the women, did show significantly greater improvements in their social circumstances (finance, housing, and employment) than those allocated to conventional care.
Similar results were obtained in a study of social work intervention in Southampton (Gibbons et al.1978a).
The experimental service in this study consisted of task-centred casework (Reid and Epstein 1972) provided by social workers.
Task-centred casework is similar to the brief problem-orientated approach to treatment described in Chapter 5.
No difference between the repetition rates of patients offered this service and those who  received conventional care was detected at the one-year follow-up.
However, when interviewed at a 4-month follow-up, more of the experimental group showed overall improvement in their social problems (70 per cent) than the control group (53 per cent ).
Also, more of the former were satisfied with the service they had received.
Again, the benefits of the experimental service were confined to women (Gibbons 1979).
In a study in Oxford the effectiveness of home-based treatment was compared with treatment of outpatients (Hawton et al.1981a).
There were two medical and two non-medical therapists.
Although domiciliary treatment was far more acceptable to patients in that many more offered this form of care kept their appointments, no difference was found in outcome between the two forms of treatment in terms either of repetition or measures of psychological distress and social functioning.
The treatment approach used in both conditions was the brief problem-orientated therapy described in Chapter 5.
Three-quarters of the patients who completed treatment found it helpful.
They particularly appreciated the problem-orientated nature of the approach.
In a large-scale Swedish study of intervention with self-poisoners, patients in one group were offered psychiatric, social, and psychological help whereas another group was offered traditional care (Ettlinger 1975).
No differences in terms of further attempts or of completed suicide were found between the two groups after a 5-year follow-up.
Nor were differences found when crude measures of social functioning was examined.
Unfortunately, this study suffered from not being a properly controlled trial.
In addition, the care offered to the special treatment group was not at all intensive.
A second Oxford study compared out-patient counselling, using the same brief problem-orientated approach described in Chapter 5, with routine care given by the general practitioner (Hawton et al.1987).
Although no differences were found between patients in the two treatment conditions in terms of their subsequent psychological and social adjustment and repetition rates, two categories of patients, women and patients of either sex with dyadic problems, showed significant improvement when given outpatient counselling.
There is only one reported example of successful prevention of repetition of further attempts.
In a double-blind placebo controlled trial, intramuscular flupenthixol was effective in reducing the number of further attempts in a small group of patients with a  history of two or more episodes (Montgomery et al.1979).
This interesting and surprising result awaits replication.
Liberman and Eckman (1981) compared the effects of behaviour therapy and insight-oriented therapy in the inpatient treatment of patients with a history of at least two recent attempts.
Patients in both treatment groups made significantly less attempts after treatment than in the two years before the study, but the lack of an untreated control group means that the efficacy of the treatments in preventing further attempts remains open to question.
However, behaviour therapy was more effective than insight-oriented therapy for patients' subsequent depression, anxiety, and assertiveness.
In summary, therefore, most special aftercare services have had no effect on repetition rates after attempted suicide.
There is, however, evidence that they can benefit patients' social and psychological problems, but that these benefits are confined to women and people with problems in their relationships with their partners (most of whom are women).
At present we seem able to do little to help male attempters by means of counselling approaches.
This may be because they generally suffer more serious problems, often complicated by personality difficulties and alcohol abuse.
None of the studies described above have been concerned with patients suffering from serious psychiatric illness or being at immediate risk of suicide.
Usually, such patients are admitted to psychiatric inpatient care (see Chapter 7).
Few clinicians would doubt that the care offered to these patients is effective.
CONCLUSIONS
Primary prevention of suicide attempts is extremely difficult and continues to present a challenge to health and social services alike.
Several possible methods of prevention have been discussed in this chapter, including emergency services, community-based counselling facilities, identification and adequate management by general practitioners of people at risk, rational prescribing of psychotropic drugs and control of toxic preparations and firearms, and educational measures.
Further evaluation of these and development of other approaches is required.
Similarly, the prevention of further episodes of self-poisoning or self-injury continues to be a problem, and while retrospective investigations have given support to the policy of  psychiatric intervention, prospective studies have failed to demonstrate any effect on repetition rates.
However, treatment studies show that special forms of treatment can have a positive effect on the psychological and social functioning of many patients, especially women.
Concluding comments
Attempted suicide continues to present a very challenging problem for medical and psychiatric services.
The increase in the extent of the behaviour during the 1970s had a considerable effect on medical teams, psychiatrists, social workers, and general practitioners.
The response to the problem has been variable, with excellent services being established in some areas and woefully inadequate facilities continuing in others.
It is hoped that discussion of the problems faced by attempted suicide patients and the factors which should be kept in mind during their assessment will have left the reader in no doubt as to the crucial nature of the assessment procedure for such patients and the need for it to be done in a careful way by staff who have been appropriately trained.
Consideration of the diversity of difficulties that face attempted suicide patients, and the range of both the degree of suicidal intent and risk of repetition associated with their behaviour, should have demonstrated why it is most important that the facilities available for management of these patients must be flexible and allow a variety of options.
There must always be an opportunity for psychiatric inpatient care when required.
However, it is likely that well under 10 per cent of patients will need to be admitted to a psychiatric unit provided that other treatment facilities are available.
For many patients, brief problem-orientated outpatient care seems to be a very satisfactory means of helping them tackle the difficulties.
This does not demand a high degree of psychotherapeutic experience, but does require a good deal of common-sense.
In a few cases home-based treatment using the same approach may be helpful, although large-scale use of domiciliary treatment does not appear to be justified.
Not all patients require specialized help after an attempt.
A substantial proportion can be referred back to their general practitioners once a thorough assessment has been carried out.
The general practitioner may wish to provide his own aftercare  for some patients.
It is extremely important that there should be good liaison between the hospital-based service and the primary care team.
During the past few years a number of different models for hospital services for attempted suicide patients have been developed.
Our experience of a multidisciplinary team approach, in which psychiatrists, nursing staff, and social workers all play a prominent role, has been very encouraging.
As indicated in the recent guidelines of the Department of Health and Social Security (1984), a sensible approach towards establishing comprehensive services would be for clinicians in each area to set up a service which most suits local conditions and needs.
Whatever type of service is developed, the most important factors would appear to be that, first, the members of a service should be enthusiastic about dealing with attempted suicide patients; secondly, they should receive appropriate training in assessment and management; and thirdly, supervision by experienced staff should be available.
Staff working in centres in which facilities for attempted suicide patients are developed should endeavour to monitor trends in the behaviour in their area.
This need not demand a large-scale research effort, but a simple record of all hospital admissions for self-poisoning and self-injury.
Such monitoring might help provide feedback to the service on its effectiveness.
However, the main use would be to identify groups of patients to whom special attention should be paid because of changing patterns of self-poisoning and self-injury in the area.
There are a number of other needs associated with the problem of attempted suicide.
Apart from a general improvement in clinical services, further research is required to evaluate the effectiveness of different methods of managing patients after they have left hospital.
In particular, more still needs to be known about the characteristics of patients most likely to benefit from treatment.
We now know that special aftercare can benefit women, but male attempters appear more difficult to help.
Further work is required to find new therapeutic methods for men.
Child and adolescent attempters are a group with special requirements, and careful thought should be given to how best to meet their needs.
Guidelines have been published in the UK concerning the management of attempters under the age of 16 (Bulletin of the Royal College of Psychiatrists 1982).
These recommend that a local child psychiatric team should  be involved with all such individuals and their families, and that young people up to 14 years of age should be admitted to a paediatric ward, rather than a general medical or surgical ward.
The general hospital psychiatric team should be able to provide assessment of older adolescents; one member of the team might take a particular interest in this age group.
In some cases, especially those with serious psychiatric disorders, the local adolescent psychiatric service should be involved is early as possible.
In others, the general hospital psychiatric service will be able to provide aftercare, including where necessary, family therapy.
Individuals who repeatedly take overdoses or injure themselves constitute a group for which there is a considerable dearth of information, both of the causes of this behaviour and means of providing effective help.
Chronic repeaters therefore should be the focus of intensive research aimed, first, at describing their difficulties and the reasons for the behaviour, and secondly, at evaluation of different methods of management, including the possible role of medication.
We appear to be a long way from finding effective means of primary prevention of attempted suicide.
At present it seems likely that the most hopeful approaches rest in three areas.
The first is the limitation in prescribing of psychotropic drugs and the provision of alternative forms of help for individuals with symptoms of depression and anxiety secondary to social problems.
This approach would have to be aimed primarily at general practice.
Already there have been a number of reports of developments of this kind.
For example, brief counselling by general practitioners has been shown to be as effective as benzodioazepine tranquillizers for patients with minor affective disorders of recent onset (Catalan et al.1984b).
Encouraging experiments have been carried out utilizing the special skills of social workers (Cooper et al.1974; Shepherd et al.1979), clinical psychologists (Johnston 1978; Robson et al.1984), and marriage guidance counsellors (Marsh and Barr 1975; Cohen and Halpern 1978) working in general practice to provide help for patients with social problems.
The second approach to prevention is the implementation of educational programmes aimed at modifying the attitudes of young people to attempted suicide.
This requires very careful planning to avoid any risk of encouraging the behaviour.
Our knowledge of  deliberate self-poisoning in young people indicates that such measures could be largely confined to girls.
The third approach to prevention, and the most difficult, lies in economic and social changes which could lead to general improvements in standards of living.
Unfortunately, current trends, especially with regard to unemployment, are in the opposite direction.
We hope that primary prevention of attempted suicide will not continue to be solely a focus for conjecture.
Apart from the load attempted suicide places on health service facilities, it is not yet known whether the high levels of the behaviour in recent years will subsequently be reflected in an increase in the numbers of completed suicides.
This would certainly occur if the rates of suicides among those who make attempts continue at the levels mentioned earlier (p. 21).
The needs associated with the problem of attempted suicide are clearly both considerable and pressing.
It is to be hoped that the interest in these patients, which has led to an impressive research effort and also the establishment of specialized clinical services, will continue despite the major economic strictures which now face the Health Service.