

The residents
The most important people in a Home are the residents.
The purpose of every Home is to care for elderly people during the last years of their lives.
That seems an obvious statement.
But there are places where the residents are seen not so much as customers but as ‘them’.
A group of people who if only ‘they’ would behave, life would be so much simpler for ‘us’, the staff.
‘They’ don't like the food, ‘they’wet their beds, ‘they’get in the way when staff are trying to tidy up or lay the table.
Most people in a residential home for the elderly are in their eighties.
About a quarter of them are men.
They come into a Home because they can't live on their own or with their families any longer.
Some of them are frail physically but are as bright as a button in their minds.
Some of them are severely confused through an illness like Alzheimer's disease or are suffering from short-term memory loss.
Some residents are outgoing and like to mix, to do things with others.
Some prefer to opt out.
Some find it hard to make a decision because they've got out of the habit or they no longer see the need.
But all of them are individuals — with hopes, needs, desires, feelings of pain or pleasure just as the rest of us have.
This chapter looks at life in a Home from the residents' point of view, it includes:
who are they?
the resident's Bill of Rights
the views of two residents, May and Bert
WHO ARE THEY?
Every resident in every home for the elderly is a survivor.
A person in their eighties today has lived through a century of more change than at any other time in history.
Violet, aged 86
‘When I was young, there were very few cars.
And of course no one had a telephone.
I was in service in a big house near Bristol.
We had to start work at 6 o'clock.
I remember how cold it was when we came down in the winter.
I had to carry hot water for washing to every room.’
Jeannie, aged 90
‘My husband died in the war — not the last war, the first world war.
He was only twenty one.
We'd just got married.
I had two lovely little boys, but they were a handful, they were.
I don't know how I'd 've coped if it hadn't been for my mum.
She took them in during the day and I went off to Bartle's — that's the engineering factory in Brick Lane.
I got to be supervisor in the winches section.
In the next war we changed to munitions and they tried to bomb us.
We had two incendiary bombs, but they were in the canteen.
We had roast potatoes for dinner that day!’
It is hard sometimes to look at an old person sitting passively in a chair and imagine them running around, bringing up babies, managing an office, driving a lorry, getting into trouble with the law, being a pillar of the local community, fighting a war.
But almost all the men and women in your Home have been active for most of their lives.
And inside, they may not feel that much different from when they were younger.
Joan, aged 83
‘When you've been very independent for a very long time, to depend on somebody else isn't easy, I find.
Also, not to be able to take part in things and not to be able to go out in the evening I find difficult.
I'd love to go out in the evening to things but you're too tired by the evening.
That I find very frustrating.’
Jimmy, aged 79
‘Some days, you feel your age.
Other times you don't feel your age at all.
If it's a good day, I feel on top of the world.
I do all I can on my good days.’
Learning to be old
An older person who has been accustomed to being in charge doesn't suddenly stop feeling responsible for other people just because he or she has gone into  a Home.
Old feelings die hard.
There may be a power struggle between some residents and the care staff in a Home, where a resident, who may perhaps suffer from some confusion, behaves as if the staff are in her charge.
Sue, a manager
‘You see it happening all the time, the move around between the carer and the resident as to who is the adult and who is the child.
There are days when some of our residents are quite determined that you are going to enable them to do what they want to do, even though what they want to do is completely ridiculous, like going out in the rain without a coat on.
They're so determined, they almost make you feel as though you are a child again.’
At other times, the residents behave as if they are children again and show feelings they had when they were very young.
Sue
‘The amount of old people who talk about their mothers, it's incredible.
You get usually women in their eighties who talk about their mothers as though they're still there, or cry terrible tears of sadness at having lost their mothers.
It seems so irrational at eighty to be thinking where's my mother…’
Feelings and desires
Feelings don't disappear with old age — sometimes elderly people are quite uninhibited.
They cry if they are unhappy, they ask for attention or affection if they feel the need, they touch you and want to be touched.
They may form relationships with other residents which have a sexual element.
Confused people sometimes masturbate in public.
If this occurs, try to contain such behaviour by discouraging anyone from sexual activity or from exposing themselves in public.
Tell them it can upset or offend other residents.
However, you should always respect a person's privacy and not attempt to prevent relationships from developing.
There may also be problems for homosexuals in a residential home.
A gay couple may wish to share a room.
They have a right to have their feelings respected and should be treated as any other residents.
To sum up
We are all made up of what we have achieved in the past, the character we have developed, our strong points, our weaknesses.
The little things that drive our family mad and the wonderful things that make them love us.
This doesn't change with old age.
Every single person is an individual and needs to be  respected as one.
Each age brings its own problems, and old age has more than its share.
But that doesn't mean that all clients are alike.
A good care assistant who remembers this has taken the most important step in developing the support which his or her clients need and deserve.
THE RESIDENT'S BILL OF RIGHTS
to live a fulfilling life
to be treated with dignity as an individual
to have personal privacy for yourself, your belongings and your affairs
to do things at your own pace and when you want to do them
to perform any activity you feel capable of doing
to have your cultural, religious and sexual needs respected
to be free to make and keep contacts with the outside world
to be involved in decisions affecting your living arrangements
to associate with others and build up relationships
to have access to the facilities and services of the community
to take any risks implied by these rights without being unnecessarily restricted
to be consulted and involved in your personal care and to be given the daily care appropriate to your needs
not to be forced to do anything against your will
RIGHTS IN ACTION
One Home has drawn up a more extensive list of practical rights which goes into detail about every aspect of life in the Home.
Each new resident and member of staff is given this and they find it very helpful.
The manager's comments are printed underneath the points they refer to.
You may register with a doctor, dentist, chiropodist of your choice.
‘We have as many as fifteen GP's attached to this Home because our residents like to see a doctor they know.’
You may have access to physiotherapists, community nursing, other nursing services provided by the health authority or private agency nurses.
You may have access to your room at all times and have the privacy to lock your room door and any cupboard inside your room.
‘Every door has its own lock, and residents also have a safe for valuables.’
You may make a complaint by using a special complaint card which will be seen by the manager of the Home.
You may contribute to running the Home by attending its residents' committee meetings.
‘We have a residents' meeting once a month.
At the moment it's chaired by one of the senior staff.
They talk about any problems, maybe with other clients, things like that and ask for suggestions.
It's mostly changes of menu that the discussion goes round.
Or for instance, we decorated two of our lounges and the residents discussed what paints and paper they'd like on the walls.’
You may control the spending of the Home's amenity fund.
‘We have to raise money ourselves to do any outings, we're given a very small budget so we have fund raising events, and the clients have total say about how we use that.’
You may get up and go to bed when you please.
‘Some clients stay up till two o'clock in the morning.
We also have what we call a flexible breakfast here as well.
It starts at 8.30 and finishes at 10.30, so clients can stay in bed if they like.
That's as flexible as we can be.’
You may purchase and wear your own clothes if you wish.
You have a right to wear saris, turbans or any clothing required by your race or religion.
‘We encourage people to spend more on themselves.
Many clients had a tendency to just store their money away and not do anything with it and sit in clothes that didn't belong to them.
Now they spend quite a bit of their money, which is nice.
It's on their own clothes and they actually enjoy spending it.’
You may select your meals from a choice on the menu, you may assist in preparing the Home's menu, you may eat when you wish during specified meal times.
You have a right to a special diet for religious as well as medical purposes.
You can go out and about as much as you wish and are able.
You may choose your own bathing/washing times and who, if anyone, will help you.
‘If clients don't want you to touch them, they just say no.
You're aware that at some stage they'll need a wash, but you just leave them until they've calmed down or you talk to them about it.
We don't force any of our residents here to do anything they don't want to do.’
You may bring to the Home any possessions or furniture within the limits of space in the building.
‘In the last year some of the rooms have been transformed, because we actually encourage clients to buy or bring in their own beds.
Some clients have carpeted their own rooms and got their own curtains and things like that.
That works quite well with confused clients as well because they can see something that belongs to them or looks familiar to them.’
You may use the Home's facility to prepare snacks and beverages.
You may have access to any written material directly concerning you, held within the Home.
You may choose how and with whom you spend your day.
‘We've had some quite interesting encounters between men and women who are a bit confused but haven't lost their desires.
We don't have any difficulty with that, what we find is that the relatives of the people involved have the difficulty.
We're quite happy to enable anybody to do anything they want to do.
It has led to some funny situations, with irate daughters saying ‘my mother wouldn't do a thing like that!’.’
You may entertain visitors in your room and invite people to visit whenever they wish.
You may take responsibility for your own medication or ask the staff to manage it.
You have the right to expect that any information imparted to a member of staff will be treated with respect and confidentiality, though some medical information will have to be discussed with other staff members.
KEY POINTS
Elderly people are individuals and like to be treated with dignity.
Residents should be able to live as far as possible as they would in a home of their own.
They have basic rights which you should respect at all times.
Most residents of homes for the elderly are in their eighties and have come there towards the end of an active life.
Many find it hard to adjust to the change.
MAY'S STORY
May is 92 years old.
She's always led a very active life.
In her early years she helped to start the Girl Guide movement in Swansea and London.
In the 1920's and 1930's she was a social worker in the Middle East, and also ran a children's home for Doctor  Barnardo's .
Although she isn't married, May is part of a large family, now three generations on, and she's kept in touch with each generation.
She likes the company of young people and finds they often talk to her about things they can't always discuss at home.
Now she's moved into a Home near some of her family after ten years of severe physical disability, which she's had to come to terms with.
‘You realise that each age has a different set of problems.
You've really got to learn bit by bit.
You've got to learn to be a toddler from a baby, you've got to learn to be a child and then a teenager.
You learn to be middle aged and then to be old aged.
You've got to learn all the way along.
And at the beginning and the end of your life you've always got to have the help of somebody alongside you — all the time.
As a child it's your parents or friends or teachers, and in old age it's helpers or carers to see you through.’
May is crippled with osteoporosis and has to walk with a frame for support.
She used to walk with two sticks, but fell down at her 90th birthday party when she stumbled over a low table and broke her hip again.
She now has to be very careful how she goes.
‘Pain is on and off.
You get stiff.
It's lovely getting into bed at night.
That sort of relieves it.
You've got to keep yourself active as far as you can.
I've got a shattered arm as well which means that I can really use only one arm, but I have to keep the muscles in the other one going as far as I can.’
Coping with pain
‘It's not continuous but it's unpredictable — you never quite know when it's coming or not.
I think that makes it difficult because if you are talking to somebody you don't know whether you're going to have a bad pain during your conversation…
It gets a little awkward.
People are very understanding and really if you talk to people and have an interesting time, it takes your mind off yourself.
You are apt to think of your pain in very big letters PAIN rather than thinking of something else.
‘I find it very helpful to look at something beautiful.
I've got lots of flowers in my room and if I'm in pain, well I say, ‘look at my lovely hyacinths’.
‘You can take your mind off things yourself really, if you want to.
Reading interesting books is a very great help and a great way of taking you out of yourself, especially travelling books.’
Because of her pain and the stiffness, the easy way out is to stay in her chair, but May is determined not to let pain master her.
‘You mustn't feel that you can't do anything.
Sometimes my helper comes in and says, ‘It's time for a walk’ and makes me do it even if I think, ‘No I'm too comfy to move!’.
But you mustn't overdo it.
If you're tired, just sit down and start again.
‘Not being active was very difficult to begin with, but I think you've got to be very positive and just say to yourself, ‘I am old now, I'm 92.
You can't do what you did when you were younger and you've got to adapt yourself’.
But it does take time, you ought not to hurry over it.
When you accept your age, life is much easier and much happier’
Being cared for
‘I think caring really means treating you as a human being.
I go about in a wheelchair and someone who pushes it very often goes into a shop and says, ‘Look here, you have bought rather a lot of things I think you had better give a cheque for them — now I? I write the cheque out, dear, and you shall sign it.’
I would rather plan all that myself.
But it's all done by a helper very often who doesn't understand you.
‘It's better to tell them beforehand, ‘You wheel the chair and if I need help in a shop, I'll let you know.’
t Make out your own list if you can.
If you can't, or if your fingers are arthritic and you can't write much, let her write it down but take a part in it yourself.
That's something I think carers have to be trained to do.
It's much easier for the young helper to do it all for you.
And I hate being called ‘dear’ or ‘darling’just as if I was a child.’
May admits she can be irritable at times.
‘I wear a hearing aid and only the other day I couldn't understand what my helper was saying.
She was talking very softly and I yelled at her ‘Do please talk so that I can understand you’ in a very irritated voice.
I felt very bad afterwards.
I think if you feel like that, the great thing is to go and punch a cushion — let off steam somehow or other But, if possible, don't let it off on your carer!
‘I don't think it's any use looking after old people unless you really care and really like old people.’
Enjoying food
‘Food is very important indeed.
You look forward to your meals very much, and I think you must have a cook with imagination because I know sometimes you have the same thing constantly and you get very bored by it.
It makes a great difference I think, food and the way it's served.
If you have vegetable dishes, you can usually help yourself And I like variety in my food.
‘I find light meals best — a good lunch, then a cup of tea at teatime and then a light supper.
Sometimes I'm rather greedy and I do eat more than I should, and then you pay for it in the end.
You get to know yourself very well really.
Sometimes you know yourself better than the doctor; you know when to take your painkillers and how long the pain is going to last too, which I find is useful.’
The outside world
Now she's in a Home, May still sees a lot of her family and still finds herself consulted by one of her numerous great-nieces.
‘Visitors are very important and I love having people here, though I don ‘t want to have too many at the same time.
Sometimes it's very nice to be alone.
And I like to get out and go shopping.
It's good to get out of the atmosphere of a Home for a time.’
Dreams of the past
‘One of the most amazing things about my life is I have the most lovely dreams about all my old friends and the old days.
You go back to all the times you've had with them and they are very, very real.
I don't know whether other oldies have the same sort of dreams, but they bring a very great compensation; and you wake up feeling very excited having met your old friends again.’
Fears about going into a Home
‘I think when you first go into the Home, you're frightened because you think you'll be treated possibly as a cabbage or just somebody who can't do anything for themselves and that you may be completely dependent on  people and you want to be independent.
You're afraid how people are going to treat you.
‘I was also afraid that I wasn't going to be fed properly.
I said to myself, ‘this is ridiculous, of course you're going to be fed properly’, but I was still afraid.
I'm very dependent on interesting food.
‘I remember so well my first day.
I was given a lovely bit of home-made cake for tea and that lifted my spirits tremendously.
It's little tiny things that matter, especially at first when you're going into a Home, they are very important.
‘You're very careful about moving about your room that you haven't had before.
You don't quite know where things are to begin with.’
Daily routine
‘I'm all for change.
I like really a lot of change in the week.
I like to know when my room is going to be cleaned.
That's useful to know because I usually like to get up rather late.
But sometimes I like to get up early.
I like to be able to arrange my own times a bit but that isn't always possible and you've got to accommodate yourself as well to the needs of the staff.’
Being patient with yourself
‘Your memory can sometimes try you.
If you can't remember something, that can be a bit of a trial but you can get used to that.
My memory's fairly good on the whole but I do forget names; and then they come back to you, practically always, if you are patient.
‘You need an awful lot of perseverance in old age.
Not to say, ‘I can't do it or I can't remember it’, but stop it for a bit and then go back to it, and then you'll find you've got it.
It's like a crossword puzzle.
You've only done about two words, then you have a break and then you go back to it and you get another three or four.
You almost finish it in the end if you don't hurry.’
It feels like family
‘In The Home I've been in, I don't feel there is any authority over me at all.
The owner of the Home may pop her head around the door and say, ‘I'm going into the town today, can I do anything for you?.’
Or she'd say, ‘We're going in the car for a little drive, will you come with us?.’
I've been very fortunate because it's very like a large family.’
Everybody's different
May feels that one of the biggest problems in old age is that people think of you as all the same.
‘Everybody's different.
Everybody's completely different and there's such a tendency not to study people really and to simply think of them as all exactly the same, ‘You're 75 and you're old and you've got to put up with that.
It's a case of just studying your individual.
‘I think some people at 75 perhaps do feel old.
I don't quite know why, but anyhow if they do feel old at 75, then they ought to be shaken up a bit.
There s a lot you can do at 75 if you're well physically and mentally.
When you're my age, 92, you feel that 75 is almost a chicken!’
BERT'S STORY
Bert is 84.
He and his wife, Nellie, live in a Home in an outer city suburb where they've been for fifteen months.
They decided to move after his wife had a stroke, on their doctor's advice.
‘I played football in my younger days till I had a bad injury in my knee which I'm now suffering from — chronic arthritis.
It more or less incapacitated me from any activity.
I went into hospital with chronic bronchitis and emphysema, and the wife meanwhile had a stroke and lost the use of her right arm — most of that has come back except her hand is useless.
When she picks anything up, it falls out.
‘When I got home, the doctor came and said of course she couldn't cook, so I was doing the cooking.
I didn't mind, but I was a bit dodgy on my leg and once or twice, walking from the gas stove to the sink, I spilt the hot water In the end, he said ‘I'm sorry, you can't stop here on your own, you'll have to be looked after’.
‘It took a lot of thinking about — living in your own home and happy there for fifty years and suddenly to give it away.
We gave everything away.
All we took from our own home was a dressing table and a small chest of drawers.
My wife misses the room to put things.
‘The social worker at the hospital — she was marvellous — she put us in touch with a charity that keeps a list of all these types of Homes and she sent us a list and this one was more or less on our doorstep.
Anyway I  phoned up here before making the journey and they took us round.
There were no vacancies then, but they were able to move two single ladies into single rooms and we took their room.
So instead of a long wait we were here within six days.
It was marvellous, really.
‘We were taken to see one other Home, it was quite nice but it was more claustrophobic — each room was like a little closed unit.’
The garden was one of the things Bert and Nellie liked about the Home they now live in.
‘My wife used to do the gardening at home.
She likes the big garden here — she even walks round next door's garden and ad mires it.
I wish I could go with her, that's the only snag.
But I can't walk because I've got emphysema and I've only got about a third of a lung as well as arthritis to go with it.
She s a bit dodgy on her feet and I'm a bit nervous about her, but she's got to the stage now when she can't sit in all day without exercise.
Now the weather's nice, she's been going out three times a day.’
Before retirement
Bert spent his working life with the Post Office, and when he retired, he missed all the companionship of the large sorting office.
‘It was a crowd of boys who'd been together for years — somebody was always up to something.
It was a pleasure to go to work.
When we went on holiday, perhaps to Eastbourne, we used to have four or five other couples who worked in the Post Office with me — we met down there annually and played bowls amongst ourselves.’
An active retirement
‘We went on continental holidays for about fourteen years all over Europe, except the hot countries — we didn't touch Spain!
We usually went to Switzerland, Holland, Germany, Denmark, Sweden.
That's really the hardest part about coming here.
You see, we were so used to being out, both the wife and I. We'd go all over London travelling and to the theatre; and of course our holidays abroad, we miss, weekends at the coast we miss.
‘There are good things about being here, like having somebody to look after us and there are no restrictions.’
Activities in the Home
‘There are parties here — at Easter time and Christmas time.
We go to those and any local activities.
They take you to the theatre if you like to pay, but nearly all the things we've already seen.
They do some activities downstairs — they take some of the old ladies and give them bits of painting and that sort of thing, but nothing I'm interested in.
I wouldn't play snakes and ladders — I haven't gone that far yet!
‘I keep myself busy by reading, mostly mysteries or sporting books.
A library comes round with big books for those who can't see well — there's a big selection of those out there and they change them often.
But I don't use them unless I've run out.
My nephew is an avid reader, and his books all come to me.’
Keeping in touch with the family
‘I keep in touch with both my sisters and my brother's wife — she rings me every week or I ring her: And my niece and nephew — well, life wouldn't be worth living without them.
I've only got to pick the phone up and they're up here like a shot.
‘Last Tuesday Nellie, my wife, had to go to hospital and they kept her in for a day and a night for eye tests.
Well on Wednesday she sat in the ward waiting to be brought home.
She sat there and about four o'clock in the afternoon the sister came round, ‘I'm sorry, Mrs Nicholson, we haven't got any transport, you'll have to stop another night.’
Anyway, Thursday she was still there and my nephew came up rather unexpectedly to bring some photographs back and he said ‘Where's Nell?’.
I said, ‘She's still in hospital’ and he said ‘She isn't!’.
He went straight out in the car and he brought her home.’
The other residents
‘We mix with the people in our room where we sit.
There are one or two we could do without, but that's always the case!
Oh, yes, we get along all right!’
The care staff
‘The care staff are marvellous here.
When I'm not able, I call them and they are only too willing to help.
But I like to be independent as much as I can, and they've got more than enough to do with the people that can't help themselves.
‘I'd like a new member of staff to know they are there to help people who can't help themselves and they also must have one hell of a lot of patience!
I couldn't do the job myself!
For a person who's dedicated it must be a very rewarding job, but for someone who only comes here to work it must be blooming hard.
‘There's one lady here — she's marvellous one moment and yet without any word of warning a care assistant will go to her and she'll put out her hand and say ‘I hate you!’.
And she has landed them one.
Then five minutes afterwards she's been as normal as anyone — I suppose it's a disease.
‘I don't feel today in my mind very different from when I was young.’
KEY POINTS
Old age isn't something you just settle into.
Like other major times of life, old age is a time when you have to learn how to deal with a changing lifestyle without losing your dignity.
Food plays a large part in elderly people's lives.
What's on the menu and how it is presented can make a lot of difference to their day.
Many residents suffer chronic pain.
They can take their minds off it, but it can make them irritable or ‘difficult’.
Both May and Bert are determined not to give in to their physical weaknesses.
Both keep going, even if it means a great effort and both keep their minds active by reading, talking and keeping up with what's happening in the world.
Starting work
Care assistant
‘I came here because I took a liking to the place and the people.
I like to work with old people.
When I first came, I spent some time with Sue, she's the manager.
I went around the place and the units to find out where everything was.
And she told me how many shifts you work, the different groups in this home and what type of clients, how to treat them.’
You've just been appointed as a care assistant.
You have shown that you are really interested in old people and you know something about your duties and your role as a care assistant.
This chapter explains what happens in some typical Homes — ones that offer good care to their residents and concern for their staff.
Every Home has its own way of doing things, and yours may not be run exactly along these lines.
Even if it is not, we hope this chapter will give you some ideas on what to expect and what to ask for.
It will cover:
first days at work
training and induction
some problems
FIRST DAYS AT WORK
HOME 1 Birch Grove
Sue is the manager of the inner-city home where Joanne has just started work as a new care assistant.
This is how she welcomes a new member of staff.
Sue, the manager
‘Right from the start, we give them a very clear picture that they're coming to work in someone's home.
This isn't our home, it's the residents' home.
That's really one of the most important things to remember.
If someone starts to give the impression that it is our home and the residents are just people who come and live in it, then they usually don't stay in the job, it's as easy as that.
‘Before we appoint a new assistant, we interview them for quite some time.
So they've heard a lot about what happens here and they've had the opportunity to look around.
By the time they actually start work, they've got an idea of the sort of Home that it is, what kind of clients are here, how many residents, how many staff and so on.
‘When they first start work, they come and see the person who's in charge, it could be me or my deputy.
We spend about an hour with them.
We talk about the standards that we keep and the attitudes that are important, as well as their shift patterns, times of duty and so on.
‘Then we attach the new care assistant to a member of staff, not necessarily the most experienced, but someone whom we see as having the right attitude to the residents.
We ask that person to look after them and to show them the ropes.
After all, it's the care assistants who really know the details, so we like them to pass on that knowledge.’
So, on her first day at work, Joanne spent an hour or so with Sue and then was taken round the Home.
Care assistant
‘After I'd talked to Sue, another member of staff helped to introduce me to the residents.
I started to talk to them — about anything really.
They talked to me about their past and told me what sort of things they like doing.’
Joanne has experience as a care assistant already, so she was able to work with other assistants straight away.
She knows that even something that seems so simple as giving a wash has to be thought about and done in a sensitive way.
Care assistant
‘In the morning when I came in, I had to help get clients out of bed, dressed and washed.
I don't find that difficult, that's really expected of me as part of the caring.
But they may find it difficult, they must feel like they've lost their dignity, the fact that we're washing them.
But I think you know how far to go because there are certain barriers.’
Settling in
During the next few days, the new assistant in Birch Grove learns where each resident's room is and what their individual needs are.
In this home there are about 44 residents, but they live in small self-contained units of 12 with their own key workers who stay with that one unit.
A new assistant won't always be a key worker (see page 51) straight away and usually spends some time with two or three units or areas of the house to get to know different ways of doing things and the needs of different residents.
Sue
‘We check out with our new staff regularly, whether they feel comfortable in their role and whether they're getting on OK.
That's one of the things that can come up in our meetings.
We hold these three times a week to discuss care issues — anything that's around or any individual client who's causing us concern or pleasure.
Anything that comes to the top we talk about.
We also use some of these sessions for training.’
KEY POINTS Birch Grove
On arrival, Sue, the manager, welcomes the new assistant and spends about an hour with her or him.
She explains their shifts and duties and makes sure they understand what the home stands for and how the residents should be treated.
Another care assistant takes them round the Home, introduces them to other staff and residents and helps them settle in.
They do not practise as a key worker straight away, but are attached to two or three units, to get used to working with different sets of residents with different problems.
Sue checks out regularly to make sure that the care assistant is settling down.
They are encouraged to speak up at the regular meetings for care assistants, which are held three times a week.
Training is an on-going process which all members of staff take part in.
HOME 2 Seaview
Home 2 is one of five Homes run by a Churches Housing Trust.
Peter, the officer-in-charge, has worked hard to make sure that new staff have the right sort of attitude before they are appointed.
There are 22 residents in a large converted private house, and at the moment many of them share a room.
However, the Home is moving soon to a purpose-built house which will provide single rooms and better facilities.
Seaview is a very friendly place — friends and relatives are encouraged to drop in at any time, and residents feel they can talk to visitors even if they don't know them.
First days
Peter
‘Because we only have 5 to 6 full-time care assistants, I spend a lot of time in the first interview to make sure we get the sort of person who really understands our attitude, and what we expect of them.
As far as I'm concerned, the residents come first; and I expect every member of staff to understand that, right through from helping them get up in the morning to taking someone off to bingo if she wants to go.
We have a short paper which I ask people coming for a job to read through, and then I ask some questions to see what sort of person they are.
‘When a new assistant joins us, we put him or her with my deputy, Wendy, or with Joan, who's a senior care assistant, so that they can follow them, be with them, be shown things at floor level.
They learn who the residents are, where they sleep and any particular problems which they might meet straight away.’
Settling in
Peter
‘It's a very informal place here — I like to keep an open door and staff and residents can wander where they want.
I don't like any barriers, so I'm always here for a new care assistant to see.
Some find their feet quickly; but I find that some assistants need support for the first few weeks, and it's up to me and Joan and Wendy to give it.’
Peter gives all new members of staff a document which tells them what their duties are and reminds them of the rights of the residents.
There is a good programme of daily activities in the Home, and all these are written up on a large board in Peter's office.
It includes everything from when the hairdresser is coming, to appointments at the hospital or outings to the local theatre.
Staff and residents are free to come in to see what is on today, and Peter is always on hand to give an informal word of help.
Continuing training
All members of staff attend regular in-service training sessions, which are run with officers and staff from the other homes in the Churches Trust.
Peter
‘All the officers of the Trust had a meeting to discuss training and we each decided to take a specific subject for one or two training sessions.
For example, I take on mobility and activities, somebody else is doing incontinence, somebody else first aid, somebody else mental health.
The turn-out is very good.
On average I think we get about 15 care assistants to each meeting.’
KEY POINTS Seaview
Peter welcomes new assistants when they arrive.
He explains their shifts and duties, and gives them their copy of the document which they have already seen at their interview.
His deputy or the senior care assistant takes them round the home, introduces them to other staff and residents and helps them settle in.
Peter checks out regularly to make sure that the care assistant is settling down.
He has an open-door policy, which means that staff are encouraged to come and see him if they have problems.
Training is an on-going process which all members of staff take part in regularly.
HOME 3 Nightingale House
At Birch Grove and Seaview, you meet an informal but dedicated approach to care.
New assistants are interviewed and chosen very carefully, and as soon as they start work they are supported and trained by senior staff and their colleagues.
They are supervised in the early days, encouraged to speak up at meetings, and they also attend training programmes which are provided for all the care assistants.
Home 3 has a more formalised approach.
The manager has recently started up an induction programme which all new staff take at the same time as they learn about the job through practical, hands-on experience.
Eve, the present manager of the home, found it very difficult to learn what to do when she first started work as a care assistant.
Eve, the manager
‘I was sent into a room and somebody said ‘Oh, you wash the floor’ because a client who was incontinent was walking around.
I didn't know where the toilets were, I didn't know what to do with this client.
I was appalled by that, and I realised there was a real need to support new members of staff by giving them some basic information.’
So with the encouragement of the local authority, the senior staff at Nightingale House have organised an induction programme for new care assistants which starts as soon they begin work.
The first day
Eve
‘I ask one of my senior staff to supervise each new care assistant during their first ten weeks with us.
Say they started on a Monday at two o'clock in the afternoon, he or she will take them away for the first hour and go through some of the main points of their work here.
We give them their induction pack (see page 41) to look at later, but it's really to get to know the layout, because we have quite a large building.
‘We walk round the building and they are introduced to any members of staff around.
We give them a list of clients' names and room numbers, and then they're asked to go round and place rooms and names together.
They actually work through where each client's room is.
‘Then they meet their four special clients, the ones for whom they will be a key worker.
The clients expect and understand that quite well now, because it's been happening for about two or three years.
In fact, they often demand their key worker when they may be still finding their feet, which is a bit of a pressure on them.’
Settling in
Over the next ten weeks, the new assistant meets with her supervisor for one hour a week, to go through the induction programme in detail.
KEY POINTS Nightingale House
On arrival, new care assistants are welcomed by a personal supervisor and spend about an hour with them.
They are given the induction pack and are taken round the home and shown the layout.
They are introduced to the clients for whom they will be a key worker.
For the first ten weeks they will spend one hour a week on induction training with their supervisor.
They will also take part in the continuing training which is available to all members of staff.
TRAINING AND INDUCTION
Induction is now a common word in all branches of industry, business and the civil service.
The word means ‘bringing in’ or ‘bringing about’(a bit like introduction), but it's used now to mean a carefully structured programme where new staff can learn about their jobs.
Managers have realised that the more information and training a new member of staff is given when they start work, the more confident they feel and the better they operate.
It happens in big business, in local government, even in a small business like a travel agency.
Many residential homes are now beginning to take this kind of approach very seriously, as Nightingale House does.
There are usually two parts to an induction programme:
special training sessions
an induction or information pack
Training sessions
These are sometimes designed to take place for a period of time such as a day or a week.
At Nightingale House, induction takes place over ten weeks in regular sessions with a senior member of staff, so that too much information isn't given all at once.
The course also includes special training in communication skills, which is an important part of care staff's work.
As a new care assistant, by the end of the ten weeks, you would be expected to know the aims and objectives of the Home and your role within it.
Sample induction programme
We have printed below part of an induction programme designed for care staff by one local authority.
It explains what information should be given to new staff on their first day at work.
After each paragraph of information, which is introduced by a dash, the sentence written in italics gives the kind of explanation a supervisor would give the new assistant.
You may find it helpful to read these items first, and then go back and look carefully at the explanations underneath.
Introduce new assistant to all the staff on duty, identify any member of staff who can provide advice and guidance.
Explain the layout of the building.
‘You won't be able to remember everyone's names first time, so feel free to ask someone's name again.’
The staff room should have a locker and/or a place to hang clothes, and nearby there may be staff toilets.
There should also be a notice explaining times and the place for breaks and meals.
‘You do need to protect your personal property.
There is no charge for meals taken with residents.’’
As a general rule, overalls are worn only when necessary.
The local authority can provide them, but employees are free to wear their own if they wish.
‘We like staff as well as residents to show their individuality rather than wear a uniform.’
Show where the time sheets are kept.
All staff must sign in on arrival and departure.
‘It's important that shift times are kept to, because the person you are taking over from can't always leave until they are replaced.
There always has to be someone on duty in a Home.’
The weekly rota is displayed in the staff room and also in the office.
It should cover three weeks at a time, with allowance for holiday and sick leave.
‘The rota system will be explained.
If you have difficulties in fitting in with it, always come and discuss your problems.’
The conditions of service will be in writing and will include things such as: absence and sickness procedures; annual leave; retirement scheme; period of notice.
‘Read the document later, and keep it in a safe place.’
The code of conduct outlines what is expected of you when you work in the Home.
‘It's important that you remember how vulnerable frail, elderly people are and how much they need your help.
You should help them safeguard their valuables.
At all times you should respect their right to confidentiality.’
Some local authorities have agreements with one or more trade unions.
‘If your employer has an agreement with a union, you will be told which one you are eligible to join.’
You will be advised about the Health and Safety at Work Act — for example, to  wear reasonable footwear to help keep your balance, and for comfort; to practise personal hygiene, especially washing your hands.
‘Always wash your hands before you work with food, and before and after you attend to the personal needs of a resident.’
All accidents, however small, must be reported and an accident report form completed.
There should be an example of an accident form in the induction pack.
‘Employees as well as employers have a responsibility to work safely.’
You will be instructed about essential fire precautions including exits and how to get residents outside.
An information/induction pack
This is a set of papers giving information on the Home's approach to care.
They often set down what the job means and how things are done.
A good induction pack includes all the information a new member of staff needs and examples of any forms they may have to fill in, such as care plans for residents.
At Nightingale House, the pack leads off with a copy of the Annual Review, which is published each year.
As its name suggests, it reviews every aspect of the running and management of the home in the past year.
It includes client care, staffing, the budget, the aims and objectives for the year, and a policy statement of the aims of the home.
Eve, the manager, believes it's very important that new assistants understand these objectives and the meaning of the policy statement right from the start.
Last year, the objectives were:
To provide a service within the community by providing a safe, secure environment in which the individual's rights and needs are recognised, by assisting clients to adjust to living in a communal setting and providing support for clients using professional agencies and the resources of the department.
The Home's policy is:
To ensure that privacy, individuality and respect, as well as a range of opportunities/options are available to all residents in the Home.
To improve and develop good practice in providing care to clients, adequate training, development and support is provided for all staff in the Home.
The rest of the pack contains the following general information:
Care staff induction programme
Map of the buildings
List of dates for care assistant meetings and all other meetings in the Home
Residential home staffing structure
The care assistant's:
Job description
Duty sheets (basic tasks to do during the morning or on afternoon shift)
Conditions of service, grievance and complaints procedure
Statement about confidentiality
The responsibilities of key working
Health and Safety at work
The resident's:
Admission/review documents
Rights in the Home
Accident forms
Assessment and reporting forms
Example of a care plan and its evaluation (see also page 56)
The induction pack gives the care assistant a very useful source of information to refer to whenever there's a problem.
It doesn't mean that the problem is solved, but there's a starting point to work from.
MAKE YOUR OWN PACK
Although many Homes may not give you an induction pack, you could start to make up one of your own.
Ask for sample forms and put them together.
After training sessions, keep any literature or handouts together with the forms so that you build up your own references to guide you.
When you are more experienced and maybe have to show round a new assistant, you will find it very helpful to have all the information in one place.
SOME PROBLEMS
However much you have been told, you may still come across problems when you first join a Home.
Perhaps the topic that worries you may be scheduled to come up in a later training session — but it happens today.
Some of the main difficulties faced by new care assistants are discussed below.
Finding your feet
Many residential homes are almost like large families.
They have their ways of doing things — you might think some of these could be done better or in a different way.
They may have their own special vocabulary or words.
It helps staff to work as a group, but it can take a while for somebody new to fit in.
Manager
‘In some Homes it's quite common that the new member of staff's quite isolated, isolated from the care staff group, not so much from senior staff.
It takes a while for them to actually settle in, and they need quite a lot of support because we do work in teams and they're quite well established teams with definite personalities.
So it's important that they're supported throughout by senior staff, because it's never very easy to fit into an established team who may be used to the old ways of doing things.’
What you can do
If you do feel left out of it, try and make every opportunity to talk to other care assistants.
It can be hard if they are all in a group talking about people or things you know nothing about.
It's often easier to make a link with one person first, perhaps by asking their advice on a problem that's bothering you.
Discrimination
Being discriminated against or harassed on any grounds — whether it's racist, sexist or even ageist — is always hard to cope with on your own.
If you suffer any kind of discrimination or harassment, you should always aim to get it stopped at once, before it gets out of hand.
What you can do
If you feel you can deal with it in your own way, fine.
But if you are unsure or unhappy, always call in the manager.
The person who's attacking you — it could be a resident, it could even be another colleague — should be told that their behaviour is not acceptable.
If they carry on, take it to your Union if you are a member.
If not, ask colleagues you are friendly with to support you if you have to be alone with that person.
Unpredictable residents
It can happen that when an assistant is helping somebody to get dressed, the person suddenly gets violent.
Perhaps they could be down doing up somebody's  laces and that person whacks them across the top of their head.
There's a difficult situation.
What you can do
Make sure that you ask about any residents who may behave like that.
When you are helping them, you obviously need to be on your guard, and treat them with sensitivity and caution.
Always explain what you are doing, and if they can understand you, ask if it's all right to do it.
People don't usually hit out unless they are upset or angry, so showing you understand their feelings goes a long way to preventing them from expressing that anger towards you.
Taking it home
It can be hard to leave your work behind when you go home, especially if something has happened to upset you, such as an illness or death.
What you can do
One of the things that experienced care staff do is talk about anything that is bothering them.
Talk to other staff, to the manager or warden, to your families if necessary.
You are dealing with emotions, not just the residents' but your own.
You need to feel able to express your feelings about them.
(But remember that residents' personal affairs are confidential.)
Care assistant
‘My mum's very comforting.
When you leave work and someone you're very fond of has died, I talk about it to my mum.
‘When I'm on rest days, I phone up if I know anybody in my unit has been poorly.
I'll phone up and make sure they are all right.
Not that I know the staff there aren't going to care for them, it's just me, I have to know myself.’
KEY POINTS
If you have problems or face difficult situations, don't try to cope on your own.
Ask for advice or help and discuss it with your colleagues.
Before you meet residents who are new to you, check if there is anything you should know about their needs or their behaviour.
The care assistant's role
A care assistant is the key person in delivering care to residents in a home for the elderly.
Who you are and how you behave will have a major effect on the men and women who live there.
Every Home is run by a manager, who may also be its owner.
There may be a deputy manager and one or more senior staff.
They are there to supervise and help, but the key role is that of the care assistant.
You are the person who actually provides the day to day care for residents.
Your personality, your way of doing things, your way of helping someone to dress, how you listen to them — all these can make it a Home where the residents feel secure, looked after and treated with dignity, as explained below:
Manager
‘To keep the whole thing in the right perspective, you have to remember that it doesn't necessarily matter what a manager decides, the service that the resident receives is actually given by the care assistant.
It doesn't matter what I do today, but if Jane when she goes upstairs or Jamilla are in a bad mood or are the wrong people for the job, they can affect our residents' lives.
It isn't easy in practice to be a good carer.’
This chapter gives you some guidelines to explain and help you in your work:
what caring actually means
how to carry out your tasks on a daily basis
The guidelines have been drawn up carefully by care assistants and managers who have put them into practice and found them useful themselves.
It doesn't mean that you will do everything in this way — you will have your own ideas and so will your management.
But we hope it will raise some questions in your mind, and give you the answers to some questions as well.
PART 1 THE PRINCIPLES OF CARE
What does caring mean?
What is the difference between caring for someone at home — your home — and in someone else's home — their home?
What is involved in being a key worker?
What happens during the first few days when a resident comes to live in a Home?
Who decides what is the best care for the resident?
The starting point in understanding your role as a care assistant must be the three principles of care.
Three principles
1 Help residents to feel it's their home
This is where the residents live, it isn't a hospital or a hotel.
Manager
‘When someone starts work here, we give them a very clear picture that they're coming to work in someone's home.
This isn't our home, it's the residents' home.
That's really one of the most important things to remember.
If care assistants give the impression that it is our home and that the residents are just people who come and live in it, then they usually don't stay in the job, it's as easy as that.’
2 The resident is an individual
Whatever care you are providing for the residents, treating somebody with respect and dignity, as an important person in their own right, has to be the starting point.
Resident
‘I like to be treated with dignity.
Some people are very apt to dump all old people together.
Some people go in the legs and some go in the head.
Well I was very lucky to have gone in the legs and not in the head!
That does help a lot.
People don't realise that you can do things for yourself.
You should be as independent as possible.’
Manager
‘We have to work very hard not to treat the very frail old people as children.
It's very easy to use your mothering sort of skills — you can be mother to them instead of friend and adult helper.
I try to treat them like anyone else.
They let you know how they want to be treated.
If somebody wants loving, pampering, I'll pamper them, but the next day they might want to live as normal as they can.
I'll do whatever they want to do.’
Care assistant
‘People are different on different days — they've got their moods.
We've all got good days and bad days.
When they've got a bad day, I find they want love.’
Sometimes you will be caring for clients who may be physically or verbally abusive, or unpleasant in their personal habits.
They should be respected as people, even though you dislike the habits.
Try and understand the reason for doing certain things.
Care assistant
‘You imagine what it must be like yourself, that's what I do.
Like we've had women who have wet their knickers and then put them on the radiator to dry, or just swilled them out in the sink and end up with a smelly room.
They're too embarrassed to actually part with them and so you have this very difficult decision as to whether to insist that you have their laundry or whether you allow them to go on doing that, causing them to live in a smelly environment.
It's quite hard, you have to be so delicate the way you go in.’
3 Every resident has a right to be independent
However physically or mentally frail a resident is, you should help them maintain the maximum amount of independence possible.
The job of care staff is not to do things for clients, but to enable them to do things for themselves.
Resident
‘Another silly little thing.
Having a lump of sugar put in your tea and stirred for you.
I hate having my tea stirred for me, I'd rather stir my own tea.
It's an absurd little thing really and yet somehow or other it's important.
Again it's a case of being independent.’
Living up to the principles
It's not always easy to remember these principles when you are tired, someone has soiled themselves yet again, another person is crying and it's time to start serving lunch.
Talk about problems
Remember there are other people to help.
Don't be afraid to ask questions, to talk about things that upset you.
A good manager will give you the chance to say what you feel and to talk about problems.
Take the opportunity.
Speak up at meetings.
If you're part of a team, tell the others if something is bothering you.
Care assistant
‘If there's any problems we don't just leave it to one member of staff, we try to sort it out together.
We have regular meetings of the staff to see if there is any particular problem or if there's a resident having any problems.
We all talk about it, different views, ideas.
We might plan an outing or something with the whole staff — each one will say where they want to go and how to make it work.’
Teamwork
Many of the large Homes have small teams which run separate units, and in a smaller Home there's some teamwork as well.
This could involve simple, everyday tasks like making beds or serving meals, or it could be planning activities and supervising them.
In some Homes, you may be a key worker, working with perhaps three or four other care assistants.
Being in a team means that you need:
Good communication skills (see pages 86–98).
The ability to compromise.
To fit in with others.
To stand up for yourself.
Being a key worker
The key worker system was introduced in children's homes in the 60's and 70's.
It's becoming common in many local authority, private and voluntary sector Homes because it generally works well both for residents and staff.
NOTE Although the title is usually Key Worker, it may also be Primary Worker, Special Worker or sometimes Link Worker.
Every member of staff when they come on duty has a general responsibility towards all residents, but a key worker will have from three to five residents whose care is their special responsibility.
You build a bond up with them, so that they see you as a friend with whom they have this special relationship.
Hopefully they trust you and get individual attention from you, even though you also deal with other residents as well.
The key worker acts as an advocate — he or she represents a client in drawing up a care plan or at any discussion where clients may not be able to speak for themselves.
What the key worker does
Manager
‘You help assess a client when they first come to the Home.
You help clients to shop, pay bills, attend church.
You are involved in their personal care, such as bathing.
You attend any reviews about the client's care and would probably escort the client to hospital where possible.
You would obviously be involved in constructing their care plan (see page 56).
‘Some people find it very satisfying to be a key worker.
Some people find that it's asking a lot of them to actually use their friendship as a part of their work.
Because we don't have a uniform or tools, we just use our personalities.’
Key worker
‘You befriend the person and therefore do whatever a caring relative would do for them, care for their needs, so that they know that you're the person they can turn to.
You could go and buy their clothes or help them choose, you'd know their size, their style, everything about them.
You'd know that if the hairdresser came how they want it styled.
‘One of my clients has got long hair and there's no way I'd let anybody cut it.
I know she doesn't want it cut, not even trimmed at the moment.
You know their likes and their dislikes.
It's like a best friend really.
‘We do all sorts of different jobs, not just looking after them.
It's like your own home.
In your own home you care for your family and you do other things — cooking, you do a bit of sewing and a bit of reading and a bit of knitting and a bit of writing…all kinds of things.
‘It can be hard when they die, because you build up a bond with them.
Sometimes maybe you build a bond that's too strong, I don't know if that's a good thing or bad.’
CONFIDENTIALITY
It is clear that the relationship between you and a resident is a very personal and intimate one.
You will see and hear and know all kinds of things about them that are of a private and personal nature.
At no time should you ever share this knowledge with other residents or talk about their affairs, unless it is relevant to improving their care or reviewing it with other members of staff concerned.
Admission of a new resident
Admission to a Home is a very big step in a person's life — and it brings all sorts of fears and anxieties.
It may also bring security and improvement in their lifestyle, if they or their family haven't been able to care for them properly.
Some of the residents' fears
The unknown
Being treated like a child
Becoming like a ‘cabbage’
Being rejected by family and friends
Going to the ‘workhouse’
Some gains
New or renewed friendships
Security — physical and emotional
Physical care
Activities and company
Some losses
A home and privacy
Moving from a large to a single bed
Being dependent on others
Choice and control over one's environment
For all these reasons, it is important that good planning and care should go into the admission of a new resident.
Before they arrive
In fact, care of residents often begins before they are even admitted.
As a key worker or a care assistant, you may go to see the person in their own home.
The first few days in a residential home can be very frightening for many elderly people.
It helps if you have seen them in their own surroundings and get an impression of the sort of person they are.
Research has shown that some old people cannot survive the emotional shock of moving to the Home and die within a few weeks.
So right from the beginning you need to give out positive feelings and positive feedback towards them.
Manager
‘Before a new resident is admitted to this Home, I go out to their own home to make an assessment.
I take the key worker with me so that they have somebody right from the beginning, somebody that they know.
When the  person is admitted, that key worker will be on duty and will work with them for up to a six week period in constructing their care plan.’
At this stage you may also be in contact with the social services who may have been supporting the new client for some time.
If there is a residential social worker in your Home, they will also be involved in that client's future care.
Health visitors now have care of the elderly as one of their main responsibilities.
Many residents visit the Home to see if they like it before they are finally admitted.
The key worker often shows them round.
This is also a good opportunity to let them meet a permanent resident who might know them or who will chat to them.
On arrival
Just as you were shown round the Home when you first came to work there, so a new resident should also be taken round and made to feel welcome.
This stage is very important.
Resident
‘It was really nice when I came here.
I came with my son and his wife and we were all given a cup of tea.
When I got to my room they'd already brought in my things and Karen, she's my key worker, she helped me unpack.
I put my photos up and then I had a little rest.
I walk with a frame so Karen gave me a hand and took me round and introduced me to people.’
One of the senior staff in the Home should be at hand to deal with formalities.
These may include:
Explaining residents' rights (see pages 22–24).
Checking valuables and explaining security facilities.
Explaining that pension books may be kept and used by residents themselves if they wish.
Noting the person's medication, which they may prefer to keep and administer themselves.
If relatives come in with a new resident, begin to get to know them as well.
The less isolated a new resident feels, the faster they settle down.
Encourage families to visit frequently and to take part in activities within the home.
One of the saddest things that old people find is the gradual dropping away of people who come to visit them.
During the day of admission
The key worker should be on hand for part of the time to settle in the new resident.
You may have a brochure or handout to give them.
The residents will need to know:
Where the facilities are — toilets, bathrooms, buzzer, fire escape, dining room, leisure areas, the bar, etc.
Where the telephone is.
Times of meals, flexibility about times of rising and going to bed.
Where they can make cups of tea or snacks for themselves.
At night, a new resident should be introduced to the night staff.
Check that they know where the lights in the room are, where the commode is and which door leads to the toilet.
Find out who will be there to wake them the next morning, if you are not on duty.
The first few weeks
This is still a vital period for the new resident.
During that time, you and the other members of staff should be observing them closely, in particular:
Their emotional needs.
Their physical and mental abilities.
What rehabilitation can be done.
Manager
‘When a client is accepted, there's a trial period for both us and the client.
In this Home it's a period of six weeks, to allow that client some time to make some real decisions about whether they want to stay or whether they want to go home.
‘Often clients think it's a good idea to come here but after a few weeks they think it's not such a good idea.
Other clients who've not been sure about coming, actually find they quite like it and it's not that bad and yes, they'd like to stay!
So there's a period of six weeks when they're given some time to settle in and after that period there's a review date set where myself, the supervisor, the key worker, the client, the client's social worker in the community and family or anybody close will be invited.
It's a time for that client to decide whether they wish to stay or if they want to go home.’
The care plan
People coming into a residential home are there because they are in need of care — they are not able to care for themselves.
But the type of care can be very different from one resident to another.
One person may need a lot of help in dressing, or with moving about, another may suffer from incontinence which needs to be managed, a third person might benefit from exercises, physiotherapy or mental stimulation.
During the first few weeks in a Home everyone concerned with the resident, and of course the resident too, will be thinking about the best care for the person.
This is usually called a care plan, which may be discussed informally, or at a special meeting.
Those who attend could be: the resident, community nurse, social worker, the key worker or care assistant and a senior staff member.
After discussion, a care plan will be drawn up and written down.
The resident has a right to know what is in the plan, and the staff of the Home will put it into practice.
Each person's care plan is reviewed regularly and up-dated.
Here are some of the more important headings in a typical care plan:
The physical and emotional condition of a new resident.
The resident's contacts with people outside the Home.
Recommendations for treatment of physical problems.
Suggestions for mental therapy and appropriate activities for the resident.
KEY POINTS
The care assistant is a key person in the care of residents.
The principles of care mean that the resident should, as far possible, feel they are in their own home.
Their dignity should be respected, and they have the right to their independence.
Confidentiality is a very important part of the relationship between care assistants and their clients.
Before residents arrive and on arrival, it's important that a care assistant, who may be their key worker, is on hand to help them feel at home.
During the first few weeks, it's important that you spend as much time as possible with a new resident, getting to know them and their family and working on their care plan.
PART 2 THE DAILY RUNNING OF A HOME
Care assistant
‘My shift today was from 2.30 till 10 o'clock at night.
On three days a week we start off with a a staff meeting at 2.30.
On days when there isn't a meeting we have a hand-over period.
The morning shift meet us in the office.
They tell us what's been happening on the unit that we're going to be working on, so that we know what's been going on for the morning.’
Key worker
‘When we go to the unit, we greet the residents — we have twelve of them — we say hello and then we make them a cup of tea.’
Manager
‘There is no fixed routine as such — we vary it according to the residents' wishes.
Each day we do something different.
If they want to watch television, they do that; if they want to walk around, they walk around, some do their own thing like reading or games.
We have people coming in to visit.’
Key worker
‘I go round to the three people for whom I'm a key worker.
I check that they've got everything they need, toiletry-wise or anything else they might need.
I'll have a conversation.’
Every residential home has a framework of daily routines and activities.
This section gives a detailed breakdown of what may be required in your daily work.
When you are carrying out any activity, you should remember the principles of care and treat the residents with dignity and encourage them to do as much as possible for themselves, even though this may take longer.
The routines suggested are guidelines: some of them may not apply to you in your current work.
The topics included are:
daily routines
clothing and dressing
bathing and washing
practising hygiene
going to the toilet and lifting techniques
the morning
Check report book and diary for any comments about residents from the previous day or night shift.
Carry out any special instructions.
Visit sick residents to make sure they are comfortable.
Also visit any resident who is incontinent and make them dry and comfortable.
Always knock on doors before you enter.
Wake the other residents.
Wake those that are blind or deaf with a gentle touch.
Chat with the person you are dealing with.
Spend a little more time with new residents.
If requested, collect specimens of urine from diabetic residents.
Empty chamber pots where necessary.
NOTE Urine that has been standing some of the night is not a true specimen for testing.
It has to be the first urine passed in the morning in a clean, empty container.
Encourage those who are mobile to go to the toilet on their own.
Help others to go.
Wait near the toilet for any resident who is unsafe to leave on their own and help them back to their room.
Check that those who can dress themselves are coping.
People from some cultures may have special clothing needs.
Help those who need assistance, as agreed with your supervisor.
Check that residents with hospital appointments are up and ready and reassure them if they are anxious.
Meals and drinks
Set the tables and check that they are set correctly, neatly and attractively.
Remember any special needs of handicapped people such as drinking cups and specially designed cutlery.
Bring in any residents who need help to the dining room.
Don't forget a new resident.
Check that any resident on a special diet has been given the right food.
Give tactful assistance to any person who needs help while eating.
Don't rush meal times.
For many residents, food is one of the highlights of the day and should be enjoyed.
Encourage anyone who wishes, to help at meal times either by preparing, serving or clearing away.
Ask every resident what they would like and try to satisfy individual preferences.
Try to make coffee or tea breaks and all meal times a social occasion.
NOTE There may be periods such as Passover, or Ramadan, when residents may have special dietary needs.
Always respect these times.
Rooms and beds
This routine may be carried out by domestic staff, or by care staff and domestic staff working together.
Allow residents to help or be present if they wish to.
Collect clean linen and have a bag or trolley for dirty laundry.
Making the bed: pull the top sheet back and check whether the bottom sheet is soiled and needs changing.
If necessary, replace bottom sheet and draw sheet.
Watch for stains (blood from a sore or wound) or strong smelling urine.
Do not tuck in sheets too tight, as frail people have difficulty in making themselves comfortable if they can't move easily.
Empty the commode pan and clean it out.
Encourage residents to tidy their clothes.
Check their toiletries, and that towels are clean and dry.
Check the general safety of the room, that a lamp or piece of furniture has not been moved where it could be a hazard.
Keep a look out for any strange medication which has not been prescribed.
Take soiled linen to the laundry and launder, if required.
In the evening
Residents have every right to go to bed when they choose, not when it's most convenient for staff.
When you are on evening duty, get to know individual bedtimes (though be prepared for someone to change their mind) and check what kind of help they would like from you.
If possible, give individual care rather than take several people to bed at the same time.
Help people to the toilet and with their personal hygiene if necessary.
Check they have a drink and anything else they need by their bed.
Make sure commodes are clean and to hand and that there is toilet paper available.
Check that they can reach light switches and call bell.
If people are sharing a room, you may need to negotiate between them what time lights should go off, or whether doors should be left open.
Make sure there's enough fresh air in the room.
Night duty
Some residents may be in bed when you come on duty, but you will probably need to help some people to bed.
It's often at night that emergencies happen.
Make sure you know exactly what to do in the way of first aid and that you can summon medical or other help as quickly as possible should it be needed.
During the night:
Be prepared to have a chat, offer a cup of tea or biscuit or to help people to the toilet or on to a commode.
Go round each room during the night and check that everyone is all right.
The day staff should tell you if someone prefers not to be disturbed during the night.
Visit any sick patients and check they have all they need.
Read their notes and check for any change in their condition.
Clothing and dressing
Dressing can he hard for a resident with stiff or arthritic fingers, or whose limbs do not move easily into clothing.
Try to make dressing as easy as possible.
Check what the resident would like to wear and that clothes are clean, and put them to hand if the person cannot move easily.
Encourage all residents, however disabled, to dress themselves as much as they can.
When you help a disabled person to dress, always start by putting the garment — trouser leg, sleeve, etc — on the leg or arm with the most disability.
Undress that limb last, when taking garments off.
Every resident should have a choice in what they wear, including colour and material.
Give advice on what is easy to care for and put on.
Avoid high necks, back zips and buttons.
Review the wardrobe regularly and suggest that the resident buys replacements.
Report any shortage of clothing to a senior member of staff.
During the day, make frequent checks of people who are likely to drop food down their fronts or soil their clothes in any way.
NOTE Make sure that this group has plenty of changes of clothing in their wardrobe.
Many find a food-stained garment a great indignity.
However, there may be a small  minority of residents who refuse to be kept clean.
Their rights should also be respected.
Arrange to go shopping with a resident who wants to buy new clothes.
Encourage residents to wash and iron their clothes where their eyesight and co-ordination are good.
Check for repairs after ironing.
Aids for easier dressing
Use of these will help residents to dress and undress themselves:
Velcro for fastenings;
Support stockings rather than tights;
Zip with an elastic pull;
‘Stay-put’ stockings;
Elastic shoe laces;
Easy shoe fastenings;
Wrap-over skirts and dresses;
Long-handled shoe horn;
Long-handled ‘grab’ for picking up distant objects.
Remember that as a care assistant, you are there to help and encourage people to do things, not to ‘do’ for them.
At all times, aim for the independence of the residents in your care.
Bathing and washing
This is a subject which tends to invite criticism.
It should always be carried out with tact, care and respect for the individual's privacy and freedom of choice.
Ask residents whether they prefer a strip wash, a bath or a shower.
You should aim to make bathtime a relaxing and enjoyable experience.
The residents co-operation should make it more enjoyable for you too.
Time of bath
Encourage regular bathing and strip washing, but a bath cannot be forced.
A reluctant bather can often be persuaded to bath by being offered a different time.
Consider whether a bath can be offered in the morning or in the evening.
If a resident continually refuses to bath and there is a health risk, report to a senior member of staff and discuss a plan of action with your colleagues.
Degree of help
The amount of help a resident needs will vary greatly, but always allow the maximum amount of privacy and independence.
If a resident is mentally alert but weak physically, a shower or a bed bath may allow them to be completely private.
Where a resident needs help only with getting in and out of the bath, you should withdraw until needed.
Where a resident needs practical help, this should be given discreetly.
At all times, respect their dignity.
This applies both to the mentally alert and the mentally confused.
A person who is very disabled will require the help of two staff in getting in and out of the bath.
Use a special lifting device called an ambulift or correct lifting procedures but be especially careful of slipping.
Be aware of the resident's feelings and don't chatter above their head.
Practical steps for bathing
Before the bath, check that you and the resident have everything you need: bath mat, bath towels, bath seat, non-slip mat, bath rack, chairs, face cloth, sponge, soap, talc, thermometer, nail cutters, laundry bag and clean clothes, bath cleaner and cloth.
When helping someone to bath:
Allow the resident to decide the water temperature, but be aware that people lose sensitivity to heat with age.
Trim fingernails if the resident cannot.
Trim toenails if this is easy, but always leave someone who is diabetic to be cared for by a chiropodist.
Remove women's facial hair, if needed.
Trim men's beard and moustache, if they request this.
Help with choice of clothes and dressing, if needed.
Settle the resident and return to clean the bath.
Record the bath in the bath book, if there is one.
Note any lumps on the resident's body, rashes, marks, etc; discuss them with the person and report them to senior staff.
Practising hygiene
The risk of infection and disease is greater for an old person than for a normal, healthy adult, as warnings on food safety show.
At all times you should make sure your own practice is hygienic.
Cloths used in the kitchen, for serving food, for cleaning toilets and bathrooms should all be kept and laundered separately from each other.
Always make sure your hands are clean when preparing or serving food.
It is essential that you wash them after you visit the toilet or help a resident.
Make sure the residents also wash their hands.
Make sure that brushes and combs are washed weekly.
Keep a look out for head lice and treat if necessary.
Encourage weekly hair washing.
Perishable food or sweets hidden away in drawers may attract mice or insects or may go off.
Encourage residents to make use of the Home's fridge.
See that clean towels are freely available (and not restricted to once a week).
Encourage residents not to wash their faces in bath water.
A smell of urine is unpleasant and unnecessary.
Wash soiled garments as soon as they are removed.
Clean soiled household linen or chairs and dispose of incontinence pads as soon as they are removed.
Using the toilet
Helping residents or reminding them to go to and from the toilets is a daily part of your duties.
Discuss with each person in your care a suitable day and night routine to help ensure dry clothing and dry bedding.
(See also incontinence, pages 70–75.)
You will need to know which residents:
Are independent;
Will ask frequently to be taken;
May need help and can ask for it;
Need to be taken to the toilet at routine intervals, usually two-hourly.
Always take someone to the toilet if they ask.
Remember there could be a medical reason for frequency.
Inform senior staff about this.
Make sure that another staff member is available if needed.
Check that the lavatory is clean and that there is enough toilet paper.
After lifting from a chair or helping on to pan, give resident maximum privacy.
If you have been asked to, observe the contents of pan and report if there is anything unusual, such as blood or a change of colour.
Clean the bottom of the pan carefully as well as the seat, floor, etc with toilet paper or paper towels.
Check that the resident's clothing is in place.
Wash your hands and ask the resident to wash theirs.
Escort the person back to their seat or room.
NOTE Men may not like being taken to the toilet by a woman, nor a woman by a man.
You should be sensitive to these feelings.
Lifting and moving techniques
You need to take care at all times when assisting or moving residents.
It can be very easy to damage your back while lifting someone incorrectly.
Proper training beforehand, preferably by a qualified physiotherapist, is essential to ensure good, safe practice.
When possible, lifting should be avoided and appropriate equipment, such as a hoist, used in preference.
However, because you may be in a situation where there is no equipment available for lifting a resident, we've included some guidelines to protect both care assistants and residents from injury:
Ensure that you have a secure base by standing with your feet comfortably apart and with your ‘leading foot’ pointing in the direction of the movement you need to make.
Your shoes should be suitable to avoid slipping or injury.
Think whether you can manage the move yourself.
Get assistance from another carer, or use equipment if necessary.
Before you start lifting someone, stand as close to them as possible.
When lifting, take the strain by using your leg muscles rather than your back, and keep your knees slightly bent, as shown in the examples on the following pages.
Make sure you have a secure grip that is comfortable to you and the person being lifted.
Tell the resident what you plan to do before you start so that he/she knows what is about to happen and can help if possible.
If there are two of you lifting/lowering someone, make sure that you work  together and that one of you gives the command ‘1-2-3 lift’, for example.
When movable equipment is involved, such as a wheelchair, make sure that it is stable before you start moving someone.
Following your training in lifting people, you will know that you need to work out first what method suits the resident as well as yourself.
Here are some examples.
1 Up the bed with two helpers
If the person has strong enough arms, sit them forward and arrange the pillows against the headboard to form a back rest.
Helpers should face towards the pillows.
Put one arm under the person's thighs and grasp the other helper's wrist.
Bend forward, keeping knees slightly bent to avoid strain, and put your shoulder under the person's arm so that their arm is over your back.
Put your free hand on the bed to take the strain.
When everyone is ready, lift together and put the person's buttocks up against the base of the pillows.
Note that some residents may be too frail to co-operate with this moving technique.
2 From a wheelchair — one person
Park the chair facing the toilet, bed or wherever the person is to be moved.
Put the wheelchair brakes on, swing the footplates to the side.
Leave room for yourself to stand.
Help the person to move towards the edge of the chair, and position your feet and knees so that his/her feet and knees are blocked from slipping forward.
Get as close as possible to them and reach under their armpits.
Clasp your hands behind their back, avoiding dragging their shoulders up.
Push your knees against theirs and squat slightly.
Give them the direction of ‘1-2-3 stand’.
When the two of you are standing and balanced together, pivot slowly around towards the toilet or bed, making sure that the person's knees are prevented from bending.
When the backs of the person's legs are against the toilet bowl or bed, arrange their clothing and push on the front of their hips to help them sit down.
3 From the floor with two helpers
Before moving the person, make sure there are no broken bones and that he/she feels well enough to be helped to sit up.
One helper (the tallest) should squat behind the person and raise their shoulders slightly.
Slip arms through their armpits and make a wrist crossed-over grip in front of their chest.
The helper assists the person into a sitting position by straightening his/her knees.
Then  the helper squats behind the person again.
The second helper should squat at the person's knees and put one arm under the upper thighs and one under the calves of the legs.
On the command of ‘1-2-3 lift’, both helpers should stand up and carry the person to a chair or bed.
Lifting equipment
There is a range of equipment available to make lifting easier for you and your clients.
The local authority social services department or health authority could provide this.
Some very useful aids are rails for baths or toilets and hoisting machines for lifting people out of bed, from a chair or into and out of a bath.
These aids can also be bought privately.
KEY POINTS
You may need to help residents dress, bath or use the toilet, but as far as possible help them to be independent.
Encourage anyone who wishes to help at mealtimes.
Aim to make mealtimes and refreshment breaks social occasions.
Check residents' clothes regularly and help them to shop if they would like this.
If someone has difficulty in dressing, make it easier with one or more aids for dressing — don't just do everything for them.
Allow residents to carry out tasks for themselves and only provide discreet support when necessary.
Preparing for bathtime will make it easier for you.
Try to make bath time an enjoyable experience.
Hygiene is extremely important at all times.
Remember that residents are more susceptible to disease and infection than younger people.
Be aware of residents' rights to privacy and individual respect.
Lifting can harm your back.
Always ask for training on the proper techniques for lifting.
Take care to follow instructions,
Try to obtain lifting aids or ask whether these are available.
Giving Special Care
Since a high proportion of residents in Homes are frail, you may have to assist with nursing care and may come across conditions which you may not have met before in elderly people.
You should at all times follow the advice of the patient's GP.
He or she will usually arrange for one of the community health team, usually a district nurse, to be in charge of nursing.
Under her guidance there are many ways in which you can assist in looking after someone who is very ill.
In dealing with these situations it will help you to know what is the best care.
There are four areas in particular where new research and established practice can give you a good framework and background knowledge for your care.
These are:
promoting continence and helping with bowel problems
basic home nursing (care of the mouth, nose and eyes)
prevention and management of pressure sores
care of the dying and procedures after death
INCONTINENCE AND CONSTIPATION
Incontinence is a major concern in many Homes, where some residents are not able to control their bladder or their bowels.
Incontinence is a difficult problem because it isn't just a problem with physical symptoms.
Lack of control brings humiliation and embarrassment for the person concerned, the actual physical discomfort of having wet or soiled clothing and extra work for the care assistant which he or she may find unpleasant.
Many people are surprised to find that when someone becomes incontinent they don't have to stay that way.
There are a number of reasons for incontinence, and these come under two broad headings, physical and environmental.
These are discussed in more detail in this chapter.
Many health authorities employ a continence adviser who is a registered nurse with further training in managing incontinence.
If you feel that specialist advice would be helpful for anyone in your care, you should try and obtain it through your manager or warden.
You may find it helpful to take a short course on managing continence.
You can also get more detailed information from the Continence Advisory Service at the Disabled Living Foundation (see page 134 for address).
Physical causes of incontinence
Disease and infection
This can be a major cause of incontinence.
Among the most common are urinary tract infections, which should always be treated by the GP.
Chronic conditions such as diabetes and weakness after a stroke may also lead to incontinence.
The nerves become damaged and are no longer able to control the functions of bladder and bowels.
Some men have an additional problem because an enlarged prostate gland can cause almost permanent incontinence.
What you can do
Make sure that any drugs such as antibiotics prescribed by the doctor are taken as directed.
Treatment may include helping the person to regain control of the bladder with help from a community nurse or continence adviser.
The normal practice is to take someone who is incontinent, and who may also be confused, to the toilet at regular intervals and before meals.
This may be every two hours, or half an hour after each meal.
It could take some trial and error to discover the correct interval; and you may need to chart the person's pattern.
Once this is achieved, the person can be encouraged to increase the time between visits to the toilet.
This may help to increase the bladder's capacity.
A bladder which is frequently emptied does not expand to its full capacity and needs gentle stretching to bring this about.
By slightly increasing the time between visits to the toilet, the bladder will be able to contain more urine and the risk of sudden incontinence is reduced.
However, toilet regimes should not be used if there is a bladder infection until the infection has been cured.
Stress incontinence
This is a leakage usually caused by a sneeze or a cough.
What you can do
There are a number of exercises, similar to some of those practised in pregnancy and after childbirth, which help strengthen the muscles of the lower pelvic floor.
These can be very helpful in cases where lack of muscle tone is the main reason for incontinence.
These exercises need to be taught by a continence adviser, a community nurse or physiotherapist.
Effect of drugs
Some drugs increase the urine flow.
Others have a tendency to cause constipation, and this in turn can produce incontinence both of urine and faeces.
Laxatives may produce a sudden bout of diarrhoea.
A common cause of incontinence at night is a mild sedative, which makes the person too sleepy to get out of bed.
It's been found that in Homes where residents are busy or active during the day, with plenty of stimulation, they are more likely to sleep well without drugs, and the rate of bed-wetting goes down dramatically.
Effect of mental confusion
Care assistant
‘One lady in this Home was particularly incontinent at night.
She had a commode in her room, but she just couldn't use the commode or she'd urinate on it — she just wouldn't take the lid off or get the hang of this thing at all.
Most of the time during the day she was all right.
She was somebody who had mild short-term memory loss, which varied from day to day but she could remember anything about the past.
‘In one reminiscence session somebody brought in an old-fashioned Victorian commode, which looked like a chair, and the group was asked what it was.
Everybody said that it was a chair except the lady.
She said it was a commode and we all collapsed in astonishment!
So we put it in her room and that solved the problem.
She knew exactly what that was.
She could use it.’
Psychological causes
For many people, the mere fact of entering a Home can bring on a bout of incontinence.
This may lead to the feeling of being a social outcast, depression and hopelessness.
It can be a form of protest.
What you can do
It's very important to reassure the person, to help make them feel their own worth and to deal with the incontinence before it becomes a habit.
Encourage regular visits to the lavatory, help the person take their mind off their depression by encouraging them to take part in the activities of the Home.
Environmental causes
Badly placed toilet facilities
Often someone who wishes to use the toilet may not find it within easy reach or be able to get out of their chair in time.
They may not feel easy at moving fast on a polished floor.
Clothing may not be easy to undo.
At night, a person may not be able to get out of bed in time, or they will dislike using a bedpan or find it difficult and messy.
What you can do
Make sure that each person is able to reach all toilet facilities easily and that they are able to use any support provided.
Lack of privacy
Using the toilet is a private affair, and many residents object very strongly if a member of staff watches them, or remains within earshot while they are in the lavatory.
An unscreened commode in a shared bedroom may present similar difficulties.
Some people are, in fact, unable to open their bladders in such circumstances.
It also takes longer for an old person to use the toilet and they may sense impatience from other residents or staff if they spend as long as they would like in a toilet.
What you can do
Care assistants need to be sensitive about this and withdraw from the person while they are using the toilet.
Provide a call bell if there is one available.
Lack of cleanliness/hygiene
Toilets and lavatory seats can be soiled.
This makes them very unpleasant to use and some residents will prefer not to.
What you can do
Regular cleaning and inspection is essential.
Aids for incontinence
The continence adviser or community nurse will be able to advise on the most appropriate aids to be used to absorb or contain urine.
These are very useful during retraining the bladder or where a cure is impossible, but they should not be used instead of exercise, retraining or other forms of therapy.
They include:
Protection for bedding and furnishings
Cheap washable sheets and covers, which are the most practical as they can be disposed of if they become heavily stained.
Pads
Various pads and securing pants are available to meet all degrees of incontinence.
Bags or pouches
These are suitable for men.
If they suffer from mild incontinence, they may use a sheath or condom, which has to be fitted correctly to avoid leakage.
For those who are mostly in bed or in a wheelchair, there are various types of bags, which can also be used at night.
If possible, choose a container which the man is able to put on and empty on his own.
Catheters
With these, a tube is usually inserted into the opening of the bladder so that urine drains directly into a small bag or container.
They should be fitted in the first instance by a community nurse, who will show you and the resident how to look after the catheter and how to empty the bag.
Care must be taken not to introduce an infection.
After the first day or so some people are able to operate their own catheters.
NOTE A careful check needs to be made that the patient's skin does not become sore while aids are being used and that the aids are being worn comfortably and discreetly.
Helping with bedpans and urinals
If you are looking after a sick person, you may have to give bedpans or urinals at regular intervals and also remove and empty them.
It's important that you don't show it if you find the task distasteful.
Make sure the bedpan or urinal is clean and warmed slightly.
Also provide a cover for the pan, towel, toilet roll and tissues.
If possible, two members of staff should place the patient on the pan.
Make sure they are well balanced and will not slip off.
You may need to remain nearby in case they do slip, but this can prevent some people from functioning so you will have to be sensitive to their feelings.
After removing the pan or urinal, give the patient a bowl and water for washing their hands.
Also give them the opportunity to wash their bottom, but be prepared to do this for them if they are unable to.
Make sure they are left comfortable in bed or in a chair when the task is completed.
Helping someone with constipation
As we grow older, it takes longer for faeces to travel through the digestive tract and this may lead to constipation.
Although it isn't necessary for a person to have a bowel movement every day, regular movements should be encouraged.
Constipation is uncomfortable, it may cause incontinence, it may cause confusion in someone who is mentally frail.
If a person becomes suddenly confused, always check that they are not constipated.
Where constipation comes on suddenly, or there is blood in the stools, always ask for medical advice.
A person who is constipated may also be incontinent of faeces because there is leaking around the hard mass.
Other causes may be mental frailty and diarrhoea  caused by food poisoning, as old people are more susceptible to food poisoning through salmonella and listeria organisms.
Ask for medical advice or treatment if someone you care for has severe constipation.
Try a change of diet
The first approach is to stimulate the bowels to become more active through diet.
Ask the person whether they already eat enough fibre and encourage them to eat more if necessary — and this doesn't mean just putting bran on cereal at breakfast.
Many people dislike the taste of bran and find it hard to swallow.
There's fibre in fruit, especially stringy or pithy fruit like bananas and oranges, in beans, peas, lentils, cabbages and spinach and in wholemeal bread and cakes or porridge.
A constipated person should also be encouraged to drink more fluid — at least1 ½ to 2 litres (3 to 5 pints) a day.
It may help people to drink more if you measure out this amount into a stock of glasses or cups, so that they can see for themselves how much this means.
NOTE Some people deliberately restrict their intake of fluid, thinking that this may prevent urinary incontinence.
They may need reassuring that if they drink more liquid this will not occur.
Always try a change of diet before giving laxatives, which should always be prescribed by a doctor or nurse.
Laxatives upset normal bowel-emptying patterns and can make the condition harder to treat.
KEY POINTS
Incontinence may be caused by disease or infection, or because a person finds it difficult to reach or use a toilet.
Incontinence can be managed and often cured if the reasons for it are known.
If one of your clients has incontinence problems, ask for help from a continence adviser or community nurse.
Constipation can also cause incontinence and diarrhoea.
Try to encourage regular bowel movements, if possible through suitable diet.
There are a number of incontinence aids available which may be suitable for a person in your care.
BASIC HOME NURSING
Care of the mouth and teeth
It's important always to keep a patient's mouth clean and moist — you will of course need their co-operation in doing this.
The mouth is usually healthy when there is:
sufficient food intake;
a well-balanced diet;
adequate fluid intake;
citrus fruits in the diet;
oral hygiene, correct brushing and use of dental floss;
well-fitting dentures.
The mouth may be in need of care if a person has suffered from one or more of the following:
inadequate fluid intake;
digestive upsets and vomiting;
a disease of the mouth;
ill-fitting dentures or broken teeth.
Signs to look out for:
dry, cracked lips;
furred tongue;
bad breath (halitosis);
loss of appetite.
Encourage people to wear their dentures and look after them and clean them regularly.
You may have to assist in this.
Encourage those with some of their own teeth to brush teeth and gums regularly.
A fluoride mouth wash will help to prevent dental decay.
If you have to clean someone's mouth for them, use swabs soaked in a sodium bicarbonate solution.
Use several swabs to swab round the mouth until it is clean.
Always discard a swab after you have used it once.
Care of the nose and eyes
If you have to clean someone's nose, use a gauze swab, dampened in a cleansing solution such as warm, sterile water.
A patient's eyes may become sticky through a watery discharge which can be very uncomfortable and will need regular cleaning.
As the eyes are so sensitive, it is best if the patient cleans them himself, using damp cotton wool balls.
Cleaning should start from the inside of the eye, and each ball should only be used once, not on both eyes.
If you have to clean a patient's eyes, take great care and ask them not to move.
If you believe there may be an eye infection, call in their GP.
Relieving pressure sores
An elderly person has very delicate skin; and if he or she has been lying or sitting in bed all day, they may develop pressure sores on the bony parts of the body — the base of the spine, the heels, the elbows or on the shoulders.
People who are especially at risk include those who are unable to move, perhaps because of a stroke, those with contracted limbs which could be a result of an arthritic condition, people with a known skin condition or allergy and those who are debilitated or undernourished, where there is little flesh between the skin and the bone.
There are two stages to pressure sores.
The first is a surface sore which starts off as a red mark.
This may become a blister and the skin may become torn.
It is important not to let this develop into the second stage, which is a deep sore, more painful and more difficult to treat.
At this stage the sore is raw, open and weeping.
Once there is a break in the skin, there is a great risk that the sore can become infected and so correct treatment is essential.
Prevention and management
Clearly the best treatment is to prevent sores from occurring at all.
One way is to relieve pressure on the sensitive points by changing the distribution of a person's weight at regular, two-hourly intervals.
If possible, always lift them with two people and take great care not to drag the skin in any way that could cause tearing.
There are a number of specially designed mattresses or supports which can help.
These include Spenco mattresses, heel cushions and special chair  cushions.
In some Homes, a ripple bed is used, in which air rotates inside the bed and so relieves pressure in a regulated way.
Always make sure that sheets or cushion covers are not wrinkled, as this can cause great discomfort and may break the skin.
If a patient is incontinent, there are also special creams which can be applied to form a protective barrier on the skin.
A good, nourishing diet with plenty to drink will guard against pressure sores.
But at the first sign of a pressure sore, inform the patient's GP and consult the district nurse.
All treatment and management must be recorded in the patient's care plan.
KEY POINTS
The patient should be nursed in a comfortable position which should be changed frequently to avoid pressure sores.
The patient should be kept fresh and clean by regular attention to face, hands, skin, oral hygiene and toilet needs.
Wherever possible, patients should do as much for themselves as they feel able to.
Meals should be made and served as attractively and conveniently as possible, to encourage people in bed to eat and take in adequate amount of nourishing food and fluid.
All other necessary care should be given, including drugs at the correct time.
All changes in the patient's condition should be monitored and recorded in the care plan.
Senior staff should be informed of progress.
Families and friends should be encouraged to visit at any time.
They should feel satisfied about the care the patient is receiving and be involved in their care plan.
CARE OF DYING PEOPLE
Today, many residents will die in a residential home rather than in a hospital.
This can be distressing for other residents and staff unless it is handled  sensitively.
A planned care routine will help deal with death.
This section includes:
care of dying people
what to do in the case of a sudden death
procedures after death
Signs of approaching death
There are both psychological and medical signs when someone is nearing death.
Care assistant
‘The signs are there.
It's the little jokes, even their actions.
We had a lady pass away not very long ago and she was on my unit.
She was very very down, very quiet a couple of the shifts.
Then one shift I went in and she said, ‘Hello Pat.’
So I said ‘Hello Amy’ and that was all.
She was ready, just by that you could see she looked better.
It was like a burden had gone.
I knew.’
There are several physical signs which may indicate the approach of death.
The resident's general condition becomes weaker and they may find it difficult to breathe.
Breathing may become noisy and shallow and may be distressful to other residents.
A change of position may help to minimise this, such as raising the head or turning them from side to side.
If this does not help, the doctor may be able to give an injection to dry up secretions and make the noise less upsetting.
The skin may feel cold to the touch and is sometimes damp with perspiration.
The face becomes pale and hands and feet get colder.
The resident may have difficulty in seeing and speech may be difficult to understand.
The appetite may become less, and there may be vomiting after eating.
The pulse becomes weaker.
The usual pattern of emptying bladder and bowels is upset.
The person may pass gradually into a state of unconsciousness.
NOTE Many people can still hear, even when their other senses appear to be lost.
Visitors should be informed of this important factor — be careful of what is said within earshot of the person.
The person's appearance
This is important because it gives relatives and other residents the knowledge that the person is being cared for.
Bed linen should be spotless and pyjamas or nightdresses well cared for.
Shave men regularly and arrange women's hair as they like it.
Apply some make-up and perfume if this is their normal habit.
Change incontinence pads frequently, and pay special attention to the person's skin, keeping it washed and dried.
Helping and caring
Very often the resident is aware of this gradual deterioration and the drawing towards the end of life.
This is a time when your support and comfort are needed, as well as your nursing skills.
Give every possible comfort to the person including touching or holding their hand.
Speak in a normal voice, as a whisper can raise anxiety.
Give care and attention without hurrying, so that the resident is kept as comfortable as possible until the end.
Nurse the resident in a position in which he or she is most comfortable, and change that position frequently.
They may need extra pillows, or the foot of the bed raised if they slide down.
Provide food if they ask for it.
Help with cleaning the mouth if necessary.
If he or she has difficulty in speaking, moistening the tongue and lips can be helpful.
Offer a commode or urinal frequently.
A full bladder can cause much unnecessary discomfort.
Give drugs regularly and let the doctor know if you think more pain relief would be helpful.
Check small articles that may be wanted — a photograph, a rosary, a book.
The resident may earlier have expressed a wish to see a religious leader or priest and this should be arranged.
If a resident does not wish to be disturbed, respect their wishes, but visit the room regularly, even if you do not speak.
The resident's doctor may have prescribed pain killers or drugs to relieve distress.
Administer these as prescribed.
No person should be left in unnecessary pain.
Relatives should be allowed to stay with the resident throughout this time so that they are not left alone.
There may be special religious rites to be observed.
If so, this is the time to discuss them.
If there are no relatives or friends, staff should be organised to stay with the dying person.
Care assistant
‘I think when we lose people, it's more upsetting if they just suddenly die and we haven't had the opportunity to do the tending and caring.
If people go to bed and are in bed for a week or more and we do all of that, all that stroking and loving, then when they actually go there's a relief at them no longer having the pain and the shock.’
Sudden death
Death can and does come suddenly in any Home.
It can cause distress for other residents and relatives.
Staff need to be especially sensitive at such a time and also to be aware of legal formalities.
The staff member who is the first to encounter the death should summon help immediately and reassure any other residents who may be present.
A senior staff member should contact the resident's doctor who will give further instructions.
If necessary, the doctor will notify the coroner's officer.
Note that in certain cases this has to be done as a formality and does not necessarily mean that there is anything suspicious about the death.
If possible move other residents away from the room where the death has occurred and lock the door.
If this is not possible, screen the body and make sure that a staff member stays with the other residents.
Residents and relatives will need particular support after a sudden death.
Allow them to express their views and fears about dying.
Do not suppress your own feelings or anxieties.
In the event of sudden death, an inquest may be held.
You should make a report giving details such as time and place of death, witnesses, any falls or injuries, etc.
Procedures after death
Your attitude
Your own Home may have established a set procedure after death which you should follow.
The attitude of all care staff will be important to other residents, who may be thinking about how they will be treated at the end.
But some old people are philosophical about death — a fact often underestimated by younger people.
Care assistant
‘I was talking to an old man about death and he said, ‘You know I've not been able to talk to my wife.
She doesn't like talking about dying or anything like that, so may I talk to you?’
I said, ‘yes, do.’
He said, ‘What I've done, I've left everything in the top drawer so that it's all easier for my wife when I die.
Am I distressing you as I talk like this?’.
I said, ‘No, not a bit.
If it's helpful to you, I'm perfectly ready to listen and to do everything I can to help’.’
If you are alone at the time of death
Summon help at once, and inform senior staff so that anyone concerned can be told and formalities can be arranged with relatives who may not be present, the GP, a funeral director and an appropriate religious representative.
If the room is shared, a member of staff should always remain in the room until the body is removed and warn the other occupants so that they can decide whether to pay their respects or to stay away until the body is removed.
Relatives who wish to remain with the body should be allowed to do so.
Those who do not should be escorted to a suitable room where another member of staff should remain with them if possible, if they wish for this.
After the relatives have departed, turn off the radiators and open the window.
If the room has to be unattended, lock the door.
If there are other residents in the room, screen the body and reassure them.
Preparing the body
In case relatives not present wish to view the body, great care should be taken not to cause them distress or offence.
The last offices will vary according to the deceased's religion.
These should be carried out under the supervision of a senior member of staff.
Wash the face and hands, tidy the hair, close the eyes.
If possible, put in the dentures.
Leave bedclothes clean and tidy and remove soiled linen.
Rings should only be removed at the request of relatives or the manager and this should be recorded.
After the body has been taken away, all personal effects should be checked and listed, with a colleague, if possible.
Sign the list of property and hand valuables over to the manager for safe keeping.
Relatives may ask to take valuables, cash, cheque book, etc away with them.
In theory you should not permit this.
All personal effects should be handed to the appropriate authority, which may be a local authority official or the deceased's solicitor or executor, who may also be a relative.
But if no Will has been made, it is very difficult to tell relatives they may not remove valuables.
While the formalities are being dealt with, relatives should be given every comfort and assistance if they seek it.
Expressing grief
It's important to express your own grief, to reassure the other residents but to allow them to grieve too.
Care assistant
‘I don't think there's anybody who's worked here for a time who hasn't at some time felt like crying, or who hasn't actually cried or felt really down.
I mean it really gets to us when people die, it's not a shallow thing at all.’
Manager
‘The whole house is quiet, it's different.
I think the way we behave tells the other residents how we react when someone dies; and so it's almost like they're watching us to see if we behave in a way they would want us to.’
Care assistant
‘The unit I work on, I think if they wanted to grieve, I would grieve with them.
I wouldn't try to put records on and start dancing, not until they was ready.
Then I would help to cheer them up, but I wouldn't cheer them up if they didn't want to, I think that's wrong.
Let them grieve — it's only human.’
KEY POINTS
Care of the dying is very important.
Keep the person as comfortable as possible.
A loving approach will ease their end.
Remember that people may still be able to hear, even though all other senses have failed.
Make sure they are cared for, with clean clothing and bed linen.
Give drugs regularly, as prescribed by the doctor.
Provide relatives with every help.
In case of sudden death, take note of any witnesses and anything which may be needed in a statement for a coroner's inquest.
After death, follow the agreed procedures about giving personal possessions to relatives.
Prepare the body for viewing, if required.
Encourage other residents to express their feelings when one of them has died — this goes for you as well.
Communicating with people
We communicate with other people throughout our lives.
At home, going out shopping, at school, at work, we give out messages which someone else receives.
It sounds very simple, but good communication isn't easy.
Most managers in business spend some time learning communication skills, so that they and their staff can understand each other— and keep their customers happy.
Communicating means being able to put a message across and to receive one.
It also means knowing a bit about ourselves, so that old habits, opinions and attitudes don't get in the way.
It's not always easy, and it can be even harder in the case of older people who may not be able to see or hear well.
We communicate with others in many different ways and we use different skills.
This chapter looks at:
face-to-face communication
reporting and recording information
FACE-TO-FACE COMMUNICATION
When someone talks to us, we receive as much as over two-thirds of the information through tone of voice and body language.
So because many elderly people can't see or hear very well, they may be missing information which the rest of us see and take in without even thinking about it.
Of course communicating is more than just telling someone something.
It's showing we care for them, showing we don't like what they are doing, helping them solve a problem.
You can learn how to communicate better with the people in your care by:
knowing about yourself
taking care about how you speak
being a good listener
body language
looking out for hidden signals.
Knowing about yourself
Caring for people means that you get attached to them, you get irritated by them, angry, bored, sad.
This is part of the job, but it also means that you have to care for yourself and know about your own feelings as well as those of your clients.
How do you do that?
Keep things in proportion
A sense of humour is high on a manager's list when choosing a new assistant.
For a resident, little things become so big when your whole life can revolve round what's for lunch and can you sit in your usual place or has someone pinched it?
However sympathetic a care assistant you are, a sense of humour keeps you from picking up someone else's stress — and of course it lightens the atmosphere.
Don't hide your feelings
You will be sad or distressed from time to time, as the care staff who are quoted in the section on care for the dying have said.It's natural, and it's a part of the grieving process to feel and to share your feelings.
Most residents don't object if you show that you have feelings too.
It helps them, as well as you.
‘A problem shared is a problem halved’ may be a cliché, but it's true.
If there's someone whose advice you value, go and talk to them.
Be yourself
Care assistant
‘You've got to be yourself.
I've seen so many people come and go who've put on this act of caring and it doesn't last a week.
You can't do it.
You're on until ten, half-past ten at night and you go home and you're back here as soon as you're up again.
You have to be yourself.’
Praise yourself
If you've helped someone and you feel really good about it, let go all those negative feelings about how you could have done it better.
Enjoy the good feelings you get.
If you value yourself, others will too.
Ask for training
The tasks involved in being a care assistant are changing as your client group becomes older and more frail.
We now know more about different therapies which can really help older people get the most out of life.
So you will need skills in leading groups, getting people's memories going, keeping them active.
Common sense, experience in your own family will go a long way; but there is training available, so if you aren't offered any, ask for it.
Also see pages 127–132.
Take your mind off the job
Make sure that you can switch off.
Do for yourself what you do for others.
If you have a family that you care for, and your job is to be a carer, do you spend any time on yourself?
Is there something that you really enjoy, that you can afford, but that you feel guilty doing?
An evening at bingo, an evening class, a whole hour in the bath!
Something you used to spend a lot of time at but haven't done for some time.
Take care about how you speak
Be clear
Simple words and simple instructions are easiest to understand, so is clear, fairly slow speech.
If the person is hard of hearing, they may need to lip-read your words, so move  your lips naturally and keep your face visible!
Exaggerated lip movements actually make it harder to understand what you say.
If you talk loudly, it can be very nasty on a hearing aid.
Keep it warm
A warm, friendly voice is especially reassuring if a partially sighted person can't see your expression.
Also use touch
Some people don't like others to get too close to them.
Most of us have a personal ‘space’ around us — often an arm's length.
When someone comes nearer without invitation, we feel threatened.
So if you need to approach someone who hasn't seen you, you should touch them to show you are there, especially someone who may be confused.
A light touch will warn them of your presence.
But some people hate being touched — that's something you'll need to find out for yourself.
Communicate directly
No matter how long it takes, communication shouldn't be through a third person unless it's absolutely necessary.
If a visitor or medical practitioner has to talk to a resident through you, make sure you consult them and don't answer for them.
Nothing is more irritating than to have someone speaking for you when you are quite able to speak for yourself.
Resident
‘A friend of mine who's in a wheelchair, the other day was pushed into a shoe shop and the shop assistant said,
‘Can you tell me if the shoes are comfortable or not?’ to the helper.
My friend was furious.
She said, ‘I can tell you if they are comfortable or not.
Don't ask her, ask me.
I'm buying the shoes!’.’
How do residents like to be called?
What others call us is very much a question of age-group.
Nowadays, everyone seems to call everyone else by their first name, even though they've never met them before.
Some people like this, others prefer a more formal approach.
This goes for care staff and management as well as staff and residents.
If Mrs Smith prefers to be called Ivy and not Mrs Smith, call her Ivy.
If Mr Khan prefers to be called Mr Khan, don't use his first name just because other residents are happy for you to use theirs.
Be careful with nicknames
It's the same with those nicknames which are common in so many Homes.
Because James Murphy walks with a limp, he gets called ‘Loppy’— he's ‘lopsided.’
Perhaps he would rather be called by his right name.
You only have to ask.
And on a similar subject, not everyone likes to be called ‘dear’ or ‘darling.’
This may not seem important, but small irritations can build up in a Home and become real barriers to good communication.
Be a good listener
Lots of different things go on when you listen:
you hear the sounds a person makes when speaking;
you work out the tone of voice they're using;
you understand the content and the meaning;
you listen out for any hidden meanings;
you work out a response.
So listening is an important communication tool.
And apart from the information you get, being a good listener helps the other side to relax and have confidence in you.
Usually we show that we're listening by:
asking questions, looking the other person in the eye;
using appropriate body language, like leaning towards them;
repeating what they've just said, to show that we've understood them;
keeping an interested note in our voice.
Are you a good listener?
Not being heard or listened to is something that elderly people can find frightening.
You may like to check just how well you listen by practising listening in some simple everyday situations.
When someone gives you some information, try to repeat it to yourself in the same way it was given to you.
Look people straight in the eye when they are talking to you and check if what they say stays in your mind longer.
NOTE In some cultures, especially among Asian women, it is bad manners to make eye contact and may upset the other person.
You need to be aware of this.
Try to recall every story in one TV or radio news bulletin.
Can you remember who spoke, as well as what they were talking about?
But though you can practise listening by yourself, it's easier with someone else.
A listening game played with one of your clients might improve your listening skills as well as their memory (see page 119).
Look out for hidden signals
Often, what someone says and what they really mean are two different things.
This may be due to the generation gap.
Younger people have been brought up in a different way from the way our parents and grandparents were.
Many of them were made to feel it was wrong to show their feelings, so they use something else to attract your attention.
A question like ‘What's for lunch today, dear?’ may be a real enquiry.
It could also mean ‘Will you talk to me for a few minutes, I feel sad.’
‘Those visitors of hers always make such a lot of noise!’ could mean that the old gentleman wants to take his nap; but it could also mean he feels left out and would welcome something to do.
Body language
A person who is partially sighted may not be able to see whether you are smiling or looking bored.
But you can still show interest in them in little ways by:
Leaning forward when they are speaking;
Nodding your head;
‘Matching’ their gestures.
That means actually copying their hand movements or the way they are sitting and doing the same.
There's been a lot of research which shows that when two people relax and feel comfortable together, their body language reflects what the other person is doing.
Try it out
It's something you can try out for yourself.
When you are getting on really well with someone, stop for a moment and notice if your body language is like that of your friend.
Look for:
Position of head.
What your arms are doing — are they still, waving about or propping up your chin?
Are you leaning backwards or forwards?
Are your legs relaxed or are your knees tight together?
Then try the same experiment with a stranger, or someone you are having an argument with.
Is it the same, or are your bodies saying different things?
Misleading signals
Body language talks without words, and we usually respond without even thinking about it.
What do the following gestures or attitudes mean to you?
A hand raised and held slightly back.
A hand stretched towards you.
Mr Smith slumped over in a chair, not looking up.
Mrs Jones looking very uncomfortable.
The first two could be a threat and a cry for help.
But what about the others?
Mr Smith may be very depressed or he may be having a nap.
If Mrs Jones is looking uncomfortable, she may have wet herself, or she may be in a lot of pain.
The more sensitive you are to what's really behind a simple statement or gesture, the better you will communicate with the people in your care.
Language barriers
It's important when communicating with people of other races or cultures to use simple language and make sure they can understand you.
If there is a real difficulty, get in touch with someone from their local community to see if they can provide an interpreter.
This is particularly important when discussing personal matters, such as someone's care plan.
KEY POINTS
The words we use are only a part of how we communicate.
We need to take extra care when talking to elderly people because they may not see or hear so well.
Practise listening skills.
Be aware of body language.
Watch out for hidden signals.
Be aware of your own feelings — a sense of humour helps.
REPORTING AND RECORDING INFORMATION
People in residential care are continually being assessed and monitored.
This means that you will be asked to observe your clients carefully and to report back.
Some reports will be on paper, to provide an accurate record of that resident, others are verbal.
Ways of reporting:
directly, in one-to-one conversation;
in a note;
at a meeting;
an official form.
There are some things that apply whatever reporting method you use.
We've used an imaginary case history to illustrate them.
Always check
Get your facts together.
Don't be side-tracked because something else has happened.
If you think something you've noticed is important, report it separately so that it can be put on the resident's file.
It's handy to have a note book with you each day, with the day and date and time you start duty.
Do it now!
We all put things off, and making a report can be top of the list.
We forget details, or they get changed in our minds.
If you are in the middle of doing something else and something occurs which you think the doctor or physio or your manager should know about, make a note of it.
Mrs Brown and Tracey
When Tracey empties the commode pan on Wednesday morning, about 8 am, she notices that Mrs Brown's urine is darker than usual.
She hasn't been aware of it before.
She notes down the time and what she saw:
Wednesday, 7th March 8am Mrs Brown: urine darker colour than normal 
Be accurate
If you make a statement which gives a stated time when something happened, don't be vague or make it up, give the exact time or say you don't know.
TRACEY
Mrs Brown, I wonder if you can you remember what time you used the commode last night?
Was it dark?
MRS B
I think it was about 4.30.
No it wasn't, I tell a lie.
It was about half past five, dear.
The blackbird was just starting up — I always like hearing him.
TRACEY
And can you say if you only went once?
MRS B
Well now you mention it, I think I did go twice, but I don't know when the second time was.
Tracey adds to her notes:
Mrs Brown says she passed urine twice during the night, possibly at 4.30 or 5.30.
Don't interpret
It's all too easy to describe what we think has happened and not what has occurred.
Put the facts down for the specialist to see.
If you want to add an interpretation, explain later that from your experience this is what you think it means.
Tracey adds to her notes:
Mrs Brown was incontinent twice yesterday.
Perhaps she didn't drink anything before she went to bed because she was worried she was getting incontinent.
I'll check with nightstaff.
Question for manager:
Mrs Brown isn't usually incontinent.
Do you want to get her GP in?
I'll get a specimen of her urine tomorrow morning anyway.
Reporting the facts directly
When you start work, you should have a formal meeting with your manager, and from time to time there will be follow-up meetings.
Usually meetings are informal.
You drop into his or her office, or bump into each other in the hall.
If you have something to say about a resident, you'll still get your message over best if you stick to the point.
Say what is concerning you, and then report the facts.
Tracey meets her manager in the hall.
MANAGER
Oh good, there you are Tracey.
Could you lend a hand with the laundry this morning?
We're one short.
TRACEY
Yes, I will.
But I need to see you for a moment.
I'm a bit worried about Mrs Brown.
Her urine's a strange colour and she was incontinent twice yesterday.
That's not usual for her.
MANAGER
 Thanks for telling me.
Could you drop a note about this on my desk?
Reporting with a note
Tracey copies out her notes neatly and gives them to her manager:
Wednesday, 7th March 8am.
Mrs Brown: urine darker colour than normal.
Mrs Brown says she passed urine twice during the night, possibly at 4.30 or 5.30.
Mrs Brown was incontinent twice yesterday.
Perhaps she didn't drink anything before she went to bed because she was worried she was getting incontinent.
I'll check with night staff.
Question for manager: Mrs Brown isn't usually incontinent.
Do you want to discuss with her if you should get Dr Patel in?
I'll get a specimen of her urine tomorrow morning anyway.
Reporting at a meeting
Meetings are usually led by a supervisor or manager.
If it's the regular Tuesday morning meeting in your home, you'll probably just all go into the office for half an hour.
The manager will make any announcements necessary, and then you will discuss your work — problems, any help needed, how your residents are doing.
Manager
‘We try to overcome any problems with regular planned carestaff meetings that all key workers attend.
I give a blank agenda to the supervisor and say ‘Have a team meeting with your own team, and see what problems you've had or experienced.’
Then I present each of their problems when I chair the full care staff meeting.
So nobody's singled out — I don't pick out one team.
I actually say there's a problem with the way you deal with this client, how can we solve it.’
Where several experts have been brought together, perhaps for a case assessment, there may be a written agenda looking something like this:
1
Minutes
2
Mrs Brown — 6 weeks' assessment
3
Report from social services
4
Statement from supervisor
5
Report from key worker
6
Current situation — Mrs Brown
7
Course of action: care plan
In this case, the meeting was arranged some time ago.
Tracey and her supervisor together with Mrs Brown have already filled in a Care Plan Assessment Form.
But Tracey feels she should mention about Mrs Brown's incontinence.
She brings her notes about it to the meeting and reads them out.
MANAGER
Thank you, Tracey, it seems very clear.
Well, Mrs Brown, was it difficult for you to get to the toilet yesterday?
MRS B
Yes, as a matter of fact it was.
I got cramp in my leg and I just couldn't get out of the chair.
I didn't like to call out because I knew they were busy getting lunch.
I just couldn't help myself.
I was ever so sorry.
MANAGER
Can you remember if you had a drink last night?
MRS B
Well, I didn't have a drink last thing.
But then I never do.
I had my cup of tea at about ten past eight, after Coronation Street.
MANAGER
Thank you.
That seems very clear.
But if it happens again, please know that you can call someone — that's what we're here for.
If you don't mind, I'll ask Tracey to get a specimen from you tomorrow morning, just in case Dr Patel would like it checked.
Is that all right?
And talking about tea, how about a cup now?
MRS B
Yes, please.
That's all right, as long as she doesn't wake me too early!
So, in Mrs Brown's case, Tracey did the right thing.
She made accurate notes and made it clear what was fact and what was her opinion.
It made it easy to check if there really was an incontinence or urine problem, and also gave a warning about a possible difficulty with cramp.
Reporting on an official form
At times, you may need to fill in an official form.
It could be an application for your annual holiday, a report on an accident or a monthly review of a resident  in your care.
If you haven't seen an example, ask to be shown the form and how it should be filled in.
If possible, keep the samples to put into your personal induction pack.
See pages 44 to 45.
KEY POINTS
Be as accurate as you can when observing and reporting.
Take notes at the time, so you remember the facts.
State what you have observed.
If you make an interpretation, make this clear.
What is ageing?
Growing old is something that happens to all of us.
As sure as we are born, so we will grow old and die — unless we die earlier from an accident, war or disease.
Having said that, every person has a different rate of ageing.
A woman of 85 may be confused and incontinent but good on her feet and able to feed herself.
Her neighbour may be struggling with arthritis and moving around with a Zimmer frame but be quite able to follow current affairs and argue about Coronation Street.
Down the road, a third person may be driving a car and taking the dog for daily walks.
After the age of 75, the physical changes due to ageing usually become more noticeable, but some people in their seventies keep up their health and fitness.
Some degeneration can be treated or even reversed and doctors and researchers in our hospitals have made great strides forward.
Many illnesses are not the killers they once were.
Someone who would formerly have been crippled from arthritis of the hip or knee may now have a new lease of life from a joint replacement.
This chapter looks at what happens to our bodies as they grow older, and how our different systems are affected by illness and disease.
It includes:
changes in medical practice
general body changes in old age
disease and illness of older people
the care assistant's role in managing mobility problems, impaired eyesight and hearing and mental and psychological conditions
CHANGES IN MEDICAL PRACTICE
There have been important changes in patient care in our hospitals, and this includes care of the over-75's.
The old ways are still vivid in many people's minds — rows and rows of very old patients who never moved from their beds, many of them confused and incontinent because of drugs or disease.
Most were unhappy — to the outside world they were just thought of as ‘cabbages’, without thoughts or feelings, because that was how the people looking after them thought they were.
There is still a real fear among the very old that this will happen to them (see page 27).
We know now that someone in a coma may still hear and react emotionally when they are nursed and that how they are treated and spoken to may affect their recovery.
We also know that people who have lost a limb, or had a stroke or heart disease can get back their mobility and their health in a way that would have seemed quite impossible only twenty years ago.
This means that even in old age, we are able to recover at least partially from what might look like an incurable condition.
In hospital, each patient has a care plan which is drawn up and discussed in great detail with the person and the nursing staff.
It's exclusive — no two patients have the same plan.
It may include details of the care best suited to help that patient towards recovery.
So today, a modern hospital ward for the care of the elderly aims to treat and rehabilitate patients — to get them back on their feet if possible and out of the ward, encouraging them to live their lives as they want to.
The long-stay ward is very slowly on its way out.
What this means for the care assistant
Today, many people who might earlier this century have been in hospital are now living in a residential home.
Instead of lying in bed they are up and about and have freedom to make choices about their routine and daily life.
It also means that a care assistant is likely to see frailer residents than used to be the case.
It could be helpful for you to know something about what happens to our bodies in old age, and the conditions and diseases which can be controlled or helped.
There are two types of age-related changes which affect our bodies:
A gradual change or deterioration of each of the body's systems which happens to everyone between childhood and old age.
A disease or illness which affects just one or more parts of the system.
Some are usually more common at a particular age.
For instance, chicken pox is usually a disease of childhood, arthritis usually affects the elderly, but we get colds or flu at any age.
GENERAL BODY CHANGES
Eyesight
Up to the age of 40 to 50, most of us can see at a distance and read close to without any difficulty.
In middle age the lens of the eye becomes harder, and we may need glasses to focus on near objects.
We become more long-sighted as we grow older, and our glasses need to be more powerful.
Hearing
As we get older, we are not able to hear very high notes.
A simple test is whether you can hear the very high pitched whistle a television makes when it is switched off.
In the same way, we cannot hear very low tones.
Skin
The most obvious sign of ageing is through our skin tissues.
The fine complexion of a baby becomes coarser and harder, we grow hair on the body, we get fine lines round the eyes and later we become wrinkled.
Some of us are bald.
The skin's power to regenerate itself also changes.
A child's skin heals fast — an aged skin takes much longer.
An old person who is bedbound may get pressure sores or ulcers in a very short time and these can take a long time to heal (see page 78).
The texture of the skin also changes and often becomes mottled and purple in colour, particularly the legs.
Teeth and dentures
Changes in oral hygiene and dental practice have come too late for the men and women in today's Homes.
Most will have dentures which need regular cleaning.
One problem with dentures is that the bone of a toothless lower jaw is actually absorbed back into the jaw itself.
This means that the lower dentures become loose and the person has problems with eating.
Regular dental checks will help make sure that dentures fit.
In old age, less saliva is produced and the mouth becomes more liable to infection.
Kidneys and bladder
In old age, the kidneys become generally less efficient.
The bladder muscles become weaker and are therefore unable to hold so much fluid.
Emptying of the bladder is more difficult and retention of urine may occur.
At the same time, the bladder becomes less able to sterilise urine and the urine is less concentrated, so more fluids are needed to take away the same amount of waste (see incontinence, pages 70 to 76).
Bones, muscles and joints
Old bones are more brittle and are easily broken.
The discs between the spine shrink and harden.
Osteoporosis is common, and is worse in women (see page 107).
Joints suffer from general wear and tear and become stiffer and less well lubricated.
Muscles become weaker, and mobility may be affected (see page 105).
Reproductive system
After the menopause, women are no longer able to bear children, as their ovaries stop releasing eggs.
Men are still able to father children into their seventies, though their sperm count is lower than in their youth.
Sexual activity becomes less with old age, but is certainly not absent.
In many Homes, some men and women have sexual and emotional relationships with other residents (see page 21).
Respiratory system
We continue breathing until we die, but in old age our lungs lose their elasticity and are not as powerful as before.
The vocal chords are also less flexible, so that our voices change.
Heart and circulatory system
There are organic changes to the heart, and it becomes less efficient as we get older; but lack of exercise causes more deterioration than simple ageing.
Arteries become less elastic and harder.
Nervous system
The most important part of the nervous system is the brain, which directs all our activities and reactions, both mental and physical.
The brain's control systems tend to deteriorate with age so that, for instance , our balance gets less good.
Elderly people are therefore more likely to fall and fracture a bone.
NOTE Though there is some decline in recent memory from early middle age, old people are perfectly able to learn new tasks, to study a language, to take up art or pottery.
Keeping the brain active is as important as keeping the body active.
Digestive system
In general, digestion slows down with age, and food is not absorbed so efficiently.
Food passes through the stomach, intestines and bowel more slowly.
Constipation is common.
This can mean that the bowels move less frequently, that hard faeces are not easily passed or that there is an increased retention of faeces in the colon (see pages 74 to 75).
Diet is a major factor in keeping the digestion in order and in keeping the body's health generally.
A good diet helps the digestive processes.
Although nutrition may not be a responsibility of a care assistant, you may find it helpful to read more about diet as part of each resident's personal care plan.
Temperature control
In our daily lives, many of our systems act together to maintain health and activity.
This happens in regulating the body's temperature in extreme conditions of heat and cold.
But old people can't cope so well with either.
Not only does their body temperature not regulate efficiently, but they are not aware that they are very cold or very hot.
Hypothermia has been well publicised and is a danger particularly to people who stay in cold rooms.
It's also dangerous for an old person to stay long out-of-doors in very cold conditions — for instance, waiting by a bus stop.
At the other extreme, many old people die during the heat waves that occur in very hot countries such as Greece.
Disease and illness
Along with a the gradual deterioration in all the body's systems, any part of the body, including the nervous system or the mind, may develop a specific disease or illness.
These may be acute or chronic.
Acute conditions include strokes, heart attacks, broken bones, and infections such as pneumonia.
Residents suffering from any of these may need immediate medical attention in hospital.
Chronic conditions like diabetes or arthritis require medical treatment including drugs to control them.
All chronic conditions should be supervised by the person's doctor.
As a general rule, residents should be considered responsible for taking their own medicines, but some may be administered by care assistants under the supervision of senior staff.
Common medicines are:
laxatives;
mild pain killers such as paracetamol, aspirin and others prescribed for arthritis;
drugs to control heart disease, including angina tablets and  digoxsin ;
some sedatives (to be used with caution and not recommended for regular use).
NOTE Some drugs can be dangerous when they are taken at the same time as alcohol.
These include barbiturates, anti-diabetic drugs, anti-depressants (tricyclics) and anti-coagulants (drugs to decrease the risk of blood clots).
MANAGING COMMON PHYSICAL CONDITIONS
Since a high proportion of residents in Homes are frail, you may have to assist with nursing care, as outlined on pages 69 to 85.
It must be stressed that the doctor's advice should be followed; but there are ways in which you, under the guidance of the community nurse, can help to improve the conditions which affect many residents:
incontinence
lack of mobility
impaired eyesight and hearing
mental and psychological conditions
Incontinence is treated fully on pages 70 to 76 in the chapter Giving Special Care .
Lack of mobility and falling
Being able to move around is an important part of keeping our independence, but there are many hazards for an old person which can severely restrict this independence.
Old people are not as steady on their feet as they once were, and falls may occur through loss of balance, weak arms or legs or poor eyesight.
Causes of falls may be:
stumbling on an uneven floor;
tripping over electric cables or badly placed electric fires;
tripping over low, small items of furniture;
being unable to judge distances when wearing bifocal lenses;
being unable to see a hazard in dim lighting, especially on stairs and in passageways and halls.
What you can do
It is very important that you are always on the look out for safety hazards in the Home.
A visitor or resident may move a small table to suit themselves — it could mean a broken hip for another resident.
Safety inside the Home should concern care staff and also residents, so always talk about it to residents as well as colleagues.
Many residents have some kind of support which is usually a stick, a Zimmer or wheeled frame or a wheelchair.
Some residents use more than one type of support at different times, depending on how they are feeling.
Some are able to walk with a support when they are inside the Home but feel more secure going out in a wheelchair.
Gentle exercise may improve mobility, but the risk of falling is always a real one and should be discussed with each person.
Osteoarthritis
This degeneration of the joints and tissues can affect hips, knees, the spine and the hands and feet.
Arthritis can make movement not only painful but very difficult.
One specialist in geriatric medicine recommends his students to put some elastic bands round their fingers and then try and do some everyday things.
It helps one understand how difficult it is just to eat, to pick things up or to dry your feet.
What you can do
It's important for anyone with arthritis to try to retain and improve mobility through exercise and movement.
This should be part of the resident's care plan.
There are exercises which even frail people can do.
Pain can be controlled through a variety of drugs and by keeping the mind on other things.
Both May and Bert in The Residents chapter suffer from chronic pain, and have developed their own ways of coping with it.
Warmth from a bath or an electrically heated blanket may also help.
Osteoporosis
Many elderly women suffer from this.
The bones gradually become thinner and more porous — that is, they have holes, and this makes them more likely to break.
The two common places for fractures are the hip and the wrist.
The vertebrae of the spine may also collapse towards each .The sufferer's height becomes lower and she will have a stoop.
NOTE Osteoporosis cannot be cured once it is present, but younger women from the time of the menopause may be able to prevent it from developing through hormone replacement therapy.
Also useful is regular exercise, taking adequate daily calcium and not smoking or drinking alcohol to excess.
Impaired eyesight and hearing
Every thirteen years the eye needs double the amount of light to see so good lighting is very important in making the most of sight.
However, fluorescent light can damage the eye, so if there is a choice of lighting, use ordinary light bulbs.
Many residents have poor eyesight.
Some conditions such as cataract can be operated on.
Any changes in vision should be monitored carefully and everyone should have an eye check every two years.
Many residents have hearing aids to assist them, but these are not always efficient.
Aids will pick up every sound around, not just speech, so that the wearer will have a constant wash of muddled noise in his or her ear — not very comfortable!
So people often switch off their hearing aids when they are not wanted.
You will need to check that anyone wearing a hearing aid knows how to cope with it.
You may be able to arrange this through a hearing aid clinic.
NOTE Because ears are so sensitive, it is very painful if you shout in the ear of someone whose aid is switched on.
If you have ever switched on a personal stereo full blast, you will have some idea what it feels like.
So make a point of checking if the aid is on or off before talking to someone who wears an aid, and speak slowly and clearly, with your face clearly visible.
KEY POINTS
While the ageing process is inevitable, ill health and disability are not.
No two people age at the same rate or in the same way.
Much can be done to increase mobility and to ease pain and discomfort.
Many residents suffer from impaired vision and hearing and should have regular checks.
Bad lighting and badly placed cables and furniture can cause unnecessary accidents.
Always be aware of safety around the Home.
MENTAL AND PSYCHOLOGICAL CONDITIONS
There are many degrees of mental frailty or disturbance, ranging from mild confusion to Alzheimers disease.
You are likely to come across people with different problems which need a different approach.
There has been a lot of research and change in the treatment of mental illness or frailty over the last few years.
If you are in any doubt, ask for a medical opinion and for guidance on how to approach a particular resident.
Among the most common conditions are depression, confusion and dementia.
Depression
This is very common in old age, particularly among women.
Grief, loneliness, poor health, financial worries, social deprivation all contribute to a feeling of acute depression.
A depressed person may cry a great deal, show self-pity and lack of interest in the outside world and have no enjoyment of everyday life, even food.
Many depressed people just withdraw into themselves, they may sleep a lot in the day but have wakeful nights.
Others become agitated and may seem very demanding.
Depressed people often complain of physical symptoms such as constipation and headaches.
Depression is sometimes brought on by a sudden change in one's life, such as coming into a Home.
What you can do
Severe depression requires medical treatment, which may take several weeks to lift.
Most people also respond to personal therapy and attention.
They respond to affection, being made to feel that they matter and to the opportunity to talk about or work through their past, especially in ways that help to raise their self-esteem.
You as a care assistant are likely to be the most important person to show someone who's depressed that they are cared for.
Research has shown that having someone to talk to and confide in is an important factor in preventing depression.
It helps if you can establish such a relationship and listen to people with concern.
Being with others is also important, and it helps if you can involve a depressed resident in outside activities.
Depression should not be a permanent state, but recovery takes time.
Relapses are common and should be looked out for.
Mild confusion
Many people suffer from this, and it doesn't have to mean that they will eventually become much worse.
The main symptom is short-term memory loss, which includes repetition of statements and actions.
In fact it's not that the memory is lost, so much as the person can't get out the facts which are stored in the memory.
It's rather like a computer when the disc goes wrong — you know the info is there but you can't tap into it.
Reality Orientation activities (see below) are helpful to keep the brain working — any activity which uses the mind is important.
Care assistant
‘People with confusion live very much in the present.
They are with you now, but they don't remember it two minutes later or know who you are even.
You often see people looking at you and you know that they're wondering if they know you.
‘Seen you before but I can't think who you are’ sort of look.
Ten minutes before you might have been having quite a close conversation.’
You need to remember that confusion can be a sign of a physical illness such as an infection, or as a result of drug therapy.
If you have any doubts, ask for a medical check to  be carried out.
Manager
‘We have a lot of people who at tea-time when it's getting dark, will want to put their coat on and go home.
Those people have lived here for about two years and they'll still say ‘I've got to go home because my old man wants his dinner.’
You can't believe that they can still say it, having had this conversation six hundred times.
All you have to do is divert their energy somehow and say ‘let's do this’, or ‘it's a cold night, how about a cup of tea.’
Then they'll say ‘I'll stop for a cup of tea then — oh, I can't go now it's too late, I think I'll stop tonight but I must go home tomorrow’.’
Helping to maintain dignity
A confused person is still able to learn and make decisions.
A key worker may spend some time with her or his clients, listening, asking simple questions and rehearsing facts like the day, the month and the weather.
Many homes have a notice board where this kind of information is displayed.
Conversation, comparing what happens today with earlier times helps to focus on the present.
Prices in the shops, politics and politicians, food and drink, smells and tastes are all subjects which can stimulate the mind.
It takes time to discover what subjects a particular client will respond to.
Books and short courses can provide you with more ideas.
It is important to remember that a very confused person lives just in each moment, the ‘now’, even if they don't remember what happened five minutes ago.
So they can enjoy the present like anyone else — exercising, going on an outing, eating their favourite food, having a bath, watching television.
For them, making the ‘now’ enjoyable is what matters.
It's also very important not to treat a confused person as a child.
Each person has his or her dignity and this should be respected.
Reality Orientation with confused people
This is a way of helping confused people be more aware of everyday facts ‘reality.’
It's designed to bring knowledge of the real world around them.
Manager
‘When you wake someone up, you very simply say,
‘it's now 8.30 in the morning.
My name's John James, your name is such and such.
It's time to get out of bed’, rather than saying, ‘good morning, it's time to get up.’
You add all this other information and you constantly do that throughout the 24 hour day by saying that, ‘it's 11 o'clock, time for your coffee’, ‘it's twelve o'clock, it's time for lunch’, and constantly giving your name and bringing them back to the present.’
Because Reality Orientation starts with the world people know, it's important to keep it looking the same.
For a confused person, each possession should have its own place.
Keep personal items, such as photos or ornaments or books, in sight.
Some places use colour coding to tell people where different things are.
For instance, every bathroom door is painted green, every toilet door, yellow.
Homes with large impersonal reception areas are better for orientation if they are broken up into smaller areas divided from each other.
But Reality Orientation needs to be done with care.
Parrot-fashion responses may not mean that the person knows where they are now.
It's usually best if it is linked with reminiscence (see page 123).
Reminiscence can produce a lot more responses, because you're tapping into a person's past which is theirs alone.
In reminiscence, you build up from past life to the present.
As they begin to remember their younger life and what their job was or the day they went on holiday to Margate, the more they may begin to make links with things happening today.
Dementia
This is a decline in the normal function of the mind.
It usually starts with short-term memory loss but may move to a change in actual social behaviour.
The main symptoms include:
memory loss;
confusion;
self-neglect;
wandering.
As many as 20 per cent of people over 80 may be suffering from dementia, but no accurate figures are available.
Dementia has been known to improve, even though this is extremely rare.
In general, dementia cannot yet be treated, though research may provide some form of treatment before long.
People with dementia often respond to Reality Orientation and reminiscence or other therapies.
KEY POINTS
The more a person's mind is kept active, the more they will enjoy their life into and in old age.
While some mental illness cannot be reversed, people with depression, memory loss and mild confusion can be helped through a variety of therapies.
Someone with short-term memory loss lives very much in the present and is able to enjoy what they do, even if they cannot recall it a few minutes later.
Keeping Active in Mind and Body
A good Home will help its residents to keep as fit as they can and will offer plenty of different things to do during the week.
It will also give special care to those with medical or psychiatric problems such as memory loss and confusion.
Care assistants help to run and supervise these activities.
You will also have the chance to provide informal activities which could be anything from putting on a record or cassette for some listening or dancing, to reading aloud, or getting someone fixed up with their portable stereo or a good romance to read.
This chapter gives you some ideas for informal things to do in the Home, organised outings and activities which may also have a special therapy value, like reminiscence.
All of them add to the quality of life of the residents, and many of them may also help you enjoy your work too.
Use the ideas suggested here as a starting point.
The local authority may also be able to provide literature on the subject if your Home is run by one.
There are also activities courses in many parts of the country.
Ask if you can go on a course.
They include:
general points about activity
informal activities around the home
an outside stimulus
physical activities
exercising the mind
going out with residents
WE ALL NEED ACTION
As we've said before in this book, people don't change that much just because they're older.
Most people enjoy doing things if they can, it helps keep our minds active and our bodies healthy.
This doesn't mean straining yourself — at every age we can manage some things better than others.
But also at every age, we can do things which are perhaps just a little beyond our reach.
Resident
‘You have to be firm with yourself.
If you're one of those who can't walk much, you've got to be very careful to exercise your self-will.
However hard it is, however cosy you are in your chair, you must just say, ‘I'm going to stretch my legs’ or ‘I'm going to walk down the passage just to show that I can do it!.’
It's a challenge.
It's also important to keep your mind working.
Very important.
Do a crossword if you can and reading.
Playing a game of patience.’
‘Somebody told me a very good memory game to play the other day.
You play by yourself.
You say something like, ‘three blind mice’— the last letter is e.
Now think of another phrase beginning with e.
It can be a proverb or a verse of a hymn, it can be anything.
You think of all the proverbs, the various sayings and you think of all the hymns you learnt in your youth.
And then you teach these games to other people.
It's very good for your brain too.
You take rather a long time sometimes to find something that fits in but you do in the end.’
Losing the habit
Many elderly people live in their own homes for many years following the death of a husband or a wife.
During that time, some spend long periods doing nothing or just watching television.
They may be isolated, lonely, fearful, at risk.
This happens long before they come into a residential establishment.
They will have disengaged from many activities in the community long before then.
Care assistant
‘Care staff are involved in re-establishing some of those links.
We encourage residents to relate to the community.
Keeping up contacts like going to the post office to collect their pension, going to the library, attending community centres and things of that sort.’
Manager
‘Our job is to provide some activities so that people can then choose whether or not they want to be involved.
It will vary depending on whether you are coping with a small house with 8 people or an establishment with 50.’
NOTE In many Homes, there are very frail residents who will have great difficulty in taking part in any kind of activity.
Also, any programme should allow people to opt out if they wish.
There is sometimes a fine line between encouraging residents to take part in an activity and making them do something they really do not want to do.
Allow choice
If a resident says quite firmly ‘No, I don't want to do that’, then what do you do?
There's no straight answer.
It's always difficult to balance what you feel is best for a client with what they say they want.
It could be they have got out of the way of doing things that they used to enjoy.
The only rule is to encourage but not to force.
Judge each case for itself.
Manager
‘We've got a lady at the moment who was able to paint at one time, quite successfully.
She's not painted for so long that she'll just have to be encouraged more and more.
Probably some day she'll actually start putting pen or paintbrush to paper and actually doing something.
The difficulty is getting them involved again in some of the things that they're interested in.’
‘As far as possible, the daily lives of people should be determined by their own decisions about their own timetable.
We should help people to live as normal a life as possible and organise the day around what they want to do.
So the time for meals should be determined by when people get up, when they go to bed and other things that they want to do during the day.’
Take risks
Allowing choice does involve some risk-taking from you as a carer and from the people in your care.
This is a question of balance — in some cases literally!
There may be someone who's a bit unsteady on her feet who has a passion for old time dancing.
Her balance may go and she may fall.
But if she thinks it's worth the risk, then it's up to you to try and contain that risk — make sure there's nothing to trip over, and that someone who can react quickly is on hand to give tactful support where necessary.
Someone else who is sometimes confused perhaps likes a trip to the pub at lunch-time.
Should you stop him from going out?
This is the view of one manager.
Others may not agree.
Manager
‘We have some clients that are called mildly muddled who are perfectly capable of going out and may get lost, but that's an assessed risk.
Rather than chase somebody and take away what little respect they have, it's far better that they go out and maybe get lost for a few minutes and then come back, than have somebody chase them.
If they want to go for a longer period, a key worker would go out with them.’
‘Even if they're completely confused, they would still go out if they want to.
Most of our clients go out quite a bit, which is nice.’
START WITH THE HOME
The Home itself is the first place to start getting people active, and there are all kinds of things which can be done which only need a bit of imagination and common sense rather than expense.
Give people who like gardening a chance to look after the Home's own garden, perhaps growing their own seeds or vegetables.
If someone has special talents or interests, ask them to run sessions for other residents rather than getting in an outsider.
There may be some good cooks, or those from other cultures — the Caribbean, Asia or Africa — who would welcome the chance to make their own special dishes.
Having a chat
Most of us at any age enjoy a good chat, but in how many Homes do you see small groups of residents talking to each other?
Unhappily, it is far more common to see great circles of chairs facing a TV set, each person isolated in a little world of their own.
Change the layout
One way of getting people to talk to each other is actually to change the layout of the reception rooms.
Break them up with screens, furniture or shelving, plants and tables.
You may get a result like this:
Manager
‘I showed a friend of mine round here one day and she said the most stunning difference was that the clients actually talked to each other.
She'd been into lots of Homes where everybody was sat separately, with their space between their chairs, whereas a lot of our people sit quite close to each other and lean over.
If someone falls or something, there is a lot of concern.’
It may not be possible to move furniture around much in a small Home, but the rooms can be put to different uses by changing the dining arrangements.
Owner
‘I also try and split the House up into smaller groups which is difficult here.
We've recently used the front room as a lounge so we have three residents eating in there, three to four eating in one of the other lounges.
It's made a great thoroughfare in the dining area and broken the dining area up a bit.
‘Small spaces help residents to communicate with each other— and also give them somewhere to escape to.
If there are a lot of people sitting in a room they'll just sit there and they won't communicate, whereas two or three or four or five residents will communicate quite freely — they don't feel inhibited or they don't feel they're interrupting somebody else's television programme or radio or something like that.’
Involve the residents
In every Home, meals have to be prepared, tables have to be laid, cleared away, washed up.
Some residents enjoy being useful and helping out with domestic tasks, and a good Home encourages this.
Manager
‘There are a lot of things that you might expect people to do as part of a normal lifestyle and those are the things that we should invest our time in doing first, I think, before we organise any activity on their behalf.
‘They can help with laying tables, preparing some simple meals, buttering bread, making toast, serving meals, clearing away.
I'm not saying that you should make it their responsibility to do these things, but we should offer them the opportunity.’
In all too many places, this opportunity is not offered and a valuable chance is lost.
The best time for activities?
You need to consider what activities are most suitable for a particular time of day.
It's thought that the morning, when people are a bit lively, is a good time for therapy-type activities — perhaps have a half-hour reminiscence group over a coffee at 9.30 or 10.00 am.
If a group is coming to entertain residents, then bring them in after an afternoon nap.
It's best if you keep to the same time each week for regular activities, though be prepared to be flexible about it.
There may be a notice board which has them all written down, so that residents and staff can see at a glance what's on today.
Manager
‘As you see, I've got this white board which we fill up with all the various activities.
About two to three of the residents go to the day centre on a daily basis.
Then, for example, on the first Monday of the month we have a library book change.
Also on a Monday we always have a bingo session because it's very popular with the residents.
Early in the morning we have a little keep-fit — ten minutes from the TV.
‘Tuesdays we have the church here every so often.
We have hairdressing Tuesday and Thursday mornings and chiropody when it's required — it depends how many people need their feet seen to.
It depends how often we can actually get the chiropodist, but she's been very, very good recently and she's come along at request, so we're fortunate in that area.
Also, some people go to stroke clubs, and we have the other churches come along.
Every month on a Wednesday, we always have a minibus outing.’
INFORMAL ACTIVITIES
These go on every day in a Home — they won't be planned beforehand or written up on a board, they are the little things of everyday life:
reading the papers or a book
playing a record or cassette
talking to the cat
making yourself and a friend a cup of tea
Things like these keep residents stimulated, and it also helps build up the relationship between you and them.
Manager
‘It helps clients to know that you care.
Doing activities with them, such as sitting down and playing cards with them, playing music with some, music that they would enjoy — old time, etc.
There's a record player in each unit.’
If there's no formal activity arranged, when you have finished domestic duties, make sure that books and papers are available and accessible and that those who are able have got something to do other than watching television.
Check from time to time that residents have something to occupy themselves on hand.
Games
There are a number of games which can be played — board games, card games, memory games.
If you don't know many yourself, ask the residents if they know some they could teach you.
Popular games normally are: whist, rummy, scrabble, draughts, dominoes or poker.
Care assistant
‘Listening games are a good way of helping someone use their memory.
You start by telling them a short story — something that happened to you as you came to work, something you heard on the news.
Take 30 seconds to a minute.
‘Then ask them to repeat it back to you just as you told it.
‘Try it the other way round.
They tell, you listen and repeat.
You'll be amazed how many little details get forgotten and new ones added.’
Quizzes
You can draw on people's competitive instincts by having two or three teams in the Home which meet regularly once a week for a little competition.
Ask one of the residents to devise the questions on perhaps a different theme each week.
Music
If you have a piano in the Home and a pianist, music can provide a chance for a sing-song — so do popular records.
Often a local pianist may come in to play.
Singing and dancing is not just good for the spirits, it's also good for the heart and lungs and the limbs!
A theme is often a good way of introducing a music session such as spring, holiday time, music from different countries.
Don't just include music from the 30s and 40s — some residents may like light classical or early music, others may be jazz buffs.
Painting
In some Homes, there's a place where residents can find paints or crayons and paper and spend a morning painting or drawing.
Painting is valuable because people who may have difficulty expressing themselves in words can get some of their feelings down in a picture.
It's a well-known therapy in places like mental hospitals and prisons and has a place for the elderly as well.
Many people also like painting for its own sake and find talents at drawing or brushwork which they haven't used since childhood.
Some people may regard painting as a childish activity.
If so, encourage them to paint pictures as they listen to music or try using art games.
Some Homes display their residents' work.
It brightens up the place and it gives artists a chance to show what they can do; and it does encourage others to try their hand at painting or drawing.
Handicrafts
There are handicrafts like weaving, tapestry, basket-making, etc, which some of the residents may enjoy doing.
However, they are sometimes more popular with staff than residents unless there's a good teacher or occupational therapist who visits regularly.
Pets
Some Homes do not allow pets.
Those which do, find that having a cat or bird or even goldfish around is very valuable.
It gives residents something young and living to look at, to care for, something to stroke.
Manager
‘We negotiate pets with the residents, because obviously not everybody would want them.
But at the moment we have four fish, plus some other unusual things that float around the tank.
We have a bird, a budgie, a cat and one of the clients has her own budgie.
We've had kittens.
The cat loves being stroked, absolutely loves it!’
AN OUTSIDE STIMULUS
People visiting the Home usually have a stimulating effect.
A new face is a new focus of interest, whether it's someone the client already knows or someone who comes to the Home on a Friday to do movement or dance, drama, music therapy or a slide show.
Visitors come to see relatives, and sometimes their friends as well.
Manager
‘We've been very fortunate in most of the families of new residents when they take them out, they often take out their friends as well.
I do encourage people to come for cups of coffee or bites to eat.
A lady today had a lunch with one of the residents, which of course I encourage.
We're hoping that will grow, that more and more friends will come and have lunch, tea or whatever with the residents.’
Visitors may also come to entertain.
There are plenty of small choirs or theatre  groups which need practice in performing to an audience who will come to the Home.
If it's up to you, make sure that the type of entertainment is suitable for your Home.
Comedy, pop or folk music groups, if they aren't too loud, can all be very effective.
And children, from schools, guides or brownies — even a nursery school — can be welcome if you have contacts with any of these.
Manager
‘There are a lot of groups about who offer their services virtually free of charge, and so even cost-wise we don't have to find too much money out of the amenity fund, it's absolutely marvellous.’
Resident
‘Last Christmas they brought the children over from the nursery school.
It was lovely!
They did a nativity play and Joseph forgot his words — but it was ever so nice to hear them.
I joined in with the carols — not that I know all the words dear, but I do know the tunes.’
Homes that make visitors welcome will have a lively atmosphere which has a knock-on effect on residents.
Care assistant
‘We have a licensed bar here so we use that as well for social evenings.
We have quite a lot of entertainments here.
We bring people, small theatre groups.
We also go out to the theatre quite a lot, to a matinee usually with seven or eight residents.’
Local professionals
Sometimes you can bring in an expert from a local college or hospital to lead activities.
Some social services departments will also offer help if you contact them.
Volunteers can come in through advertisements in the local paper or shops.
You could be surprised by the number of people around who have time on their hands and love to come round and do things.
One Home has had great success with an art therapist who came over to take classes, combining residents from a number of Homes close to each other.
Sometimes ads in local papers bring in volunteers.
Manager
‘We have one lady here who was an artist.
She used to do some of the drawings in the Radio Times many years ago before she retired.
We wanted to get her back drawing again so we put an advert in the paper.
A very eccentric lady wandered in here one day asking, in response to this advert, if there was  anything she could do and she said she was an artist.
I said, ‘yes, jolly good, perhaps you can come and do some painting with the residents’.
So we set it up.
She turned up and she was absolutely wonderful She just had a kind of visual imagination that most people don't have and she had the ideas even though she didn't have any teaching techniques or anything.
‘She was actually very good at drawing and she would draw the residents.
They thought that was wonderful.
They all had their pictures done and eventually over a period of about a year, she actually did a portrait of everybody in the Home.
Staff included.
People wanted to be the next model to sit and she'd chat to them for about an hour and draw, and they'd get a picture at the end of the session, just like you get in the street.’
Look after the volunteers
Manager
‘If you are going to set up things for volunteers, you need to make sure that you've got your act together because otherwise, if they just turn up and muddle along, they won't stay.
I've learnt that from bitter experience!
You've got to give them a very specific task to do and give them the support and the materials to do it with and make sure it happens so that when they turn up at 3 o’ clock, it's set up to go.
And they need to be praised and thanked, too!’
PHYSICAL ACTIVITIES
Exercise
Physiotherapy is important so that hands, arms, legs, etc are kept mobile.
Some homes provide individual therapy, others may have group work on a regular basis.
There are many simple exercises you can do to help people keep moving which can be done sitting down such as ball games.
There are exercise tapes to play.
Games which stimulate touch and the brain, such as putting several objects into a black cloth bag and then putting your hand inside to identify them.
There are several good catalogues which you can obtain and which may supply you with new ideas (see book list, page 136).
Also ask the physiotherapists who visit the Home for ideas for group work.
Dancing
This is an excellent activity for those who are able.
It's a good way to get people  going, especially if they are confused, because music sets up an automatic response in us.
A research study at the University of Birmingham has shown that elderly people attending craft and dance classes were less stiff and prone to painful joints.
They also had better balance.
People from the dance group also became more outgoing and at the end of the study had improved muscle strength and reduced blood pressure.
Dancing also gave a feeling of well-being and encouraged them to be more sociable.
Remember that you can always put on a cassette and get a bit of dancing going informally.
EXERCISING THE MIND
Discussion groups
Some Homes have discussion groups which  the residents themselves arrange.
They discuss everything from AIDS to water pollution to the European Community.
Reminiscence groups
Reminiscence is to do with getting people to use parts of their memory that actually do work.
Most people, even if they're confused or have short-term memory loss, are able to remember the past.
You can begin to bring someone back to the present if you can gradually get them to remember events in their life nearer to the present day.
Reminiscence is usually carried out with five to six people.
The leader will show the group something to spark their memories — it could be photographs of the war, pictures from magazines, music, slides, even pieces of furniture.
(See story about the commode, page 72.)
If you have problems finding material, your library could put you in touch with a local history society.
They may be able to lend out material about your area in the early part of the century — shops that may have been pulled down, local roads or markets, pictures of young people in clothes of the period.
Any of these could provide a trigger to the memory.
It isn't always easy to lead a reminiscence group, and sometimes it needs a skilled leader.
Manager
‘Not all care assistants feel very comfortable leading a group and some reminiscence groups can be very distressing.
They're recalling painful events from the war and you can have tears and great distress.
You need to be prepared for that.
It's not just a question of having a good old chat about the wild 30's.
There's some pretty distressing experiences most people have had.
More distressing to them anyway and you need to help them talk about it.’
Hobbies
Other activities of a creative sort are ones that are built in over and above that.
It's only in the last ten or twenty years that people have had the time or the money to have hobbies, especially to do with music or painting.
Many elderly people will not have had any hobbies at all.
Some of them may be able to start up new interests, but it's usually best to start from their own experiences in life.
Many elderly people will not have had that many.
Manager
‘Having established what it is that people are interested in, you need to start with the individual.
If somebody's had a lifetime of doing tapestries or needlework or sewing, then encourage them to do needlework as an individual.
You don't have to gather them together in a group in order for that to be a successful piece of creative activity.’
Outings to concerts or the cinema, and gardening and outdoor work are also likely to be more popular with one or two people on their own rather than with a whole group.
GOING OUT WITH RESIDENTS
Some residents get out and about regularly, even if they may be rather slow at walking.
It's important to encourage as much contact with the outside world as possible, for instance going to local events, taking evening classes, joining clubs and so on.
It usually works best to make outings as normal as you can — ie, go with just two or three people to a concert or the theatre rather than with a whole organised group which will stand out.
Some managers encourage residents to keep ties with their local community.
Manager
‘Some of the residents are still able to go over to the shops.
The one worry of course, is the main road.
Up until recently, we had a resident who went across  on a regular basis but her health deteriorated, and we have at least three or four who do wander about the shops.
One gentleman goes each day for a drink in the pub, and one of the ladies wanders around seeing people who she knows, because she's lived in the village all her life.
‘So we do have a few residents that still come and go as they please.
But just at this particular time we've got a lot of residents with Zimmer frames and they really just aren't steady enough without one of the care staff going across with them, which does happen.
They only have to request it, and they can certainly go across to the shops.’
Outings can be for just one or two residents to go somewhere they want to, or it may involve the whole staff and all the residents.
These involve a Home of over 40 residents and a Home of 21.
Manager
‘One of my ladies would like to go to bingo and I'm in the process of trying to get a member of staff free, so she can go.
‘We are planning to go to the pantomime and the seaside.
In the summertime, we had a bus come regularly and we used to take the residents out, just a few.
We went up to the safari park, to Evesham for fruit picking, to Redditch for shopping.
It has to be places that are very flat and you have to be so careful.
When we take our residents out, we have to take a wheelchair out for everybody.
We've only got about two or three people in the whole house that don't have a wheelchair if they go out.
‘The latest idea is to actually take them out to the hairdresser's or shopping, so that happens every month without fail, sometimes more often.
Sometimes the driver comes and takes one group out for half a day, then he'll take another group out for half a day, or he'll take them out for a full day's picnic.
There's usually a helper with the minibus and also we can send a member of staff, so that there's plenty of help at hand.’
Combining forces
Manager
‘Last year we arranged a few entertainment evenings over at one of our sister Homes.
In fact, one particular evening we managed to get all twenty-one residents across there, plus some of the people from the Lodge and we had a lovely evening.
We had a choir visiting another Home which we arranged, with food and a little buffet, a nice singsong, etc.
That was a very, very successful evening, and now we're organising an entertainments evening down there again.
‘This is much better because the residents from three, four or five Homes can go.
We have them in a lovely big room with refreshments, buffets and so forth and they have a whole entertainments evening.’
Organising group holidays
There are several hotels, especially on the south coast of England, which specialise in taking groups of older people and who make them feel welcome.
It's important to check that they offer good facilities and proper staff care.
For more sources of information see page 135.
KEY POINTS
The best Homes always have plenty going on.
Get residents with special talents or interests to help with activity sessions.
The first place to start activities is within the Home.
Keep to regular times for organised groups.
Ask the residents to teach you games they know.
Pets are very important therapy for old people and usually get on very well in a Home.
There are often people in the community or groups who like coming to
Homes as volunteers.
Keeping open house for friends and families provides more fun and stimulation for residents.
If you are one of a group of Homes, it can make sense to arrange joint activities.
At all times respect the wishes of residents who do not wish to join in activities.
If you are particularly interested in any activity or craft, ask to go on a course to learn more about it.