

Ward learning: opportunities and problems
Nurse education is at present undergoing great changes.
But whatever happens, the ward will retain an important place in training.
Whether the nurse gains clinical experience in the ward as an apprentice or as a student-observer, the main aim is still to provide the best nursing care possible for the patient.
The Committee on Nursing (1972), chaired by Professor Asa Briggs, stated that it believed nursing to be the major caring profession.
It follows from this that one of the main aims of nurse training must be to produce a nurse capable of a high standard of nursing care.
During the three-year course for registration, the student nurse spends four-fifths of her time on clinical work.
It is, therefore, in the ward that most of her experience is gained, and here that the standard of good practice is set.
This chapter explores some of the learning opportunities provided by the ward and some of the problems that may arise.
The emphasis throughout is on learning rather than teaching.
Included are some suggestions for making the best use of the opportunities and for overcoming the problems.
Ward learning resources
During her training, a student is assigned to various clinical areas for periods of six to twelve weeks.
In line with EEC directives, the programme now includes experience of geriatric, paediatric, obstetric, psychiatric and trauma care.
The community aspect of each specialty is also covered.
A learner therefore has to adjust to many different environments as well as learning about a particular specialty.
Too frequent changes in clinical work could produce a fragmented training and may put stress on the learner; but the more varied her experience, the more able the nurse will be in solving problems.
Properly planned, each allocation will provide a new sort of experience, and by making full use of her learning  opportunities the student will gain in knowledge, ability and confidence.
The ward is the ideal place for learning, but only if its full potential is realised.
This raises several important issues.
The first of these is ‘What has the ward to offer the learner in practical experience?’
Ward objectives are invaluable here in helping to identify the practical experience.
For example, one objective may be that ‘by the end of the allocation the student will be able to plan the nursing care of a patient following cholecystectomy, based on his or her problems and needs’.
By formulating such objectives, ward staff are able to define precisely the general and the specific care required by the patients of their particular specialty.
Because of the specialist nature of most wards, some skills will be practised by the learner only during that one allocation.
Stoma care and continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis are examples of this.
Other aspects of care, however, are common to all patients regardless of the nature of their illness.
Objectives help to guide a student's learning by specifying the range of experience available.
Another consideration when formulating ward objectives is ‘who is available to help to teach the students during an allocation?’
The ward sister is clearly the most important person of all.
The standard of nursing care, the atmosphere and the promotion of a good learning environment all depend on her.
The role of the ward sister will be discussed more fully later in the chapter.
In addition, whilst in the ward, the learner has the opportunity to work in close contact with specialists in all fields.
The specialist personnel, such as a physiotherapist, a clinical nurse specialist or a social worker, can help the student to learn about all aspects of patient care.
The student will also learn about the importance of teamwork in the clinical field by observing the contribution of each to total patient care.
The student nurse can also learn much from the patient and his or her family.
Nursing care is individual to each patient, as the patient should not be expected to conform to a set pattern of treatment.
All nurses must be ready to ask the patient's advice, and not feel resentful if their care is questioned.
For example, a patient with disabling rheumatoid arthritis can teach the learner the best way to perform a procedure with the minimum of discomfort.
Relatives will be helpful in providing information about the home environment, thus increasing understanding of the patient.
For the student to benefit from this opportunity to learn, time and encouragement  must be given for informal ‘chats’.
Too often, quiet spells in the ward are spent in ‘weekend cleaning’ and not in patient contact.
Ward objectives will help to ensure that the learner's training programme is co-ordinated.
The objectives should therefore be modified according to the individual requirements of a student.
This brings us to another important factor in developing the full potential of the ward learning environment: ‘what does the student require from the clinical experience?’
A nurse working in her first ward is going to need a very different experience from a senior student preparing for her final examination.
The ward specialty, however, remains the same.
The requirements of all nurses must be recognised, and met by allocating the appropriate experience.
Clinical assessment for learners is a useful aid here in monitoring the progress achieved.
Ward organisation is important in ensuring that the learner's individual requirements for the development of her clinical skills are met.
The emphasis must be on total patient care, whereby the learner has responsibility for particular patients.
The allocation of work by tasks, although an efficient way of ensuring that work is completed, is unsatisfying for both the nurse and the patient.
The patient is in hospital for treatment of disease, and obviously care is designed to promote his or her comfort and well-being.
Whilst in the ward, however, a patient is also the ideal audio-visual aid for learning (Fig. 3. 1).
Although this role is secondary, and must at no time be abused, the student learns through planning and providing care for individual patients.
Individual care is based on an understanding of the social, psychological and physical condition of the patient.
He or she may have several diseases concurrently which will complicate nursing care.
Knowledge of social problems will help a nurse to plan for discharge.
The student will learn more effectively through identifying the particular needs and problems of each patient.
The formulation of care plans is a valuable teaching and learning exercise, provided the student has guidance from an experienced member of staff.
Planning care also requires a sound understanding of the pathology of the patient's illness, the clinical features produced, and the appropriate medical treatment.
After a full assessment, priorities of care can be determined from both the nurse's and the patient's perspective.
As already mentioned, the learner requires support and guidance, not only in the formulation of a care plan, but also in the implementation of care.
It has been emphasised that the learner needs support and guidance when carrying out new skills.
Team nursing not only provides this support but offers a way in which the fullest value can be gained from the opportunities for ward learning.
Under this system, junior and senior nurses work closely together in the care of a group of patients.
The team is accountable to the ward sister, and some overall supervision will be necessary.
But otherwise the team organises and implements the nursing care, and carries full responsibility for the group of patients.
Some care needs to be carried out by two nurses, and the less experienced will learn from the other.
Provided the example set is good, the student will learn not only about the physical care of the patient but also about his psychological needs.
The junior will observe an experienced nurse explaining investigations, comforting bereaved relatives or communicating with a deaf patient.
At the same time, the senior nurse in the team can learn the importance of planning and organisation, and the need to give clear and accurate instructions about patient care.
Each member of the team will learn to contribute, develop initiative and gain a sense of responsibility.
Teaching and learning will become a joint effort between junior and senior learners.
Team nursing in the ward provides a preparation for the staff nurse's role, which otherwise may be neglected in nurse training.
In addition to providing a comprehensive understanding of nursing care and its relationship to disease and treatment, clinical experience offers the student an opportunity of learning a wide range of practical skills.
A third important consideration, therefore, in facilitating learning in the ward is that there should be continuity between theory and practice.
No matter how good the theoretical preparation, it is only when the student works in the ward that she is required to translate knowledge into practice.
Only through bedside nursing can she develop her skills.
During her training, a student is expected to gain competence in a wide range of skills.
Some require good manual dexterity, for example, the handling of forceps, the removal of clips and bandaging all require fine movements, and can be learnt only after a certain amount of practice.
The time spent in acquiring a skill will obviously vary for each student.
Frequent supervision whilst the student attains proficiency is therefore necessary to ensure that a good technique is developed.
Other skills, however, are less easy to acquire, for example those necessary for effective communication between nurse and patient.
The planning of each patient's care is dependent upon a comprehensive and accurate assessment.
A lot of the necessary information is obtained through discussion with the patient and his relatives.
A student can learn much about interpersonal skills through observation of more experienced staff.
Through the application of her knowledge of theories of interaction, the student will learn to develop constructive relationships with patients.
Some preparation in nursing care and skills is obviously necessary before the full benefit of learning at the bedside can be derived.
Classroom instruction is invaluable in providing some of this background and in giving the learner confidence.
Textbooks are also useful, but have their limitations.
Diseases are categorised and insufficient note is made of the effect of multiple pathology on the problems of the patient.
The information in textbooks also becomes outdated quickly, and therefore details of recent research and developments are not always included.
Computer-aided learning is still in its infancy in nurse education, but (as with textbooks) this method of learning can only help the student to acquire knowledge, not practical experience.
Problems may occur when the sequence of learning in the school does not correspond to clinical practice.
There may be a time lapse between teaching and practical experience, so that recall may be  impaired.
Hence the excuse often heard from a student ‘But I am sure that I learnt that in the school!’
The modular system, whereby the theory and practice of a particular specialty are co-ordinated, has done much to minimise these problems.
The learner, however, is still frequently confronted by the unfamiliar.
As well as encouraging her to apply general known principles, the ward staff also need to provide tuition and support.
This brings us to another important point.
Teaching in the classroom and on the ward must correspond.
On the one hand, there is no value in tutorial staff teaching unrealistic and out-of-date care which the learner has to unlearn in the ward.
On the other hand, the ward staff should adopt a uniform standard and method throughout the hospital.
This practice should be based on proven principles, acceptable to all, and not on routine and ritual.
Classroom teaching is therefore important in helping the student to develop confidence and competence.
The student's understanding of the wide range of topics taught will be tested only when she is required to put it into practice.
There are some interesting observations about this in Eve Bendall's study ‘So you passed, nurse’(Bendall 1975).
The ward thus provides an ideal setting for learning.
But the student must also be encouraged to learn, and be helped to recognise opportunities for doing so.
Students often complain that nothing has been learned from a particular allocation.
This may be because no formal teaching sessions took place, and no specific assessment of skills occurred.
Ward learning is however a gradual process, and the student can easily overlook the value of discussions of patients' progress, the care supervised by a senior nurse and the opportunity to observe experienced people at work.
Teaching and learning are very different, and the student must not rely on teaching alone for development of expertise.
Ward objectives will give her guidance in making the most of each allocation.
Some of the problems
There are obviously going to be problems associated with learning at the bedside.
The organisation of a ward is directed towards ensuring the best possible standard of patient care, and is not primarily concerned with the needs of the learner.
A conflict between service demands and educational requirements can occur.
However, the teaching of students is a necessary prerequisite of  good patient care.
Some of the problems that arise cannot be solved immediately, but in the long term many can be anticipated and overcome.
The ward is not a classroom, and teaching and learning cannot take place without interruptions and constraints.
In the school, teaching takes place in purpose-built or adapted classrooms where equipment is plentiful and space adequate.
Reality strikes home when the learner arrives on the ward to find it overcrowded with beds, chairs, trolleys and even patients.
Skills have to be exercised in a cramped space amid the noise and activity of the ward.
Teaching and supervision may be interrupted by the unexpected, making concentration and learning difficult.
This, however, is the reality of nursing, and the student must be helped to adapt to all situations.
Despite good management on the ward, there are always times when some equipment is lacking.
But the absence, say, of sterile dressing packs can be turned to good use.
The student has to improvise and adapt the procedure without departing from the principles of aseptic technique.
The way in which she copes is a real test of her understanding.
Lack of time is a perpetual problem for the ward staff and may be given as an excuse for the failure of ward teaching and supervision.
Teaching does indeed take time, but in the long term it is a great time saver.
A learner who lacks confidence and competence will take much longer to implement care, and will also put the patient at risk.
Poor techniques will develop, and these may be passed on to more junior learners.
Substandard nursing practice may or may not be the fault of the individual, but it always points to inadequate supervision and teaching.
Opportunities for teaching occur spontaneously throughout every day, and do not need to be manufactured or to be time consuming.
These will be discussed later.
It is impossible to predict bed occupancy, or to some extent, the types of patient who will be admitted at various times of the year.
An orthopaedic and trauma admission ward is a good example of this.
Emergency admissions as a result of road traffic accidents or falls on icy pavements cannot be arranged.
The student may nurse only patients with ingrowing toe nails or hallux valgus.
The resulting clinical experience is limited, and not fully representative of the specialty.
The ward staff, however, can provide additional practical experience to compensate.
For example, observation in a fracture clinic or operating theatre can be arranged.
Suitable ward-based  projects give the student opportunities to set up traction or to practise orthopaedic procedures.
Although these situations are contrived, the learner gains valuable experience in the care of patients with orthopaedic problems.
Staffing levels are also difficult to predict, and holidays or sickness may leave a ward very short of nurses, both trained and untrained.
In these circumstances, the senior staff will find it virtually impossible to teach and supervise students as well as provide the patients with adequate nursing care.
Some degree of ‘task allocation’ may become necessary, though the concept of total patient care should never be completely abandoned.
By good planning and communication, the identification of priority tasks and their allocation among the members of the team, the learner is helped to work efficiently and effectively.
The students will benefit by gaining insight into the importance of communication and organisation, and will learn how to adapt to different environments.
No one can predict when a busy period may occur in the ward.
Therefore any available time during less busy periods should be used for teaching.
In this way, the learner will gain confidence, and this goes a long way to promoting safe practice if at a later time adequate guidance and support are lacking.
As most of the ward learning occurs at the bedside, full discussion of the patient and his treatment provides another problem.
Whenever possible, the patient should be included in discussions about his care.
A separate venue must be available, however, if confidential information is to be considered in relation to nursing care.
Free discussion about the quality of the work of the learner is also necessary, and is best done away from the bedside.
This follow-up is essential in ward teaching, but poor facilities often make it difficult to achieve without interruption.
A ward full of learning opportunities does not automatically ensure that the student will learn.
She may lack motivation to increase knowledge and improve skills, and appear uninterested.
This attitude often hides a fear of failing or of making mistakes.
Lack of support during previous clinical experience may have sapped the confidence of the learner.
During training the student will learn from many teachers, and the junior nurse can be confused by apparent differences and contradictions.
Each teacher approaches a procedure in an individual way and has different areas of expertise and interest.
Similarly, each teacher will make different demands on the learner, and variable standards may be expected.
As the nurse becomes more experienced, the material taught can be evaluated, but the junior nurse may become muddled and feel insecure.
The ward staff should be aware of this problem and give extra support and supervision when necessary.
The student may also appear uninterested because of a lack of job satisfaction and encouragement.
Actual dislike of a specialty will produce a negative student who does not want to learn.
Recognition of good work carried out by a student and help in improving standards when her work is less good will demonstrate the interest of the ward staff in her progress.
This will help to promote interest and motivation to learn.
The senior staff also need to be alert to other problems, such as illness and personal worries which interfere with learning.
This is not only in the interests of the student but also helps to ensure a good standard of nursing.
As mentioned earlier, the needs of the patient are always of prime importance in nursing care, and teaching must not interfere with this care.
Unnecessary procedures must never be carried out just because a learner needs the practice.
But it should be possible by careful organisation to arrange both that the patient gets the best care, and that the learner gains the experience she needs.
Care can, for example, be timed so that a particular nurse has the chance to develop the skills she lacks.
Allocation of work using total patient care should secure this, but as the patient's needs are constantly changing it may not always succeed.
The ward is thus a ready-made learning resource centre with the facilities and staff to promote the development of good nursing care by the student.
But as with any organisation, it is not without problems and these can hinder its effectiveness.
The permanent ward staff bear the responsibility for finding ways to overcome or minimise these problems, so as to enable the ward to play its full part in the training programme.
At the same time, the learner must be encouraged to take every opportunity both to learn and to participate in the teaching of others.
Resources for ward learning
A later chapter will discuss in full the use of audio-visual aids in ward learning.
But brief mention of them will be made here as the opportunities for ward learning are so greatly enhanced by the provision of appropriate resources.
Questions can be answered as they arise, and spare time can be used to broaden understanding of a diagnosis or treatment.
The information can be presented in different forms.
Reference books can form the basis of a small library.
These should be selected by the ward sister and school of nursing librarian so that the particular specialities of the ward are covered.
As finance for books may be limited, money given by patients could be used for this purpose.
Some books will no doubt disappear, but this should not lead to the library being discontinued.
The provision of learning resources need not be costly, as many drug firms provide information free.
It is possible for the ward to collect and develop its own material.
Articles from the nursing press and newspapers and ward-made charts will supplement the library.
Copies of interesting x-rays or photographs can be kept, thus further increasing learning resources.
Large clear diagrams drawn on sugar paper and covered with transparent film are particularly useful teaching aids.
They are also invaluable when explaining treatment to patients and relatives.
Students should be encouraged to produce their own teaching material.
This not only augments the supply of visual aids, but is an excellent method of learning.
Each ward should have written guidelines on how to undertake procedures.
Staff can produce an individual handbook covering specific aspects of care, for example pre-operative preparation or a doctor's preferences for treatment.
This is particularly helpful to the student at the beginning of her allocation.
It is important, however, that the information is not presented in such a way as to perpetuate routine and ritual.
Whenever possible, the reason for the recommended method should be given.
Other information which should be readily available to the learner includes nursing records.
These must be written legibly and without abbreviation, so that the student can make maximum use of them.
Understanding of the total care of a patient is not helped by references such as S.O.B., N.B.M. or T.L.C. In addition, the care plans and progress notes are professional records.
Although queries and complaints are relatively few, a comprehensive record is vital if legal action is taken.
The solicitor's defence is only  as good as the quality of the information in the written documents.
Medical records are also useful in helping the student to learn about all aspects of a patient's care.
The value of a doctor's notes is greatly enhanced if the information is concisely presented.
Problem-orientated medical records (POMR) are now used by many doctors.
This system, devised by Weed (1969) complements the problem-solving approach used in nursing care planning.
Information of current interest or related to the ward learning programme can be presented in a display form.
A notice board  placed in a suitable part of the ward is useful for presenting learning material.
Responsibility for changing this and keeping information up to date can be delegated to a staff nurse or senior student.
Students will have an incentive to seek more information about the patient if the information is well presented.
Material should also be selected carefully as the quality of the resource is more important than the quantity.
An immense pile of out-of-date articles will possibly obscure the purpose in view and deter the student from learning.
The teachers in the ward
Students have been vocal in recent years about the lack of supervision and support in the wards.
As stressed earlier, inadequate guidance when new nursing skills are performed causes anxiety, not only to the learner but also the patient.
This leads to job dissatisfaction for the learner and can adversely influence the recovery of the patient.
Yet constant supervision and guidance would be costly in personnel and could retard the development of independence and initiative in the learner.
All trained staff in the clinical field have a responsibility to teach, although few will have had formal preparation for this.
The permanent ward staff are in the best position to encourage learning.
They are the experts in the care of the types of patients admitted to the ward, and are familiar with the specific skills, routines and demands.
They also provide a stable focus around which the ward organisation revolves.
It is in the interest of the senior staff to ensure that the best nursing care is given, and that the learner is safe and reliable.
This automatically necessitates teaching and supervision.
There is, however, a conflict between teaching and the many other commitments to the ward.
The senior staff have many competing responsibilities.
Overall supervision of a ward is in itself a mammoth task and constant interruptions make the concentration on one patient or learner difficult.
The geography of the modern hospital has also brought problems.
In the Nightingale Ward, the sister could see the beds, patients and learners from one place and quickly assess the situation.
The small unit arrangement, although more intimate for the patient, has meant detachment for the nurse-in-charge.
It is now necessary to walk much further to see the patients, and a nurse or patient in trouble may not be immediately detected.
Curtains around a bed can also hide a multitude of sins in patient care.
The learner who apparently  works quickly and efficiently may have much to learn in bedside nursing.
It would be impossible to supervise everyone, but nursing care must be monitored to prevent substandard practice developing.
Few of the trained staff have had any guidance in how to teach, and this may produce a feeling of inadequacy.
Not everyone wants to teach, and with the very rapid advances in treatment the ward sister may sometimes have an uneasy feeling that the student is more up-to-date than she herself.
Confidence can be obtained from further education.
The past few years have seen the development of continuing education programmes for trained staff.
It has been appreciated that learning does not stop with the examinations for registrations.
Some post-basic courses (such as the English National Board Clinical Courses and the Diploma in Nursing) have curricula leading to a recognised qualification.
Other courses have developed on an ad hoc basis to meet the learning requirements of trained nurses.
Excellent study days and short courses on ward teaching are now being arranged in some Schools of Nursing.
These provide an opportunity for ward staff to obtain guidance on how best to pass on their clinical expertise in an effective way.
Despite the problems, the trained ward staff are in an ideal situation to guide the learner in her development of nursing skills.
They can detect problems which may hinder learning.
If there is a good relationship within the ward team, the student will feel able to discuss difficulties as they arise.
She will also feel able to draw on the great assets the team have to offer, namely experience and a wide knowledge of patient care.
Senior students too are valuable teachers in the ward team.
Preparation for instruction is again minimal, but with help from the trained staff the senior learner can develop a teaching role.
This secures extra teaching for the junior nurse, and the senior student will herself learn from this role.
She will gain confidence in communication and management skills, and her own knowledge will be tested.
It is well known that one of the best ways of learning is to teach others.
The student ‘teacher’ will have a responsibility to maintain standards, and this should be reflected in an improvement in her own nursing skills.
The more senior nurse can also support the junior in difficult situations because of her own recent experience.
The ward sister and trained staff on the other hand may have forgotten the small incidents which cause anxiety in the learner.
The junior nurse should also be involved in teaching.
The sequence of clinical allocations is such that the junior may have  more experience in a particular area than a senior student.
Seniority does not necessarily denote competence in all procedures.
The senior learner should not feel ashamed if in some things a junior is more skilled.
Everyone has a contribution to make to ward teaching and the student should take every possible opportunity to learn.
The senior nurse should participate in the teaching of students in the unit.
Again this is not her prime responsibility and preparation for teaching may be limited.
But in her routine work there is ample opportunity for teaching.
The daily visit to a ward provides an opportunity for hearing a report on the patients from the learner.
This can be used as a teaching session while providing the senior nurse with some of the information required for the management of the unit.
The senior nurse may also allocate time for individual teaching of learners, or for group tutorial sessions.
Her contribution in discussion of ward management will be particularly relevant and useful.
A clinical nurse specialist, such as the stoma therapist, is also in valuable in the teaching of students.
The role of the specialist must include teaching the nurse as well as the patient.
Thus her expertise is passed on.
Education of all the ward team promotes continuity in the specialised care of the patient and increases the skill of the nurse.
Other specialists too, such as those in the paramedical field, may be involved in ward teaching.
The physiotherapist, dietitian or hospital chaplain should explain and discuss their contributions to the total care of the patient.
Community aspects of care must also be included, so that the learner understands the importance of both hospital and home.
Cooperation between all concerned with patient care will be improved when the function of each role is discussed and understood.
Where appropriate, paramedical staff should be asked to participate in ward tutorials.
For example, a tutorial about abortion would obviously include some discussion about the ethical aspects of therapeutic abortion.
This can be made more valuable by the inclusion of the hospital chaplain.
The student can also learn about the role of other members of the ward team by visits to departments such as the diet kitchen or occupational therapy unit.
Whenever possible, students should have the opportunity of accompanying the occupational therapist or physiotherapist on a home visit.
The learner will thereby gain a much greater understanding of the patient.
This should at the same time lead to improved continuity of care for the patient.
The medical staff can help directly and indirectly in the teaching of students.
By recognising the complexity of the work of the ward sister and the demands made on her time, doctors can help by cooperating in good ward management.
Planning of ward rounds and non-urgent procedures in conjunction with the nurse-in-charge leads to better organisation.
Learners should participate in ward rounds and medical procedures, and accompany the doctor when a patient is being examined.
If total patient care is practised, the learner is able to report her observations on the progress of the patient and learn first-hand about future care.
The reasons for treatment, the purpose of investigations and the progress of the patient can be discussed with the doctor.
The doctor can also help by writing comprehensive and legible medical notes.
Information and instructions are often misunderstood or misinterpreted because of illegibility or abbreviation.
The ward sister and doctor may be able to formulate a medical examination sheet.
This can be designed to include problem-orientated recording, the system outlined earlier in the chapter.
The introduction of a pre-printed form will save medical staff time as well as aid student learning.
So far, the personnel mentioned in relation to ward teaching are those with little or no specific preparation for it.
Some are natural teachers and enjoy this role, drawing on a wealth of experience.
The tutor and the clinical teacher, on the other hand, have had specific preparation for teaching, and therefore have a well-defined part to play in ward teaching.
The registered nurse tutor is involved in the education of the learner throughout training, and has a heavy commitment to teaching in the school of nursing.
Preparation for classes, actual teaching and administrative duties necessarily limit the time available to her for bedside teaching.
Nonetheless, most tutors are involved in some way with ward learning.
The ward may be used in conjunction with a classroom session, patient care being used to demonstrate the practical application of a particular subject.
Furthermore, the tutor may be allocated to a particular ward or unit to help to co-ordinate the learning programme.
She can advise on ward objectives, teaching content and methods of presentation.
She may also participate in the ward teaching, either at the bedside or by leading tutorial sessions.
The learner benefits from the extra supervision and teaching, and the tutor is able to assess the student's progress in practical skills.
The tutor can also keep up with developments in treatment and patient care, and is made aware of  the stresses these may put on the learners.
The ward staff, too, benefit from the addition of a trained nurse, one who is able to teach students patient care and relieve them of some of this responsibility.
Indeed, in some hospitals, joint appointments of ward sister and teacher have been introduced.
By alternating the two roles, the appointee provides an invaluable link between clinical practice and theory, and between service and school of nursing.
The role of the clinical teacher has been discussed in the previous chapter.
Here, therefore, only the opportunities and problems in bedside nursing as they affect the clinical teacher will be mentioned.
The clinical teacher is involved not only in the education of the learner and the care of the patient, but also in the maintenance of good relationships and communication between the ward and the school of nursing.
She has a highly interesting job which allows her to remain in close contact with patient care.
She also has the added stimulus of teaching.
The work of the clinical teacher is influenced by the way in which her responsibilities are organised.
She may be allocated a group of learners, and follow them throughout their training.
This means that the clinical teacher has to work in many different wards.
Alternatively, she may be allocated specific wards where she is responsible for all learners who work there.
Both systems have advantages and disadvantages.
Supervising a group of learners throughout the whole of their training is very satisfying for the clinical teacher.
She can maintain individual contact and watch the progress of the students.
The teacher and student get to know each other well, and therefore work in a relaxed productive way.
The needs of each learner will be recognised and work can be planned to meet them.
Where there is a personality clash, the learner should be re-allocated to another clinical teacher.
For her part, however, the clinical teacher has to work in many wards, and is unable to become expert in any one speciality.
Contact with the ward staff and the patients will be short and will lack continuity.
As a result, good relationships are hard to build up and maintain.
Allocation to specific wards allows the clinical teacher and ward staff to work closely together to improve learning opportunities for the student.
The clinical teacher can become knowledgeable about a particular specialty, and will be aware of the demands of the ward.
She will know the stage reached in the care of each of the patients and will be able to establish a good relationship with them.
The drawback of this system is that the clinical teacher works only briefly with each student and has little on which to assess progress.
She can find herself working exclusively with the obvious problem students.
Good and less good students all need teaching and supervision in their clinical work.
Yet it is often the students who have failed an assessment who receive most attention.
The clinical teacher must have a good method of communicating the progress of the learner to ward staff and tutor.
She does not work in isolation, and poor records will deprive others involved in teaching of vital information about the student.
The work of the clinical teacher is based on relationships, and the success or failure of these relationships will affect her efficiency and effectiveness.
It is the responsibility of the clinical teacher to ensure that everyone understands her role and the important part she plays in nurse education.
Too often the role is not understood, and she is in danger of becoming a general factotum (Fig. 3.2).
Firstly, the clinical teacher must have a good relationship with the staff of the school of nursing.
The major part of her work is in the instruction of learners.
Policies affecting nurse education will therefore influence this work.
It is unfortunate that a clinical teacher may not always be involved in decisions taken by the school.
The clinical teacher can make a valuable contribution, and nurse education benefits when tutors and clinical teachers work closely together.
The clinical teacher must also be involved in planning timetables, since she is often required to teach in the classroom.
Ward teaching commitments must be honoured, and this cannot be done if the clinical teacher is asked at short notice to participate in classroom teaching.
Sensible planning and co-operation will minimise  the time spent away from the ward; for example, sessions in the school from 10 a.m. to 11 a.m. make ward teaching difficult.
Secondly, the clinical teacher should establish good relationships with the ward sister and staff.
She must respect the ideas and methods of the ward, provided of course that these correspond to accepted hospital practice.
A good spirit of understanding between the ward staff and the clinical teacher makes the task of ward teaching much easier.
Too often the clinical teacher is looked upon as an interfering and critical representative of the school of nursing -and as one who takes three hours to teach a student how to take a blood pressure!
The truth is that learning new skills does take time, and progress may appear to be very slow.
In the long term, however, the ward benefits from a student who through supervision becomes more competent in the care she gives.
The clinical teacher should be part of the ward team, but must resist becoming an extra pair of hands.
The ward staff should understand that the primary role of the clinical teacher is to teach and to ensure that the students obtain the maximum benefit from their ward allocation.
Yet on very busy days the students will be under stress and unable to concentrate on learning new skills.
On these occasions, the clinical teacher can do much to support the student and advise her about the organisation of priorities in care.
The student and the clinical teacher can work as a team, though not necessarily together.
The student will learn realistic ways of ensuring good nursing care even when the workload is heavy.
On quieter days the clinical teacher will have time to discuss the finer details of care and relate them to the needs of the patient.
The clinical teacher also has a responsibility to ensure that a high standard of nursing care is given to the patient.
This must, however, be done in a realistic and sensible way, the demands of the ward being balanced with the needs of the learner.
To ask, without prior notice, to withdraw six students for a tutorial when the ward is desperately busy will not help relationships.
Thirdly, the clinical teacher must develop a good relationship with the learner.
This is a priority because a tense, nervous student will not work well, and will be unresponsive to teaching.
The clinical teacher is not a highly critical ‘examiner’, as the student sometimes thinks.
She and the learner should work together, as partners, to achieve a high standard of care.
The teacher, while not allowing poor practice, needs to remember that the learner is a learner and needs the opportunity to become proficient.
On the other hand, the student must not be spoon-fed.
She should be  encouraged to take the initiative in solving problems of care, always with the sympathetic support of the clinical teacher.
The clinical teacher has another role, as counsellor to the learner.
She is involved in clinical nursing, yet is detached from the ward team.
If a good relationship exists, the student should feel able to discuss anxieties and problems which may interfere with learning.
For this purpose, it is essential that the clinical teacher has access to a room where discussion can be private and uninterrupted.
Finally, the clinical teacher has to maintain a good relationship with patients and relatives.
She may be dressed in a different uniform, and therefore must explain her role to the patient.
For effective teaching, the confidence and co-operation of the patient are essential.
Patients often feel a responsibility for junior nurses and may resent the intrusion of another person whose presence inhibits their relationship with the learners.
When one carries out patient care, one must always remember that the needs of the patient take precedence over the needs of the learner.
Clinical teaching with a relaxed learner and patient can be great fun, and all three can learn from each other.
Because the clinical teacher works in both the ward and the school, there is a danger that she becomes part of neither.
She has a commitment to both, and may be torn between the two.
She cannot readily down tools during the resuscitation of a patient to be on time at a meeting in the school.
On the other hand, the ward may not understand the demands made by the school.
Non-appearance on the ward does not necessarily mean that the clinical teacher has overslept or is sitting, feet up, drinking cups of tea.
To fulfil her role properly, she must have time to prepare sessions and keep up to date with a wide range of subjects.
Despite many problems, the work of a clinical teacher is immensely rewarding.
It can be very tiring, and she has to adapt constantly to the changing needs of the learner, patient and ward.
The job is what the individual makes it, and the onus is on the clinical teacher to explain her role and ensure that it is recognised by all.
This positive approach brings benefits which contribute greatly to the improvement of ward learning.
It is then up to the clinical teacher to check the effectiveness of her own work by watching the students' progress in attaining a high standard of nursing care.
Ward learning and the ward sister
The previous section has outlined the contribution made by the  clinical teacher to ward teaching and learning.
The success of her work, however, is dependent upon her relationships with the ward team.
Central to this team is the ward sister, and she is the key to creating a good learning environment.
The findings of current research into the role of the ward sister highlight her importance.
In particular, her leadership influences the type of ward management and ‘atmosphere’.
Pembrey (1980), in her study of the role of the ward sister, looked at the management cycle in relation to the organisation of nursing care.
The good ward manager took into account the individual requirements of both patient and nurse when organising care.
These management skills had been learnt through observation of other sisters rather than from formal management courses.
The style of ward sister leadership was explored further by Ogier (1982).
She observed the verbal interactions between sister and learner.
She also elicited the views of the students about the way ward organisation helped them to learn.
Highly rated were sisters who were approachable, oriented to nurse learners, and who gave explicit directions about nursing care.
Interestingly, however, Ogier found that the ‘ideal’ sister may have different characteristics, depending on the speciality of the ward.
Fretwell (1982) studied in more detail the clinical learning environment.
She contended that, although on paper two wards might appear very similar, there were considerable differences in the experience offered to students.
She observed that sisters have different management styles and ward routines which contribute to a variation in ward ‘atmosphere’.
She says ‘It was clear that the sister's influence on learning extended beyond the actual teaching she did; for she was able to initiate teaching and (through her ward organisation) place learners in situations in which they had an opportunity to learn’(Fretwell, 1980, p. 70).
The amount of time spent by ward sisters on teaching varies considerably.
Sisters were categorised by Orton (1980) as having either a high or a low student orientation.
‘Orientation’ described the sister's attitude and behaviour towards learners on her ward.
Sisters with a high orientation were found to spend on average 16% of their time teaching, whereas those with a low orientation spent 11%.
She concludes from her study that there is strong evidence to suggest that the ward ‘climate’ is an important factor in the satisfaction of students with their learning environment.
An evaluation of the ward as a learning environment will be completed by 1986 by researchers at the Nursing Education  Research Unit, Chelsea College.
Results of the pilot study (Lewin and Leach 1982) indicate some of the characteristics of a ‘good’ ward.
Although the time spent teaching was said to be similar on most wards, the trained staff on a good ward devoted more time to supervision, practical demonstrations and participation in ward reporting sessions.
The findings from these research projects are obviously important for ward learning and teaching.
The links between the characteristics of the ward sister, her management style and the provision of clinical experience for learners are clearly demonstrated.
The ideal sister is democratic, patient-orientated, and fulfils an active teaching role.
It might seem that good ward sisters are made in heaven!
The results of the research projects, however, do have practical implications for the selection and training of sisters.
Preparation for the role of the ward sister has been haphazard.
In the past, a new sister has learned mainly through observation of those more experienced; and then, through trial and error, has developed her own style of ward management.
As discussed earlier in the chapter, there are increasing opportunities for continuing education for trained nurses.
Formal education, however, may not be enough.
Pembrey's findings were that the role model was important in helping a sister to develop a good management style.
This conclusion was the main impetus behind the King's Fund scheme of ward training for newly appointed sisters.
The experiment has been described by Hazel Allen (1982).
As the complexity of the work of a ward sister grows, it is important that her contribution to ward teaching is not lost.
Although the time she spends actively involved in teaching may be limited, she can, through her organisation of nursing care, facilitate teaching by others.
Assessing the learning requirements and progress of students
As outlined at the beginning of the chapter, for the student to make full use of the learning opportunities available during a ward allocation she must be aware of what these are.
Similarly, the ward sister must know the previous experience of the learner, what her capabilities are and what she needs to learn on the ward.
An introductory letter can be sent to the learner before the allocation starts (Table 3.1).
This will introduce the student to the speciality of the ward, and give her time for preparation.
The letter   also removes some of the fear of the unknown, and will help the learner to settle more quickly.
On arrival, the ward sister and learner should have a preliminary discussion.
The ward sister can explain what she expects the nurse to learn during the allocation, and can set objectives.
The ward teaching programme can be explained, and the learner shown the ward learning resources.
The ward sister also must establish the needs of the student, and how best to meet them.
Actual nursing practice can only be assessed in the ward, so supervision and teaching must be organised.
The student may have particular needs.
For example, she may be required to take an assessment of her nursing skills for examination purposes during the allocation, and may need extra help for this purpose.
The assessment should not trigger off frantic practising, but the ward sister can arrange for the student to have the relevant experience.
Where continuous assessment of clinical competence is used, the ward sister and student can outline their aims for the allocation.
This first discussion will demonstrate to the student the interest of the ward staff in her and in her progress.
She will feel accepted as a member of the ward team and will be more ready to learn.
Opportunities for valuable experience will not be wasted, as both ward sister and learner are aware of what needs to be achieved.
Follow-up discussion is equally important, as the student needs to know how she is progressing.
This can occur at any time but particularly when the student has been observed or supervised in her nursing care.
An accurate record of her progress needs to be kept and a check made on the experience she has gained.
An assessment of progress is essential midway through the allocation.
1 he student will then have time to act on the report, and the ward sister will then be able to evaluate the ward teaching and rectify omissions in the student's experience.
The final discussion will include evaluation of the ward learning programme by the student.
This will help the ward staff to improve teaching content and methods.
The ward sister will be required to write a ward report on the student, and this must be discussed fully with her.
Testing of knowledge gained can be centred around the ward learning objectives.
The student may have submitted written work or completed work sheets while on the ward, and these should be marked and returned.
These discussions take time but are essential to ward teaching.
The students and her needs must be known to the ward staff if learning is to be effective.
Too often the student and her capabilities are matched to the number of stars and stripes she has on her uniform.
Similarly the student must be aware of the opportunities for learning, so that she is able to make full use of her time on the ward.
Teaching opportunities in the ward
Earlier in the chapter it was mentioned that there are many ways in which teaching and learning can be incorporated in the normal routine of the ward.
During an allocation, the student will acquire new knowledge and skills, most of which will be learned in an informal and unstructured way.
The requirements of each learner are different, and the ways in which she learns best also differ.
One student will gain more from one method of teaching than from another.
The opportunities for the education of the student during her ward allocation must not be left to chance.
Each ward should have a planned programme which makes full use of its learning opportunities.
The overall responsibility for the organisation of the ward learning programme can be delegated to one particular member of staff, but everyone in the ward team should participate.
Teaching methods will take various forms.
The role model
Teaching by example can be one of the best ways of passing on skills, provided of course that the example is good.
Students are observing all the time the nursing care given by others, so the senior staff are in an ideal position to demonstrate good care.
This will include practical skills, organisation, communication and also attitudes to patients.
An experienced nurse should demonstrate a new nursing skill before the learner attempts it herself.
A high standard set by the skilled nurse should be reflected in the performance of the learner.
The student should be critical of everything observed, as blind acceptance is dangerous.
This is particularly so if the standard of care is bad, because poor nursing care will then be perpetuated.
Students observing poor nursing care will find it difficult to maintain good standards themselves.
The learner may even be ridiculed for taking too long in her care, and an attitude of ‘why bother?’ will develop.
This is obviously not conducive to ward learning, and valuable clinical experience is wasted.
Attitudes to patient care can be passed from the ward staff to the learner.
The ward sister who spends time talking to the patients and is interested in them as individuals will pass this approach on to the junior nurse.
The student will not feel a sense of guilt if she sits down to talk to an anxious patient.
The attitude of the learner to the patient can also be adversely affected by what is said.
A senior nurse who describes a patient as ‘difficult’ or ‘demanding’will influence the way in which the others view the patient.
This is well illustrated in The Unpopular Patient (1972) by Felicity Stockwell.
The quality of ward organisation and communication is also reflected in the learner's performance.
The student will learn from experience about the importance of planning, and passing on information.
A chaotic ward, where no instructions are given about patient care, will usually result in bad nursing care.
The student is unable to work methodically and priorities cannot be set.
It is true that some nurses who observe poor standards in ward management or patient care will resolve never to perform so badly.
Learning is therefore achieved in a negative way, but a certain amount of experience is necessary before such an evaluation can be made.
Both junior and senior nurses and others involved in patient care can be the ‘model’ from which the learning occurs.
When working  together in a team, the members can learn much from each other.
If one of them is aware that she is providing an example for the others, she will have an additional incentive to set a high standard.
Every nurse in the ward is responsible for promoting good nursing care.
This can easily be achieved if teaching by example is recognised as a valuable way of passing on expertise.
Individual teaching and supervision
One of the most intensive ways in which a student can learn at the bedside is from individual tuition.
The teacher may be a more experienced student, one of the ward's trained staff or the clinical teacher.
The learner works closely with her instructor while carrying out nursing care.
This type of teaching has obvious benefits for the learner because her special needs can be met.
The teacher can concentrate on improving particular aspects of the student's skills.
All opportunities that arise for one-to-one teaching should be taken.
As in teaching by example, special arrangements do not need to be made for individual supervision.
For example, two nurses are required to do the medicine round, and the administration of drugs can be used as a learning opportunity.
The senior nurse will ensure that the learner is checking and giving drugs in the correct way.
As the drugs are checked, the learner's knowledge of the action and side effects can be tested.
The administration of the medications can then be related to the patient and the treatment of disease; the student is learning not only safety in drug administration, but also more about the total care of patients.
Another opportunity for individual teaching occurs when the learner acts as assistant for a clinical procedure.
In this situation the teacher could be a doctor, physiotherapist or clinical nurse specialist.
The student will have an opportunity to observe and ask questions.
As well as acting as a support for the patient she will be gaining additional information relevant to her understanding of patient care.
The learner can be taught when she reports to the ward sister and other members of the nursing team about the care and progress of her patients.
Discussion of the problems and treatment of each patient in relation to nursing care planned will help ensure that the learner understands the rationale for such care.
The student's observation of a patient will be tested, and she can be guided to  evaluate her work.
Short sessions such as these are invaluable as the student is learning from actual patient care, and a wide range of subjects will be drawn together in order to bring about better understanding of this care.
Although these opportunities for learning occur within the framework of the ward's routine, extra time will be needed if student tuition is included.
The teacher may feel it is quicker and less tiring to carry out the task alone, or to ignore teaching opportunities.
But this defeats the idea of ward learning, and the students will suffer in their development of knowledge and skills.
A more structured approach to one-to-one teaching occurs when someone, for example the clinical teacher, arranges to work with a learner on a specific day.
The session is discussed beforehand with the student so that her particular needs are met.
Objectives for learning can be set so that the nurse has guidelines for the session.
Where possible, the clinical teacher arranges for the ward staff to allocate patient care to provide the best experience for the learner in this supervised role.
Learning should be centred around the total care of a group of patients.
The responsibility for planning their care should be with the learner.
Problem solving is invaluable in increasing the learner's adaptability and confidence.
The clinical teacher can guide and advise but should never monopolise the situation.
There should be time not only to carry out the patient care but also to discuss and evaluate it.
Therefore the work load should not be too heavy.
The value of this type of teaching is immense.
There is an opportunity to relate theory to practice, and as the teaching is set at the student's level of understanding and experience, time can be spent on aspects which she finds difficult.
Practical skills will be included and new experience will be gained under supervision.
One-to-one teaching is tiring for both learner and teacher, as the session requires a high degree of concentration from both.
The teacher must ensure that the student is relaxed, so that stress does not interfere with learning.
If the session is viewed as a dreaded ordeal, the learner will feel anxious and not gain maximum benefit.
Overteaching must be avoided as the learner will become confused and end up by remembering nothing.
Important points should be emphasised and reinforced.
Guidance about further reading can be given so that learning continues and is not viewed as a once and for all matter.
The clinical teacher must be adaptable, as the objectives set for the student may need to be revised because of altered patient care.
For example, the scheduled removal of sutures from a patient's wound may be delayed because of poor healing.
But catheterisation may become necessary because the patient develops retention of urine.
Here the needs of the patient obviously override the needs of the learner.
This situation is a reminder that no two patients are the same, and that the learner must be adaptable in the nursing care she gives.
While teaching, whether in a structured or unstructured way, the teacher will get to know the learners and their individual weaknesses and strengths.
The students must have full information about performance — including both praise and criticism.
An honest appraisal will help their progress and guide them to further learning opportunities.
Group teaching
There are many situations when learning on the ward is better achieved in groups.
This method is less time-consuming as one teacher will be teaching several learners.
As with individual teaching, group teaching can be structured or unstructured.
The ward report on the progress of each patient, which is given at the beginning of a shift, is an example of group teaching that can be given in the normal routine of the ward.
Full discussion will lead to a better understanding of the patient.
The ward sister has up-to-date information, for example, the social worker's reports or changes in treatment.
The student will have been in close contact with the patient while carrying out nursing care, and will have observed the patient's progress.
All information can be pooled at the report session, and problems discussed and clarified.
The active participation of the learner should be encouraged as this will lead to improved confidence and a sense of responsibility.
A comprehensive review of the patient can be achieved through the use of the care plan.
The student who has cared for a patient is in the best position to evaluate and report on his or her progress.
Although a monologue from the ward sister may take less time, the full potential of the ward report for teaching is not reached.
A good report will also contribute to improved care of the patient as well as the education of the learner.
Group sessions between senior staff and learners are also of value when ethical problems occur in the treatment of patients.
Free discussion about attitudes to a problem will relieve anxiety, and mutual support can be obtained.
Senior staff may have encountered  a similar situation before and can contribute their experience to the discussion.
The learner may view the problem from a new angle and introduce fresh ideas for consideration.
The use of new equipment can be demonstrated to a group of learners, as it would be time consuming to teach each student individually.
Participation by the learners will stimulate questions and discussion.
It is, however, essential that everyone can see the demonstration and hear what is being said.
Therefore the size of the group must be limited.
As there will be students of varying experience and ability, it is essential that the information is clearly presented to everyone while ensuring that the least able understand the demonstration.
The teacher must also see that the interest of the more able student is maintained.
The learner should have the opportunity to participate in ward rounds and case conferences relating to patients in her care.
Personnel other than ward staff will be involved, and the attention given to teaching learners may be small.
The student can, however, learn much from listening to the exchange of views, and can contribute by reporting her own observation of the patient.
The content of informal discussions will be unpredictable and cover a wide variety of material.
Within the ward learning programme, it will also be necessary to plan structured tutorials when set subjects are discussed.
Tutorials
Tutorials should be arranged during a ward allocation so that the learner covers specific subjects relevant to her clinical experience.
These tutorials can take many different forms, but all should relate to patient care.
The session may cover the background anatomy and physiology necessary for the understanding of diseases treated on the ward.
The implications for the nursing care of a patient with specific disease can be discussed in full.
The learner may present a history of one of the patients to illustrate particular points about treatment and care.
Tutorial time may be allocated to a discussion of ethical problems, or to a general talk about ward policy.
The leader of the tutorial can be anyone involved in patient care, and the group may sometimes include the patient.
The tutorials must be relevant and stimulating.
As they usually occur in the afternoon, the learners may be tired and sleepy after a busy morning and a big lunch.
Concentration will be further  impaired if the accommodation is poor and there are constant interruptions from telephone calls or enquiries.
A suitable place for ward tutorials is often hard to find as they must be held near the ward.
A sudden emergency in the ward would necessitate extra staff and thus signal the end of the teaching session.
Facilities should be available for presenting visual aids which will help to maintain interest.
The tutorials must cater for learners of differing abilities and experience.
Students with more knowledge of a subject should be involved in teaching the others in the group.
As junior students may feel reluctant to ask questions, material must be presented clearly to facilitate understanding.
All learners should be encouraged to participate in the sessions.
Tutorials are an essential part of ward learning, and they and the other methods of teaching must be drawn together in the formulation of the ward learning programme.
The ward learning programme
When the ward learning programme is being planned, the needs of the learners and those of the ward must be balanced to achieve maximum benefit for both.
It is pointless allocating hours of teaching to irrelevant material.
Yet it is also unrealistic to expect one hour of teaching time per week to be sufficient to cover the information required for good patient care.
Decisions should be made at the outset on what is to be covered in the programme.
Its content will obviously be considered in relation to the ward learning objectives.
The specialist experience available on the ward will indicate areas for teaching.
Note should be made of particular skills and types of care not practised elsewhere.
The subjects should be relevant to the needs of the students at all stages of training.
It must always be kept in mind that the nurse cannot be expected to become an expert in the speciality from a short allocation.
The ward staff should discuss the reasons behind the introduction of the learning programme.
If they are not motivated to implement the programme it will not run effectively.
The expected benefits of improved knowledge and nursing care by the learner can be summarised in aims and objectives.
These will be stated in general terms for the whole allocation.
For example, it can be stated that ‘By the end of the ward allocation the student will be able to catheterise a female patient, using an aseptic and atraumatic  technique’, or ‘By the end of the ward allocation the student will be able to identify five potential problems associated with catheterization’.
These guidelines for learning should be given to the student at the beginning of her time on the ward.
More precise objectives for individual teaching and tutorials should also be listed.
These are of particular value when a student misses a session.
She is then able to cover the same ground, using the objectives set by the ward.
The length of the whole learning programme must be determined.
If students are allocated to the ward for eight-week periods, it is sensible to have a rotating cycle of an eight-week programme.
The content of the programme should follow a logical sequence.
In practice, the student will necessarily miss some continuity because of days off and night duty.
Also, learners will commence their ward allocations at different points in the eight-week cycle.
A programme planned on a weekly module, plus the provision of learning objectives, will provide the most successful answer to these problems.
The time in the week the sessions take place depends on the demands of the ward and on the availability of teachers.
The afternoon may be the best time, as the patients are resting and having visitors.
Also in many hospitals there is an overlap of nursing staff in the afternoon.
It is, however, unrealistic to plan a teaching session for a busy day when operations and doctors' rounds are in full swing.
The number of teaching sessions, and the time allotted to each, must be realistically planned, the demands of the ward being matched with the need to provide teaching opportunities.
Once this is decided, off-duty may need to be adjusted to allow for the teaching commitment.
As mentioned earlier, a suitable ‘classroom’ must be found near the ward where teaching can take place and visual aids can be presented.
This will not always be used as visits to departments or ward rounds may form part of the programme.
Discussion about how each subject is to be covered will identify who is needed to do the teaching.
A variety of people will be involved and should be brought into the planning of the programme.
The teaching method to be used must also be decided.
Revision of aseptic technique may best be covered by one-to-one teaching, whereas the care of the terminally ill patient may best be discussed at a tutorial.
All this information can be drawn together and an appropriate ward learning timetable formulated (Table 3.2).
The programme    must be available for the student to see at the beginning of her allocation.
Preparation for the sessions and follow-up reading are then the responsibility of the student.
A workbook of worksheets can be produced by the ward staff to complement the ward learning programme (Table 3.3).
The workbook given to each student at the start of the allocation will provide further guidelines for learning.
The information required to complete the ‘book’ should all be available from the ward resources.
The worksheets should also provide pointers for further study and information about relevant research.
At the end of the allocation, the student and ward sister can review the completed workbook and the student can evaluate the effectiveness of the programme.
Constant review and revision of the learning programme must be undertaken to ensure its continuing relevance.
Every ward should be considered a learning resource centre for each speciality-, with the ward sister, in effect, the librarian.
By the development of the ward programme, the full potential of the resource will be realized; but to plan an effective programme, the ward sister and staff need to be aware of the advantages and problems  of bedside learning.
They have at their disposal a wide variety of teaching methods and of teachers.
The learner is allocated to the ward for such a short period that every learning opportunity must be exploited to the full.
The onus, however, is on the student to obtain full benefit from the programme initiated by the ward staff.
The student must not be allowed to leave the ward with the feeling expressed by Sir John Davies in Nosce Teipsum :
‘Skill comes so slow, and life so fast doth fly,
We learn so little and forget so much.’
Summary
The aim of this chapter has been to discuss the opportunities and problems associated with ward learning.
These are related specifically to the personnel involved in ward teaching and the methods by which the teaching is undertaken.
The responsibility of the student to take opportunities for learning has been stressed.
Finally, suggestions have been made for improving ward learning by the introduction of a planned programme.
This includes teaching sessions, and the use of worksheets and all other learning resources available in the ward.
For the success of ward learning, evaluation of both the ward programme and the progress of the student is vital.
Aims and objectives
The purpose of teaching is to bring about changes in students through the medium of planned experiences.
Statements describing proposed changes are normally referred to as aims and objectives.
In this chapter, we shall examine the nature of these two concepts and estimate their value for teachers.
Although these terms are sometimes used interchangeably, it is useful to distinguish between them.
An aim can be taken to be a statement of intent on the part of the teacher, usually expressed in general terms, whilst an objective is a statement describing in specific terms what the student is expected to do at the end of a course of learning experience.
Consider the following:
1.
To introduce the students to the practice of nursing.
2.
To provide an introduction to basic physiology.
3.
To develop an understanding of the psychological aspects of nursing care.
4.
To develop an understanding of the principles of therapeutic diets.
5.
To introduce the postoperative medical and nursing care of patients with peripheral vascular disease.
6.
To extend the student's understanding of psychiatric conditions, their treatment and nursing care.
7.
To provide practical experience of the nursing care of patients with respiratory disorders.
These are aims and could be prefixed by the statement ‘The teacher intends….’
They are general in nature in that they indicate broad areas of content and could be achieved in a variety of ways.
Aims are necessary starting points, but before the teacher can begin to provide learning experiences further refinement is necessary.
How, for example, is one to know that the students have  an understanding of therapeutic diets?
Which diets are involved?
Are these to be learned all at once and how are they best learned?
How is the teacher to tell that her teaching has been successful?
These and many other questions will need answers before teaching can begin.
The first step is to translate aims into objectives, that is to state exactly what is expected of the students.
Compare the following list of objectives with the above aims:
The student will be able to:
1.
Make up a bed according to standard procedure, for a postoperative thyroidectomy patient.
2.
Prepare a day's diet sheet for a Gujurati Hindu patient with chronic renal failure, taking into account relevant medical and religious constraints.
3.
Given a particular post-operative patient in the recovery phase, draw up and execute a plan of nursing care for the first twenty-four hours.
It will be seen at once that these statements are more specific and precise than aims, which raises an important question.
What degree of precision is necessary?
Objective (1) could be written in more detail.
We could specify in which hand the draw-sheet is to be held, which arm the nurse is to use to support the patient, the degree of tension to be applied to the draw-sheet to make it taut and smooth.
We could specify what words the student will say to the patient and even at what point she is to smile.
There is, in fact, no single answer to this question.
The degree of precision in objectives will depend on the intentions of the teacher, the experience of the student and the nature of the activities involved.
If the teacher's intention is to give a general overview or introduction to a topic, then less detail will be needed.
Where students are already experienced then perhaps some very precise detail will be required.
Some nursing skills require a higher degree of precision than others: compare, for example, the post-operative care of a patient carrying the sickle cell trait with that of one who does not, or bed-making for patients in traction and for more active patients.
Objectives, then, should reflect the teacher's intentions and should be appropriate for the students and for the activity involved.
On the whole this is a matter of the teacher exercising her professional judgement both as a nurse and a teacher, but there are a variety of ideas available to help her in devising objectives.
Some of these we will consider next.
Devising objectives
Three useful conditions have been advocated by which a teacher may judge her objectives.
These are:
1.
That objectives should be unambiguous.
2.
That they should specify the conditions under which the final behaviour will occur.
3.
That they should indicate the standard to be reached.
We shall deal with each one in turn.
Ambiguity can arise from two sources:
1.
Lack of clarity on the part of the teacher about the task being taught.
2.
Lack of clarity about the outcome or final performance required.
Clarity about the nature of the task involved can be achieved by carrying out a task analysis.
This consists of breaking down the task into its constituent parts and compiling a list of the skills and knowledge involved, thus composing a recipe for the successful performance of the task.
Where practical skills are involved, this may take the form of observing someone perform the task (a competent nurse in this case) and recording in detail what she actually does.
At first glance this may seem a tedious and unnecessary task, for any nurse aspiring to teach others ought to be sufficiently proficient at nursing not to require this kind of reminder.
However, the matter is not so simple.
Nurses who have been nursing for some time are likely to have reached the stage where much of what they do has become automatic, that is, carried out without conscious thought or awareness.
It is quite easy when teaching a novice, especially in the earlier stages of teaching, to omit important details and to omit explanations and justifications for what is done.
These are often vital for a beginner, because they give meaning to the tasks involved.
Some form of task analysis is necessary therefore, either in the form of observation or introspective reconstruction, in order to write unambiguous objectives.
The second source of ambiguity, confusion about the final performance required, is slightly different from the above source and is perhaps more common in teaching.
It occurs when teaching programmes do not relate to the final assessment of learning.
A common example is the situation in which students find themselves  being asked questions on topics that have not been taught.
A less obvious and regrettably a more common example is where students are presented throughout the course with bodies of facts and procedures to be remembered and applied as faithfully as possible; then in the final testing they are assessed on their ability to apply their knowledge and skills to new situations, or to explain, justify and discuss the reasons behind procedures.
Now all of these require more complex intellectual abilities than simple remembering, and therefore need to be included in the teaching programme and reflected in the form the objectives take.
This illustrates the important link between objectives and assessment.
 Ambiguity , then, can be avoided by having a clear understanding of the abilities and capabilities that are going to be assessed.
This will be reflected in the choice of words used in objectives.
It will be noted that these begin with a verb stating the actions students are expected to show.
Some verbs are more ambiguous than others.
Consider the following two lists:
(a)
understand
know
grasp the meaning of
appreciate
show an interest in
acquire
(b)
describe
list
prepare
demonstrate
contrast
state.
The meanings of the words in list (a ) are not as clear as those in list (b ).
How does one know that someone ‘understands’ or ‘knows, something?
One can only tell by asking the person to do something such as‘state’ or ‘demonstrate’.
Clarity in objectives can be achieved by using the latter terms.
A simple test for ambiguity in the two lists can be made by asking a number of people to say, separately, what they would expect to see, if they were asked to mark students showing the capabilities given in the two lists.
Close agreement indicates some degree of precision, whilst general disagreement about a word suggests that it is ambiguous.
One important difference between the two lists is that those in list (a ) refer to internal events and states, whilst those in list (b ) denote external and therefore observable behaviour.
Words such as those in list (b ) are more suitable for writing objectives.
Of course, we want our students to know, understand and appreciate the things we are teaching, but these terms represent our intentions and are more suitably expressed as aims.
The simple test for  ambiguity in an objective is to ask the question: Does this objective state what the nurse is going to do to show me that she has learned?
This, then is the first condition for successful objectives — lack of ambiguity.
The second condition is that it must specify the conditions under which the behaviour will occur.
This consists of including a statement of those things with which the nurse is to be provided in order to demonstrate her final level of performance.
In our three examples of objectives given above, these conditions are specified.
In (b ) we are not asking the student to make up any bed but a particular kind of bed for a particular patient.
The conditions are laid down.
Similarly, ‘for a Gujurati Hindu with chronic renal failure,’ and ‘given a post-operative patient in the recovery phase’specify different conditions and limits.
In the latter case, the nurse is free to choose which post-operative condition she is to work on.
What limits a teacher wishes to set will depend entirely on her own intentions for a given student.
A different kind of limitation is set by the third condition and it is this which we will look at now.
The third requirement (that an objective should indicate the standard to be reached) is probably the most difficult one to meet, for it embraces a whole range of problems and issues that are perhaps best dealt with under the heading of assessment.
Nevertheless it is not something that we can ignore, for the teacher needs feedback from her students' performances in order to judge the effectiveness of her teaching and may need to know that students have reached certain standards before progressing to more difficult work.
Students also need to know what standards are required of them.
All too often they have to guess what is in the minds of their teachers.
Those who make the right guesses early on are often seen as ‘good’ or intelligent students; those who do not are often labelled slow or stupid.
The problem lies in determining what the standards shall be.
In some cases they are provided: making up a two per cent solution means two per cent not one per cent or ten, giving ten millilitres of medication is a precise measure, but it is not always so easy to define standards.
Sometimes there are ‘standard’ requirements to be met.
These may be standard to nursing in general, or locally determined.
Institutions often have their own expectations, and provided all are agreed within an institution the teacher may draw on them.
It is this kind of situation that is indicated in the first objective in the examples above.
For example, the objective ‘make up a bed, according to standard procedure’ draws on general standards in that waterproof pillow-covers and light bedding would be required, and local standards for bed making, whether that means a ‘general tucking-in all round’or ‘all corners perfectly rectangular and with the top sheet turned over 32.5 cms’.
This appeal to local standards does not solve the problems, but merely moves the solution from the shoulders of teachers, which may or may not be a good thing.
The important point for the teacher to remember is that local agreement about standards does not in any sense make them absolute.
In some nursing situations, establishing criteria for objective assessment involves procedures that are too technically complicated or too time consuming to be attempted.
Judgements of students are often made on the basis of the subjective values of teachers or ward staff, that is, on what is believed to be good practice.
This seems to apply particularly in the area of nurse — patient relationships.
It is commonly accepted that part of a nurse's functions is to be sensitive to and provide care for the psychological needs of patients, achieved in part through interpersonal relationships.
If students are to be assessed on this aspect of their performance, it ought to be included in any teaching programme and in the teacher's objectives.
The difficulty is not so much in defining the content for a given situation as stating the level of performance required.
If this is doubted, try to write a set of objectives, including criteria for assessment, for the psychological care of an elderly middle class lady who has just had a colostomy performed.
It is not that these judgements should not be made, but that where subjective judgements are made by the teacher she should be aware that this is so and be prepared, not only to give reasons for her judgements, but also to be sufficiently flexible to change them in the light of particular circumstances.
There are three further points to be made about writing objectives.
The first is that it is usually preferable to make each objective refer to only one learning outcome.
Example (3) falls down in this respect in that it includes two different activities and outcomes: ‘to draw up a plan’, and ‘to execute it’.
If both of these activities are to be taught, then two objectives are needed so that we can distinguish between failures of planning and failures in execution.
If the student is known to be competent at planning, and it is the details of execution we are to teach, then a double objective would be acceptable.
The second point is that the writing of objectives has a purpose.
It enables teachers to make clear statements about what they want  their students to do, but it is not always necessary or possible to satisfy all of the conditions given above.
Considerable variations in format are possible, depending on what the teacher wants her students to achieve as a result of her teaching.
Finally, the purpose of this section has been to help teachers write clear objectives.
Whether or not the content and outcomes in nursing or educational terms are worthwhile is an entirely different matter.
One could write clear, concise objectives for a completely irrelevant content, and one's teaching of it could be improved, but this would in no way justify the use of an irrelevant curriculum.
Objectives form part of the technology of the teaching process.
In order to appreciate the value of objectives, it is useful to examine the part they can play in the teaching process.
There is a variety of models for teaching, perhaps as many as there are   teachers, but the one that provides the most logical context for objectives is the systems model illustrated in diagrammatic form in Figure 4.1.
In this model the planning and teaching process is analysed into a sequence of logical steps.
It begins after the aims and general content for a period of ward experience have been defined.
Once the task to be taught has been selected we can begin the first step in the model, that of analysing the task into its component elements and plotting the knowledge and skills necessary for successful performance.
Not only does this provide us with the content to be taught, but it also lays the foundation on which final assessment can be based; however, before we can devise our objectives, two further collections of information are needed.
These are obtained by step two.
Here we check to ensure that the students have the knowledge and skills necessary to begin the piece of learning.
This may include knowledge of technical terms and procedures, background knowledge of relevant anatomy and physiology, knowledge of pathological conditions, related signs and symptoms and so forth.
This step should ensure that the difficulty level and the volume of material in any one session are right for the students.
Where there is close liaison between ward teachers and the school of nursing, and where ward experience is part of a planned programme, this information will be available from previous teaching; but where these conditions do not exist it is necessary for the clinical teacher to carry out her own checks with the students before the teaching can be planned.
The second part of step two is often neglected by teachers, mainly because it is difficult to obtain accurate information.
There is sufficient evidence to indicate that students may differ markedly in the ways they set about learning.
Some may prefer to be given a global picture of what is involved in the task and then be allowed to fill in the details as they need them.
Others may prefer a step by step process of building up fine details, until mastery of a subsection of the task is reached, before moving on.
Some may prefer to be presented with a prescribed set of facts and skills, whilst others may learn best by being encouraged to discover things for themselves, often as solutions to problems.
The opportunities provided in the clinical area for teaching on a one to one or small group basis should enable the teacher to be aware of at least some of these differences in her students, and to make some provision for them in her teaching.
Using this information, we can now write objectives that will achieve that stated aims and will be appropriate for the task and  the students' differences and needs.
They will also form the basis for assessment in step six.
The selection of methods and resources is a major topic in itself, for just as there is no one best method of learning there is no one best method of teaching.
The main criterion is that the methods selected should be the best available for achieving the selected objectives for a known group of students.
However the realities of the clinical area impose constraints on both methods and resources, so that in achieving a satisfactory compromise between the ideal and what is possible the teacher may find her imagination and ingenuity tested to the full.
A second constraint, one that is often overlooked, comes from the teacher herself.
just as students differ in preferred methods of learning, so do teachers differ in preferred methods of teaching.
The bases of these differences seem to be not only differences in acquired knowledge and skills, but also in intellectual and personality characteristics, that is in styles of thinking and styles of social interaction.
Competence in teaching means having sufficient insight into the teacher's own weaknesses, strengths and preferences to enable her to adapt her methods so that she is comfortable in using them.
We now have three criteria for the selection of methods and resources: that they should be appropriate for the objectives and the students to be taught; that they should be practicable in the context of the teaching session; and that they should be compatible with the personal resources of the teacher.
Once the teaching has been carried out, it remains to test formally or informally that the objectives have been achieved.
In this model, testing consists of checking that the students can carry out the task by the criteria detailed in the objectives.
It is here that the value of well thought-out objectives can be seen.
All too often teachers intend to teach one thing, actually teach another, and test for something quite different.
As objectives are translations of intentions into statements of final competence, this confusion is less likely to happen.
In cases where students achieve all objectives satisfactorily, step six provides information for step two of the next related teaching programme.
The final step provides an evaluation or post-mortem of the whole teaching programme so that, in cases where students have not achieved the objectives, appropriately modified plans can be made for future teaching.
This process of continuous evaluation, if carried out conscientiously, will lead to more effective teaching.
The systematic model of teaching illustrates how influential correctly used objectives can be on the whole teaching process from planning to assessment, and demonstrates the need for extreme care in choosing them.
We can turn now to a closer examination of the kinds of objectives possible.
There is a tendency when first writing objectives to limit them to simple forms of behaviour, such as the reproduction of facts and the demonstration of skills; but if we, as teachers, are to offer our students anything more than simple training, we must be able to devise objectives that describe more complex operations.
One model that provides a basis for objectives is the Taxonomy of Educational Objectives, published by Bloom and his associates (Bloom, B. S. et al .,
1956).
In this model, educational goals are divided into three fields or domains, each representing a different aspect of human functioning.
The domains are:
1.
Cognitive: embracing the intellectual abilities of remembering, conceptualisation and reasoning.
2.
Affective: emphasising the emotional qualities of feelings, attitudes, interests and values.
3.
Psychomotor: emphasising the development of motor skills.
Each domain is subdivided into a hierarchy of categories, which provide the basis for a set of objectives for a given piece of learning.
In the cognitive domain (Table 4.1), the categories are: knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis, synthesis and evaluation.
They are arranged in order of increasing complexity.
Table 4.1 presents the categories with the abilities that teachers could aim to develop in column one and in column two some terms for use in corresponding objectives.
The following is an example of some cognitive objectives for teaching the nursing care of a patient recovering from heart surgery.
The student will be able to:
1.
Describe the nursing interventions prescribed (knowledge)
2.
Give reasons for each step (comprehension)
3.
Carry out the care for a given patient (application)
4.
State the underlying principles for post-operative care of a patient following heart surgery (analysis)
5.
Plan and execute the post-operative care for a second patient (different condition)(synthesis)
6.
Evaluate the effectiveness of the plan for satisfying the medical, psychological, and personal needs of the patients and for catering for potential problems.
(evaluation).
In practice a set of objectives like these would be written for a series of teaching sessions for a specific student or group and may be varied to suit their experience and needs.
Objectives (1) and (2) could consist of checks after a preliminary period of revision or practice carried out by the student on her own.
The teaching and practice sessions for objective (3) may consists of several guided experiences with different patients, for which subsidiary objectives may be needed.
The teaching for objectives (3) and (5) may, in practice, run together as increasing competence enables the nurse to take more responsibility for the work.
The affective domain is similarly divided into a hierarchy of five categories.
These are: receiving, responding, valuing, organisation, characterisation by value complex.
Table 4.2 gives the main interpretations of each category and some terms for related objectives.
The first two categories represent the initial stages of involvement  in learning to be a nurse.
The final three categories represent the progressive development of a professional style of nursing, in which patterns of personal, social and emotional functioning in all aspects of the work are sufficiently self-disciplined to enable the nurse to work effectively.
The nurse should strive for the middle way between total involvement in the job dominating her personal life to the point where her development as a person is impaired and her health jeopardised; and the other extreme in which she may be technically proficient, but appears totally detached from the work both emotionally and socially.
In this model this desirable ‘professional style’ consists of collections or sets of values attached to different aspects of the work (such as the administration of drugs, carrying out aseptic technique, basic theoretical knowledge such as anatomy, physiology, pathology and so on), organised into a complex structure which characteristics the nurse's attitudes to the work.
It seems difficult to write behavioural objectives for this domain alone, as affective functioning is always interwoven with cognitive functioning.
In the examples of objectives given above for the cognitive domain, the affective component will be revealed in the quality of the interaction between the student and patient, in the  way the nurse handles any complications arising, and in the evaluation stage, in the emphasis she places on personal and psychological needs.
It may be argued that because the affective domain deals with qualitative differences it cannot be planned for in the same systematic way that is applied to knowledge, and that it is best dealt with by providing suitable models, and by discussion when problems and student needs arise.
It may also be argued that, as this field is concerned with aspects of the student that are intimately connected with her personality, it would be unethical to attempt systematically to bring about changes.
This could be seen as indoctrination and not education.
The motor skills domain has received far less attention than the cognitive and affective, and objectives in this field are perhaps best devised from a study of the way skills are learned.
The principles described above still apply in that skills are especially suited to analysis, and can be assessed more easily than the other domains by objective tests.
Evaluation of aims and objectives
We can now turn to assessing the value of these ideas for education in general and clinical teaching in particular.
There can be little doubt about the need for the clear formal statement of the aims of nurse education.
Teaching is a purposive activity, so that even though the teacher or school may not formulate aims consciously they will be implicit in the teaching, and will influence the course of the student's education.
As the purpose of teaching is to produce a planned change in students, it is essential that those whose responsibility it is to produce the change should be clear not only about their intentions but about the assumptions on which those intentions are based.
The process of formally stating aims can be instrumental in bringing about an examination of assumptions if undertaken in a self-searching way.
Translating aims into specific objectives can assist in removing the confusions that can arise between intentions and practice, but beyond this the case for objectives is less certain; in fact, it has been one of the most hotly debated innovations in teaching for some time.
For a comprehensive review of this debate the relevant chapters in Stenhouse (1975) are recommended.
The advantages and disadvantages of objectives can be examined from several viewpoints but we will confine ourselves to three: the practical, ethical and educational.
From the practical standpoint, it is often claimed that there is never enough time to write objectives; that their use removes the spontaneity from teaching; and finally that from a clinical point of view they are inappropriate, as much of the teaching is ‘crisis, teaching and cannot be foreseen nor planned.
The question of time can be answered in two ways.
Teachers become more efficient at writing objectives the more they practise, so that they can soon reach the stage where the time taken is no more than is required for planning anyway.
Of course one needs to exercise some common sense about the number of objectives written for any one piece of teaching, but if teaching sessions are seen as part of a series for a given student then objectives can be written for the whole series.
This seems the most appropriate way to use Bloom's Taxonomy (1956) in clinical teaching.
Objections on the grounds of time often disguise a more fundamental problem which concerns teaching in general and not just the objectives model.
It is reasonably accurate to say that good teaching comes largely from thorough planning, yet all too often far too little planning time is made available.
Where this is the case, it is the teacher's responsibility to present the best case she can for more time to those who devise her timetable.
She must also become more efficient herself in the use of the time available.
Formal planning strategies can assist in this.
Loss of spontaneity is a different kind of criticism.
It is true that occasionally experienced teachers can give good, seemingly spontaneous, teaching.
This is usually due less to some brilliant inspiration of the moment than to a skilful adaptation of previously made and polished plans and techniques, and is therefore a product of planning rather than an alternative to it.
Brilliant, spontaneous teaching is a rare event, and it would be a disservice to students to abandon planning in the hope that such teaching might happen.
The question of crisis teaching needs closer examination.
We need to know what a teacher can do in a crisis that could be called teaching.
It seems that the teacher cannot do much more than demonstrate applied knowledge and nursing skills, applied personal resources, and the skills required in modifying and adapting a variety of procedures to meet particular contingencies.
A demonstration is only part of the teaching process; the rest, such as the presentation and analysis of the theoretical knowledge on which the procedures are based, the teaching and practice of necessary skills, the evaluation of the procedures, and extension work such as the construction of contingency plans for related but different emergencies, must take place in follow-up sessions.
If this is not done then the teaching and learning are left unfinished.
Follow-up sessions can be planned and suitable objectives devised for the student.
In this way the unplanned crisis serves as a powerful stimulus for further, planned teaching and therefore does not preclude the use of objectives.
A stronger criticism of the use of objectives can be made on ethical grounds.
This view argues that it is undemocratic and unethical to change deliberately another person's behaviour.
This is usually countered by arguing that there is a basic selection of knowledge and skills that a nurse must have to ensure competence, and teachers and curriculum planners are in a better position than students to know what these are.
Secondly, the student volunteers to become a nurse and therefore consents to being guided by those who know what is required.
Whilst there is some truth in both of these arguments, they are open to question.
The superior knowledge of the teacher does not automatically invest her with the right to place students in an intellectual straitjacket, nor does volunteering to be a nurse mean that one has automatically signed away one's rights as a human being.
The real point at issue here is not whether objectives should be used but how they are used.
They can become a rigid system for controlling students and teachers, but they need not be used in this way.
If objectives from the higher categories of Bloom's taxonomy are included, where students are asked to make judgements, to criticise and evaluate; and if students are given a range of objectives from which they may make their own choices and even, at the later stages of training, are encouraged to write their own, then this will go a long way to meeting this criticism.
The most fundamental criticism raised on educational grounds is that objectives may be suitable for training programmes but are not suitable for education.
The heart of the matter is the distinction made between these two concepts.
Training is seen as the acquisition of knowledge and skills for a specific purpose.
The trained person applies them in ways that are laid down during training.
Education is seen to include some of this, but goes a long way beyond competence in application.
It stimulates the development of rational thinking, of critical and creative abilities so that an educated person is able to employ any knowledge and skills she may have in a variety of ways and contexts.
The concern is more with the development of the student's mind, not solely with behaviour.
There is no simple formula by which this may be achieved, and its very nature makes it impossible to draw up a catalogue of final behaviours to be acquired.
The educated person is characterised less by what she can do, and more by what the process of learning and knowing has done to her.
There is no easy  solution to the education versus training argument in nursing.
If the clinical teacher sees her role as a trainer developing competence then objectives can be applied; but if she sees herself as providing something more than this, perhaps aiding and encouraging the development of the nurse as an autonomous person within the context of nursing, then she will go beyond the stage where objectives can be applied.
This criticism is sometimes expressed in another way.
The question often raised is ‘should education be so dominated by assessment?’
Many teachers argue that the more important things that they are concerned with, the ‘something more’, are qualities that cannot be measured by tests of competence; if teaching is geared to what can be measured, objectives in other words, then these important qualities will be omitted and both the teaching and students will be the poorer.
Where a teacher feels this is likely to happen it becomes her responsibility to see that the danger is avoided.
Where objectives are used appropriately the model does have some advantages.
One advantage is that the students are not in competition with each other, as each student's achievement is assessed against the criteria laid down and not against the best student.
Given time, it is theoretically possible for all students to gain 100 per cent marks.
Two further advantages are that objectives provide the student with a clear idea of what is expected of her and that teachers are forced to think clearly about what they expect of students.
The best conclusion that one can draw is that the objectives model provides a useful tool for certain purposes, especially the basic levels of knowledge and skill acquisition, but that is should not be used exclusively nor without judgement.
Approaches to learning
Almost everything we do in our daily lives whether it be driving a car, making tea, or solving complex professional problems on the ward, is directly or indirectly the result of learning.
It is not surprising, therefore, to find that learning has been one of the most extensively studied of human abilities, yet we do not have one complete explanatory theory that can guide teachers.
A glance at any psychology textbook on the subject will reveal a variety of conflicting views about the nature and process of learning derived from widely different experiments with humans, rats, pigeons, monkeys, and even octopuses.
The reason for this diversity is that learning, like all mental processes, remains hidden.
What takes place when someone learns something cannot be observed directly; we can only know that learning has taken place by examining changes m the person's behaviour after the event.
Similarly we can only make inferences about the nature of learning from observing these changes.
The problem is reflected in definitions of learning.
The following are typical:
’ Learning is a more or less permanent change in behaviour not due to maturation or damage.’
’ Learning is a change in human disposition or capability which can be retained, and which is not simply ascribable to the process of growth.’
Gagné 
These definitions do not say what learning is, but describe it in terms of its effects.
One of the problems created by this hidden nature of learning is that it is not clear whether or not the same process is involved in widely different activities.
Does learning to ride a bicycle or give an injection involve the same processes as learning the anatomy and physiology of the alimentary tract, or a foreign language, or learning to solve problems?
At the beginning of this century it was  believed that one could find a basic element of learning that was common to all these activities; and that once this was established it would be possible to construct a single theory that would explain all learning and would provide a once-and-for-all guide to teaching.
Several attempts were made to construct such a theory by such people as Watson, Thorndike, Hull, Tolman and Köhler and his colleagues.
Eventually these theories fell into disuse, largely because they were unable to explain the whole range of different types of learning.
Nevertheless, each theory contributed something to our understanding of the process.
In recent years it has become more acceptable to distinguish between different types of learning.
Gagné (1970)— whose work we will examine later — has compiled a hierarchy of eight types, the purpose of which is to help the teacher to match her teaching to the kind of learning she wishes to produce.
When an experienced teacher is planning a learning experience, she asks herself at least three questions:
1.
What is learning and which kind is involved in this activity?
2.
What are the different conditions under which learning is most likely to take place?
3.
What part can I play in bringing about this learning?
She may not formulate these questions consciously, but her planning and teaching will reflect the influence of these considerations.
The purpose of this chapter is to examine some possible answers to these questions and to relate them to the clinical situation.
Types of learning
It is convenient to divide approaches to the study of learning into two broad categories:
1.
Associative learning, which includes both classical and operant conditioning and emphasises mechanical connections or associations between events.
2.
Cognition theories, which emphasise internal functions such as perception and understanding and see learning in terms of the organisation of mental connections which influence future performance.
Historically associative theories have their origins in the latter part of the last century in a reaction against current introspective approaches in psychology.
This reaction produced attempts to apply scientific principles and procedures to the study of human  functioning.
Scientific method involves the precise measurement of observable events, which in the case of learning meant studying the measurable changes in behaviour.
Principal workers in this field were Watson, Pavlov, Thorndike, Hull and the contemporary psychologist, Skinner.
The main concept in associative learning theory is that there is a basic unit of learning which consists of a more or less permanent connection between two events: a stimulus (S), which is any object or event that acts on an organism, and the reaction to it, or response (R) that the learner makes.
Once the connection is made and established it is referred to as an S-R bond.
The more frequently a response is paired with a particular stimulus, the more likely it is to become a permanent relationship or habit.
Complex human behaviour is seen as established sequences or chains of S-R bonds.
The teacher's function is to decide what these chains are to be and to take steps to establish them as permanent ways of responding.
Associative theories can be divided into two major fields, each offering a different way for establishing S-R bonds.
These are classical and operant conditioning.
We will deal briefly with these in turn, but for a fuller account the reader is recommended to Walker (1975).
In classical conditioning, learning consists of establishing a relationship between a natural response and a stimulus that would not normally evoke it.
The basic experiment with dogs conducted by Pavlov (1925) will illustrate the principles.
Presented with food (S), dogs secrete saliva (R) before eating.
This bond was referred to by Pavlov as ‘unconditional’ meaning innate and not dependent on previous learning.
Presented with the noise of a tuning fork, the dog will respond, by turning its head or cocking its ears, but will not salivate.
The purpose of the experiment was to train the dog to salivate at the sound of the tuning fork without food being present.
This was achieved by presenting the noise of the fork just before food was given, and then after some repetition presenting the noise of the fork alone.
Before training
1.
Tuning fork (S) →Head turning
Training
2.
Tuning fork plus food →Salivation (R)
After training
3.
Tuning fork (S) →Salivation (R)
The dog had learned to associate the tuning fork with food and responded to it as though it were food.
This new bond was called conditional (upon training) or conditioned.
Two conditions are necessary for this kind of learning to occur.
The first is called contiguity, which means that the two stimuli — the fork and the food — had to be presented simultaneously or at least close together.
The second condition is that repetition or practice of this pairing was necessary.
Numerous experiments have been conducted involving different variations of the principles.
Where Pavlov used pleasant stimuli, others have used unpleasant ones such as electric shocks.
It has been found that this form of conditioning can occur much more rapidly if the response prevents unpleasant stimuli occurring or stops them once they have started.
Eysenck, a contemporary British psychologist, has investigated classical conditioning with humans employing eye-blinking as the unconditional response.
One important finding is that people differ in the number of repetitions needed to establish this kind of learning.
The differences are thought to be functional differences in the nervous system.
It seems that anxious people condition most easily and it is thought that irrational fears are established in this way.
As this is a very basic form of learning it is unlikely that the clinical teacher will find any direct applications of it in her teaching.
One is more likely to see examples of the results of it however.
Recovering patients rapidly acquire anticipatory responses to the noise of the tea trolley, and some patients may show excessive anxiety reactions to the sight of a hypodermic syringe.
Perhaps more important for the teacher is that some students, especially those from other cultures, may have been conditioned to respond to authority figures, especially teachers, by unquestioning obedience.
Such students may seem to lack initiative and may even be dismissed as dull.
Working alongside the student as a nurse affords the clinical teacher opportunities to help such a student develop a more questioning attitude to nursing.
The second form of associative learning, operant conditioning, was developed by the contemporary American psychologist, Skinner, who not only conducted laboratory experiments with animals, but, unlike most other theorists, also developed from his findings teaching procedures for use with people, especially programmed learning and teaching machines.
The two necessary conditions of contiguity and repetition apply but the procedure is different.
The basic principle in operant  learning is that an item or sequence of behaviour is strengthened or weakened by its consequences.
An operant is any item of behaviour shown by a person.
If the behaviour brings about pleasant or rewarding consequences, it is more likely to be repeated.
If on the other hand the consequences are neutral or unpleasant, then the behaviour is less likely to occur and an alternative will be found.
Pleasant consequences are called reinforcers and the strengthening of the behaviour is called reinforcement.
Some variations of the basic model have been studied.
If a reinforcer is given every time an operant is shown there is an initial rapid increase in the occurrence of that operant until a steady level of behaviour is reached.
Once the reinforcer is stopped there is a decline in the rate of responding.
If, on the other hand, the frequency of reinforcement is changed after the initial increase to an intermittent one, that is the person is rewarded only occasionally, then there is a further increase, and the behaviour is maintained long after the reinforcer is withdrawn.
The learning has become more or less permanent.
The technical term for intermittent reinforcement is ‘partial reinforcement’ and represents the most powerful way of developing and changing behaviour.
Selective reinforcement, the rewarding of required and approved behaviour, can be a useful technique for teachers, where praise and approval are used for shaping and maintaining desired student performance, especially in the early stages of learning when students need this kind of reassurance and when the work itself has not yet become intrinsically satisfying.
Associative learning provides explanations for basic forms of learning.
It is unlikely, however, that a single S-R bond can be found in human learning, as most of the things we teach involve complex sequences or chains of responses.
What this model suggests is that the acquisition of complex behaviour is analogous to constructing a wall, a process of building up a structure brick by brick.
Whether or not this is acceptable depends on how one sees complex behaviour.
Some would argue that such a view does not take into account the complex nature of the human mind.
This opinion is held by those who advocate a cognitive approach to learning.
Cognition theories
Whereas associative theories emphasise the passive responding to external events and the building of complex behaviour from small  elements, cognition theories emphasise the active engagement of the person and an organic model for the acquisition of complex behaviour.
Between the presentation of stimuli and the responses made to them, a complex sequence of selecting, discriminating, organising and decision making is said to take place.
The active engagement of the learner in this process has been studied extensively under the title perception.
Successful nursing depends very largely on the nurse's ability to deal effectively with information received through the senses, whether it is obtained by formal means, such as taking blood-pressure, temperatures and so on or by informal means such as noticing changes in the patient's condition during bed-making.
Some information is registered and acted upon, other information may register but be stored and recalled later whilst other information may not be registered at all.
There seems general agreement that the mind does not work like a camera, faithfully recording everything in front of its lens, for apart from the discrimination of sensations and the filtering out of some of them, the information that is passed on undergoes considerable re-organisation and change so that there is always a discrepancy between the sensory input and what is perceived.
It is on these final percepts that judgements and consequent action are based.
Formal observation techniques and equipment are designed to reduce this discrepancy to a minimum but the nursing process depends on much more than can be obtained by this means; therefore it is important for the teacher to have some understanding of the factors that affect the formation of percepts so that she can help the nurse to make accurate judgements where these are possible and to be sufficiently receptive and mentally flexible to consider more than one possible judgement as basis for action.
This understanding is important for teaching too, because whatever the teacher intends the student to learn, she will learn her own approximations to it.
A variety of factors in the stimuli presented have been found to influence selection.
Intense, novel and variable stimuli are attended to rather than others, whilst regularly repeated stimuli seem to become ignored.
The organisation of material once it has been attended to was extensively studied by Gestalt psychologists.
Their basic proposition was that we tend to organise and simplify incoming information until it makes a satisfying pattern.
Similar information tends to be grouped together, whilst missing information tends to be completed from what is available, or from experience.
The value for teachers of this information is that, by  presenting the content of their teaching in a pattern that is satisfying to the students, favourable and appropriate perceptions will be formed.
One can see this at work in the now widely-used system of allowing each student to provide total nursing care for the patients in her care for a period of time.
The students form a more personally satisfying picture of nursing as a process.
Previously acquired knowledge influences our perception of events in that it provides frames of references against which current information is judged.
We perceive things as we know them to be, not necessarily as they are.
This can be demonstrated visually.
When we look at a house in the distance and we see a small house — say half an inch high — surrounded by trees two inches high, we are not fooled into perceiving them as small.
The rest of the distant landscape provides a frame of reference that enables us to make fairly accurate judgments of their size.
We have changed our frames of reference from the immediate vicinity to the distant one.
Although in a given society there will be similar frames of reference about general things, acquired from initiation into a common culture, there are always differences between people because experiences are personal and largely unique.
The present writer has no experience in microbiology and could not tell the difference between bacilli and cocci if he saw them.
An expert in the field could be expected not only to classify them correctly but would also know what to do about them.
Sometimes different people have conflicting frames of reference that can lead to problems of understanding.
A ward sister may perceive the student who spends a lot of time chatting to a particular patient as wasting her time when there is work to do, whilst the student may see herself as legitimately practising her ‘social interaction skills’, and attending to the psychological needs of the patient.
Frames of reference are the means by which we classify and categorise events in our perceptual field and form the basis of our judgments and consequent action.
The purpose of learning, according to cognition theories, is to construct a number of organised detailed frames of reference held in a sufficiently flexible way to enable us to change from one to another when considering an event or problem so that the best judgment is made and a rational course of action is taken.
In order to understand how this happens we need to understand two ideas that are central to cognition theory.
The first is ‘concepts’ and the other ‘cognitive structures’.
A concept is the idea of something.
It is an abstraction of the  common properties or attributes of similar things.
For example: bed, patient, ward, nurse, are all concepts in that they refer to classes of things, not single instances.
It is not the word that is meant here but the idea denoted by it.
The term ‘patient’ refers to a class of things containing numerous instances or examples all of whom have some things in common, and some things that are different.
The things they have in common, or critical attributes, are the things that help us to define a concept, which in turn helps us to identify further examples of that class of things.
One presumes the concept ‘patient’ may be defined as: ‘a sick person in receipt of medical or nursing treatment’.
Concepts are formed from numerous percepts of similar things, and are the way by which we deal with the millions of percepts we form daily.
Without some form of  simplification of this kind we would never be able to cope with  our lives, nor think, nor communicate with others.
Not all concepts refer to concrete things: some like love, pride, time and weight are abstract.
Some are simple, like ‘patient’, with only a few critical attributes, whilst others such as‘emotion,, ‘perception’ and ‘learning are complex.
The same process by which we simplify and organise sensations into percepts, and percepts into concepts, also enables us to organise concepts into hierarchies or cognitive structures.
For example: ‘dog’ belongs to a family called canis, the family canis belongs to a class of mammals, which in turn are vertebrates, which are animals.
Each group becomes more inclusive the further we move up the hierarchy.
People differ in the content of their hierarchies.
In the above examples, some may have dog — mammal — animal as the only categories, whilst others may have extensive structures linked and merged laterally.
Hierarchies in anatomy may be cross-linked with those in the class of physiology.
The differences in organisation are said to be due to innate ability, and the kind of experience received.
The value of concepts and cognitive structures is that they enable us to classify events and to make judgments and (unlike repertoires of behaviours and lists of facts) enable us to solve new problems.
If the process of nursing is seen as a problem-solving activity in which the nurse acts on her own  initiative generating her own solutions, rather than one in which she repeats ready-made solutions; and if the reasoning of the cognition theorists is accepted as valid; then the teaching of nursing should be organised in such a way that the student not only acquires the necessary knowledge  and skills, but does so in such a way that they develop in her flexible cognitive structures.
Associative and cognitive theories present two major examples of different approaches to the study of learning, and although they differ in very many respects it is possible to synthesise them in a way that offers guidance for teachers.
Gagné's hierarchy of learning types brings together simple and complex forms of learning in a logical way, providing a model for planning and sequencing learning.
Conditions of learning
As the process of learning is hidden, it is not accessible to direct influence; however, it is possible for the teacher to do more than tell the student what she needs to learn.
Within the constraints and limitations of the ward, the teacher can arrange and structure teaching to facilitate learning.
This facilitation involves meeting conditions necessary for learning to take place.
Some of these conditions are internal to the learner, e.g. motivational states, attitudes, intelligence; others are under the direct control of the teacher and consist of ways of structuring teaching.
Four of these, considered by Gagné as basic to all learning, are:
1.
Contiguity
2.
Practice
3.
Feedback
4.
Readiness.
Contiguity
Contiguity refers to the simultaneous occurrence of stimuli and responses in learning.
In the classical conditioning experiment, the two stimuli were presented simultaneously.
Operant conditioning involves contiguity, in that the reinforcing event follows closely the production of a response.
Contiguity is necessary in all forms of learning.
Practice
Practice is the repetition of responses and is necessary for learning to become permanent.
It is more important in simpler forms of  learning such as skill learning when it usually means repetition.
In complex learning such as problem-solving, it can mean having the opportunity to perform further activities within a particular class of problems.
Feedback
The third necessary condition is the provision of various forms of feedback to the student.
During the process of learning the student is working to achieve something; knowledge of how close her performance is approximating to the desired goal not only has a motivating effect, but if given in sufficient detail provides information which enables her to adjust her learning nearer to the goal.
In the early stages of learning a task, feedback in the form of words such as‘good’ and ‘well done’should be provided more frequently and immediately.
Errors too should be pointed out immediately, so that they can be corrected before they have become established.
Later, as the student becomes more proficient, she will provide her own feedback and the teacher may delay or withhold comments.
Setting intermediate goals and providing an assessment of them is another way that feedback can help the student adjust her learning.
The ideal end state is reached when the student can accurately assess her own performance, but this will only occur after periods of meeting externally set requirements.
Readiness to learn
The final set of conditions we shall consider can be represented by the term ‘readiness to learn’.
By this is meant that the student must have the prerequisite knowledge and skills to begin learning the task.
All too often students have difficulty or fail in their learning because they have an imperfect grasp of some concept, or because they have not learned some particular skill.
Gagné has provided a formula by which we may detect what is missing from a student's repertoire.
It also provides a structure that links together different types of learning in a logical way and can provide a structure for planning and sequencing learning.
Types of learning are distinguished, and are arranged in an hierarchical way so that earlier types are necessary conditions for later types of learning.
The final type is the solving of problems.
Categories are as follows:
1.
Sign learning 2.
Stimulus-response learning 3.
Chaining .
These three types were described under associative learning.
In sign learning, the student makes diffuse responses to signals in the environment.
In type two, specific behaviours are linked with specific events as in classical and operant conditioning.
In type three, the responses are linked in sequences or chains as in performing a motor skill.
4.
Verbal learning.
The learner acts appropriately on receiving verbal instructions or requests.
This requires that the student understands the terms used, especially technical terms.
Without this understanding further learning is restricted.
5.
 Discrimination learning.
The student learns to recognise and distinguish between different kinds of events and responds to them appropriately.
Examples:
The student identifies different signs and symptoms, distinguishes abnormal breathing from normal, distinguishes between the onset of pressure sores and normal skin, and discriminates between examples of infected, socially clean and sterile dressings.
Discrimination learning is facilitated by the use of the correct technical terms (verbal learning).
6.
Concept learning.
Whereas in discrimination learning the student learns to distinguish between events and objects on the basis of their differences, in concept learning she concentrates on the similarities of phenomena belonging to a class and makes a common response to them.
Examples:
Responds appropriately to different signs of internal and external haemorrhage.
Employs aseptic techniques in different situations.
Defines asepsis.
7.
Rule learning.
Rules are combinations or chains of concepts which guide and regulate practice.
Examples:
Haemorrhage reduces cardiac output.
After a period of peripheral circulatory failure there is a danger of
renal failure.
Aseptic techniques require sterile equipment.
8.
Problem Solving.
The student recalls the relevant concepts, rules and skills and combines them to form a solution to a problem.
Examples:
How can we change this patient's dressing without risking infection?
This patient has suffered a period of acute hypoxia.
What are the dangers, what signs should we look for?
What action can we take?
Readiness to learn can be seen as the possession of learning at lower levels of the hierarchy, necessary to begin learning the present task.
We can now look at some applications of these principles to teaching.
Learning psychomotor skills
A large percentage of nursing consists of actions which, when analysed, can be seen as skills.
It is not surprising, therefore, that much of the clinical teacher's time is spent in teaching combinations of a variety of skills.
We shall now review skill learning.
A skill has three characteristics:
1.
It is a chain of muscular movements called motor responses.
2.
It involves the co-ordination of hand and eye movements.
3.
It requires the organisation of chains into a complex response pattern.
A chain is a sequence of stimulus and response units.
After the initial stimulus, which is usually an intention to commence the action, the completion of a response acts as the stimulus for subsequent responses, so that the chain becomes a smooth action.
An example of a chain can be seen when starting a car which can be plotted as follows:
S (intent to start engine)
R (looking forward and to rear)
S (sight of clear road)
R (testing gear for neutral)
S (gear in neutral)
R (turning key)
S (sound of engine firing)
R (release of key)
S (key released)
R (depress accelerator)
Not only does this action involve hand-eye co-ordination but it also involves information received by the other senses.
For this reason, skills are sometimes called perceptual-motor skills.
Most nursing skills consist of a number of chains or subtasks combined  to make up a complex response pattern.
It seems that the subtasks are arranged hierarchically and that learning follows the sequence from small or simple elements to chains and sequences.
Skill learning falls into three phases: cognitive, fixation and autonomous.
During the cognitive phase, students attempt to intellectualise the skill and form a verbal plan which guides execution.
During the fixation phase, the correct sequences are practised until the chances of making errors are reduced and the behaviour becomes fixed.
This may take days, months or years in some cases.
The autonomous phase is characterised by the disappearance of the verbal plan and an increase in speed and accuracy.
The skill becomes increasingly resistant to stress influences and can be continued despite outside interference.
No conscious effort is required, and it is sometimes possible to carry on a non-relevant activity, e.g. holding a conversation, whilst performing the activity.
Once this phase has been reached, forgetting is unlikely.
We can turn now to the application of the basic learning conditions.
Contiguity
In skill learning this means the proper sequencing and timing of the elements of a chain.
There are two possible variations in sequencing.
The skill can be learned as a whole and in the same sequence as normally performed in practice.
This is best for complex and highly organised skills where component parts interact.
The whole method is a form of simplification.
In less organised skills where there is little interaction, subtasks may be learned and practised separately before combining them.
Practice
Practice serves to strengthen the S-R elements of the chain, to aid the learning of sequences, to prevent forgetting and to strengthen the fixation and autonomous phases.
Periods of practice should be spaced with short rest periods in between, but much will depend on the time available and the opportunities provided on the ward.
Feedback
Feedback is especially important in skill learning.
Two forms have been delineated: extrinsic and intrinsic.
Extrinsic feedback is provided by the teacher in the form of information about the success or failure of the practice to match up to the standard performance.
It must be provided immediately to have any effect on learning: the longer the delay, the slower the rate of learning.
Intrinsic feedback is obtained through the student's own actions and is of two kinds — internal and external.
Internal or kinaesthetic feedback is the feeling obtained from the muscles when performing a skill.
It is that ‘right feel’ about an action that tells one all is well.
It may take some time before a beginner experiences it, but performance will not become efficient until she does.
External feedback is information obtained through the senses, usually visually, by which the student can judge the level of performance and make corrections where necessary.
An extension of intrinsic feedback is the feeling of satisfaction obtained after completing a skill successfully.
Extrinsic feedback from the teacher is necessary during skill learning and early practice, until intrinsic feedback takes over.
The final set of conditions for successful skill learning are derived from the learning hierarchy.
It is necessary for the teacher to ensure that the student can perform any prerequisite skills, can make any discriminations and possesses the concepts and rules required during performance.
For example, in learning to prepare and give an injection, has the student sufficient knowledge of aseptic technique?
Can she measure in the appropriate units?
We can now draw up a simple plan for teaching a skill:
1.
Analyse the skill, breaking it down into S-R units, chains, subtasks, prerequisite knowledge and skills.
2.
Assess complexity of skill and decide whether to use part or whole method.
3.
Determine whether the student has the prerequisite knowledge and skills.
This is usually done by questioning to assist recall.
Arrange training for anything not known.
4.
Demonstrate and describe the skill, emphasising important parts.
5.
Help student devise a verbal plan.
6.
Provide for contiguity and reinforced practice.
7.
Provide extrinsic feedback.
8.
Help student to notice intrinsic feedback.
9.
Provide remedial practice for parts with which the student is having difficulty.
Learning knowledge
Knowledge is understood to consist of facts and concepts combined into hierarchies of rules, the purpose of which is to inform and guide practice so that not only will nursing be more efficient but also professional problems not previously encountered by the nurse can be solved.
This is a higher use of knowledge and is called generalisation.
To achieve this the nurse needs more than facts and skills; she needs the capabilities represented by the higher levels of the learning hierarchy.
We shall now review these higher levels.
Discrimination learning
Discrimination learning is especially important for nursing practice as nurses are constantly faced with distinguishing between one set of conditions and another in the form of signs and symptoms, in the form of differences in kinds of equipment and their use, and in the form of differences in patients' problems and needs.
Two difficulties often encountered in this type of learning are: that complex phenomena are more difficult to distinguish than simple ones, and when similar phenomena, that is those with many characteristics in common, are being examined there is a greater chance of confusion.
To help the learner, complex examples should be reduced to the essential characteristics and differences emphasised.
The basic conditions apply in that discrimination learning requires that the early levels of the hierarchy have been satisfactorily acquired in relation to the current events being discriminated.
Contiguity refers to ensuring that the student has the opportunity to make suitable responses.
Practice is interpreted as repetition, and feedback consists mainly of approving reactions from the teacher.
Concept and rule learning
Both discrimination learning and concept learning are related to and dependent on the process of perception as described earlier, but both concept and rule learning have a close affinity with language.
Concepts and rules are most often taught by definition and description, and whilst this can be successful, given a good  communication technique, it has the disadvantage of failing to produce generalisation.
But in the clinical area it is possible to teach concepts by observation and experiences supported by language.
The following plan is one way that this can be achieved:
1.
The student is informed of what she will be expected to do after she has learned the concept.
This will be the identification of new examples of the concept.
2.
The teacher ensures by questioning or other means that the student can make necessary discriminations and has knowledge of the appropriate terminology.
3.
The teacher presents positive and negative examples of concept.
A positive example is one that has the necessary attributes whilst a negative one has none.
The latter are useful in that they shorten the time taken to learn the concept.
Several of both kinds are needed, depending on the student, and are presented either simultaneously or in alternate sequence over a period of time.
During this learning period the teacher should encourage the student to talk about the examples, and in the early stages ways should be found to make the essential characteristics stand out.
4.
Testing is carried out by presenting the student with a new example of the concept and asking her to identify it.
If she does this correctly she has learned the concept.
The teaching of rules, which are combinations of concepts, consists mainly of assisting the student to recall those involved, ensuring that they are fully understood and combined in the right order, and in providing the opportunities in clinical practice to apply them.
It follows then that when the student can correctly apply the rule in a variety of situations, she can be said to have learned the rule.
In considering problem-solving, the final level of the hierarchy, it is necessary to distinguish between the learning of solutions and learning how to solve problems.
When teaching theatre nursing, in the accident and emergency department and in other situations where teaching is dictated by the medical condition of the patient, the student is learning established solutions to problems.
Teaching is almost always by the expository method of demonstration and description, and the kind of learning involved is at a lower level of the hierarchy.
Learning how to solve problems is a more complex activity in that it involves thinking at a higher level.
To solve a problem the student must recall the relevant concepts and  rules and combine them in a way that satisfies the principles of good practice.
This can be taught, in that the teacher can create the optimum conditions for this kind of learning.
The most satisfactory way of teaching problem-solving is by the method of guided discovery, in which the teacher presents the problem usually in the form of a question.
The student formulates her solution which is checked by the teacher and, where circumstances allow, carries out the solution.
In the final discussion stage, the student evaluates her work.
The degree of complexity of the problem chosen will depend on the level of the student.
The steps for creating this kind of learning are as follows:
1.
Present the problem, usually in the form of a question, and indicate the form the solution will take but not the solution itself.
2.
Assist the recall of the relevant concepts, rules and skills involved in the solution.
3.
Guide the students, according to their experience, through the process of formulating and testing hypotheses by indicating which areas to focus on.
4.
Check the solution.
5.
Supervise the application where necessary.
6.
Encourage final self-evaluation.
Unusual questions, ideas and solutions from the student should be treated with respect.
In the early stages a higher proportion of errors will occur, but these should be shown to have value in the process of reaching a solution.
Opportunities should be created where time allows, for self-initiated learning.
This form of teaching takes more time than other methods but the emphasis is on learning the processes of thinking and organisation involved in reaching solutions.
By ensuring the student has the prerequisite knowledge and skills, the time involved can be reduced considerably.
Conclusion
In this chapter we have reviewed some types of learning and the conditions necessary to promote them.
How far the teacher will be able to meet these conditions will depend on the constraints imposed by the ward, how periods of clinical experience are viewed by tutorial and clinical staff and what kind of learning the teacher  wishes to promote in the student; and this depends, very much, on how the teacher views the process of nursing.
Teaching resources
’ You cannot teach a man anything, you can only help him to find it within himself .
Galileo.
Education today, both in the general educational field and in nurse education, involves the use of a vast array of differing materials and equipment (software and hardware); and the use of an expanse of knowledge, in the form of libraries, journals, and research documents.
In this chapter on teaching resources, I shall endeavour to aid the reader in the selection and use of materials, production of handouts, worksheets and visual aids, as well as understanding a wider look at resources.
Teaching is the ability to communicate effectively to the student or pupil, enabling learning to take place.
Teaching or learning resources are tools that enable the communication to be more effective.
Only by increasing the motivation of the student, increasing attention, and aiding attainment of knowledge, skills and desirable attitudes, will learning take place, causing a permanent change in behaviour.
Teaching aids must not be introduced solely in order to save time, but must make possible an increase in understanding for the learner.
Assessment of any visual aid must be based on its ability to convey information, and therefore differing types of media are required for differing teaching methods.
Students today are used to visual effects of a high quality, such as in documentary programmes on television, and expect competence on behalf of the tutor and clinical teacher in their use.
In 1971, the General Nursing Council convened a committee to look into the the use of visual aids in training schools.
The report highlighted the under-utilisation of expensive equipment.
Similar findings were found by Marson of Sheffield Polytechnic with the under-use of programmed material and visual aids.
(Marson 1971, Townsend 1975).
The role of the teacher is changing, with less emphasis on the teacher providing all the material for the student, but increased emphasis on providing a stimulating environment for active learning to take place.
During primary education, the child learns by two methods:
1.
Doing (play)— using resources provided.
2.
Being told — verbal communication by the parent and teacher.
During secondary education, the use of the spoken word increases.
It is economical in time and resources, but sadly is only effective if the teacher is one of the rare breed who is highly skilled in lecturing methods.
Telling is not teaching .
Owing to shortage of teachers in nurse education, and the number of learners, we are gradually returning to learning by discovery, with the teacher acting as guide, counsellor and facilitator — in other words, the learner is doing .
Resources are the hub of this method of education, in which books, programmed texts, tape-slides, ERIC micro-fiche, charts, dissection of organs, research documents and patients' care plans are all used in the learning process.
Discussion and evaluation take place with the tutor, enabling individual assistance to the learners, according to their special needs.
The learning resources centre serves teachers and learners alike.
In many teaching establishments, a media resources officer is available to give advice on equipment, materials, maintenance of equipment and production of visual and audio aids.
The teacher, librarian and media officer need to understand each other 's special skills in order to work together as a team:
1.
The teacher analyses the learning needs;
2.
The media officer translates them into the design;
3.
The librarian obtains the information and resources.
The final decision must be the teacher's.
Not all schools of nursing are so well equipped or staffed as to afford a media officer, and responsibility for the care and maintenance of equipment is delegated to teaching staff.
Related to nursing, the term ‘teaching resources’ includes the entire hospital personnel, the equipment of the hospital, the primary care team in the community, the patient and his family.
Team-teaching is another term which needs introduction.
It can include the immediate team of tutors and clinical teachers within the school of nursing, but in the wider sense it includes the medical staff and all trained staff of wards and departments, each with their  special skills, personalities and valuable experience.
Allocation of time and facilities with ample free time for discussion is essential for effective team teaching.
Success will depend upon each individual contribution and the effort put into the teaching programme, coupled with the ability to work in harmony.
The sum total should be far greater than each individual component.
Good communication within the team is essential for harmonious working relationships, with weekly meetings headed by the team leader to discuss the nurses' evaluation of their modular experiences.
The knowledge, skills and desirable attitudes to be encouraged, translated into team objectives, form the core of the team approach.
This translation is tedious but essential work, as the nurse and the team must both know in which direction they are to proceed.
A final evaluation based on the objectives follows at the completion of each module.
Each module should include objectives indicating aspects of care related to the changing needs of society:
1.
Pattern of disease health problems,
2.
Expectation of health,
3.
Patient and family needs.
In this way the curriculum objectives become a teaching resource, upon which the method of teaching and selection of teaching aids are based.
The learner as a resource person
Nursing care based upon the nursing process is being widely implemented in the United Kingdom, and one of the main skills that nurses need to develop is the ability to be able to communicate effectively with the patient and his family, in order to be able to define the patient's problems.
Communication within the caring team, and the formation of nursing care plans, ensures continuity of patient care.
In the past, it has been assumed that nurses have already developed these skills when leaving school, or that they are acquired whilst providing patient care.
LeLean (1973) and Ashworth (1980) both identify the need to include interpersonal skills in the nursing curriculum.
Nurses tend to control most patient/nurse conversations, and therefore may ignore what the patient needs to discuss.
Most questions that nurses ask patients are closed questions, and therefore do not encourage the patient to express his feelings of social, emotional, or physical need.
The learner may be regarded as a resource person by encouraging  intercommunication between learners in role playing, and experiential learning, which are then followed by discussion and analysis of the effectiveness of the situation enacted, and the feelings which were generated towards each other.
Abbott Laboratories Ltd (see p. 148) have produced a learning package of video-tapes concerned with the elderly and the patient with cancer.
The presentation contains guidance for the tutor to enable maximum learning and skill development.
Tutors may like to venture further and produce their own ‘situational’ tapes covering aspects of ward management and patient care.
Many articles have been written on communication skills, which may assist with ideas.
The Nursing Bibliography produced by the Royal College of Nursing is essential for every nursing library, both for tutors and learners, when exploring areas for study.
Discussion also assists learners to identify their own feelings and attitudes, so deepening understanding of themselves, their patients and colleagues.
Clamp (1980) sets out eight objectives which may be achieved by learning through incidents, and these briefly are to be able to:
1.
analyse work
2.
identify and describe feelings and behaviour
3.
demonstrate empathy
4.
identify problems and make decisions
5.
demonstrate intellectual skills, verbal skills, the ability to think
6.
discuss how understanding of patients, relatives and colleagues as individuals can be achieved
7.
explain the concept of a harmonious team
8.
assist peers and colleagues more positively.
When one works with learners in the ward, discussion of all aspects of communication, including non-verbal communication, is essential.
What did the learner do well?
What does she need to improve?
When one provides any care, whether it is managing a group of patients, or bathing one patient, the following skills are demonstrated — social skills, management skills, communication skills, and practical skills.
When one gives the learner feedback on her ability these skills provide a framework for assessment.
Patients experience high anxiety levels at time of admission to hospital.
Why did the learner not identify the signs of anxiety expressed through non-verbal behaviour?
How could the anxiety have been avoided?
What lessons are to be learned and applied to future care?
These are skills which can be simulated in the classroom, but teacher and learner need to work through situations together in the  real world, so that learner can receive the support she needs.
This could later provide the basis for a role play or discussion session in the classroom.
In the clinical area, learners develop their practical and social skills, but at the same time develop a full sense of responsibility, especially if given the guidance and support they need to become safe and competent practitioners.
Teaching, too, becomes teaching for reality, so narrowing the gap between theory and practice (Bendall, 1976).
Nursing research as a teaching resource
If nursing is to become a profession, it needs to develop its own body of knowledge.
Nurses providing care in the community or hospital, and teachers planning the curriculum, must base practice upon theory (i.e. a body of knowledge) that has been researched.
This body of nursing knowledge is growing rapidly, and trained nurses should be encouraging learners to question what they do, and why.
Is the care effective?
Could the care be improved?
Has any study been made of a similar problem?
The librarian may be able to carry out a relevant literature search.
Nursing care can run the risk of becoming ritualised.
We do things like this because we have always done it that way.
This care is not necessarily unsafe or ineffective, but we should always ask whether there is a more effective method, and in some cases, whether we need to do it at all.
For research to become a learning resource, lists of suggested reading in preparation for modules of experience should contain reference to relevant nursing research, in order to prepare for discussion in class.
This gives learners guidance in their self-directed learning, and encourages a problem-solving approach to care.
A problem-solving approach is a necessary feature of the nursing process, in which it is applied to seek to alleviate the patient's problems; it is also crucial to the research process.
In the final year of training, investigative projects can be given to learners as intermodular work, and the presentation of such projects can form part of their modular assessment.
Some of the topics which might be suggested to learners are:
— Handwashing techniques — application and efficacy
— Accuracy of fluid charts — are they always necessary?
— Standards for recording observations of vital signs
— Advice to patients before discharge
— Catheter care and the incidence of urinary infection
— Oral hygiene — methods and effectiveness of care
— Support for junior nurses — what are their needs?
— How could senior students better assist them?
The ward sister naturally needs to be consulted, and this can be discussed at a preliminary interview between the learner and the sister.
The tutor and clinical teacher can give guidance and support to ensure that too large a topic is not undertaken: ‘advice to patients before discharge’ needs to be narrowed to an area of care which is part of the modular experience.
A literature search has to be made by the learner, who then makes an assessment of the particular problem.
The project should include a review of the literature, a summary of the findings relating to the aspect of care investigated, and suggestions for improving care based on the investigation.
These projects encourage a questioning attitude, and the application of nursing research findings to patient care by the ward team.
When presenting the project, learners can be encouraged to use audio-visual aids, and to view the exercise as valuable experience in the development of their own teaching skills.
Project topics should be organised by the tutor prior to presentation so that a logical sequence can be developed, aiding discussion by the total group.
Teacher and learner learn together.
Ward staff are invited and encouraged to participate in the learner's project and to attend the presentation.
When compiling the timetable, a time should be selected to enable the maximum number of trained staff to attend.
Knowledge is never static, but successive generations of nurses fail to implement the findings of research.
Why is this so if the curriculum is to be based on research?
Very little research has been carried out on teaching methods and the effectiveness of learning in nurse education.
Lectures feed learners with information, giving them a feeling of security because they have notes which they may then be able to regurgitate when answering a theoretical question.
But how much of this knowledge is applied in the ward?
Eve Bendall (1976) in ‘Teaching for reality’ states that ‘…the major part of written answers to nursing questions bear little or no relationship to the nursing performance of the writer in 80% of trainees’, and she goes on to say ‘…we are producing trained nursing staff who are (through no fault of their own) woefully lacking in many of the skills they need.’
It seems from this work that theory and practice  must be directly linked, and the main area in which to teach these linkages is the clinical area.
Learners when questioned about why an aspect of nursing care is necessary often demonstrate poor understanding of the principles upon which such care is based, in relation to their patient's need.
If learners were encouraged to be more active in the learning process, rather than sitting in a classroom, and this active learning was based on patient care in the clinical area, would the learning be more realistic?
Self-directed learning takes a great deal of planning by the teaching team, and teachers are reluctant to let go of the responsibility of being the main teaching resource.
Learners, too, can become very anxious if they are not fully supported during their learning experience.
The development of a problem-solving, self-directed course of study
‘Patient problems’ provide a basis for studying nursing, and so these problems form the presenting, or trigger, problems which are given to the learners.
The material is discussed and analysed in order to identify what it is necessary to know in order to solve the problem, and hence manage patient care.
The curriculum content is based upon problems in differing areas of patient care, and nurses with specialist skills and experience are necessary to construct the curriculum and programme evaluation.
A presenting ‘problem’ to the learner might be, for example:
1.
‘Difficulty in breathing’: The tutor and learners decide what they need to know in order to understand the problem and provide nursing care.
How do we all breathe normally?
How is breathing controlled?
How can nursing skills assist breathing?
How does medical treatment reduce the problem?
2.
‘Difficulty in expectoration’ may be another problem.
What is sputum?
How is it produced and why?
What is infection and its effect on the respiratory tract?
How can nursing care and physiotherapy aid expectoration?
What medical care and treatment will reduce the patient problem?
3.
‘Confusion’ may be another associated problem.
Why does confusion occur?
How does the nurse manage the confused patient?
What are the advantages and dangers of oxygen administration?
Does the patient smoke?
How do you ensure patient safety?
4.
‘Difficulty with eating and drinking’: What is the importance  of ensuring fluid and energy intake, especially in a pyrexial patient?
What are the complications of dehydration, and those of poor oral hygiene?
Many other problems may be presented, for example problems related to preparing the patient for safe discharge to the community.
The examples stated here are basic to all patients with a respiratory problem, or problem of the cardiovascular system.
However, the cause of the problem in a particular patient will be different, and so actual care may also differ.
If the learner can be guided through the programme, and can begin to delineate for herself what she needs to know, then the knowledge and skills developed should become more relevant and an inquiring attitude should be strengthened in the learner.
The timetable for this form of learning needs to be much less formal.
Planned tutorials or lectures can be programmed for material which might provide a basis for development.
The use of reading lists, tapes, slides, video-recordings etc. needs to be carefully planned, because they form a major resource.
The tutor is the facilitator of learning, and the learner is active.
The workshops mentioned later in the chapter may provide a hub for the self-directed learning by basing them on the problem(s).
Suggested steps in the planning are as follows, and it will be immediately apparent that they take time:
1.
Prepare outline (broad) aims and objectives for period of study.
2.
Identify ‘problems’ for study according to learners' current ward allocation.
3.
Decide on the order of the presentation of material to the learner and produce flow diagrams.
4.
Prepare objectives for nursing care based on patient problems.
5.
Circulate objectives and outline course material to all concerned (ward staff particularly) for discussion.
6.
Make modifications and prepare a breakdown of study programme into learning units, demonstrating how the patient ‘problems’ fit into the units.
7.
Prepare trigger material to be presented to the learner:
(i)
Worksheet, reading list, audiovisual aids etc.
(ii)
Prepare flow guide for tutors who will support learners through the process of problem-solving in order to attain the expected outcomes.
8.
Ensure that all objectives can be met by the programme provided.
9.
Prepare assessment instrument based on objectives, and circulate for comments.
This might include continuous assessment of the learner in the clinical area, with the expected level of competence defined in the objectives, appropriate to the learners' stage of training.
10.
Make alterations following discussion.
11.
Design an evaluation sheet for tutors and learners.
12.
Revise unit material on the basis of the evaluation.
Learners need to see the total experience (theory and practice) as a learning module, and many of the topics explored are discovered, discussed, and learned as a result of caring for the patient.
What?
Why?
How?
When? need to be asked constantly by the learner.
The dual role of the learner as a student and employee causes conflict in the clinical area between the need to learn and the multiple pressures exerted upon all ward staff committed to patient care.
Bendall (1976) states ‘…the most fundamental mistake was to separate those who teach and those who practise.’
As a result of this separation, and the increased pressures upon the nurse teacher and the ward sister, theory and reality have sometimes drifted apart.
I have suggested a way of learning which uses the skills of both the teacher and the trained nurse in the clinical environment, working together to improve patient care.
Nurses should become more knowledgeable, and able to apply such knowledge to patient care, and encourage the development of professional competence in the delivery of individualised care to patients.
Why do we need teaching aids?
The term ‘aid’ is very often coupled with ‘audio-visual, and ‘learning’.
Aid means help, but often aids are learning materials in their own right, e.g. programmed texts.
The primary goal of audiovisual instruction is learning, and, through research, techniques have been developed to enrich learning.
There are three main levels of providing learning experiences.
1.
The closer one can get to reality, the easier the learning by the student, provided that the necessary knowledge has been given previously to facilitate comprehension.
2.
Learning through audio-visual materials, i.e. objects, specimens, modules, slides, filmstrips, radio and television.
Although they do not provide the real experience, they aid and increase understanding and motivation.
3.
Learning through the use of words, e.g. speech, writing, formulae, used singly or in combination for discussion, presentation of seminars, projects, essays etc.
The general value of teaching aids is:
1.
To enrich learning and add dynamic interest.
2.
To increase understanding of concepts.
3.
To increase acquisition of  knowledge and aid retention of factual information.
4.
To provide a stimulus for discussion.
5.
To encourage voluntary reading.
6.
To motivate students by allowing them to share a common experience.
7.
To foster desirable attitudes and change behaviour.
8.
to allow experts into the classroom.
9.
To expand the social and physical environment of the learner.
Teaching aids are therefore valuable for students of all ages ana experience.
Availability and selection of aids
In these days of financial restraint, the availability of teaching aids and the more expensive equipment may be limited by the budget.
However, much can be done by the teachers themselves at very little cost to the department.
A little thought and ingenuity is all that is required.
Very often, the simpler the aid the more effective it is, and less likely to go wrong.
The following points should be borne in mind:
1.
Any visual aid should be carefully selected and planned to add clarity to the presentation.
2.
The rationale for using the aid is:
a.
To simulate reality.
b.
To increase retention.
c.
To increase motivation.
d.
To stimulate discussion.
e.
To demonstrate relationships.
3.
Would any other type of aid be more effective or appropriate?
4.
Are visual movement or tactile stimuli necessary?
5.
Is the visual display area adequate?
6.
Is there an electricity supply?
7.
Is it cheaper in the long term to buy rather than to hire?
8.
Is the aid reliable and in working order?
9.
Commercially produced films, tape-slide presentations and programmed texts must be viewed in advance.
Catalogues describing films can be misleading about the information they contain.
The content may be too trivial or too deep for the group, causing embarrassment to the teacher.
Students are not reluctant to hide their frustration and impatience.
10.
Each individual piece of equipment has a special contribution to make; for example, a tape recorder can be equally effective in stimulating discussion as a film, but films or video tapes are more effective for the demonstration of practical skills where movement is essential.
11.
When selecting equipment to buy, one should make sure that servicing facilities are good and spare parts are quickly obtainable.
How long would servicing take?
Is there a replacement service for equipment, or can one hire similar equipment from within one's area?
If equipment has to travel between hospitals and schools, it must be able to withstand stress and so a strong carrying case is preferable.
This seems obvious, but is not always heeded when selecting items.
12.
When any equipment is purchased, an account of the cost of software (paper, film, video-tape, slides) must also be included.
13.
How many staff can use the equipment?
Will special instructions be required for most of the staff, in order that the materials can be fully utilised, or will it be the ‘toy of one or two people; or will it lie dormant in a cupboard until someone revives interest in it?
In the Journal of Advanced Nursing ,(1976) Marson and Townsend state that there is need for change in educational technology in this country.
However, change of this nature is hindered by:
1.
Lack of understanding about innovation.
2.
Lack of the skills and knowledge needed to service equipment.
This is particularly important when the installation of expensive equipment is contemplated.
3.
Non-availability of the appropriate software.
4.
Difficulties in organisational arrangements.
5.
Lack of staff motivation.
Aids as teaching resources
1.
Non-projected visual aids
a.
Pictorial —
(i)
Blackboard/whiteboard.
(ii)
Flip charts.
(iii)
Wall charts.
(iv)
Felt boards and Magnetic boards.
(v)
Noticeboards.
b.
3-D Models.
c.
Simple visual aids for the teaching of principles and concepts.
2.
Projected visual aids
a.
Overhead projector
(i)
Preparation of own material.
(ii)
Commercially produced material.
b.
Slides 2 cm x 2 cm and the slide projector.
c.
Epidiascope.
d.
Film loops.
e.
Films and film projector.
f.
Videotapes
3.
Programmed Instruction
4.
Audio aids
a.
Tape recorder.
b.
Radio.
Non-projected aids
This group of teaching aids is by far the most important, and should not be regarded as second rate.
For clinical teaching, they can be fully mobile in many cases, and do not require an electricity supply.
They are relatively cheap and sometimes can be produced by a hospital workshop — or an imaginative husband!
White board/chalk board.
Very few classrooms are without this almost traditional teaching aid, and few teachers omit to use it.
However, too often the student strains to see what is written because the teacher has not considered how she is using the board.
Understanding the flexibility of this equipment leads to more efficient instruction.
All board work should be planned as far as possible when preparing the lesson, e.g.  
One should decide whether any information would be better given on a hand-out, or on the overhead projector.
The use of the board for superfluous material should be discouraged, since it should be used to make a learning sequence meaningful.
Explanations of concepts and principles can be demonstrated by diagrams or verbally throughout the lesson.
The summary may be retained, since headings of the  lesson plan usually make a good outline for students’ notes.
The rest of the board can be used for any material that may be erased.
Advantages of the chalkboard/whiteboard are:
1.
It becomes an integral part of lesson planning, and the students can use the board to develop their own teaching expertise.
2.
It is useful in recording progress in work programmes, e.g. trial and error ward management problems, one example of which might be organising patient allocation for total patient care and delegating responsibilities by senior student nurses.
They would work in groups to present the final plan, showing the patients' needs and the nurses' needs.
Evaluation of how the plan has met these needs takes place in open discussion in class.
3.
Arrangement of ideas on the board provides a stimulus for new ideas and lateral thinking.
4.
Project work can be developed in outline and the board allows for the planning and evaluation of group experiences.
When writing on the board, one should not carry on any verbal discussion, as the words are lost to the class.
One should always face the students when addressing them.
Make sure that the written communication can be clearly seen.
1.
Avoid glare on the board — shiny surfaces can be prevented by careful blackboard maintenance.
Yellow chalk is sometimes better than white.
2.
Do not stand in front of what you written.
3.
Use the board calmly.
Hurriedly written sentences are very often indecipherable.
At a distance of 32 feet, letters must be 2½ inches high to be clearly visible at the back of the class.
4.
Make sure the board is clean on leaving the class.
Templates may be made by the teacher for outlines which are repeatedly used, e.g. the human body and its organs.
These enable the production of more proficient diagrams by anyone who cannot draw.
Cardboard or plywood can be used for this purpose.
Material may also be transferred to the board by making a  pattern of the diagram of the required size on paper.
The outline is punched with small pinholes using a sewing tracing wheel.
The pattern is then placed over the board, and the surface of the paper facing you is rubbed with chalk.
On removing the paper from the board, an outline is produced as a series of small dots.
During the lesson the diagram is drawn in when appropriate.
Another technique is to use the epidiascope to project the image onto the board and the picture can be outlined in coloured pencil.
(Safe on rubberised boards only).
Whiteboards can be used similarly with watersoluble pens which enable the surface to be cleaned with a damp cloth.
Care must be taken not to use spirit based pens as this makes cleaning impossible, except by using spirit.
If this is not easily available, nobody will thank you for the error!
The paper outline technique can still be used, but instead of chalk a light coloured pen can be used.
It will just be visible to the teacher but not to the class.
Projection onto the whiteboard is made directly, using the white surface as the screen.
Flip charts/Wall charts.
The flip chart is a large pad of paper, which may be blank or filled with previously prepared diagrams, pictures, maps, cartoons and so on.
There are commercially produced stands or easels to hold the papers, but a home-made version is cheap and easily stored.
It can, furthermore, be used in the ward.
The paper is clipped together by firm bulldog clips at the top edge of the required piece of hardboard, so allowing the charts to be turned over in an upwards direction.
The stand must be free, that is, away from the wall and an intravenous stand would be ideal, particularly in the ward.
For storage, the whole aid can be hung from the wall, or stored flat.
Each presentation may be a chart demonstrating relationships, a picture to stimulate discussion, or a series of sequences demonstrating a manipulative skill, procedure or physiological process.
(Fig. 6.1).
To produce these pictures the paper must be fairly tough if they are to be kept.
Sellotaping the edges will increase the life of the chart.
Use cheaper paper if the communication is not to be retained.
Drawing with thick felt pens is essential for the presentation to be clear.
Use the epidiascope for outlining pre-prepared material as with the blackboard.
Clear use of colour is also important.
Above all else, the chart should:
1.
Be simple — one should draw only that which is relevant.
2.
Have a message.
3.
Be attractive and not cluttered.
4.
Use coloured pens or differing coloured backgrounds to increase attention.
5.
Have letters large enough to be seen easily from a distance.
Chart display.
Classrooms, clinical rooms and seminar rooms are not always liberally equipped with hooks or pegs on which to hang charts.
If you are fortunate, large soft boards are provided for the use of drawing-pins.
Other methods are:
1.
A long piece of cord/string by which charts can be suspended by a bulldog clip, paper clips or clothes pegs.
2.
Plasticine, which will hold charts temporarily on a blackboard.
The use of Plastitak or Blu-tack, which is similar, does not harm the wall.
3.
Magnets which will hold charts with metal fittings to any metal strips or objects fixed to the wall.
Felt board/Magnet board display.
Both these boards allow for movement of the display; they are therefore very good for the rearrangement of sequences, e.g. planning patient care, ward management, functions of the body, heart valves or types of joints.
A homemade felt board is easily made from an old blanket.
If the surface is brushed, making it fluffy, shapes cut from felt, flannel or material backed with flocked paper will easily adhere to the  blanket.
One can use paper shapes that are fairly stiff and stick a piece of Velcro on the back surface as this also sticks easily.
Keep the pieces from each presentation in separate boxes, making re-use easy.
They take time to make, but can be used many times.
It is not time wasted.
Make sure the presentation can be seen and read from a distance.
Felt boards are very versatile, and they are only limited by the imagination of the teacher.
Magnetic boards are expensive and used in a similar way as felt boards.
Magnets are stuck onto the back of stiff paper shapes by a strip of Sellotape.
The magnets are expensive and lose their magnetism if banged or dropped too many times.
Take care to store them safely.
Some chalkboards and whiteboards have a metal surface which can therefore be used as a magnetic surface.
Commercially produced wall charts.
There are some excellent wall charts produced commercially, and also some which are so complicated that they defeat the purpose of their manufacture — to explain concepts, facts and principles.
Always ask yourself ‘Do they say what it is you are trying to make clear to the student?’
If the answer is ‘No’ then try a diagram made by yourself.
The value of graphic material is to attract attention and convey information in a summarised form, e.g. cell division.
Anatomical charts portrayed in too much detail may be ignored by students.
A torso is much more effective in demonstrating relationships, because the learner is ‘doing’ by handling the organs, taking apart and putting them together again.
How to evaluate a wall chart:
1.
Is the subject appropriately presented in this form?
2.
Is the subject appropriate for the group?
3.
Is it suitable for the level of the work?
4.
For which purpose is it designed?
a.
To demonstrate skills?
b.
To show visual relationships?
c.
To organise knowledge?
d.
To stimulate and motivate learning?
e.
To modify and mould attitudes?
5.
The design —
a
Is the message clear?
b.
Is the information easily obtained from the chart?
c.
Is the use of colour effective?
d.
Is the layout simple?
e.
Does it add to the communication which you are making?
Flat pictures.
The versatility of the flat picture is enormous, and a collection of pictures from magazines and newspapers can be used to stimulate discussion.
They can be pictures of situations, of people, places, facial expressions, or scenes of differing behaviour.
Pasted to cardboard they can be stored.
Pictures are useful for interviewing purposes as not only do they assist discussion during a group interview, but they enable the interviewer to estimate the communication skills of the candidates.
The level of understanding of people's needs and an estimation of the prospective nurse can be made from the discussion.
Pictures can be used to increase the powers of observation of nurses and the interpretation of non-verbal signals both to and from the patient.
Scenes of ward situations enable the nurses to make a quick evaluation of a problem.
How would they deal with the situation?
What would their priorities be?
The group can discuss the various interpretations.
Would they have made a different assessment?
Has the situation been dealt with effectively?
Are there any legal or ethical problems arising from the depicted scene?
When choosing pictures for teaching, the teacher must have regard for the suitability of the picture and also consider whether the learner has the prerequisite knowledge to understand the picture.
Has it interest value?
Are the cues contained within the picture strong enough for their proper interpretation?
What is the overall quality of the picture?
Posters.
Fosters must be kept simple, have a message, use colour subtly and be eyecatching.
The design must captivate the audience.
Used in workshops, they can add interest.
In cartoon form they can very often clarify points, focusing upon topics that might otherwise be hurriedly overlooked as being too difficult to comprehend.
A series of pictures depicting the formation of DNA using a train and trucks commences with something with which we are all familiar and can recall instantly.
Notice boards.
Notice boards must be large enough to ensure that displayed items are not overlapping and obscuring one another.
If the board is sectioned by coloured tape, and each section clearly headed (e.g. Introductory Course; Year 1; Year II; UKCC Royal College of Nursing notices), it makes selection of material to be read easier.
Ideally, one person should be responsible for notice boards so that out-of-date notices are not cluttering the board and interest is maintained.
Notice boards are meant to be noticed, and therefore must look attractive.
Articles of up-to-date information  will draw people to the board and encourage the use of a central information source.
In this way they become a teaching resource.
Models
Models provide a three dimensional experience and very often a real understanding of the structure.
They are made usually to be handled by the learner, but how often to you actually see nurses using the models?
They are very often at the front of the class for the sole use of the teacher, whilst the class sits passively.
Used in this way, a chart would probably be more effective because it may be larger and more easily seen at the back of the class.
In workshops, learners should be encouraged to use the models effectively.
The size of commercially produced models for nurse education may be life size or greater.
The principle of the model is to stimulate interest, but it does have its limitations.
Provision of the real object where possible is usually eagerly explored.
Dissection classes with small groups of students are excellent since even the squeamish can take part as onlookers, whilst a fellow student performs the dissection.
An example of increasing learning is to dissect sheep's kidneys.
Unless the outer capsule of fibrous tissue is actually felt by the learner, there is little appreciation of its strength and its protective function in maintaining the shape of the kidney.
Similarly, an animal's eye can be easily dissected, but this would not increase understanding or explain the complex nervous system related to vision.
Models used to simulate resuscitation procedures are an invaluable aid, and enable the nurse to practice the skills of external cardiac massage and expired air ventilation; but however complete the simulation of the emergency situation, the emotional effects of the real situation cannot be taught.
Ample discussion of these procedures and the ethical implications should be allowed in the timetable.
More complicated models for the simulation of cardiac arrhythmias are available for nurses specialising in intensive care work.
The prerequisite knowledge of the cardiac cycle must be fully understood however, as must the ‘normal’ electrocardiogram.
Models to explain principles and concepts are usually welcomed by groups, particularly if biology and physics have not been studied in school.
Examples that can be used are:
Two microscope slides can be placed together with water or oil between them to allow for easy movement across one another, but  trying to pull them apart without sliding the surfaces together is very difficult.
This demonstration helps in the understanding of a potential space (e.g. between the pleura).
Another example is the similarity of a piece of elastic to normal lung tissue and a piece of string to lung tissue in chronic chest conditions.
The stretching of the elastic explains the elasticity of lung tissue and that energy is required to stretch the tissue.
It is an active process.
Release and recoil of the elastic is passive, no energy being required.
The string demonstrates that energy is required to extend the string to its full length and that no elastic recoil is demonstrated on release of the string.
Similarly in chronic chest disorders recoil is diminished, and only by using the accessory muscle of respiration is air expelled from the lungs.
The value of models is:
1.
To simulate reality
2.
To enable class participation, individually or in groups.
3.
To complement worksheets and other teaching aids.
4.
To give the learner visual, tactile and aural stimuli, which increase the learning experience.
In summary the model may be used as part of a learning sequence, so the teacher must ask the question ‘has the learner the requisite knowledge and skills to enable further learning to take place?’
Exhibitions, visits etc.
Visits are only as good as the preparation made before them.
The exhibition or centre must be visited by teaching staff before the learners and an assessment made, which should include the following questions:
1.
What are the aims and objectives of the visit?
2.
Will the experience be of value to nurse education in its widest context?
3.
What interest will be satisfied by the visit?
4.
What preparation will be required?
5.
Will the centre require knowledge of the needs of the nurses, so that they use the visit to their best advantage?
6.
Do the learners need to spend more time in some areas than in others?
7.
Is a worksheet necessary?
8.
Can the group get to the centre easily?
9.
What will the total cost be?
10.
Will uniform or mufti be required?
Finally, allow time for discussion and evaluation of the visit.
Projected visual aids
Overhead projector.
The overhead projector is probably the most used teaching aid after the blackboard/chalkboard.
Indeed, it can sometimes be used as a board substitute but cannot entirely replace it.
(The device projects onto a screen by passing light through an acetate sheet approximately 25 x 25 cm.)
Storage of transparencies allows them to be used at a later date, therefore time spent in careful production is time well used.
Planning of the lesson sequence is important: what visual representations are required and what needs to be included on each transparency?
Would a series of transparencies be better than overcrowding one frame?
The projector has many advantages: for instance, pre-production of the acetate sheet enables better layout, drawing and writing.
Transparencies can be studied for longer periods than drawings on the board, and no time is consumed by drawing during the lesson.
However, there is a danger of giving too much information too quickly.
Additions can be made during the lesson by using permanent ink for the diagrams and using water-soluble pens for labels, which can be washed off later.
Intermittent use of the projector gives a change of teaching mode, thereby aiding and maintaining the interest of the class.
The image is bright and the use of brightly coloured pens adds stimulus variation.
The teacher can face the class at all times, thereby alleviating the tendency to talk to the board.
Highlighting important points is made on the projector,not on the screen.
Use a sharp pointed instrument, such as a pen or pencil.
If the finger is used, the image is partly obscured by the hand.
A further advantage of the projector is that it is cleaner to use than the chalkboard (Fig. 6.2).
Specialised uses:
1.
Overlays can aid the build up of complex subjects.
2.
Movement can be produced using silhouettes on the opaque screen.
3.
Commercially produced transparencies are now more widely available.
Disadvantages of the overhead projector are few, and mainly relate to technical breakdown, such as a bulb blowing, or the fuse   breaking.
Some modern projectors have an inbuilt device for quickly switching to a new bulb.
A broken one can be replaced at a more convenient time.
Making your own transparencies.
There are three thicknesses of acetate:
0.004 of 2.5 cm Flimsy
0.005 of ‘' Normal
0.007 of'’ Thick
Use a thick piece of cardboard at least 30 cm x 30 cm square as a firm base to work on.
Use A4 or quarto paper with narrow lines (6 mm) as a guide for lettering.
Place acetate on the top.
Cover with a cardboard frame — the acetate being centralised.
Hold all in place with paper clips.
The lined paper allows for clear writing; make sure that all letters are the same height as the narrow lines.
Letraset can be used, in which case the letters may be reduced to 3 mm.
The size of the letters will depend upon the size of the room and the distance that the image is to be projected.
(Fig. 6.3)
Diagrams must be clearly drawn with a good use of colour and labelled clearly.
Do not overcrowd the frame.
Place tissue paper between acetate sheets for storage, to prevent scratching.
Pens: Staedler — Lumicolour 315 washable ink pens (water soluble) Staedler — lumicolour 317  permanent ink pens (spirit soluble) Staedler also make a fountain pen (cartridge) useful when using the projector for writing during the class.
Pentel also make a range of pens which are excellent, especially as the felt tips do not become fuzzy with use and maintain their firmness.
Washable and permanent ink pens can be used in conjunction with each other; for example , a diagram can be drawn in permanent ink and labelled in washable ink.
This means that the labelling can be removed and the aid used as a recall test.
A ‘stock’ of  outlines, organs or microscopic structures of the body can be made in permanent ink.
Movement of fluids, molecules, etc. can be illustrated as necessary using washable ink and then removed, allowing re-use of the basic diagram.
Evaluation tests and quick quizzes can be given using acetates on the projector, written in permanent ink and the answers added later.
Coloured acetate sheets in yellow, red, blue or green are obtainable, but are more expensive than the ordinary transparent sheet.
They can be used for stimulus variation and they do reduce glare.
Cellofilm (cellophane in rolls) is disposable and relatively cheap.
The rolls are used on the roller bars fitted to the projector.
If you are preparing a lecture on the roll, care must be taken to ensure that the ink is dry before winding on, or else the result will be disastrous.
Heat from the projector will dry up ink in the pens more quickly than with preparation on the film beforehand.
Make sure the tops are replaced on the pens immediately after use.
Acetate marked in differing scales for graphs, shorthand and music are also available.
The graph paper is useful for the teaching of electrocardiograms.
Professionally finished coloured transparencies can be made using Transpaseal, which is adhesive on one side.
Cut the approximate size to be covered, take off the backing and stick over the area, removing any air bubbles.
Using a scalpel, cut off the surplus Transpaseal, without cutting through the base acetate.
Projector Letraset comes in red, blue, green and brown.
The letters are transferred clearly.
Film loops, films and video tapes.
Motion film can be more readily understood by the use of editing, decreasing the rate of the film and exploding motion sequences.
Difficult ideas can be made easier by the use of animation.
Movement compels attention, and the use of colour and sound heightens reality.
Photography via the microscope enables everyone to see the same view, and minute movements, e.g. phagocytosis of a bacterium by a white blood cell can be seen in motion and therefore be more easily remembered.
Films can be used to influence attitudes, as can video tapes, to an even greater degree.
Ward management techniques, human relationship skills, teaching skills and behaviour patterns can be filmed and played back to the group.
Discussion can follow about how these could be modified or improved.
for instance, could staff and equipment have been used more effectively?
Could the approach to the patient have been modified?
Did the nurse show  understanding of the patients' needs?
Care must be taken to introduce video tape technique gradually, as the experience can be traumatic for most people in the first instance.
In time, however, learners and trained staff welcome the opportunity to see themselves as others see them, and endeavour to improve their skills.
Film loops or mini-films are usually single concept films of a short length, say ten minutes.
Used as an integral part of teaching they lend themselves to workshops and multi-media situations.
Information is provided by the loop in cassette form.
If repeated showing is desired, this is possible until the idea is fully understood.
Revision can be assisted by the use of loops.
In nursing libraries a set of film loops of practical procedures can be made available, either for revision or to illustrate procedures that have not been available during a period of ward experience.
When one uses films for teaching, it is important that the teacher is fully aware of the films that are available.
Costs can be reduced if films are supplied under contract for a set number each month.
Teachers can improve their own demonstration techniques by observing methods shown in films.
Learners can evaluate a film not only for the content, but also for the teaching method.
The environment in which a film is shown is important.
Everyone must be able to see and hear, and the seating must also be comfortable.
Ventilation is vital to prevent microsleeps!
All teachers must be acquainted with the use of cine projectors.
Before the class the projector must be set up, seating arranged, and the screen put in place.
Make sure that black-out arrangements are available in the room.
Preview of the film is also important as questions posed before the film can aid attention and motivation.
Discussion of the film afterwards can aid the teacher in evaluating the effectiveness of the film.
Uses of film.
Research has shown that people learn from films and remember sequences.
Motivation is heightened, factual knowledge increased, and opinions may be modified.
Careful selection of films therefore aids learning.
Films used alongside other learning methods add stimulus variation, and motivate the learner.
This function is vital in student centred learning.
There must be an adequate basis of previous knowledge for learning to take place.
The film should reinforce existing knowledge and then introduce further topics, concepts and principles.
In this way, the learners are encouraged to extend their knowledge and skills.
Programmed instruction
Many schools of nursing today have teaching machines and books designed for programmed instruction.
The material to be learned is logically structured to achieve the presented objectives.
Programmed instruction allows the learner to set his own pace, and proceed to the next block of work only when the previous block has been fully mastered.
Many teachers try to compile their own programmed texts, but it must be said that this takes a great deal of time to prepare.
Setting precise objectives is important.
There are five main steps when compiling a text:
1.
State the behavioural objectives to be reached at the end of the programme, i.e. what the learner is expected to be able to do .
2.
Divide the material into planned blocks in order to achieve the objectives.
3.
Break down each block into discrete units of knowledge.
4.
Frame questions within each unit to test assimilation.
In each step the information has to be provided.
Ask pertinent questions or make statements in which the learner fills in the missing words, so that the student's understanding can be tested.
There must not be any ambiguous steps in the sequence, since the understanding of each step must facilitate the learning of the next step.
5.
Evaluate.
Try out the programme on a sample of appropriate students to test the reliability of the sequence.
It is important to determine, by a pre-test, the students' background knowledge.
A post-test will disclose what the student has learnt from the programme, and whether the objectives have been met.
Each time a teacher prepares a lesson, it should be put into logical sequence, and the preparation of a programmed text is an extension of this activity.
Programmes can be designed to provide comprehensive teaching, drawing on all nursing-related disciplines.
This type of sequence could be used to build up a picture of a patient suffering from a specific condition.
The programme would include the prerequisite knowledge for understanding the principles and concepts of the pathological process, the development of the abnormal body function and the skills required to nurse the patients and assess their short and long term needs.
An outline history of the patient can  be given to the learner including his socio-economic background and his emotional response to his illness.
By carefully sequencing the programme, the structure and function can be related to the signs and symptoms.
The nurse assesses the patient's needs and plans the care to meet the needs.
Programmed texts cannot replace the teacher, but do enable her to give more individual assistance to learners.
This involves time, which is a resource requiring careful planning.
By relieving the teacher of a heavy load of formal teaching sessions, time is released to assist learners in small groups or individually.
In turn, the teacher keeps herself up to date and maintains an active interest in motivating and guiding the learner.
Audio-aids
The spoken word is one of the most persuasive and common methods of communication, and remains so, despite the advent of television.
Hearing is one of the senses essential for communication, but it is very often the use of the spoken word which presents difficulty in understanding communication.
We do not always say what we mean to say, and leave ourselves open to misinterpretation.
This is particularly true of people with differing cultures and also of people under stress.
Nurses frequently have difficulty in conveying the exact meaning of messages to patients and relatives.
Because this skill is vital to a nurse, it must be developed by clinical teachers, tutors and the ward team.
Intonation is important.
The alteration of stress on certain words can completely change the meaning of a phrase or sentence.
In order to reinforce verbal communication, we also use non-verbal communication, such as gestures, posture or facial expressions, and these also need to be discussed.
Critical listening enables nurses to evaluate communication and this skill can be developed by using the radio and teacher-produced tape recordings.
A way of improving communications is to assist the learner to become sensitive to the sharing of ideas, discussion of topics and experiences.
The spoken word must be heard clearly.
We have all heard of the party game where a message is whispered form one person to the next: ‘Send up reinforcements, we are going to advance’.
The message at the other end has been distorted to produce send three and fourpence, he is going to a dance'.
If we speak, we must also  listen, and tape-recording is a good technique for evaluating our own communications.
Listening to fellow colleagues, patients and relatives is an important skill, but we should also teach nurses to be aware of what the patient or relative does not say.
Is the apparently overconfident patient too afraid to ask a direct question?
Is the implication of the answer something that he cannot cope with?
How does the nurse cope with these situations?
Hard and fast rules cannot be laid down as each individual situation varies, but if nurses participate in discussion and role play, it can help them to have more confidence when they experience the real situation.
They can learn from their mistakes at no cost to the relative or the patient.
To communicate effectively is an art which also presupposes the ability to listen.
In the teaching of the principles of group discussion, every member of the group should take turns in leading the discussion.
As the group becomes more experienced in discussion techniques, its self-confidence should increase.
Teachers leading discussions should ask the following questions:
1.
Does the attitude of the group facilitate discussion?
If not, why not?
2.
Has the teacher provided an environment where listening is possible?
3.
Has everyone been encouraged or allowed to speak?
4.
Are the students encouraged to express their own ideas in discussion?
5.
Are the students able to be constructive — not destructive?
6.
Are the group members flexible enough to accept ideas and opinions different from their own?
Patients and relatives can be brought into the classroom either in person, or in the form of a taped interview or talk.
A possible example of this might be their experiences of bereavement, pre/post-operative preparation, admission/discharge experiences.
Lectures may be recorded on to cassettes for ward or school teaching programmes.
Such recordings are useful if made available to learners for revision or to those who have missed the lecture.
Trained staff too might find recorded items valuable for their own continuing education.
The recognition of particular sounds has importance in nursing education.
Below is a list of sounds which could be useful to reinforce the spoken word:
1.
Systolic and diastolic pressure sounds
2.
Heart sounds
3.
Respirations
a.
obstructive airway disease
b.
Cheyne-Stokes respirations
4.
Bowel sounds — normal and abnormal
5.
Fleural and pericardial friction rubs
6.
Deaf aid simulations
7.
Alarm signals
a.
Fire
b.
Monitoring equipment
8.
Fire extinguisher release
9.
Oxygen valve blow-out
10.
Ward noises (night and day)
11.
Music used in psychiatry and during childbirth
Rationale for using sound aid:
1.
Increases retention of information
2.
Increases motivation of the learner
3.
Stimulates verbal discussion
4.
Demonstrates sound relationships
Workshops
In my introduction to this chapter and throughout its length, I have stressed the importance of the activity of the learner with the teacher acting as facilitator and co-ordinator.
A shop is where activity or industry is apparent, where items are sold.
Therefore, a workshop in the context of education is envisaged as a place where ideas are exchanged and new concepts and principles are introduced so that they can be discussed, accepted, or rejected by thinking learners.
The teacher has items for sale, and whether the learner buys will depend on her:
1.
Display of the goods.
2.
Encouraging the learner to see a need for the goods.
3.
Motivating the learner to buy the goods and use them to the best advantage.
In the workshop, theory and practice are more easily linked by displaying and making available material and practical work, side by side, each depending upon the other for full understanding.
Answers to such questions as:
1.
Why does it happen?
2.
How does it work?
3.
What is it for?
are provided by a range of resources available to the learner, permitting her to find her own answers.
Nowhere in a workshop is there room for the learner who wants to sit back and be spoon-fed with facts.
Good nursing hinges on the ability to assess, plan, provide and evaluate care for the patient in a given set of circumstances.
In other words, we must motivate our learner to think, and give her ample opportunity to do so.
Careful planning, co-ordination and evaluation of workshops are a must.
Unless the learner is given careful guidance in using such resources effectively, the whole process is a waste of time for all concerned.
How often do you hear learners complain What on earth are we expected to do?’ or ‘How do we go about it?’
Planning a workshop.
Firstly, a workshop must have a central theme.
This could be an aspect of patient care, such as the prevention of pressure sores, a comprehensive study of a specific health problem such as alcoholism, the problems resulting from a pathological process (e.g. atherosclerosis) or a study of homeostatic mechanisms.
Alternatively, the title could be ‘Care of the patient suffering from —’ or, ‘having difficulty with —’
When planning a workshop:
1.
Write down your aims and broad objectives.
2.
Set your behavioural objectives.
Ask what do I expect the nurses to do at the end of the workshop.
3.
Assess the facilities that are available.
Will you require one large room for the entire week, with subsidiary rooms for practical classes, formal lectures etc., or is one room sufficient?
What equipment will be necessary.
4.
Find out whether library facilities are available to nurses after 5 p.m.
If not, can the workshop be available to the learners and be manned by teaching staff after 5 p.m.?
This last factor will depend on the number of teaching staff in the school and working relationships within the department.
5.
Decide whether there are any linked educational visits e.g. visits to the community — homes of patients, clinics, health centres, prisons, factories, museums, schools — can provide a wider perspective than just looking at a topic from the hospital angle.
6.
Find out the learners’ initial state of knowledge.
If they are beginning their training, what is their educational background?
Having decided on your broad aims and objectives and any outside resources which may be required, you should then break these down into the knowledge and skills the nurse requires in order to complete the project.
Next, time-table the programme and identify the formal teaching sessions required to give the learners a firm basis on which to build.
This requires an awareness of their present state of knowledge.
Link up the theory and practical sessions into a meaningful and logical sequence, allowing time for individual study or small group work.
Decide what teaching resources you will need for the formal teaching sessions.
These sessions should be reinforced using the resources in the workshop and in the classes on clinical nursing care.
The overall design of the workshop will depend on structural facilities of the school and also the number of willing teaching staff.
One tutor or clinical teacher would find it impossible to work in isolation.
A team effort is required.
The pooling of resources, personalities and skills is essential for a forward-looking approach to education.
Furthermore, learners very often find a team approach to patient care productive since the caring team are seen,as a team , linking hospital and community services.
From the objectives a workbook must be planned.
Each learner should have a copy of the objectives.
A reading list must be compiled.
The librarian may be able to assist you with this, and also any tape-slide presentations or video tapes.
You may be able to have these resources in the workshop to enable group viewing if the number of students is large.
The design of the area will depend upon whether you have a practical room available (dissection, if you are including this, will require hand washing facilities), a reading area and somewhere for the provision of supplementary reading, and whether the library can be used.
Further resources
Models.
These are for the learner to use , to handle, take apart and put together again.
The student should identify the specific  parts and relate the structure to the function.
Real specimens too can be available so that the size of an organ, or the appearance of tissue can be appreciated.
Dissection of animal organs aids in the reinforcement of lectures -e.g. an ox heart, lambs' kidneys etc.
Instructions on how to dissect the organ must be given and guidance as to the parts the learner is to identify, draw, describe etc., based on the objectives.
Displays to illustrate important points .
Here, the use of charts, either commercially produced or designed by the teaching staff, are useful.
Nursing procedures can be shown effectively in display form, e.g. urinary drainage — what are the underlying principles involved?
What instructions must be given to nurses caring for the patient?
What special needs does the patient have if catheter drainage is implemented?
There are many aspects which can be considered using this layout.
Flip charts can be used either to give information, to describe a sequence of events, or to ask more searching questions for discussion later.
Dietetic treatments form an important part of treatment in some cases.
A display depicting the abnormal function, the dietetic correction and the principles involved, plus a display of foods available, can, with imagination, be depicted in visual form.
Co-ordination of the workshop
In order that the learner uses the workshop to the best advantage, a full introductory explanation must be given.
To some learners it may be a completely new experience.
Discussion should take place regarding the learning methods, i.e. practical work, discussions, role play, tutorials and individual study.
The workbook should be distributed at the beginning of the weekday, together with the aims and objectives for the shop.
If the workshop is planned to accompany a module of nursing experience, the ward and school objectives can be given so that the learner comes to see the ward and school staff as a complete team.
The workbook can include questions to answer, observations to make, care plans to complete and topics for essays to be written.
Reading lists including relevant research and articles from journals should be appended.
The learning that is expected from the accompanying ward experience can be made explicit, and here the names of the staff who might act as resource personnel can help the new learner particularly.
Projects (or nursing care studies) could be suggested  to complete in the ward situation.
Studies that reach a high standard can be  submitted for publication.
Last but by no means least, the book should include the learner's own evaluation of the workshop and a final evaluation of the complete learning module, both in the school and the ward.
How to use the workshop
Each learner should be assigned to a clinical teacher or tutor whom they should consult regarding individual difficulties.
The same teacher should also be responsible for group tutorials.
Teachers should be active when in the shop and approach the learners; sometimes the learner holds back because she feels she is the only one with difficulties.
The teacher can get together a small group to discuss problems.
In this way, each student gets individualised assistance according to her special needs.
Worksheets and hand-outs
What is the difference between a worksheet and a handout?
Sometimes it is difficult to separate the two, but basically a hand-out is a prepared statement complete in itself, whereas, a worksheet requires student effort to complete and should stimulate further work.
Hand-outs.
Learners like hand-outs, but they should not be used with monotonous regularity to echo everything the teacher says.
If this is the case, they will not be used by the student.
Hand-outs usually give information and therefore the information must be accurate and set out in such a way that it can be easily read and understood.
Difficult concepts can be illustrated on a hand-out as diagrams or graphs, backed up by short, clear, written statements.
The hand-out can be given out at the beginning of the learning session and used as a basis for teaching.
This ensures that each learner has a chance in class to go through the handout and study it.
The sheet can be retained for revision purposes.
The device ensures that the students have the correct information and avoids copious note-taking.
Hand-outs can also be given at the end of the teaching session or sequence.
For instance, to summarise small group work or seminars.
The information produced can be amalgamated and distributed to all the learners, so that everyone has the benefit of the work of the entire group.
At the end of a lesson, a hand-out  can summarise important points thus allowing full concentration and attention during the instruction.
I have already mentioned some information that can be included on a hand-out, e.g. reading lists, training plans, aims and objectives.
Diagrams, graphs, etc. may also be given as hand-outs.
Before preparing any hand-out, however, teachers must ask themselves why they are giving it and how they are to use it.
— Is it to be used in class, or as an evaluation tool?
Is it an objective that the learner be able to draw the particular diagram?
If so, would it be better if they reproduced it themselves?
Is it to be given to ensure that everyone has the correct drawing or to save time?
A diagram may be used to summarise a lecture, or group of lectures, or to outline a plan.
Any drawing must be large enough to be clearly seen and also set the standard for items produced by the learner.
Worksheets.
These provide a basis for further instruction, either with the assistance of the teacher, or for individual work.
Care must be taken to ensure that completed worksheets are evaluated.
A worksheet can be used as a preparation for role play.
Situations and characters to be portrayed can be set out for the learner on a worksheet.
Each student receives different instructions and this allows for spontaneity of reactions, thus making the situation more real.
Worksheets can provide feedback for the teacher.
They can be distributed at the completion of the teaching and worked through under test conditions, e.g. multiple choice, true false questions.
They can also be used to evaluate the teacher, when they might include questions such as:
1.
Do the students feel the teacher has enabled them to achieve the objectives?
2.
Was all of the teaching clear?
3.
Could the topic perhaps be put in a different way?
4.
Should anything else be included/excluded, stating the reasons why?
5.
Which aspects of the learning experience have been most enjoyable and why?
6.
Were the visits useful?
Whether it is a hand-out or a worksheet, a critical look is important.
One should consider the following:
1.
Does the hand-out/worksheet do what it is meant to do?
2.
Are the questions clear and unambiguous?
3.
If it is a test, is it valid?
Does it test what it sets out to test?
4.
Are the questions reliable?
5.
Is the information given up to date?
Should any additional references be included?
6.
Does the hand-out need revising in the light of new reports etc?
7.
Is the document motivating in its content and presentation?
8.
Does it assist the learner to be creative and outward-looking in her work?
In conclusion, when considering the inclusion of any teaching resource in one's teaching programme, one should bear in mind that:
The whole art of teaching is only the art of awakening the natural curiosity of young minds for the purpose of satisfying it afterwards.
Anatole France.