

A Lancashire Lad's Way to Fame and Fortune
‘I WAS A Tiller Girl.’
If you are eligible to say that, anyone over the age of forty will be impressed in the nicest possible way.
Usually dancers are leered at or looked down on whenever they mention their job, so why are Tiller Girls different?
It is extraordinary that their image of being hardworking, respectable and down-to-earth has lasted for so many years.
So strong are the memories of the Girls that whenever they announce a reunion, photographers and journalists are eager to record the event.
How many women can claim to have been a Tiller Girl?
It certainly runs into thousands.
And it all began in 1890 when a successful businessman, who could not dance a step, presented four ordinary little girls from Manchester in a pantomime at the Prince of Wales Theatre, Liverpool.
All over the country children worked in similar acts but this particular quartet,Les Jolies Petites , was fortunate.
Their mentor was brilliant at his job.
His name was John Tiller.
A standing ovation greeted the end of their encore on the opening night and such praise was lavished on the troupe during the run that Tiller resolved to give up his work in the cotton trade and throw in his lot with the theatrical profession.
He was thirty-six years old and had heavy family commitments; it was late in life to change course, but he had hankered after the theatre for years and now decided to follow his instincts.
He might have had thoughts of destiny but it is unlikely that even he could conceive that troupes of girls bearing his name would still be dancing nearly a hundred years later.
His true parentage was kept secret even from most of his family.
Far from having a rich father, he was the illegitimate son of Maria Frances Tiller, born in Blackburn on 13th June, 1854, when his mother was twenty-four years old.
The father was not named at the registration of birth; but maybe his mother took revenge on him when she added an unusual Christian name, Ibbotson, to follow the two commonplace forenames, John and Thomas.
The stark, blank space in the column listing ‘father's name and occupation’ on his birth certificate was to haunt him all his life.
He and his mother were to become defiant of officialdom and simply falsified information on official forms whenever they wanted.
When John was ten, he became a choirboy.
His ambition, which was to drive him so hard in later life, resulted in his being made choirmaster by the time he was fourteen — his first taste of authority.
His deep love of music moved him to take lessons with Dr Hiles,(later Professor of  Harmony and Composition at the Royal Northern College of Music) and the young Tiller showed an early flair by winning prizes for harmony while studying under him.
In 1872 his mother married a joiner called William Pointon.
By that time Maria was forty-two and her bridegroom only thirty-one, but with her usual disregard for red tape, she put down her age as thirty-three at the wedding ceremony.
All her life she refused to give her true age even after her young husband left her.
A year after her marriage she had her second and last child, Frederick William.
John himself was in no hurry to get married, he still lived with his mother in a small working man's house in Moss Side and enjoyed a good social life.
His uncle, John George, owned a highly successful cotton agency which was one of the largest in Manchester, and he had the wealthy lifestyle that his nephew craved.
His enormous merchant's house was full of beautiful furniture, glass, china and musical instruments.
Pictures and prints adorned his walls.
Fourteen servants waited on the family.
His stable contained not one but several carriages.
Here John learned to appreciate the material things in life and in later years he allowed journalists to make the mistake of attributing John George's wealth and position to him at this time.
The well-to-do uncle treated John as a son and took him into his expanding business.
He described himself as the ‘natural son’ of his parents on his baptism certificate, and this may explain the affinity he felt for the boy.
During the day John worked in the cotton trade, and in his spare time he devoted his energy to music and various activities, such as acting as the secretary for cricket clubs, always with the intention of promoting his business career.
At nineteen, marriage was thrust upon him when one of his many girlfriends announced she was pregnant.
Mary Carr was also nineteen.
She was a shy, retiring girl, always overwhelmed by her forceful bridegroom with his immense appetite for life.
At their wedding ceremony on Christmas Eve, 1873, John took embarrassing matters into his own hands and nominated a Thomas Tiller as his father and claimed to be of full age.
He certainly was in no hurry to marry poor Mary as she was already six and half months pregnant.
The couple went to live with his mother.
Soon the little terrace house became a hub of domestic activity when not only his first daughter Eleanor Elizabeth played with his half brother but they were joined two years later by his second daughter, Florence.
More children came with monotonous regularity; within eleven years a total of ten children were born (of whom three did not survive).
The eldest boy was endowed with the family name of John and the over-high expectations that the family had for their first sons.
The relationship between father and son was always strained and the child insisted on having himself called by his second name, Lawrence, from quite an early age.
At this point John Tiller's business was promising.
His uncle had entered him as a subscriber onto the Royal Exchange, Manchester, and made him a partner.
The contrasting characters of John and Mary are  clearly shown by the way each chose to describe his occupation when registering their children's births.
While Mary relegated him to ‘Manchester Warehouseman,’ John preferred the more optimistic ‘Cotton Manufacturer’!
However, by 1884 even his timid wife believed in his affluence as they had moved into a pleasant merchant's house in Didsbury where their youngest children, Walter and Jessie, were born.
His enjoyment of music now led him into more theatrical pursuits.
He had become a stage manager and officer of the Minnehaha Minstrels .
This was an enthusiastic amateur group, the members of which, all businessmen, would rehearse once a week in each other 's houses and then, blackening their faces with burnt cork, perform for charities in the Manchester theatres.
Whether their talent was as great as their enthusiasm is unlikely.
One performer was a deaf flute player who had the habit of playing long after the others had finished.
Whatever their standards, they were successful, collecting money for the charities whilst making good business contacts.
Typical of the streets of Moss Side where most of the Tiller pupils came from.
John lived in Granville Street from the age of 19.
Number 8 not only housed his mother, her husband and son but John's wife and first four children stayed there too
In 1885 John became director of the Comedy Theatre, Manchester, and in the same year he began teaching children to dance.
His early pupils practised for hours every Saturday afternoon amongst the bales of cotton in one of the firm's warehouses.
He also started to give lessons at his  home, but his wife swiftly showed her disapproval.
Already known to have a weakness for a pretty face, it was understandable that she worried now he chose to teach attractive young girls.
In their first public appearances these pupils performed tableaux and dances in church pageants, which were popular in the 1880s.
Then John made use of his position as director of the Comedy Theatre and arranged the children's dances in the pantomime.
In later, more celebrated, times he would always acknowledge this as his first theatrical experience.
It was in fact a humble beginning, for the cast was enormous and his crowd work was not exceptional; he received neither credit in the programme nor any mention in the press for his direction.
During the day things were not going well at work.
There certainly was trouble at the mill.
Although John was a partner every move was under his uncle's direction.
His cousin Samuel was now old enough to join his father and take his place as heir to the business, and the two young men were never compatible.
John George had long ceased to play the father to John: not only did he put his son first at all times, but his alcoholism made him extremely difficult to deal with.
The atmosphere between the three personalities was electric and one day there was a violent quarrel.
John stormed out and set up in business on his own.
The rift between the two younger men never healed after that quarrel, and their families never spoke again.
John Tiller led a fragmented existence at this time.
He carried on presenting dancers in an amateur capacity, but it was an activity that was taking up more time than he could afford.
He could not accept all the offers that were made, for he had after all to keep his large family of seven children in the manner he had chosen.
He was well placed in the cotton industry and it gave him a generous income; therefore it had to take precedence, but the monotony of arriving at the same place at the same time every day now bored him as much as had the mechanical frenzy of the bobbins when he arrived.
In the autumn of 1890 Tiller was asked to present a quartet of children at the Prince of Wales Theatre, Liverpool, in the pantomime Robinson Crusoe , subtitled The Good Friday That Came On A Saturday .
From his pupils in Manchester, he chose four tiny girls aged about ten.
Their names were Dolly Grey, Tessie Lomax, Cissy and Lily Smith.
He was exact in his choice; not only did they have the same slender shape and were equal in height, but they were malleable too.
They had to be.
Relentlessly he made them repeat every movement and worked them for hours on end until they were perfectly in unison.
Most evenings they were so exhausted they had to be carried home on their parents' shoulders.
They were the first of thousands of Tiller Girls who would feel like crawling home after rehearsals.
Every movement had to be perfect.
Every head had to turn simultaneously.
One early Tiller remembers:
We often cried with pain.
Our feet often became too sore and blistered to be put into shoes, so we walked home in our stockinged feet.
The sheet music published after the first quartet's appearance (The Raymond Mander & Joe Mitchenson Theatre Collection)
John's mother, Maria, who had often earned her living as a seamstress, made the lavish costumes; the cream-coloured dresses made up in a    pinafore smock style reaching just below the knee.
Each wore a blue sash at hip level, a matching bonnet, silk stockings and black shoes with a buckle.
Wearing quality materials like cashmere, they must have felt like princesses.
Their routine was not the high-kicking style that eventually made John's name.
Each child cradled a doll dressed in red and their first song was a lullaby, arranged by John, called Mamma's Babee .
Clap hands and clap hands till Dada comes home,
Baby had gum drops though Mamma has none.
Hush-a-bye baby, Dada
is near,
Mamma's a lady that's very clear.
John was so sure of an encore that he rehearsed the girls in a burlesque version of a quartet from the Gaiety Theatre in London, and in a later scene they performed a coconut dance — a long-established feature of theatre and street dance of the time.
They certainly had a protective manager in John Tiller but the little girls were overwhelmed by their new way of life.
They were now thirty-odd miles away from the Manchester slums where they had been brought up, a distance that put them beyond the range of mobility of their families, who could not afford to visit them.
The law demanded that they attend school for the few hours they were not in the theatre, but time spent on education was minimal as the pantomime was so popular that there were matinées most days.
The curtain went up at 2 pm, so the children had to arrive at the theatre at about 1.15 to get ready.
The production lasted well over three hours, and then it was soon time to get ready for the evening performance.
A matron chaperoned them at all times, trekking them from digs to school, on to the theatre and finally back to their digs at night, the crocodile of children walking slower as the day progressed.
Tiller was a stickler for cleanliness, so she was told to be strict in supervising their washing (for some this was as novel an experience as appearing on stage).
The pantomime continued for three months.
It was a clockwork existence for the children, but the rapturous applause more than compensated for their tiredness at the end of the day.
They were made to write home once a week, proudly enclosing copies of their glowing write-ups from the newspapers, hoping that a neighbour could be found to help out with any reading difficulties.
As a final honour, normally reserved for either managers or principal performers, the troupe were allowed a benefit performance.
Gifts from colleagues in the show and admirers in the audience would be presented on stage.
Gold-topped walking canes or cigarette cases were typical presents of the time; the girls received numerous bouquets, and (from the producer, Captain Wombwell) a gold brooch each.
The entire box office receipts were normally given to the lucky artiste.
This was to compensate in some way for the rather poor salaries.
In this instance it is unlikely that the children received any financial reward.
John's fee was his first professional one and would only just cover the expenses of presenting the act.
Once John Tiller made the decision to become a professional manager, his business acumen surfaced.
He treated the benefit performance as a showcase for his work.
He devised a special programme, teaching the girls a new song and dance called The Little Gypsies and this earned their usual encore.
He also added another number called The Little Musicians , which was performed by four slightly older children.
He gave two solos to girls who repaid him by becoming loyal workers for many years.
Little Dollie Bell recited a sad ballad entitled At the Stage Door .
The second soloist was billed as ‘Bessie Cowan, aged 11, who will perform a sailor's hornpipe’.
She was, in fact, Bessie Cohen, who later rose to fame as a music hall soloist.
She had a more bohemian background than any other Tiller pupil.
Her father had come from Lithuania and started working as a tailor's presser, then he ran a clothes shop in the parlour of his house in Strangeways.
Bessie was at a strict Jewish school at the time of her début and was expelled publicly for appearing in the theatre.
The earliest photo of any group of Tiller Girls.
Taken c.1891 it includes Bessie Cohen (second right) who later became a successful Music Hall soloist
After their pantomime season,Les Jolies Petites toured for a year at  various dates all over the country, always getting an excellent reception.
Their relatives were overjoyed that they could see them on stage when they returned to their home town in the summer for a couple of weeks at the prestigious new Palace of Varieties.
Their popularity resulted in Tiller getting a request not only to train the children and arrange the ballets but also to present a quartette of ‘lady’ dancers for the 1891 pantomime The Fair One with the Golden Locks at the Comedy Theatre, Manchester.
He called this group the Tiller Quartette and the girls were Annie Johnson, Patti Bell, Madge Vernon and Amy Knott.
Amy had had previous theatrical work and soon became one of his principals.
In truth this troupe did not receive the idolatry that his juveniles had aroused the previous year, but they must have pulled up their silk stockings because when they went on tour later one reviewer did describe them as:
…a charming set of young ladies who shine out prominently as sprightly vocalists and dancers, whose contributions to the programme are received with much favour.
Two groups appeared: the Tiller Ballet and the Tiller Combination of Eight Ladies .
The word ‘ladies’ often figured in John's description of his dancers.
He was at great pains to ensure that the public did not associate his performers with the bad name that dancers usually had.
It was to be the golden rule that no Tiller would have a hint of scandal about her: a difficult task for the pretty vivacious girls from the poor streets of Moss Side.
Suddenly they were wearing expensive clothes on and off stage, taking cabs everywhere, men were showering them with gifts in an attempt just to be seen with them.
It was difficult to keep their feet on the ground when they read about themselves in the newspapers:
I am more than pleased to see the Tiller troupe remain.
My good friends of masher persuasion are in seventh heaven when they have the opportunity of admiring eight pretty faces.
Eight sylphlike forms and eight pairs of dainty, twinkling feet and ankles.
The rest of mankind and womankind also admire the physical attractions of those maidens and are roused to enthusiasm by their perfect dancing.
Of course we must have cartwheels and the maiden to whose lot it had fallen to perform this important feature of the dance so very neatly and prettily is recalled.
Several bouquets were handed up and no doubt well received.
Mr Tiller has a worldwide reputation as a manager and trainer of vocalists and  terpsichorean troupes and this one certainly does him credit.
Sir, I don't think I'll go to the Grand next week, I'm getting susceptible and it's a bit bewildering when there are eight and all in one troupe.
The Tiller troupe is a terrific turn.
I should think so when there are eight fascinating female forms in it, turning, twisting, pirouetting and corkscrewing about the stage at any one time.
It is enough to turn the brains of all the gilded youth of Hull.
John had improved the standard of girls in the line, while other dancers in the commercial theatre tended to be ragged.
A Producer would simply  form a scratch troupe and almost throw them on stage.
A mixture of shapes and sizes often working next to each other— fat, thin, tall and small.
An ambitious dancer would kick high above her head, desperate to be noticed, while beside her another might hardly bother to lift her leg.
Managers found it impossible to maintain discipline: if a girl found a man to keep her for a while, she would ‘scarper’(disappear).
Replaced by a stagestruck girl of fourteen, recruited locally, she would be superficially trained in a matter of hours by the Head Girl then, absolutely terrified out of her wits, be put on stage the same night to pacify the Producer, for having paid for eight costumes for a number, he usually insisted on eight bodies filling them, whether or not they knew the routine.
If two girls applied for the job then the one whose shape filled the costume got the job.
Even with a few days' rehearsal it was an unnerving experience.
It was unknown for Tiller's dancers to scarper and his replacements would be thoroughly rehearsed rather than discredit him.
The Gaiety Girls were the most fêted troupe at this time.
They had high opinions of their value on stage, which made them rather undisciplined.
One was notorious for talking on stage, to the annoyance of the principals who were desperate to get the attention of the audience.
Seymour Hicks, the famous singer, once became so infuriated that he stopped the orchestra in the middle of his song, turned to the girl and snapped, ‘Dear Lady, shall you finish your story or shall I finish my song?’
There was a stunned silence on stage and in the audience.
She looked him straight in the eye and said, ‘Do you know, dearie, it's a matter of the utmost indifference to me what you do.’
Such strict training was given by Tiller that none of his dancers would have contemplated talking in the first place.
It may have been a glamorous enough life on stage and, despite the famous Tiller ethos, at the stage door, where the young lads who laid siege to the girls came to be known as Stage Door Johnnies.
But behind the scenes it was a different story.
Hardened professionals were disgusted by the so-called dressing rooms.
A comedian of the time described them in The Stage :
Two dressing rooms, one for the gentlemen, one for the ladies, all beautifully decorated with cobwebs and dust, the accumulation of years and uncovered stone floors.
The room I shared with others had evidently been a cellar under the street.
Water oozed out of the walls and as each night wore on, the heat distilled a fetid and poisonous atmosphere.
Clothes laid briefly against the wall became wet.
A pail of cold water for washing was set on the floor so that performers had to bend over to use it.
A cupboard measuring six foot by six foot for the ‘star’ actress.
Outside these dressing rooms runs a corridor — in other words a haunt of rats — at the end of which there is a water closet which gives off the most terrible stench, enough to upset the stomach of any weak person.
This is a specimen of our dressing rooms, but not by far the worst, as I know of one in the North of England where a corner of the floor is submerged in filth and water.
Tiller's child dancers could not offset the grim conditions backstage with an exciting nightlife as adult performers could.
Obviously, no stranger was allowed to approach them after a performance, and certainly no gifts were to be accepted.
They were whisked away from the theatre by an ever vigilant matron, who stood over them while they had their dreaded wash with cold water from the jug and basin in their room.
They would tour all over the country for wages of a few shillings a week.
Their education suffered, naturally:
On Mondays you went to the nearest school.
Not that you did much, you'd be going from class to class entertaining the kids with your dances and stories.
They didn't believe the names of some of the acts; Dulcie Laing, the serio and legmania dancer, Mademoiselle Hilarius and her demon pig Tordaunt, so we used to do impersonations of them…
Every week we would have to adjust to new teachers; it made us adaptable but didn't do much for our education.
Then we'd come back to the digs, wash our hair, have a wash if we were lucky, then on to the theatre.
We had two performances a night and a Saturday matinée as well…
We often had to sleep four to a bed.
‘Top and Tail’ we called it.
We soon learnt to notice if a bed was pulled away from the wall.
If it was, that meant there were livestock in the room and the landlady had done that to stop these things falling from the wall onto the blankets.
We would have to pack up everything carefully on a Saturday night and travel on a Sunday.
It became terribly hard in the winter.
Tiller's organization was efficient and matrons were vetted strictly, but a few negligent ones did slip through:
There was one matron when I was eleven, who was horrible.
Mr Tiller used to come to tea every Sunday but we were too frightened to tell him about anything.
I always remember the custard was lovely on a Sunday, the rest of the week it was like water.
When we used to go out in the street, I would be on one side of the matron holding her arm, my sister on the other side doing the same.
We used to say ‘First we go up, then we go down’ as we lifted her up and down…
Behind her back we would say to each other, ‘She's drunk again’.
She used to get tight regularly.
It was hard to keep a juvenile troupe together for any length of time.
Children had the unfortunate habit of growing too tall, whereupon they would be sacked so the few shillings earned were lost to a family that might well depend on them.
If a girl had two parents still at home, she had to get written permission from both of them before performing.
Women were more eager than their husbands to sign the note.
‘Let her go,’ they might say, ‘give her a chance to see the world, after all who is she going to meet round here?’
Hardly diplomatic but the man was persuaded.
Another favourite argument was the fact that the girls received training.
It was like an apprenticeship, and such a thing was rare for girls.
Great store was set on the word ‘training’.
It proudly appeared on many programmes.
‘The Lamp Scene in which 200 trained children appear’ was typical.
Other fathers were often unemployed and jealous of a child bringing home a weekly wage: understandable if they had a daughter like Dolly Ashby:
I'd run all the way home, put it on the table and say, ‘There you are, I'm better than you, our Dad!’
Many had a puritanical objection to stagework.
Even when Martha Sissons was a hundred years old, her father's disapproval was her strongest memory:
I was always afraid of me father.
If he had known I was on the stage, he'd have murdered me.
So me mother used to keep it dark.
It was the seven shillings wages I was worried about, but I used to give that to me mother.
I used to tap dance, high kick, do splits, pull my legs up at the back of my head.
I was a clever little girl.
I started when I was nine and carried on till I was fifteen but I didn't turn round (spin) very good.
I got so bad I couldn't do it so I gave up.
John faced a continual turnover with his juvenile troupes.
His first one,Les Jolies Petites , disappeared after its tour of England and Tiller never used the name again.
Possibly Northern audiences found the French an affectation as the original subtitle, the Excelsiors , was used many times.
He now formed two child duets.
The Forget-me-nots were billed as ‘the smallest song and dance act’ and eventually blossomed into a team of eight, fronted by Amy Knott.
The other duet was called the Sisters Iris .
John heard Cissie Iris, the elder girl, singing a song with the principal boy from the circle during the show.
Never off duty for a moment, he took her into his training school and soon gave her a booking in his spectacular,Jack and Jill .
She progressed eventually to the title role, playing it 500 times.
Tiller waited until her younger sister was capable of putting over a song and dance, and then sent them off touring the country as a double act.
Although he preferred to train dancers from the age of nine, by the time the pantomime season came he had so many to cast he had to accept adults and teach them after they had finished a day's work.
Emma Southworth went with two of her workmates to classes every evening after she finished at the mill.
She remembered that John's only rehearsal place at the time was in a long room above a sundry warehouse in Lower Moseley Street.
She thought ‘Mr John’ was very strict but kind.
He had a long stick which he would place under their legs when doing the high kick to indicate where it should reach.
She spoke of tears at times until they got it right but accepted the suffering as he had no favourites and called them all his ‘dolly girls’.
There was no tea break but Mr John and a woman, who she thought might have been a chaperone, would go into a little room at the end, where she fancied they had a nip or two.
Tiller's theatrical enterprises were expanding so fast it became inconvenient to use his warehouse during the evenings and at weekends, so he took over part of St James's Hall in Oxford Street, Manchester, adjoining the St James's Theatre.
Now that he had premises that could be used day and night, he made sure his talents and availability were known.
He placed regular advertisements in a trade journal,Music Hall , listing the troupes and soloists that were available with references to their most prestigious bookings.
In return,Music Hall carried photographs and articles about Tiller's achievements, so spreading his fame still further.
No previous dance troupe manager had attacked the entertainment world so vigorously.
Of all his soloists, Bessie Cohen had pride of place.
Her sister Anne, too, was later billed as ‘little Annie’.
Bessie often fronted one of his most successful lines, the Troubadours .
They consisted of six, occasionally seven, statuesque women in the style of the day.
Putting his Minnehaha Minstrels experience to good use, Tiller trained them to play banjos and mandolins, and to sing in harmony as well as high kick.
They toured the country for many years with great success.
He also taught the mandolin to four small girls and called them the Fairy Four .
They went out to South Africa for Luscombe Searelle, an ostentatious gentleman who advertised the fact that he owned theatres in Johannesburg and Kimberley.
He organized his shows with military precision, gaining the admiration of Tiller, who became his British representative.
Bessie Cohen (centre) and her colleagues at a rehearsal of the Troubadour act c.1895
Searelle invited artistes to contact him by first writing to John, who thus  became responsible for their standards.
Eight companies consisting of twelve acts were sent out at ten-week intervals, and the actual length of engagement was twelve weeks.
Settled in his large premises in Manchester, John devised a pastoral ballet called Rustic Revelry .
It was a brilliant exercise using one hundred children, trained of course, with only a handful of principals.
The entire production including scenery, props and wardrobe would be transported from town to town and then most of the children recruited locally.
The show was flexible and he could slot his best troupes in and out, thus ensuring a regular wage for them and constantly rehearsed lines for him, all ready at a moment's notice to go to South Africa, the continent or the best halls in London.
In 1893 the Forget-me-nots were billed us the ‘smallest dancers on the variety stage.
They were vocalists us well us dancers.
The boy featured is one of John's few boy artistes: Little Barnette
In 1893 he extended his theatrical pursuits well beyond dance arranging when he became producer of the summer season show at the Palace Theatre, Isle of Man.
All his favourite soloists appeared, many fronting his best troupes; Amy Knott with the Forget-me-nots , Bessie as usual with the Troubadours and Maggie Rimmer and the new Rainbow troupe who slipped off during the run to do a couple of weeks at the London Pavilion and the Oxford, then returned to complete the season.
He was also presenting ballets in a similar format to Rustic Revelry .
He called them spectaculars and would set up the storyline, do the lyrics and librettos with J. J. Wood and co-write the music with Cuthbert Clarke.
Costumes and sets were also made under his supervision.
Having found a successful formula, he kept to it.
Within a year he could provide eight spectaculars, all ingeniously flexible to fit one- to three-hour bookings.
He kept many numbers simple enough for local children to perform (The  Grand March of the 64 Flower Gatherers was typical) and of course every show could guarantee House Full signs, with relations and friends packing the theatre every night.
Although he could be seen at rehearsals of his shows in small English towns, Tiller was an international name now.
On the continent his troupes were popular in Germany and had regular bookings at the Paris Olympia and the Casino de Paris.
A trio of premier dancers trained by him toured in George Edwards' Gaiety Girl companies in America and Australia.
His business enterprise knew no bounds.
He set up a Christmas Carnival, taking over the entire St James's hall and theatre complex, putting on side shows and trade exhibits.
He also set up a theatrical agency with a J. H. Milburn.
The partnership was not a success, however, and within six months Milburn took it over and amalgamated with Nathan and Sommers.
Sarah Wood showing the elegant costumes that John provided c.1905
Whilst keeping his Manchester activities going, his most important move in the late 1890s was to take rooms at Trafalgar House, Great Newport Street, in London.
Not only was it more convenient for his financial deals in international negotiations to be done there, but he needed more dancers.
He had accepted so much work that he was committed to supply a hundred dancers for the pantomime season alone.
He had trained all the suitable women in the Manchester area.
It had been years since he could supply pupils solely trained by him.
But even with his new London base it was impossible to gather enough talent from both his schools for the coming Christmas, so he advertised for dancers in the trade papers and took a chance that he could knock them into shape.
The new school was called the Tiller Training School and Lyric Academy.
The move to the capital was a great upheaval for the Manchester girls, for not only did they now have to rehearse in Sin City as they called it, but they also had to work with Londoners.
The two sets of girls might just have well come from two countries at war.
Accents were so strong they could not even understand each other.
The northerners thought the others posh and ‘mardy’(affected), while in return they were found to be coarse and vulgar.
There was no doubt, however, in Tiller's mind, as to which group worked harder.
Until the day he died, he would praise his northern girls above all others.
All Tiller Girls loathe the description ‘chorus girls’: its offensiveness dates from this time.
As a troupe they were paid to perform their own ‘spech’(speciality number).
In pantomime or musical comedy they might also be required to appear in production numbers with the rest of the company but true chorus dancers were always kept in the background.
The best shows in London had girls who worked as showgirls.
The difference?
Dancers danced and showgirls ‘showed’.
The latter wafted about but certainly never danced.
Men in the audience would fall in love with the beauty of these women who did little else but walk about in beautiful costumes.
Newspaper articles now called John's dancers ‘Tiller's Girls’.
Like Gaiety Girls they had been judged worthy of a separate identity.
From now on the capital G would always be used in reference to them.
By the turn of the century, which was only ten years since his first professional engagement, John Tiller had amassed a great fortune for himself whilst changing the lives of working-class girls by giving them good wages and a career.
He was to continue to revolutionize dance in the commercial theatre and become the most successful dancing master of his time.
Blackpool Children Get Their Chance
IN 1900 Tiller had an idea for a routine which excited him so much he could hardly wait to show it to the public.
The number was extremely complicated so realising that completion would take some time, he took out advertisements a year before of the first performance and announced that bookings would be accepted for the unseen act.
The Mystic Hussars , as it was called, proved to be so popular and successful that it was performed for over 40 years.
Rival troupes gave so many imitations that its inventor was forgotten.
Of all routines that ex-Tillers recall, the ‘Hussars’ gives the most pleasure because of the overwhelming response from the audience.
The Mystic Hussars routine was performed for years.
Ethel Helliwell is seen checking the electric wiring which made possible the spectacular effects
As the front curtain rose, the entire stage was blacked out by drapes which also concealed twelve doors at regular intervals.
All the audience saw were twelve soldiers marching slowly towards them apparently from miles away.
This illusion was achieved by slightly blinding them with blue lamps facing them and lowering dummy bodies from the flies.
At the point when the puppets disappeared behind the doors, there was a crash of music.
Exactly at the same time the Girls, who had each been standing behind a door, burst through and on to the stage.
They wore white military costumes in the style of musketeers; the fabric was impregnated with luminous paint which glowed as they marched and countermarched in the stage blackout.
Then each Girl put her heels into a small square on the stage floor, connecting up with the power source.
The girls were wired up so that the current lit up their cockades and enabled their swords to give off sparks as they fenced.
This startling routine delighted the audience so much that they usually refused to let the show continue until an encore had been performed — often two.
Many hours of tears and frayed tempers were suffered in order to complete this intricate routine.
John had a vision of what he wanted, but not being able to dance, was absolutely frustrated at times trying to get over his ideas.
‘Christ almighty,’ he would shout, slap his forehead, slam down his walking cane and storm out.
He'd cool off while he took a walk.
The Girls were not highly trained dancers and were frankly terrified of him.
In press interviews he arrogantly stated that the Italian schools of dance were too exacting, too inflexible.
He claimed his pupils never came to hate their work.
Certainly all reports spoke of genuine smiles on the Girls' faces, of their brightness and animation.
Elsie Parker had ‘lived in’ during her training.
Her description is at odds with Tiller's.
She maintained that you simply stood and watched the other Girls; this was called ‘sitting at the side of Nellie’(Nellie or Eleanor being the only daughter John allowed to take part in the business.).
Anne Liddy agrees there was no real training: ‘In Tiller's you didn't learn, you just followed on.
Copied it.’
It was not difficult for Anne since she had been encouraged by her father to practise her clog dancing on the kitchen hearth.
Together they would go to the Tivoli and Grand Theatres in Manchester, and when they got home he would get her to imitate the dances she had seen.
Anne decided to get into Tiller's troupes.
She lived in Salford and was so poor that she often had to walk all the way to Manchester to rehearse.
John was delighted, not only with her considerable ability but also with her smallness, and put her into the Manchester Mites .
The Mites did a great deal of touring and were given outdoor clothing, often a hooded cloak, socks and shoes, even a suitcase each.
This helped the really poor to look equal to the more affluent while at the same time providing a walking advertisement for John Tiller.
As a sign of their professionalism, each had her own make-up box.
They were supervised by a Miss Walker who, although she could not dance, also watched over their dances and made them up every night.
This was a simple job as the aim was to look younger than their years: flesh colour for the face, blue greasepaint smeared on the eyelids and a little rouge on their cheeks.
Experiences with digs, good and bad, Anne Liddy took in her stride:
We went into one place and there was a carpet on the sitting room floor, it was nicely set out.
When we got back, they'd taken the carpet and some of the furniture away.
Plenty of bed bugs, they would drop on top of you.
You got out as quickly as you could the next morning otherwise they could get into your skin.
Often sleeping four to a bed, they made up this rhyme:
‘When dancers sleep in a bed,
Four at the bottom
Four at the head,
You scratch their noses
And they tickle your toes-es.’
Anne remembers sleeping seven to a bed but at ninety-six years of age was still puzzling out where the eighth member of the troupe ended up.
She would creep down the stairs in the middle of the night to raid the larder, hoping to cut a slice from one of the enormous cheeses stacked there, trusting the landlady would not notice.
Her worst fright on one of these ventures was seeing what appeared to be fluorescent fish on a single stick.
These turned out to be a row of haddocks.
The Manchester Mites were a huge success.
When they worked in their home town, the audience would queue round the block to see them perform twice nightly.
They were usually billed as the star attraction so John obviously made a good profit out of them but they were still paid at the same rate as all his juveniles, five shillings a week.
Their pay was, however, increased when he loaned them to Madame Rasimi to work in Lyons and Bordeaux, and they were proud to be able to send almost ten shillings weekly to their mothers.
Now that he had established himself in London with a training school and offices, John decided to expand his headquarters in Manchester.
He moved from St James's Hall to a large, sedate house in Lime Grove, and swiftly converted it into a combination of a commercial office, a factory and a school of physical culture.
A staff of clerks dealt with correspondence, typing lyrics and dialogues and hand-copying band parts.
There were small studios for authors and composers to work in.
An army of seamstresses repaired costumes and cut and sewed new ones, working in a room that resembled a large draper's shop with dozens of drawers from ceiling to floor, each crammed with accessories and shoes.
The property room looked like a theatrical battlefield with masks and armour lying around in different stages of completion.
There was a gymnasium equipped with ropes, Indian clubs, parallel bars and fencing equipment.
The largest area, a hall in which Tiller claimed he could train 200 pupils at any one time, was dominated by three enormous mirrors that would show the girls their mistakes.
Curiously there were no barres, the rails at hip height used for ballet practice.
Though the business was thriving, there was one aspect that gave him great concern and over which he was powerless to exercise any sort of  control.
The Girls were so attractive that his relations were courting them and marrying the most beautiful ones behind his back.
It was natural for the Girls to go out with men but Tiller was possessive and seemed to expect them to remain single until they were about thirty years of age, then quietly fade away.
When one of them married he gave the impression of feeling betrayed.
His first loss was Marie Millward.
She was one of his favourite leading ladies.
Only two of his performers were ever allowed to place individual advertising cards in Music Hall:Bessie Cohen and Marie.
When, of all people, his estranged cousin Sam suddenly married Marie in 1902, not only was John annoyed, but there was outrage on both sides of the highly intolerant Tiller family.
Sam found himself completely cut off by his own side of the family, who considered he had married beneath him; while John had a furious row with him because he did not think Sam good enough for Marie.
The beautiful Elizabeth Tomkins who worked for John for seven years before marrying his second son, Robert
The couple had a daughter, Marjorie, who grew up deprived of contact with paternal relatives and excluded from any news of John and his work.
The little girl persuaded her mother to share some of her memories of her dancing life, though in secret from Sam: and it was not long before Marjorie inevitably developed an ambition to become a Tiller Girl herself.
Then John's second son, Robert, married the stunningly beautiful Elizabeth Tomkins who had been dancing for seven years.
Robert had never been a healthy man and found it difficult to earn a living.
As his family began to grow, money was hard to come by so he became a clerk for his family and John cannily gave dressmaking work to his new daughter-in-law to help them survive whilst getting good value for money for himself.
Just as she had been a conscientious dancer, she now became an equally conscientious needlewoman.
Elizabeth toiled for hours on end and her children remember her machine going non-stop.
Great wicker baskets were trundled in and out of their home but she never complained nor spoke of regretting the end of her dancing life.
The Tiller fame and fortune had also become an attraction for hangers-on to members of his family.
Nellie, the eldest child and closest to John, married an aspiring theatrical agent and manager, Percy Rimmer.
He was immediately dubbed a ne'er-do-well and a bad lot by the family, and the Girls quickly learnt to get out of his reach whenever he was around.
They had to meet up with Nellie a great deal as she was supervising the school's wardrobe.
If they mentioned him, she would mutter, ‘Don't talk to me about that rat.’
This confused the Girls' uncomplicated minds as they knew the couple were still living together.
Eventually Nellie got rid of Percy Rimmer and replaced him with Robert Clarke, who did Tiller's stage effects.
Dumpy, down-to-earth Nellie faced facts and realised people would spot the difference in age between herself and Robert, so decided to confuse them all by calling him her adopted son.
He, at least, kept his hands off the Girls but he did flirt with Nellie's young nieces whom he would take out on the quiet.
John's wife Mary and daughters
To add to John's uneasiness at seeing his Girls and family mingling to his loss, there was deep concern about his wife.
For many months a nurse had been taking care of Mary, described by everyone as a gentle, retiring  person.
She was seriously ill with cancer of the womb.
She had never been involved in his business and as it grew, saw considerably less of her husband.
Now she was literally wasting away, and his visits were still infrequent.
Her unmarried daughters Florence, Bertha and Jessie, however, lived at home and gave her what comfort they could.
Mary died in February, 1905, aged fifty.
Only twenty months later, John married his second wife Jennie.
His children appeared to feel no bitterness about her stepping so swiftly into their mother's shoes.
She never attempted to take Mary's place, but simply extended her considerable warmth and kindness to them.
There is no doubt that Jennie Walker had played quite a part in John's life before they were married.
She had been given a programme credit for making dresses several years before.
She had been supervising classes at the Manchester school and was, in fact, the Miss Walker that Anne Liddy remembered making her up on tour.
It is highly likely that she was the same woman that Emma Southwick imagined was having a nip with Tiller in the back room during rehearsals way back in the St James's Hall times.
From the start Jennie was surrounded by gossip.
It was rumoured she had been a barmaid, heady stuff in those days.
The combination of the sophisticated impresario with his driving ambition and the outspoken Newcastle woman with her earthy language and manner to match, made them appear a strange couple.
John, of course, had long since lost his northern accent and took delight in his appearance as the well-heeled businessman.
Whatever their difference on the surface, their union was excellent for business.
She was to remain childless and showered all her love on every single Girl at the school.
She scoured the streets in the poorer areas looking for likely candidates and then, knowing the reality of poverty, taught them the rules of hygiene in her own way, which the Girls would imitate and laugh at behind her back.
‘You have a bath and powder well in between,’ she would say, oblivious of their embarrassment.
She would give money to them to have their hair done.
‘Go and get your hair crimped and tinted.’
The canny ones would simply have their hair set and buy a good meal with the remainder.
She would never notice that the hair had not been done.
Jennie was already a dynamic force in John's business by the time they were married and almost to celebrate it, when he had a publicity brochure printed with engraved illustrations of the dancers, pride of place went to portraits of himself and his bride.
There always had been ambivalent feelings between father and oldest son.
At the wedding ceremony, when the usual problem of naming his father had arisen, John put ‘Lawrence Tiller (deceased)’ but his son was called Lawrence, was still alive and now a man of twenty-nine, working as general manager in the business.
His flirtatious manner was a cause of great concern to John; he had lost too many dancers to marriage with his own relations, but had reckoned without his secretary, Amy Bradley.
She had set her sights on Lawrence and married him within a year of John's own ceremony.
At Easter in 1900 John Tiller produced his first show at the Winter Gardens Pavilion, Blackpool.
The Tiller Quartette appeared in Jack Ashore ; it was described as a ‘Patriotic Spectacle’ and set in 1805 in a  village in Cornwall.
By the summer, the same show had been enlarged and retitled Jolly Jack or The Heart that Beats for a Sailor .
The programme claimed that there were 100 artistes in the cast.
Admission was sixpence and the elegance of the audience was mirrored in a programme note: ‘Ladies of the Pavilion Stalls are kindly requested to remove their hats’.
This was the time when hats resembled wedding cakes with layers of chiffon, tulle, feathers and even birds.
Elizabeth Tomkins in the lead role in ‘Jolly Jack’ c.1901
This production in 1900 started a long association with Blackpool.
John quickly became intimate friends with Mr Huddlestone, the general manager of the Winter Gardens complex, and together they produced more scenes and numbers during the summer season and well into the autumn.
The shows that year were such a success with holiday-makers and residents that they continued to produce entertainment there for twenty-five years.
Tiller was allowed complete freedom of ideas, an opportunity he readily grasped.
Excited by the countries he saw on his travels, he wanted to share his impressions with the audiences and did so in scenarios such as From Monte Carlo to Japan .
His fondness for rustic scenes inspired The Quaint Old Village of Honeysuckle Hollow .
One year he produced a comic sketch called The Magic Hotel or How Tommy and his Uncle Herbert Spent a Quiet Night .
Usually the spring show was a rehash of the summer show from the previous year.
Repeating numbers would quickly get the artistes in trim and once the show was on they would start rehearsing for the main summer production and perform at the same time.
A patriotic number was always featured.
Tiller usually co-wrote the music, always visualized the scenic designs, executed them and also supplied the stage properties, charging the Winter Gardens management for all services.
It was the same moneymaking format as his touring spectaculars.
After the season the show would tour the country with a few troupes from the original cast and local children appearing in the large scenes.
Local children were very keen to get work for the long season at Blackpool.
There was a rival organization at the Tower Ballroom headed by Madame Pauline Rivers who had established a good reputation years before Tiller arrived.
Young though they were, her pupils knew she could not provide the amount of professional work that he had to offer.
Little Ethel Helliwell heard about John's auditions while in the middle of a rehearsal for the Tower show:
Although I was only nine, I was determined to get in.
I pretended to see a pin on the floor.
I kept pretending to pick it up and others, getting further and further to the door picking them up.
When I got there, I ran like mad.
A troupe at Blackpool c.1900
Ethel ran out of the door with the frightening single-mindedness that later made her the most successful Tiller Girl.
She was eventually in charge of 160 dancers at one point, and she choreographed productions all over the world.
She commuted by air between England, France and Monte Carlo, took a Hollywood screen test, only to turn her back on America for her love of a famous impresario.
But her career started simply playing a sailor on a battleship, in the background of her first show.
One of John's earliest troupes, the Superba Quartette
So the little Blackpool girls got their first taste of the world of entertainment.
They would be placed into various troupes: the Merry Mascots , the Snowdrops or the Twelve Twinkling Stars , in accordance with their heights and talents.
The biggest attraction, the Manchester Mites , came to Blackpool to work the season with them.
This created a few problems as intense rivalry was felt between the children from the two towns.
‘Blackpool used to be a riot when we walked out,’ said one Mite.
They would be marshalled back to their digs, proudly wearing their uniforms.
Remarks were made by the local rivals, not about dancing  standards as the Mites were inevitably highly experienced and could not be faulted, but more was made of their apparent roughness:
Mr Tiller got these Girls from Manchester, they were the lowest of the low.
That was in the beginning.
Then he started getting Girls from Blackpool, they were a better class.
He got better Girls from there, not boasting.
This attitude is still held by many early Tillers today.
Dolly Ashby auditioned when she was eleven years old.
She had a confusing family background, as many children did in those days.
As her natural mother had been unable to care for her, she had been taken in and looked after by an uncle and aunt.
She was so happy with them, she called them Dad and Mum and living only a few streets away from her real mother, would visit her daily, calling her ‘My mother's sister’.
She was accepted for the Winter Gardens show, immediately struck up a great friendship with Edith Whalley and they became inseparable.
When Tiller offered her work abroad, she refused, being frightened to travel too far away from home.
Whole families of female relations worked for Tiller.
Nepotism was rife.
‘Have you got any more girls?’
Jennie would ask the mothers.
The Helliwell family not only supplied Ethel of the Iron Will but her twin sister Alice, and elder sisters Elsie and Mabel.
All four Girls eventually danced all over the world, sending quite a considerable amount of money home to their mother.
Edith Whalley had an older sister Gertie.
They had been orphaned and were so desperate for work that they auditioned while still mourning.
Black dresses right down to our ankles.
We had an older sister at home.
She had to go to work too.
I can't remember the wages they paid us but we couldn't get work in the shops anyway.
The two sisters bravely tried to support their family home with their salaries.
One day they took their niece, Doris Carter, to a rehearsal:
I was only just eight.
Mrs Tiller said ‘Go on, get into the line.’
They pushed me in.
I said, ‘I haven't come for that.’
They took no notice.
I told them I wasn't old enough but Mrs Tiller said I was tall enough and she would work it.
My mother had a fit when I went home and my aunt said I'd been taken on.
Once the show opened at the Winter Gardens, Tiller would disappear on his travels round the world.
Jennie preferred to stay and supervise; she was always backstage seeing to their make-up:
There used to be a mile-long queue to be made up.
All God's fear on earth used to be behind Mrs Tiller.
We never wanted to be the first one when she had a new stick of make-up as she didn't take the cellophane wrapper off.
It used to scratch your face.
We daren't tell her, we were so frightened of her.
We would push each other to the front of the  queue.
You'd have to be in your vest.
My mother had time on her hands so made my underwear.
She looked down and said, ‘Who's made your knickers?’
I went scarlet at the word ‘knickers’.
Edith Whalley, looking like a modern day punk, who auditioned in strict mourning.
Aged 11, and already showing her strength of character, Billie Bart in the Bristol pantomime ‘Dick Whittington’, 1900.
She was to become the sort of opportunist that John would have admired: her second marriage was bigamous and when she was in her sixties she returned to Britain from America in order to marry a consultant surgeon at Bart's Hospital.
Unfortunately he slipped from her grasp by dying
With the Winter Gardens show employing 100 to 300 artists every summer and the schools in London and Manchester training others all the year round, there was a never-ending pool of dancers instructed in the Tiller style.
Both Mr and Mrs Tiller were always on the lookout for any child or woman with potential.
In 1906, a seventeen-year-old orphan called Jane Balfe was working in a factory.
Her friend Angela, who worked for Tiller every year in pantomime, asked Jane to accompany her  to the stage door of the Hippodrome Theatre, Manchester, to pick up a contract.
Jane describes the incident:
Whilst Angela was signing the contract, John Tiller himself walked in.
He said, ‘Hello Angela, are you coming back to work with us again?’
He then turned to me and asked if I was signing a contract too.
I replied that I couldn't dance.
He said, ‘That doesn't matter.
I'll show you what we want.
Let me see your teeth.’
Apparently he always reckoned a pretty girl with a lovely smile was more important than any other quality; so the teeth had to be good.
He then asked to see my legs.
I was terribly embarrassed; not only was I a convent girl but the skirts were worn down to the ankles and women just didn't show their legs in those days.
Angela told me not to worry; Mr Tiller was used to seeing girls' legs.
I pulled my skirt up a little but he said he'd have to see higher than that to make sure my legs weren't bowed at the knees so I did as I was told.
Jane agreed to go into pantomime.
The work was fairly easy — just a little movement, not the high kicking style of the true Tiller line.
She was overjoyed to find she earned a much higher wage than for her factory work.
This was important to her as she was self-supporting and had found it tough going in the last two years.
Relatives had taken on the boys of her family but did not want the responsibility and lower wages of the girls.
She had had to rough it alone in digs since she was fifteen.
In the last week of the pantomime, Jennie asked her if she would like to learn to dance properly, adding that Mr Tiller didn't like girls already trained but preferred them to learn his way.
Knowing she had to support herself, they paid her while she trained at the Manchester school.
She had to provide her practice outfit which consisted of a short skirt of any colour, just above knee length, with a blouse.
They continued to pay her while rehearsing and with seven other Girls, she was sent on tour round England.
The stage costumes were ornate, the hemline above the knee and worn with knickers massed with frills so that no outline of the leg could be seen.
That would have been considered vulgar.
Often the skirt was frilled as well making it impossible for the audience to see where the skirt ended and the knickers began.
Tights, which Jane had to pay for herself, were made of thickish cotton and fastened with a coin each side and taped.
They rarely showed their hair on stage as enormous head-dresses or wigs were worn.
As well as her tights, Jane had to bear the cost of tipping the callboy and dresser every week.
The other Girls would have had to send money home but Jane set aside a similar sum to tide her over periods of unemployment.
The morning rehearsals each day were a Tiller rule not demanded by the management and so were not paid for.
In these sessions they practised their kicking and wheeling; John brought in a sergeant-major to train them in military marching.
The quick turn of the head, called dressing in army terms, was to check that the line was dead straight, and woe betide them if it wasn't.
Although there was always precision team work, they also had solo  spots within the number, called ‘individuals’ by the Girls.
A reporter at the time describes the La Scala Girls at the Palace:
They make their appearance in charming costumes of pale blue and each one a replica, to the  minutest detail of the other seven.
They sing a buoyant chorus song and march around the stage whilst performing evolutions.
Eventually they make an exit in a long rectangular line, all with arms extended.
Then follow several individual performances.
One member of the troupe submits a graceful skipping rope dance and another with a tambourine gives an exhibition of her skill as an acrobatic dancer.
Afterwards the whole party take the stage again and the orchestra strikes up a seductive ‘coon’ melody.
The Girls commence a tuneful lilting chorus and subsequently go through the familiar ‘cakewalk’ evolutions.
They do them though, with a wonderful spirit and grace and two of them present a kind of duet which evokes a spontaneous roar of applause.
A particular feature of their performance is the marvellous precision and clockwork-like regularity of action they maintain, even in the most intricate figures.
The effect of the whirling figures all moving identically is curious and fascinating.
Ornate dresses and coy looks c. 1900
Jane had to master the eye make-up of the day.
It was quite an art.
Called ‘hot black’, it consisted of a stick of black greasepaint of which a small spoonful was held over a lit candle; when it was melted, blobs of the hot grease would be put on each eyelash with a hairpin.
Gradually it dried and more would be added until the eyelashes were laden.
John's obsession for uniformity was thwarted at this point as the experience of the older Girls always showed in their eye make-up.
Their lashes would be heavily caked whereas the newcomers were fearful of the technique at first.
The face make-up was known as ‘fleshing’; it was then a natural colour, not the tan that became popular later on.
The white dusting powder over the fleshing was sometimes cornflour.
Every evening the make-up would be wiped off with a towel resulting in quite a large laundry bill for each Girl.
The biggest crime of all was to go round to the front of house or into the street in ‘full slap’, as stage make-up was called.
Life was hell for unsuccessful acts; not only did the performers have to put up with heckling and catcalls but they had to be agile enough to duck the rotten eggs and fruit thrown by a disgruntled audience.
The fact that they had brought these missiles with them showed their aggressive intentions.
Many artistes got drunk before they faced the ordeal on stage.
If a couple of drinks helped to steel the nerves, a full bottle made it thoroughly bearable.
Every night the show finished at eleven; after the Saturday performance they would have to pack the stage costumes and props carefully into skips which were large wicker baskets which could be thrown around without harm to the contents.
Then they would all go for a fish and chip supper.
They had to be up early on Sunday morning to get to the station to travel to the next venue which was inevitably the other side of the country.
Being a shy person, Jane was often overawed by the landladies.
One woman was so mean that she turned out all the lights immediately they got into their bedroom.
She had not told them the whereabouts of the lavatory.
Halfway through the night, they decided they needed to know, went out on to the landing, groped around but in desperation had to go back to their room, pee in their shoes and empty them out of the window!
However, Jane loved dancing and the new life that was opening up for her, but when she was offered work in 1907 at the English Theatre, Paris, she was frankly scared.
Rumours abounded of white slave traffic.
Newspaper stories told how innocent women strolling the streets of foreign countries would ignore the feeling of a slight pin prick in the arm and next minute would find themselves in brothels.
Immediately she saw Paris, she forgot any anxiety.
She fell in love with the elegant shops, the boulevards lined with trees, the outdoor cafes, especially the small one next to the theatre where the Girls congregated before the show.
Once it was known the dancers frequented the cafe, the Stage Door Johnnies started gathering.
Always courteous, they would first announce their presence by sending messages or flowers.
One particularly persistent suitor sent Jane postcards every day.
Unknown to her, he would be in the cafe while she ate.
As it was rumoured amongst the Girls that horsemeat was served, she was unadventurous and always stuck to a monotonous diet of egg and chips.
When she came to pay for the bill, she found that it had already been paid.
This frequently happened and the waiter refused to  tell her which man it was.
When he eventually introduced himself, she politely told him that she would rather pay her own bill and had enough money to do so.
Looking unusually demure, Jennie Walker who became the second Mrs Tiller
By now, some of Tiller's Girls were truly world travellers; the best troupes had bookings in Paris, St Petersburg, San Francisco, Berlin, Cape Town, Hanover, Geneva, Vienna, Buenos Aires and Hamburg.
Their journeys were well organized by the super-efficient Head Girls but of course occasionally plans went awry.
The Palace Girls had an unfortunate experience trying to reach Paris.
It was arranged that they should get the express train from Hanover in order to open at the Folies-Bergère on the very evening of their arrival.
To their dismay, they arrived at the departure platform just in time to see the express pulling out.
As it was imperative  that they get to Paris as quickly as possible they embarked on a slow train, hoping to arrive in time for their turn at the theatre.
What they did not realize was that the express train had a restaurant car and the slow train did not.
The Palace Girls, needless to say, were hungry to start with; nevertheless they had to exist for seventeen long hours on bananas and chocolate picked up at wayside stations.
When they eventually got to Paris, they found that they might just as well have stopped and had a meal in Hanover.
The opening night of the Folies had been postponed for two days.
What did they do next?
They simply made a raid on the first restaurant they came to and gave the proprietor fits.
Nudity was now presented on stage and one producer tried to coax Jane into leaving Tiller for this work.
She was appalled when he explained to her she would be required to pose in a picture frame.
It would not be true nudity, he assured her; she would wear a body stocking.
She would only have to sit still and clever stage lighting would make it appear as though she were naked.
Jane had no hesitation in refusing although she had no work offered after that particular season.
She always felt sad at the end of the run.
The other Girls would talk about their families and homes which made her feel so lonely.
It was a contradiction that although John was warm to his Girls he was emotionally quite remote from his own children.
Yet he had always generously supported his mother and half-brother.
When he offered to buy her a house in Blackpool, her request was for a simple terrace house, similar to the one in which they had spent their early life together.
She settled in Crocker Street and he visited her regularly during rehearsals of the Winter Gardens shows.
After a short illness in 1909 she died.
Now the declaration of her age on the death certificate was out of her control, the truth was listed at last.
She was seventy-eight.
His mother had been a pragmatic woman, always making the best of the most difficult situations, earning a livelihood as a needlewoman to help her sons when young and later during John's early theatrical ventures.
She had lived to see him prove himself beyond all her expectations.
As his fame and fortune grew, she never became ostentatious and refused all his efforts to encourage her into a more luxurious life.
Like all successful businessmen, John was willing to delegate responsibility to a trusted circle of people while he developed new contacts.
In Manchester his new wife and eldest daughter were in charge of the school in Lime Grove, the theatrical stores and the annual Winter Gardens show in Blackpool.
He put Madame Sismondi, whom he had booked years before to go to South Africa, in charge of his London school.
When her act split up, he offered her a permanent studio within the premises where she could run her own classes.
In return she supervised the classical side of his training school.
He was making a small fortune with his spectacular ballets which toured the whole year round.
Always involved with every side of the production and never one to hide his light under a bushel, he was credited in every programme as co-writing, composing, designing, and making props and scenery — a one-man band.
He dominated his many touring pantomimes too.
In order to store the increased amount of scenery and wardrobe, he  bought new premises at Heald Grove, Rusholme, and his daughter Nellie was put in charge.
John failed dismally, however, when he set up any business with a partner.
He was so autocratic that he had to dominate every enterprise.
Just as his earlier attempt to form a theatrical agency ended in failure within six months, a later venture with George Sheldon failed in 1902 with equally bad feelings.
Then there was the abrupt dismissal of his German representative through the columns of Music Hall : ‘Herr Obermeyer no longer has any connection with these Schools.’
John subsequently opened a training establishment with Will Bishop, a famous performer, which they called the ‘Hygienic School of Dancing’.
Again this swiftly closed.
No one, it seemed, could work on equal terms with him.
He was so forceful and dogmatic in his ideas that the Girls would be embarrassed at band calls when he interrupted acts, totally unknown to him, to tell them what he thought was wrong.
At the turn of the century, he had been excited by his conception of the Mystic Hussars routine.
Now ten years later he conceived a simple notion: as the Girls were kicking, he got them to link their arms around each other 's waists.
Proximity would help them work well together.
At last it was possible for them to achieve absolute precision.
His dream had come true.
He would have been proud to know that this was the idea that really made his name for posterity.
Even in the 1980s a troupe could be performing a highly individual routine in the most modern style but they only had to link arms, synchronize a few kicks and the audience would break into spontaneous applause.
Whatever fame future choreographers were to have in the commercial theatre, not one could claim such an instantaneous reaction.
The highly popular ‘Tally Ho’ that is still copied in pantomimes today
How John Retrieves a Lost Fortune, But Loses a Son
THROUGHOUT his theatrical career, Tiller produced hundreds of troupes, giving them names like the Snowdrops , the Four Champions , the Imperial Quartette , and so on.
Each line had its speciality; it might comprise exceptionally small girls, or very tall ones, or talented acrobats, but whatever the speciality, all could sing and dance.
There is no doubt that the standard in his troupes was excellent; his pride in his reputation would not allow public appearances unless all the routines were impeccable.
Occasionally the chemistry within the troupe resulted in exceptional work and it would become his crack troupe.
The Palace Girls were one such top line team.
Before they were formed for regular bookings at the Palace Theatre, London, every Girl had considerable experience in dancing.
The line became instantly popular and managements all over the world were impatient to snap them up whenever they were free.
Whilst resident at the Palace, their conductor was Herman Finck, a composer who collaborated with John for the Winter Gardens seasons.
He admired Tiller, describing him as a genius at organizing and directing his Girls but also noting that John ordered everyone about in a dictatorial way.
This was hilarious as Finck himself was equally autocratic.
One evening Finck proclaimed that a piece of music that Tiller had composed for a skipping-rope routine was dull and lifeless and that neither he nor the Girls could do a thing with it.
He remembered a piece of music he had been carrying around in his head for years and bragged that he knew a better tune.
‘If you can do your dance tonight without a band rehearsal, I'll play a lovely melody.’
He was arrogant enough to expect them to dance to music they had never heard.
The Girls knew that their reputation for dancing as one was at stake, but because they were so well drilled and were accustomed to Finck's ways, it worked brilliantly.
In 1912 the Palace Girls were selected to represent all Tiller Girls when they were greatly honoured by being invited to perform at the very first Royal Command Performance.
Although troupes of Tiller's dancers eventually appeared in more than twenty-four such shows, it was to mean more than any other Royal Command in that the acts were personally chosen by the King and Queen.
They had regularly appeared before the rich and famous but this audience included a dazzling array of royalty: the King and Queen, the Grand Duchess George of Russia, Princess Victoria, the Princesses Christiana and Victoria of Schleswig-Holstein, Prince Arthur of Connaught, the Duke and Duchess of Teck, Prince Alexander of Teck, and Princess Henry of Battenberg.
The front of the Palace Theatre was presented as a flower garden with the Royal Box transformed with a bower of roses.
The Girls had the third spot in the first half of a bill shared with George Robey, Harry Lauder, Little Titch and Anna Pavlova.
The souvenir programme, looking like an enormous chocolate box covered in purple velvet, included a photograph of John Tiller with eight portraits of the Girls round him.
Their act was called A Fantasy in Black and White .
For their routine they wore white curled wigs beneath black velvet hats and white satin dresses with narrow black-edged flounces.
They performed against a backdrop resembling a pen and ink drawing on white paper.
It was a thoroughly tested number as Tiller had not only shown it at the Palace but his La Scala Girls had also performed it at the Winter Gardens Pavilion, Blackpool, the previous year.
The Girls were also included in the finale which consisted of the 150 music hall artistes presenting Variety's Garden Party .
Edgar Wallace, a great fan of this troupe, took a fancy to one Girl in particular and would take the whole team to the races in order to meet her.
Declaring that she was so beautiful that she ought to be in pictures, he gave her some of his manuscripts.
Unfortunately for him, his feelings were not reciprocated and she went off to work in America.
Sydney Baynes was another admirer and he dedicated his Destiny waltz to them.
The Palace Girls, 1912
Always willing to undertake a new challenge, Tiller sent out a complete production to South Africa in 1912.
Jane, the orphan girl, was chosen to go.
All the Girls were excited but some of their parents were absolutely terrified.
‘You can't go there,’ said one mother, ‘there are lions and tigers.’
'Not down the streets mother,’ replied her knowing daughter.
The journey took six weeks.
Tiller travelled with them, but first class while they were relegated to steerage.
Rehearsals went on as usual every morning but in order to disturb the other passengers as little as possible, they had to get up very early and work in a screened-off area.
Once in South Africa, they went to Johannesburg where they stayed for twenty weeks before going on to Durban, Port Elizabeth, Cape Town and Kimberley.
They were wined and dined as never before.
Many Girls became engaged, one to a Lord.
The tour lasted eighteen months only, the combination of the Russian Revolution and World War I stopping the show from being a longer success.
The people backing it ‘bunkered’(disappeared with the money) and as Producer Tiller felt morally bound to pay off all the artistes himself as well as to find their return fares.
This practically ruined him but rather than take the easy way out and declare himself bankrupt, he called a meeting of his creditors and asked for time to pay.
He was too proud of his name and reputation to have the slur of bankruptcy against it.
So at sixty, he started to build up his business again.
However, even when in debt, he continued to enjoy an extravagant lifestyle.
He declared that his large diamond rings were his investment; they probably were as after his ‘crash’ some disappeared but he still maintained his two houses.
Mrs Tiller presided over the one in Blackpool while he was at the grander one in Addlestone, Surrey, to which, when the Girls were playing in London, he would invite small groups for a short weekend.
They were captivated by the beautiful village, played croquet on the lawn and altogether had a delightful time.
Then on Monday the chauffeur drove them straight to the theatre for the show.
The London headquarters now moved to stylish new premises at 143, Charing Cross Road.
Not only was the rehearsal space larger but here Tiller was able to have an imposing office which he decorated with caricature drawings of himself showing large heads on small (but fat) bodies, and always with his hands clasped behind his back.
There were several large photographs and the one that he was particularly fond of certainly gives the impression of the successful impresario.
He favoured less one that had been taken ten years before in which his bowler hat and suit are typical of a provincial businessman.
With his attention diverted to the new studio, the honour of the Royal Command Performance and the crisis with his South African production, it is not surprising that Tiller was unaware that he was losing control of his Manchester school.
As General Manager, his son Lawrence felt more able than his father would acknowledge and started his own troupes.
He was so  cunning about it that his dancers thought they were still working for John!
There was a showdown and in 1914 the relationship that had always been so ambivalent was destroyed.
Lawrence was thirty-six years old, the same age at which his father had begun his own theatrical career.
He was intelligent enough to realize that his father would never allow him much freedom in the business and so he started his own training centre at Heald Grove, Rusholme.
Amy, his wife, naturally relinquished her job as secretary to John and actively encouraged him.
Many suspected that the move had originally been her idea.
Despite the fact that he had always called himself Lawrence, he advertised his business as the John Lawrence School of Dancing, neatly acquiring the kudos of his father's name.
John's pupils continued to train at Lime Grove.
The road itself had become a colony of residents specializing in theatrical and allied activities.
Caroline Moore, who described herself as a professor of dance, occupied number 1.
Nellie Tiller lived at number 10.
John, of course, was still at number 15.
A school of masseurs had set up at number 17 and a rival dance director called Sherman Fisher was working from number 18.
He was successful with his dance troupes for many years despite the fact that young girls did not like working for him as he was notorious for his wandering hands and slimy advances.
They retaliated by cruelly nicknaming him ‘the Chinese Jew’.
John Tiller looking like the typical provincial businessman
Lawrence Tiller and his wife Amy who went into successful competition with his own father.
Even the naïve dancers suspected it was Amy's idea
The three youngest of Tiller's own children married at this time.
Bertha, who had been a student at art college in Manchester, wed Percy Gaunt and went with him to Shanghai.
Jessie was John's youngest and sweetest child.
After her mother died she went on many trips abroad with him.
She was  always impressed by his fame and would have liked a theatrical career.
She did appear in amateur shows just as he had, but he would not allow any of his children to become professional performers.
So Jessie became a secretary to a Manchester solicitor and eventually fell in love with and married an officer during the First World War.
Although he showed particular fondness for Jessie, John certainly was not generous to the couple when after the war her husband wanted to set up in the textile business in Newcastle.
It was his parents rather than John that helped them financially.
Walter, the youngest boy, had the most distant relationship with his father; he and Robert had been sent to boarding school and had seen even less of John than their sisters.
When he was quite young he emigrated to Australia; his girlfriend followed and they eventually married.
It was ironic that such a prolific man should have so few grandchildren.
Only Nellie, Robert and Jessie had offspring.
Lawrence was the one who never seemed part of the warm family atmosphere created by his brothers and sisters.
The rest of them felt his wife tried to sever all connections.
She had a definite dislike for Robert's wife, the former dancer, and refused to see her as she grew older.
John Tiller and his surviving children at Bertha's wedding in 1912: kneeling l to r — Nellie, Jessie and Florence; extreme left — John Lawrence; John — next to the bride; top left — Robert; tallest on the right — Walter
John's youngest daughter Jessie appearing in an amateur theatrical show — just as he had
John adored being with his grandchildren.
As with his own children, he actively discouraged any of them from becoming performers.
One youngster who loved to recite to him felt utterly rejected when she heard him remark that ‘some unsuccessful applicants were no better than this child’.
But he gave much of his time to them and showered them with expensive gifts.
Tiller began to provide entertainment in the intervals at the Empress Ballroom, Blackpool.
Most of the productions shown here were patriotic spectacles requiring little dancing ability.
This was an absolute godsend to beginners.
A rumour that he was casting 100 children went round St James's School in Church Street, so instead of going straight home the girl pupils nipped off to the audition.
Not only did half the school turn up but seemingly so did hundreds from all the schools in Blackpool.
John had not expected such an overwhelming response, and as not even the Ballroom itself could contain such large numbers, he took them all outside into the street to make his selection.
Gertie Sohl, one of the lucky schoolchildren chosen to appear at Blackpool
Children with previous experience not only did the shows at the Pavilion at 2 pm and 7 pm but they also appeared at the Ballroom in between, thoroughly enjoying the mad rush.
The children's troupes were graded from tallest to smallest in order to emphasize the difference in height, the littlest usually getting most of the laughs and applause.
Although Tiller still produced the Winter Gardens show every year, he delegated more and more of the work there to his assistant directors as he was so busy abroad.
Once the show had had its opening night, Jennie took over.
She was there every single night, a formidable figure in her long, black skirt, cardigan and black straw hat.
The stage hands thought she looked like a vulture waiting to pounce and would mutter that the old girl was on the sidelines again.
It was her single-mindedness in keeping the show perfect that resulted in some very blunt speaking which some found hard to take.
Throughout the routine she would direct the dancers.
Hissing nonstop, ‘Ssst, ssst.
You there, number five.
What do you think you're doing?
You wait till you come off.’
Number five became so terrified she made more mistakes and prayed to God that the dance would never finish.
One unfortunate Girl had a more ample bosom than her colleagues and as Jennie could see her sticking out in front, she was ordered to get further back.
Of course in doing so, her rear became out of line, so she was cussed for that too.
Most of the Girls were embarrassed by her constant hissing.
Others, probably because they were novices, felt it supportive.
Despite her criticism of their dancing they knew she cared for them and always stepped in in any family crisis:
She was so kind when I was orphaned, she always made sure I was fed by organizing a rota of other Girls' mothers who took me in until I was fourteen; otherwise I would have ended up in an orphanage.
A juvenile troupe, 1917
Despite the fact that the Ballroom shows had comparatively short runs, every production was spectacular.
One Girl reported:
We were in the show King and Country and had never done anything on stage before.
It was when the war was on.
I was a little scout.
I had a tent near the band.
The others all dragged on planks and sandbags.
Then we had Lights Out and when the bugle went again, the firing started.
There was terrific gunfire played on the great organ.
You'd have thought that the enormous Ballroom was on fire.
The bugle sounded again.
One soldier fell.
Another was writing a letter.
There was one with a stretcher and Red Cross nurses were represented.
They all sang O God our Help in Ages Past .
There wasn't a dry eye in the house.
John's crack juvenile troupe was still the Manchester Mites and their feuds with the local Girls still raged every spring when they emigrated to Blackpool to perform there.
Their matron Daisy had a very interesting background.
Unknown to them, she had been one of Tiller's favourite leading ladies around 1906, but when the work offers stopped she faced the same bleak future confronting all dancers who feel too old to dance.
She was unmarried, had no relation able to support her financially and no training for any other job.
She was an excellent choice to supervise the Mites , knowing just what tricks they could get up to.
Thus she played a part in the Mites ’ continuing popularity and remained in the theatre world that she loved.
She certainly needed all her expertise one night when the children made their entrance for a skipping rope routine.
They were supposed to enter just as the large velvet curtains with enormous gold tassels rose.
The leading child came on slightly earlier than usual, caught her rope on one of the tassels and found herself going up.
She was very frightened and had no idea what to do until Daisy managed to shout above the laughter in the audience to let go.
Like all juvenile troupes they had to go to court every Monday in a new town to obtain a licence to work.
This was a means of seeing whether they looked well and that there was proper control of their curfew.
Quite often police were at the stage door making sure they were out of the theatre at the regulation time.
At school the other children treated them like royalty.
On one occasion they got so swollen headed that they were charging the children a penny each to try on their hats.
Daisy soon put a stop to that.
Their education certainly suffered as the teachers did not like them interrupting the curriculum and sat them at the back of the class and told them to write home.
Although some of the Mites were as old as fifteen, because they were called Mites , their routines were always childlike.
With tambourines they would sing, ‘She's a ragpicker, she's a ragpicker.
All the livelong day’ and kick as high as they could.
In another number, dressed in nightdresses and carrying candlesticks, they would sing:
‘'TIS the shadow on the wall
Close your eyes and you won't see it at all 
Look it dances all the night
By the moonbeams' mystic light 'TIS the shadow on the wall.’
The Mites over school age resented being with kids all the time and tried to assert their freedom.
On a trip to Dublin two of them asked and received permission to share a double room away from‘the children’.
Temptation proved too strong one night when there were some naval cadets in the audience who threw flowers and chocolates up to the troupe and were waiting at the stage door after the show.
Somehow the Girls gave Daisy the slip and went off with them.
Daisy, of course, found out and that was the end of their independence.
The landladies found the Mites well behaved; they all had separate tasks for the day, two doing the food shopping for the troupe which the landlady would cook.
Others made beds, swept and cleaned.
During the war, John allowed Edith Whalley and other married women to work for him
The Girls smoked despite the fact that it usually meant instant dismissal if they were found out.
When they heard John or Jennie coming towards their dressing-rooms they would hastily open any windows and try to wave the smoke out.
One Girl was caught but was too useful as a Head Girl to get the sack:
At this time we used to rehearse in long cardigans.
We'd been practising hard and were having a rest, just standing around and the Head Girl  was smoking.
Suddenly she said, ‘My God, it's the Old Man’, pinched out her cigarette and put it into her cardigan pocket.
For a while she talked to Mr Tiller.
Suddenly she realized she hadn't put it out properly and said, ‘Excuse me, Mr Tiller, I think I'm on fire.'
The war presented many one-off jobs for the older Girls, usually unpaid, as they were entertaining the troops.
They had to be prepared to perform in the strangest conditions.
Six of them did a routine on top of a tank, and did not stop even when the snow began to fall.
The most luxurious setting was a specially prepared Music Hall aboard ship.
It was given at the launching of what was Britain's largest liner at the time, the S.S. Aquitania .
The Sunshine Tillers appeared with George Robey and Vesta Tilley.
The war also gave a chance to married dancers.
Until this time, Tiller never knowingly employed them.
Even if there was a booking in a Girl's home town, John's regime was so demanding that a husband would no doubt have objected to his wife giving priority to her work.
But while the men were away at war, the rule was relaxed.
In order to pay his debts and restore his reputation, John took almost every job that was offered.
This led him to accept work in productions that really weren't up to his standard and the increased bookings resulted in a massive turnover of dancers.
It was possible for a poor girl with talent to rise through the Tiller hierarchy.
The very best Halls in London were booking the Girls and there were exciting prospects of travelling abroad to all the major capitals.
If a dancer showed some individuality, she was fortunate as John was still offering principal work.
He had numerous bookings on the Broadhead circuit, aptly named the ‘bread and butter tour’ by the Girls.
When he presented a complete pantomime, which naturally he had devised, directed, co-composed and co-designed, he could offer a weekly wage for an average of seventy-five artistes in each show.
Perhaps because John was fostering each Girl's personality within their ‘spots’ in troupe dances, this period produced the brightest Tiller sparks.
The outrageous philandering May Sharples, Ethel and Mabel Helliwell who both eventually took over choreography for the troupes, the four successful Holt sisters, the formidable Jessie Wharton, Head Girl of the first Palace Girls and later inseparable companion to Mrs Tiller, and the most important dancer of all to John, Mary Read.
Just as Jennie had been on the sidelines while his first wife was alive, Mary became his mistress almost immediately he went through his second marriage ceremony.
When he produced a new brochure he proudly placed portraits of his wife and himself side by side with his dancing sylphs.
On another page he included a picture of Mary that can only be described as erotic.
She was exceedingly beautiful in a childlike way.
With her sensuous smile and her bare shoulders, she could be likened to a contented cat who knows she has found a good home.
She came from Chorlton-on-Medlock and he created the Sunshine troupe around her.
His wife definitely was aware of the relationship and never had a good word to say about Mary.
He wisely kept the two women apart as much as possible.
The Sunshine Girls were the only troupe to travel as far as St Petersburg and Budapest but it was noticeable that they rarely worked at the Winter Gardens which  was Jennie's stronghold.
In fact it was at this time just as the United States was beginning to take up his Girls that he set up a school there.
He put Mary in control of the palatial establishment in New York.
Within eight years he had fully repaid his creditors and accumulated a greater fortune than ever before.
He had overcome the rivalry of his son and felt that he fully deserved the expensive lifestyle he enjoyed with Mary.
Mary Read, John's mistress
Life for his Girls was less easy.
Very few dancers could carry on physically beyond the age of thirty.
Even had they wanted to, the producers would not have accepted them.
Some never thought of planning their lives and went on dancing until no more work was offered.
Going into another troupe after being a Tiller would have been too much of a comedown.
The only other alternative was to start an original act but after years of ‘dancing as one,’ most Girls could rarely think as individuals.
So at the end of their dancing career many tried desperately to hang on to the fringes of the theatre world as did matron Daisy Woodworth.
Anne Liddy, the clog dancer, only worked for John for a couple of seasons, so she had not been Tillerized.
She went in and out of the entertainment business all her life, one week being a top mount in an acrobatic act, and the next week working in a chocolate factory.
Many left to marry and raise families.
John was always displeased when a Girl became engaged.
He saw them in terms of the hours of training he had given them and regarded their departure as something to be listed in the debit columns.
It was of course pure selfishness, as having persuaded the Girls to take up a short-lived career which he dominated in a exceedingly paternalistic manner, he did not remain a father figure when  that career was about to finish.
Apart from offering a few Head Girls work as non-dancing supervisors in difficult situations abroad, there never was any long-term guidance.
They were all expected to send money home to their mothers but were not taught the value of saving for their own futures.
Because there was no advice whatsoever, very few saved and only later realized how foolish and extravagant they had been:
I used to shop in Shaftesbury Avenue and buy two or three nightdresses at a time.
They were so transparent and thin, you could put them through a wedding ring.
I bought such beautiful, expensive clothes.
I was a fool but nobody impressed on me the need to save.
As far as John was concerned the Girls did not exist once they gave up dancing.
It was as if they should simply fade away when they got old like the soldiers they represented on stage.
Jennie on the other hand was thrilled when the Girls announced wedding plans and there was always a warm welcome from her when they dropped in to show off a baby.
While Jane the orphan was resting she started courting a Manchester boy.
She began to consider the fact that she was over twenty-one and felt anxious that she would never get a home of her own.
She was torn between her love for dancing and her dreams of family life.
Quite quickly she decided to marry her suitor.
He became a good husband, quiet and kind, but his family were strong Methodists and were shocked that she smoked and had such a joy of life.
Her outlook had been considerably broadened by her theatrical experiences.
Her husband was not jealous of her dancing career but her in-laws were.
When he went off to the war in 1914 she took a job as an usherette in an effort to get as near as possible to the warmth of the theatre and away from the coldness of his family.
She had a tin of photographs which she would browse through, reminding herself that life had not always been so humdrum.
‘Burn those,’ said her sister-in-law.
‘You've got to settle down; if you don't burn them, I will.’
So she did as she was told.
She hankered after her dancing days till she died at the age of ninety.
She loved her family but having tasted a more exciting life, could not forget it.
Some Girls accepted marriage offers simply because they saw no other alternative.
This became the saddest decision of all.
It was the laughter and companionship that they missed more than anything when they retired.
They had been geared up to use so much physical energy that even when they were very old they had a  dynamic force within their bodies for which they had no outlet.
At least six lived on well into their nineties, every one of them sharing an absolute hatred of old age.
All had the habit of changing the dates on the backs of their photographs to make it appear they were ten years younger than their true age.
When interviewed by the author at the age of ninety-six, Edith Whalley said, ‘Don't tell them how old my sister and I are, luv.
After all we're Pros and Pros never tell their age.’
‘A Pound For Me Mum…’
IN THE 1920s when John was regularly crossing the world to finalize his deals, he always arranged that every trip ended in New York so that he might be with his darling Mary Read.
He closed his Manchester school and knowing that his wife rarely deviated from being either in Blackpool or London, he could safely assume there was little chance of a confrontation.
At last he was content with his relationship with one woman; there seemed to be no others that he chose to flirt with.
Because the Girls in Britain and on the Continent hardly saw him, it was a case of absence making the heart beat faster.
They became terrified of him knowing that when he did appear, his object was to select one or two of the best dancers to complete troupes in America.
He would not allow newcomers to be shipped abroad at random.
Only the experienced with a long Tiller record were considered.
He certainly spoke his mind: ‘Among you Girls, one is a star but from the dancing I've seen, the rest of you had better get back to your washtubs.‘
The famous Plaza Girls.
As usual, Mabel and Ethel Helliwell are the bookends
At one point Mary returned to put some of them through their paces.
Having heard of her relationship with John, the Girls looked at her in fascination, and could only talk about the wonderful clothes this woman wore.
She never seemed to wear the same fur coat twice.
Jennie certainly knew about the gossip and would make the odd crack.
After opening nights at Blackpool, she would snub John; when he waited for her at the front entrance with their car and chauffeur she would deliberately slip out of the Stage Door and go home by tram.
It must have been humiliating for her to accept that after helping him to create an empire within show business, he should choose to spend his time with a younger woman.
Despite his great wealth, John didn't miss a trick when it came to cutting the cost of exporting costumes from England.
When new ones were completed, the seamstress was told to take out all used dress shields from the old costumes and stitch them into those due to be taken abroad.
This saved duty.
In order to cope with the enormous workload while he was away, extra staff were taken on into the Firm as the newcomers christened it.
Although appointed as secretary, Doris Alloway became more like a daughter to Mrs Tiller.
Both Jennie and John had immense compassion to the point of obsession for anyone suffering from TB.
If it was known that a Girl simply had a relation with the disease, she would find herself singled out for extra help to the point of favouritism.
Doris was not only the niece of a past secretary who had contracted TB, but so had both her parents.
Without exception the Girls adored Miss Doris, as she was known.
Heavily built with a full round face that was always smiling, she greeted them with such warmth that even timid newcomers relaxed.
She mothered all of them in a way that Jennie could not now she was becoming more erratic.
She worked a sixteen-hour day, returning to the flat where she often stayed with Jennie and Jessie.
For some unknown reason, the blinds were always drawn, giving it a depressing atmosphere.
Many found it oppressive.
Dispensing love and friendship to everyone she met, she was almost too good to be true.
Faced with the need to chastise a dancer, she never gave way to anger nor showed her annoyance but her eyes would fill with tears and she would say, ‘I never thought a Tiller would let us down like this.’
Everyone appreciated her saintlike qualities and loved her.
Although the accounts were handled by a well-known firm, there were in addition a mountain of wage packets and simple book-keeping to be handled.
At last John's son Robert was given a chance; he was allowed to take over this clerical work, and was methodical enough to cope with it.
He certainly needed a helping hand.
He had been badly injured in the war, staying in hospital for four years and undergoing twenty-eight operations.
Despite his heavy family commitments, he was instantly dismissed by his father when it was discovered that he had entertained a nurse in the company flat.
Robert Smith was a relative of John's first wife and found himself summoned by the great man to take over the accounts.
‘Mr Smith’, as he was always formally addressed, was under the impression he was just temporary holiday relief.
On hearing that the job was to be permanent he was gallant enough to ask Robert's sanction before accepting.
On learning  the reason for his predecessor's dismissal he decided never to put his livelihood at risk by getting friendly with any of the Girls.
He vowed that no hint of scandal would ever be attached to him.
In a business that was headed by someone virtually at war with his entire family over their moral misdemeanours, this was a wise decision and brought Mr Smith fifty years' work.
Gently but firmly he asserted himself in the organization.
When requested to do his work in the company flat, and remembering the funereal atmosphere of the place, he refused.
He realized that accepting it as an office would have meant being pressed into staying late at night talking shop.
He demanded and got a proper office.
At first it seemed impossible to cope with two employers with their contrasting attitudes towards money.
John was prudent; his wife reckless.
As they were rarely in the office together, he found his orders constantly changing.
Eventually he told them he could not serve two masters and as he had, by then, proved himself to Tiller, he was given complete financial control.
The Carlton Girls, one of the many Tiller troupes who worked on the exhausting cine-variety circuits
One of Mr Smith's regular jobs was to send an agreed proportion of the Girls' wages to their mothers.
‘A pound for me Mum, a pound for me digs and a pound for me.’
He would smile to himself every time he heard this as they came to sign their contracts.
Mr Smith understood there was a need to send money home to most mothers but reasoned if the Girls were capable of earning above average wages, they should be treated like adults and make their own decisions about their finances.
So from then on they learnt the discipline of budgeting and faithfully sent home the pound themselves.
The office was more like an army headquarters than a theatrical business as every day Girls would be transported somewhere at home or  abroad.
There were no worries when entire troupes toured as their Captains were always experienced travellers but often one or two replacements were needed and they had to travel in couples or even alone.
The paternalistic Tillers knew they would be at risk so William was taken on to carry out these arrangements.
No one ever seemed to know William's surname and he had a bizarre appearance at a time when smartness was highly valued.
Most people thought he looked like a tramp with his habit of tying his trousers up with string, but the first thing that all the dancers noticed was that he had big, flat feet.
Very tall, usually wearing a cap and carrying a basket on each arm, he was a real trouper to all of them.
He not only met them off trains, got taxis, and frequently turned up at theatres to see how they were getting on, but would also dip into one of his baskets and present each Girl with a bar of chocolate.
If Jennie ordered baths to be taken it was William who escorted them, gave them soap and a towel and waited for them to come out.
The fact that he seemed a little simple did not escape their notice but they felt such affection for him that no one ever teased him.
The other members of staff knew that his apparent simpleness was due to a sad childhood; he had been brutally beaten by his father and this had resulted in his withdrawing into himself.
He had a great love of music and when the rehearsal rooms were rented out would join the musicians.
He was jointly responsible for writing at least one tune which became a hit and made a name for the other writer.
Typically he was never given acknowledgement for his part in its creation.
The Theatre Royal, Leeds, 1923: Doris Carter (top row, second left) appeared in the same line as her aunt, Gertie Whalley (front row, left).
Nellie of the Knobbles is in the top row (third left)
As well as rehearsing the Girls Jessie Wharton now became companion to Mrs Tiller.
After her spell in the Palace Girls she had graduated to playing small parts in the Blackpool shows.
Now that she was too old to dance regularly she would understudy the Girls and they all recognized her as a marvellous dancer:
I'll say I remember Jessie Wharton, she was a real trouper.
She used to wear a spotless white blouse with an enormous black bow on her chest and always wore her rehearsal pants very long.
If you ever put on long knickers, the others used to call them your ‘Jessie Wharton's’.
Another ex-Head Girl who now taught was Nellie Nixon, commonly called Nellie of the Knobbles because she was so thin that her muscles stood out.
Lily O'Grady hated the squalor and untidiness of the dressing-rooms
At about this time tights were no longer worn on stage: ‘wet white’ was used for the Girls' legs.
This was made up by the Head Girl mixing  together oxide of zinc, glycerine, rosewater, a touch of yellow ochre and methylated spirits, the latter helping to dry it on the legs.
Naturally it had to be washed off after the show before outdoor clothes were put on.
There would be a frantic dive for the wash-basins as soon as the show finished, as most theatres still only had one basin in dressing-rooms that held well over a dozen Girls.
The wash down would be done with one leg up at a time and an impatient queue waiting behind.
All the difficulties with ‘wet white’ were eliminated in Birmingham where there was an obscure ruling that bare legs were banned (this remained in force as late as the 1950s), so when playing there they were given cotton tights but had to put a penny at the side, wrap a piece of string round it and the tights in order to hold them up.
Being so unused to all this, most preferred to literally stick with the ‘wet white’.
Greasepaint was now used for the face.
Gone was the flattened-out effect; a more contoured look was possible with these sticks that could be bought from chemists all over the country.
The numerous shades were indicated by numbers.
The Girls used a combination of numbers five and nine; a few streaks painted on the cheeks, chin, nose and forehead were blended with the fingertips.
Eyes were accentuated with blue shadow for the lids and a red blob in the corner.
A special carmine stick replaced rouge on the cheeks followed by a dusting of face powder.
Their eyelashes were still built up with hot black, mouth open to concentrate.
The whole ritual took most of them half an hour though there were always a few that gossiped so much they had to be nagged by their Head Girl.
Because their new make-up was so much thicker, a strong removal cream was needed to take it off.
Boiled lard in a pan of water, cooled, strained and mixed with oil of lavender was used.
This gooey mess was wiped off with towels at the end of the evening.
In England at that time shop girls would have a weekly wage of about twenty-five shillings so John Tiller was giving dancers an excellent deal by paying them fifty shillings a week when on tour, matinées providing an extra ten shillings.
They would only spend ten shillings towards their rooms, which they shared.
Another ten shillings was put aside for food; they rarely learnt to cook as landladies preferred to prepare the food the Girls had bought.
Touring was tough.
Each weekend would see them on their way.
One Girl said:
Your life seemed to be spent sitting on skips at Crewe.
When you got to the station you'd see groups of theatricals.
You'd know the pros, they'd have their round hat boxes, their big fur collars, the chorus would all be together, they always wore those high heeled shoes with bows at the front.
It was such a laugh, so many theatricals all diving into the buffet.
As each train arrived you would see the reservation stickers on the coaches.
Desert Song, More Splashes Revue .
Yes that was more like it, you had a friend in that so you ran along the train trying to find her.
All around you, others would be shrieking ‘darling’, kissing each other on the cheek.
Always so many darlings, and you knew they hated each other.
The daft thing was they were probably going back to where we'd been  working.
Seemed pointless all this travelling.
Another was more practical:
The main thing you wanted to do on the train was pull the blinds down, wash your stockings and put your hair in curlers.
The Girls were lucky if they had booked digs, otherwise a visit to the stage door-keeper was made and he would probably have the list.
Failing that they had to trudge down the nearest side streets with their suitcases, knock on doors at random asking whether they took theatricals.
By the twenties, lace curtains and an aspidistra in the window were bad omens.
The owner would inevitably be old-fashioned, strict about everything, and there would be no chance of a front door key each.
The Carlton Girls in another routine
Peggy Price hoots with laughter at the sort of women who put on airs in front of her lodgers:
They used to try to be so posh.
I used to play up to that, pretend to be the lady.
One of them asked if I would like some beetroot.
I said that I didn't care for it.
‘Oh, my son loves beetroot butties,’ she replied.
Another time my friend and I were in bed, I heard the woman shout, ‘Are the two ladies in bed yet?’ 'Yes, Ma,’was the reply.
‘Well, let our Jimmy down to pee in the sink then.'
Once we were sitting round the table and the landlady's son said, ‘Give me the butter.’
She pulled herself upright very grandly.
‘If what?’ she asked, waiting for him to say please.
‘If you're not too bloody busy to get it,’ was his answer.
Digs were notoriously bad in London and in desperation the mother of the actress Fay Compton founded a hostel called The Theatre Girls' Home in Greek Street, Soho.
It was an admirable venture and most of the Girls found it an exciting place to stay.
All theatre and film calls were thoughtfully put on the noticeboard.
The management often let their regulars stay on credit, within reason.
It was very strict, which pleased parents and the Tiller office.
Certainly no boyfriends were permitted to call on the boarders.
Not that the Girls wanted them to as during rehearsals they were utterly exhausted.
Said Mary Fox:
I found muscles I never knew existed.
I couldn't even walk up the stairs.
I used to have to go up on my bottom.
Not only were boyfriends forbidden but even fathers were not allowed to cross the threshold to carry their daughter's suitcases in.
The Girls slept in cubicles with others, which seemed strange at first but the fun they generated helped to overcome any homesickness.
After about nine months' stay they could graduate to a single room but by then many preferred to be in with their friends.
The charge was incredibly low, only a pound a week and all food provided except butter.
In those early days they were expected to go to chapel every morning; bells seemed to announce every change in the timetable.
There was a big rehearsal room for those capable of working in the evening and a nice sitting-room for those who could not.
While at the hostel they could get a free pass to visit any cinema or theatre so a decent life was possible on the half pay rehearsal salary.
Mrs Tiller took a lease on a flat in the Bloomsbury area.
She had the walls repapered, new carpets and furniture bought for every room and then sub-let it to her favourite Girls.
As the Helliwell sisters always had the pick of the best jobs, they of course lived there while working in London.
There were four of them so there was as much chance of the average Girl staying at the Tiller flat as of getting into Buckingham Palace.
The war had been over a long time.
Titles for productions now mirrored the jazz era:Sparks of Wit and Flashes of Humour, Tit Bits from Tip Top, Life and Laughter .
The flappers had reached Blackpool.
Tiller writing the storyline still whisked his audience round the world but the comedy element was more dominant.
A working motor car was featured on stage in one scene.
The songs too had jokier titles:Down Where the Cross-Eyed Claras Grow, I'm the Good Man that Was so Hard to Find .
John was rarely seen in Blackpool; after he had written the outline for the summer show he put assistant directors in charge of rehearsals.
When he did appear, just before opening night he looked an impressive figure in  his expensive clothes.
He became quite frightening when he got in a rage trying to explain his last minute ideas:
We went on for what seemed like hours and still none of us understood.
Eventually he bent over and told the Head Girl to kick him; she was amazed but she did so — just stepped forward and kicked him and that was exactly the step he wanted.
They call it the strut now.
Another time he got us to lie on the floor with our legs in the air.
We wondered what on earth was happening.
With his hands he showed us where he wanted the legs to go.
It was simple but effective.
We stayed on the floor throughout the routine with our legs up — didn't half hurt.
Looking more like rugger forwards, the local Girls line up for ‘On the Road’ at the Winter Gardens, Blackpool, 1 112–
Up to this point, variety had been the main source of income for the Firm.
Now the public were beginning to prefer the new ciné-variety as a  form of entertainment because it was such good value.
For the bargain price of one shilling and sixpence the audience could watch alternating film and stage shows.
There would be three to five showings a day depending on the degree of popularity.
Very often a second film and newsreel would be interspersed with more acts and an organist.
American companies decided to build new cinemas in Britain and as the reputation of the Girls had already been made in the States, they were eager to book Tiller troupes.
The various lines of dancers took the prefix of the cinema building they were appearing in.
As a result the Paramount Tillers rehearsed in their red and white check rompers, the Carltons in brown and white, the Plazas in blue and white and the Astorias in yellow and white.
The whole country seemed to be full of Tiller Girls kicking in their little check outfits.
There were even handkerchiefs in various colour schemes and embroidered with the troupe's name.
Meanwhile the Palace Girls c.1923 now contained some of John's favourite and prettiest Girls
Previous theatre work had been tiring but now cine-variety was exhausting.
A successful film usually ran for six weeks and there were three to five separate performances, six days a week to get through.
A newcomer could be excused for not realizing in what show she was performing.
The day began at 10 am for rehearsals for the next production but if this proved unsuccessful, it was taken off and the new production rushed on.
As cine-variety rapidly increased in popularity, smaller cinemas presented similar shows and the Tiller office was inundated with bookings for their troupes.
Instead of resting in dressing-rooms between shows, the Girls were burnt out coping with double and tripling.
Coaches would transport them from place to place, their costumes hanging above their heads.
Often they would change on the move.
John provided the Plaza management with two different lines of Girls with no particular style, then he hit upon the idea of creating a line of tall Girls with long legs.
The Plazas immediately took the public's  imagination.
Suddenly everyone wanted tall dancers.
It was the beginning of the end for many short Tillers who had started work as juveniles, reaping the reward of looking much younger than their years.
Francis Mangon, an inventive lighting designer, had been brought over from America to be in charge of productions for the Plaza company.
Most of the visual ideas were imported but he found Ethel Helliwell brilliant at organizing the execution of them.
So began a relationship on and off stage that gave the audiences some of the finest Tiller work.
The driving force behind the Plazas was undoubtedly Ethel; to some extent she relished knowing that the Girls called her the slave driver behind her back:
One mistake and we were in next day for two hours.
I suppose it was good for us, but we didn't think so at the time.
For her part she was under extreme pressure, still only in her twenties and supervising up to 160 Girls at any one point.
Deeply in love with Francis Mangon, she was anxious to impress him professionally.
He reciprocated by flaunting his other affairs in her face.
One routine that all troupes performed was the Pony Trot.
Created by John way back in 1910, it began with the Girls grouped in sets of four dressed as ponies and imitating the animals' movements.
Before they became accustomed to the heavy weight of the head-dresses, they felt as though their heads would drop off.
They would curse their lack of height as they pranced round because the tallest Girls were always chosen as ‘drivers’ and simply trotted behind.
Each set of four had their reins held by a ‘driver’, so once on stage there was no way that a message could be passed to a colleague should anything go amiss.
This problem was to make it the most accident-prone routine in Tiller history.
They were literally held together in sickness and health.
One Head Girl found her team circling round the stage once as rehearsed but then galloping straight off stage to the lavatories; apparently one of the Girls had realized that she had a sudden attack of diarrhoea and had acted with unheard-of initiative.
The Plaza Girls, a troupe of tall dancers that were an instant hit with the public.
Ethel Helliwell is appropriately stationed at the top
In the 1950s Bert Hardy brilliantly captured the essence of the Pony Trot for Picture Post but the re-creation of the routine shown on television at that time seemed a pale version of the original to the women of the twenties; they recall the music being so much more inventive with a man simulating the horses' hooves with coconut shells, hunting horns and whiplashes all adding to the atmosphere.
When film companies wanted troupes, the office gave the work to those already appearing in the London theatres — the lucky ones in Raise the Roof, A Little Bit of Fluff, Charley's Aunt and Life and Laughter with Tom Walls, Ralph Lynn and Syd Chaplin.
They found their combined film and theatre schedule as exhausting as cine-variety.
They were up at 5 am to travel by train to Elstree to get there by 7 am.
They would then find that they were hanging around for hours and the crafty ones would try to find a prop bed to catch up on some sleep.
As soon as they finished around 5 pm, they would travel back to London and snatch a meal of the inevitable egg and chips.
After that it was on to the theatre for the evening show, then back to the Theatre Girls' Club for, if they are to be believed, another meal of egg and chips.
The extra pound a day for their film work did little to compensate for their tiredness which surely must have been as much due to under-nourishment as overwork.
The Plaza troupe were delighted with themselves.
A critic had coined a phrase for them and it was taken up as a catch phrase —‘They dance as one woman and what a woman.’
Whilst they were appearing in Up With the Lark at the Adelphi Theatre, they coped admirably with their filming schedule but were furious when Sickert produced a picture of them called High Steppers .
He had the habit of hoarding newspaper cuttings that interested him and occasionally created a picture from one.
The Girls regarded this one with loathing as it shows them with heads and legs all at different angles.
One of the Plaza Girls bore the surname of Tiller.
In fact her audition must have created deep turmoil in John.
She was the daughter of John's estranged cousin, Samuel and his wife Marie Millward, one of his favourite principals.
When Sam died in 1923 aged only fifty-four, Marjorie felt free to try to do what she had always wanted, and auditioned for the Tillers:
My father died when I was fifteen.
The following year, in May, I sneaked off to audition for Tiller without my mother's knowledge.
I had to wait two hours before seeing him as he was in conference with a producer.
Funnily enough Doris Alloway didn't ask for my name.
Finally he took me in to his office and said he was looking for Girls to work at the Winter Gardens, Blackpool.
I auditioned and he hired me.
I thanked him and was about to leave when he realized he didn't know my name.
I wouldn't tell him until he assured me three times that I had the job.
He got the shock of his life when he found out who I was and asked if my mother knew I was there.
When I said she didn't, he rang for his chauffeur and told me he was going to see her and asked if I wanted to go with him.
I thought I was in enough trouble so I refused.
Off he went; he must have persuaded my mother because when I eventually did get home, she didn't put up any resistance.
I don't think they had contracts in those days; I certainly was never given one to sign.
Marjorie never felt that there was any favouritism shown to her.
In fact she felt that Jennie positively disliked her, particularly when none of the shoes in stock fitted her and Jennie refused to buy her a new pair.
Dancing night after night in a pair of shoes a size too small regularly reminded her of Jennie's animosity.
In truth through the years Tiller Girls danced in ill-fitting shoes and had bunions to prove it for the rest of their lives.
After a few weeks in Blackpool, Marjorie was overjoyed when sent to America to join the Lollipop Troupe for a year.
She returned to another season at the Winter Gardens in 1925.
John as usual attended the opening night.
Afterwards he met Marjorie at the stage door and said, ‘I want you to know I'm well pleased with your work.
I have great things in store for you which I will tell you about when I come back from America.’
She was never to learn of his plans as he sailed for New York the next day and never returned.
He died on 21st October, 1925, of angina pectoris in Lennox Hill Hospital, New York.
In his obituary in The Stage , the writer pertinently remarked that ‘People die not so much on account of their age or that they are worn out, but because of the loss of their lifelong associates.’
It was a strange coincidence that he made his final sailing to America on the day that his closest friend, Mr Huddlestone, was buried.
The obituaries published in Britain, on the Continent and in America all acknowledged him as the originator of military precision dancing and reported how he had dominated a whole era of show business.
They also stated that his kind regard for his employees was unique in the entertainment world.
John seemed to sense death approaching.
He had made a will only one month before and when Mr Smith reminded him that the lease of the office premises was due for renewal, he remarked that he wouldn't be needing them.
The previous year he had disposed of all his costumes, props and scenery.
It certainly seemed as though he was tying up all the loose ends of his life.
His body was brought over from New York by Mary Read and fifty  Girls representing troupes all over the country met at Westminster Bridge Road and had the strange experience of travelling in the Necropolis Funeral train to Brookwood Cemetery.
Despite the sadness of the occasion, many gave way to hysterical giggling as they gradually realized that every compartment contained mourners or corpses.
They sobered up at the graveside in anticipation of the encounter of Jennie and Mary but it was not as hostile as they expected.
Later as a memorial to their husbands, Mrs Huddlestone and Jennie presented a stained glass window at the church at St Stephens-on-the-Cliff at Blackpool.
When his will was published, the popular press were delighted to highlight the acrimony that John expressed in it.
‘Father Rebukes Sons’ ran the headlines.
The bewildered children of his son Robert learnt for the first time how their apparently benevolent grandfather really viewed their father.
‘I have made no provision for my son Robert other than the bequest of £100 because he has been the recipient of my bounty during my lifetime and has nevertheless caused me sorrow and trouble on numerous occasions.‘
Speculation about the relationship between Lawrence and John was also at an end.
Kind souls, such as Mr Smith, who had reckoned that Tiller  had encouraged his son to set up on his own, were proved wrong.
John wrote emphatically: ‘I have made no provision for my son Lawrence other than the bequest of £100 because he had his own business in opposition to mine; I was willing to work with him and help him but he would not and preferred competition.’
Jennie was heard to remark that the will was a cruel one; by this she meant that not only were family recriminations made public but that when outlining a request for a company to be formed, her husband certainly showed his doubts about her competence.
He suggested that the directors be restricted to Mr Smith, Mary Read and Doris Alloway.
Even more humiliating was his belief that Mary, not Jennie, should be made president and managing director.
There was at least a proviso that she should be asked for her written consent before the company was set up but otherwise she was not mentioned in his plans for the future of the schools.
He named just six of his favourite Head Girls and awarded them shares, which must have surprised others who thought they were special in his affections.
Mary of course was to get the largest amount — twenty.
Rene Todd, the second in command in New York got ten, as did Doris Birch, the top Girl in Paris and also Nellie of the Knobbles fame.
The redoubtable Ethel must have been shocked when it was made clear she was down-graded to five, the same as Gracie Holt.
Kind, gentle William received acknowledgement for his loyalty and he too was awarded five.
The fact that John had handed over the reins of power to Miss Doris and Mr Smith seemed a great honour but his stipulation that they should keep and maintain the name and reputation of the business so long as it was possible to do so proved a massive task for them in later years.
Despite John's wishes, when the company was finally registered only Jennie and Doris Alloway were listed as directors with Mr Smith as secretary.
Mary had been totally excluded.
Jennie had won.
The completion had taken two weary years.
As Mr Smith admitted: ‘It was anything for a quiet life,’ and Jennie had her way.
John never forgave Lawrence for breaking away and going into competition with him.
Lawrence copied his father and started with groups of juveniles such as these Merritots 
The Tiller reputation kept the business alive; despite the fact that Jennie  did not have her husband's inspiration to create new routines, she certainly had the character to head the organization.
After John died, when the Girls were asked to appear at the Royal Command Performance, she saw no reason why this show should be any different from the others and stood in her usual place at the side of the stage, hissing corrections at the Girls.
‘Paris, of Course'
WE started to rehearse our routine for the show.
Mrs Tiller suddenly pulled me out and made me stand at the side.
She said nothing to me and after rehearsals I was still standing there; I'd done nothing all morning, and she called me into the office.
I was scared to death, really I thought I'd got the push.
‘Well,’ she said, ‘do you want to go?'
‘Where, Mrs Tiller?'
‘Paris, of course.'
Well, that was it and I was in a daze.
I had to get my passport done, my parents' written permission because I was only seventeen and I found myself in Paris two days later.
This was typical of the casual way in which Jennie selected Girls to go abroad.
It became a pattern to work in Paris after a season or two in England but if a replacement was urgently needed, any dancer who caught her attention was likely to be shipped abroad.
To this day Girls who worked in the 1920s would not consider others to be proper Tillers unless they had done the inevitable Paris stint.
For Jennie, it was just another date to be filled.
Elyse Burton said:
I remember crying my eyes out.
I was only sixteen; they wouldn't let me go on a world tour.
I went into her office crying.
‘Look, love,’ she said, ‘how would you like to go to Paris?
Would you be happy if you went there?
Would you stop crying?’
I did and I went.
Jennie recognized that the world could be at any of her Girls' feet but she also understood that sometimes the youngsters were too scared to travel abroad.
They had no idea what was in store for them; their education was basic and there was no television to enlarge their horizons.
The cinema shed a little light on the way of life in America but to them the continent was an unknown place with unintelligible languages.
I thought I was going into a different world when I entered Germany.
‘Oh look, there's an English cow,’ I said.
I really thought it would look different.
Tiller had no sympathy; he would actively show his dislike for anyone who rejected foreign contracts.
He now regarded the British work simply as training for the more lucrative engagements abroad.
I had rehearsed all the routine for the South America job, then I just got a bit panicky; the captain tried to talk me back into it.
Tiller was mad; he never forgave me but Jennie just said, ‘Perhaps Bella doesn't want to go so far away.’
She understood.
All Girls under twenty-one had to get written permission from their parents and although fathers still tended to be against the idea, no one appeared to have committed forgery.
Many a family row lasted for days until the dancer got her way.
To add to the stigma of the wicked stage, the men also feared that their daughters would end up on the streets of Paris.
As usual the mothers were all for the idea of travel:
My mother thought we could see the world which she never would do, that it would be an education in itself.
She was far-sighted in that way.
The aptly named Extraordinary Dancers who were booked to appear in the highly sophisticated Folies-Bergère and then went on to tour the world
The troupe called the Eight Extraordinary Dancers travelled together in an outdoor uniform that had been supplied: heavy capes, white socks, boots, and, as a symbol of their destination — a beret.
It was an exceptionally youthful group, five of them were only fourteen, and the fact that they were booked for, of all places, the highly sophisticated Folies-Bergère made the ‘extraordinary’ very apt.
Because of their age, they were cosseted more than usual and Mr Smith escorted them to the boat and bought them dinner.
If they travelled alone or in couples, it was of course dear William who met them, carried their luggage, bought their tickets, but once at the docks, they would have to do the rest of the trip alone.
The only advice from Miss Doris was to follow the crowd.
Despite the risks involved no one was lost or waylaid.
Doris Lupton remembers her first trip vividly:
My friend and I bought new coats before we went.
Black lisle stockings and flat-heeled shoes.
We must have looked so gormless; we certainly looked it in our passport photos.
We went in to see Jennie before we left.
‘Oh look, Jessie,’ she said.
‘They've even got their gloves on.
You know, Girls, all ladies wear gloves!’
And to this day I can't go shopping without my gloves on.
The sophisticated appearance of the other Girls was miraculously achieved on a salary of around £4 a week.
They longed for the hats and shoes they saw in the Galeries Lafayette.
As they could not afford haute couture they went to a little shop opposite their theatre which was called Mama's and the owner allowed them to put money aside weekly to buy the dresses they wanted.
A tallyman or woman visited their dressing-rooms with exquisitely embroidered lingerie which they found impossible to resist.
They were a captive audience for the beautiful satin and silk and a few weeks later their mothers would be complaining to Mr Smith that their weekly pound had not been received.
It was usual for the Girls to stay at the English Girls' Club when they first arrived.
Learning to pronounce the address ‘Quatorze rue du Perre, Place Pigalle’ to a taxi driver was the first hurdle they had to overcome:
I had a terrible job.
I'd say it over and over again in my schoolgirl French.
He'd just give me a look, the way the French do and eventually when I was thoroughly humiliated, he would repeat it properly.
The Club was run by an Englishman, the Rev F.A.
Cardew, on the same lines as its twin establishment in Soho.
Here there were dormitories for four or six and just as in hospital wards of the time, the walls were painted a sombre grey.
Each inmate had her own locker and a screen for privacy.
When the Prince of Wales was in Paris, they heard that he would be visiting the Club.
‘I don't know what the Prince will think of these bare  walls’, Ann East said to her room-mates.
She persuaded them to invest in ten rolls of wallpaper bought from a corner shop that sold everything from paraffin to knickers.
Unfortunately despite the wide range, the stock did not include paste so they were up until the early hours, matching and fastening the wallpaper on with drawing pins.
Inside and outside the English Girls' Club in Paris.
Here the John and Lawrence Tiller Girls met but kept their distance
The Eight Extraordinary Dancers lived there up to the ears as usual with their own brand of juvenile mischief, watching the matron getting undressed by looking over her partition or stitching up her nightdress.
At one point they were thought to look peaky so each was given a bottle of Guinness and some oysters and they sat on their little iron beds scoffing them.
A vision of the Infant Phenomenon multiplied by eight.
After they had proved their trustworthiness, permission would be given for them to live in couples in a pension .
This decision divided the independent types from the gregarious; some thoroughly enjoyed staying at the hostel for years:
I loved the Club and all the Girls.
It was my cup of tea.
I loved fooling around.
I hated the idea of being on my own.
Being so conditioned to being together at all times, even after some Girls moved out they returned every day to play cards.
The Englishness of the place suited most Tillers; terrified of unknowingly swallowing horsemeat in restaurants, many preferred to suffer cold rice pudding at the Club.
They were also put off the idea of French food by smelling garlic on the stagehands' breath.
The combined smell of garlic and eau de cologne was terrible.
Also staying at the Club were the Lawrence Tiller Girls.
The family tension between father and son was passed down to the dancers.
There was no ruling that they should not talk to each other but that is what they believed.
To this day many are convinced they were kept in separate dining rooms.
Four of the Eight Extraordinary Dancers performing the ‘Pony Trot’
Ah!
Les jambes de la femme!
John was paid an annual fee by the Folies-Bergère management for the exclusive use of his Girls in Paris.
Forty-eight were used in one production and of these the Eight Extraordinary Dancers did their own specialities which were naturally very juvenile: the Pony Trot , the Bells and the Xylophone .
The remaining taller dancers, called Les John Tiller Folies Stars , not only appeared in the production numbers with the rest of the cast but also had their own numbers.
Working on the stage of the Folies was fraught with difficulty — there were so many trap doors for the various effects: fountains, moving staircases, foam cascading down the side, even mimosa perfume sprayed from the flies in one number.
They  wondered why they were asked if they could stand heights and naturally no one admitted to such a weakness so seven volunteers were picked to appear in Les Jambes de la Femme.
They had to take their places on a enormous swing; once seated it was lowered from the flies until the audience could only see their legs as they went through their act.
There was an effective underwater scene which entailed the Girls walking in fours into a lake and appearing to drown.
In fact once submerged they had to find a red rod and drag themselves along it to the other side of the stage; more than one mother screamed in fear when she saw the show.
Considerably less risky but with definite romantic potential was the Kisses Over the Garden Wall number, the entire line being dressed as either girls or boys.
At the end, the ‘boys’ clambered onto the wall, sat with legs crossed and threw themselves backwards over the wall one by one into the arms of a stagehand.
Not one Girl was dropped and due to the anti-social breath of the stagehands, not one romance developed.
The star of the Folies in 1926/7 was the irrepressible Josephine Baker.
She was friendly, which was unusual for stars of the day.
She could not believe her eyes when she saw the Tillers being marched off in the crocodile line to the English Girls' Club after rehearsals.
They were equally amazed at her.
It was unbelievable that she was only the same age as many of them.
They had heard about her erotic exploits but their jaws dropped during the dress rehearsal of one of her entrances.
Half nude, she held onto a big, round glass ball which was slowly lowered from the flies and poised above the stalls.
They were even more agog during the much publicized Banana Dance when she danced with only a curtain of bananas round her waist.
Another time she seemed to have nothing on under a grass skirt as she danced on a mirrored floor.
They were filled with admiration for her highly individual personality; they had been trained to sink their personalities into the line and were happy to do so.
Although they were in the same show and of the same age, they were a world apart as women and performers.
She gave them an understanding of the qualities needed to become a star.
As far as nudity was concerned they quickly accepted it in Josephine's act as it seemed such a natural part of her but their attitudes were quite prudish when confronted with the nudes backstage.
There seemed to be a surfeit at the Folies.
While waiting to go on, they would see the women rub lipstick onto their fingers from their lips and transfer it onto their navels and nipples.
Working alongside such eroticism made them feel awkward.
They were proud to be in the show but terrified that their parents would send for them if they knew of such blatant nudity.
So they spent hours painting brassières onto the nude photographs before sending the souvenir programme home.
However, when Dolly Howard thought she would peep through the curtains to see how her father was reacting to the nudes she found that she was the one who was shocked.
He had his binoculars on them!
Among the English there were two opinions about the French girls.
One group swore that they did not get any salary, but took the job to attract men for prostitution; and others went out of their way to prove their own sophistication by talking to them.
All agreed they had a rough deal as their work often involved great pain.
Appearing in the Living Curtain meant that their arms were strapped in an outstretched   position from the interval until the finale.
Often one of them would faint and be left prostrate until the end.
They could be friendly:
She took a great fancy to me, used to buy me presents.
I thought this was marvellous.
They weren't expensive gifts; a little posy, perfume.
Then she suggested that I go and stay with her in her flat.
I thought that  was wonderful.
I'd save lots of money as I wouldn't have to pay for digs.
When I told the Head Girl, she explained that the French girl was a lesbian.
Well, that didn't mean a thing to me, so she took me out next day to the Champs Elysée, into a very expensive shop.
There was a woman buying some lingerie for another.
The Head Girl warned that the same fate would happen to me.
I was intrigued, I still couldn't see what was wrong with having your underwear bought for you.
Then I heard there was a book about this lesbianism.
I got it and was shocked.
Even so I smuggled it home to England just because it was banned.
Maybe this records the Girls' first sighting of the nudes!
The Head Girl who was so anxious to shepherd Mary back to heterosexuality was Doris Birch.
She had lived in Paris so long that she had the appearance of a true Parisienne with her neatly bobbed hair, her brogues and long cigarette holder, inhaling the smoke as though she wanted it to reach her toes.
She had a highly charged emotional life, two-timing a Paris Wire journalist with a jockey who beat her up.
This probably accounted for the fact that she was not on duty at the theatre as much as she should have been and was very moody when she was there.
Also working in Paris were the Lawrence Tiller Girls
Once the show was on, life was fairly easy with one show a night lasting  from 8 till 11.30 pm seven days a week, and matinées on Saturdays and Sundays.
During their time off, there was an exciting world to explore for the adventurous.
A few developed a liking for the racecourse and as it had been drummed into them to dress correctly for every occasion, somehow they managed to provide themselves with the obligatory long trailing gowns by lending each other clothes and accessories; they appreciated the elegance of their suave escorts in tail coats and top hats.
Official invitations to all les Girls would be pinned up on the stage doorkeeper's noticeboard.
As their popularity grew, they became quite blasé when deciding what to accept.
It was the height of the nightclub era and naturally the owners were eager for the presence of the attractive dancers who had been delighting their members earlier in the evening.
One night several arrived in response to a typical invitation.
They found the gentlemen in the club in white tie and tails all smoking through long cigarette holders, as was the fashion.
Thankfully none of them tried the ‘feely feely’ business that the Girls loathed.
It was true they were very quiet which the Girls thought was a combination of shyness and the language barrier.
As they left they received a kiss on their hands.
Next morning the stage manager took great pleasure in informing them they had been to a women-only club.
Barbara Sutton was stunned:
I still didn't really understand when he said they were lesbians.
I thought it was a nationality and went round saying I'd met some strange women from Lesbia.
A couple had more facts of life shown to them by a taxi-driver.
Although it meant a detour he drove them through the Bois du Boulogne.
He knew where the nocturnal gatherings were held:
The first time was a bit of a shock.
He went through quietly with his lights off and then suddenly switched them on.
We learnt quite a bit.
Strategy was necessary to get out on a date alone.
The under-sixteens would be marshalled back in crocodile fashion by an older Girl of about twenty-six.
The matron of the Club was under strict orders from both the London office and the Rev F.A.
Cardew to keep a rigorous check on her charges.
In order to get official night leave, one successful plot was to pretend to have a brother or an uncle, depending on the prospective escort's age, who was supposedly visiting Paris.
With luck the senior Girl would tell them precisely what they could or could not do, and when they had to return to the Club.
The most open arrangement was to inform a rich suitor that if he wanted a date, he would have to take the whole troupe out.
This was a popular move as it guaranteed no ‘feely feely’.
Surprisingly the men were always delighted to take up the offer.
The Girls dared each other to go out with boys of their own age: after all they had to find out what a ‘French kiss’ entailed.
When they escaped with these younger, more eligible men, they loved to go to the bistros and discover French food.
A meal would only cost five francs but they noticed how the prices went up if their escorts were American, English or Australian.
Bowls of fruit, flowers, even the cruet would have to be paid  for.
They enjoyed the Moulin Rouge and Bal Tabarin, the club that presented a Russian act:
We used to see them dancing.
A knife here, a knife there.
It would stick in between their toes, it looked so easy.
In the cellars, absinthe was all the rage, one sip and you felt as though your head would come off.
A few were unfortunate, they fell in love with Russians.
Wasn't there something wrong with Russia at any time?
Anyway, they would fall in love with these Counts who were ten a penny and even pay for their drinks.
I warned them.
For every Tiller that admits to sneaking out, two will insist that they stayed indoors every night.
They all say there were no passionate affairs but occasionally the tempters must have been successful.
It is unlikely we shall ever know what some really got up to.
The famous Tiller discretion was instilled into them at the same time as their routines and with equal thoroughness.
The Tiller organization lost the Folies booking a couple of years after John's death but other work was soon offered in Paris by the Paramount cinema group.
It was on cine-variety lines and as the producer was Francis Mangon, he naturally brought over Ethel Helliwell to choreograph for him.
Whilst they were doing five shows a day and rehearsing at the Paramount, they were told to double at the Lido.
This was in the heart of the Champs Elysées and was a subterranean establishment consisting of a swimming pool, a Turkish bath and a cabaret:
We must have been going round like zombies.
It was like a nightclub at the Lido.
A very handsome place, a dance floor and a wonderful swimming pool.
On it were gondolas and beautiful-looking men punting the show girls.
The Turkish baths were quite near our dressing-rooms and we must have been so exhausted one night that we lost our way.
We suddenly found ourselves in the Turkish baths with a dozen nude men.
I don't know who was the most surprised.
The Paramount/Lido schedule was one of the most exhausting a Tiller line ever had to endure.
After a few months the Girls would be sent to perform in casinos, mainly dotted round the south of France and Monte Carlo.
Although they still did an average of three shows a night, after their stint in Paris this was easy.
It felt strange to be working so close to their audiences.
The stage area at the casino in Le Touquet was almost close enough to the tables to kick the glasses off.
Many of the musicians were unused to working with dancers and once when the band was out of tempo, the Girls started singing as they danced to get the music synchronized.
For the second show their Captain stood by the pianist and rapped out the rhythm.
The glamour of Monte Carlo was renowned so they were overjoyed when a troupe was summoned from England to appear in a special show for Prince Rainier's father at the Opera House.
Their billing announced  ‘The Girls are making a flying visit to Monte Carlo!’
It took them three days to get there via Dover, Calais, a train to Paris, and finally a coach to Monte Carlo.
At a subsequent season they were less keen when they found they were expected to work on a raft near the famous Sporting Club.
Eventually they became accustomed to the short trip to it by speedboat, the audience watching them from the casino.
The strangest selling for a Tiller routine — the raft at Monte Carlo
Tiller's style of precision dancing was naturally admired in Germany.
The outrageous May Sharples was in charge of the Girls there.
She had graduated from dancing to small parts at the Winter Gardens but because there was difficulty in getting money out of certain managements in Berlin, she was now a non-dancing Captain.
Frances Lunn describes her:
By the time I knew her, she was a mature woman.
She'd got a big bust.
She was notorious for having lots of love affairs which she told us all about.
She'd been to South Africa and showed us some lovely diamonds.
She tacked on to me because I was useful.
I was good at sewing, you see, and a good knitter.
She had me altering corsets.
I sat there sewing instead of rehearsing which I needed.
The novel life abroad made Frances disenchanted with Britain when she returned home for a spell:
We got used to the lovely coffee and rolls for breakfast.
There is no imagination here in England.
Tea is very insipid after good coffee.
We got used to having it with cream on the top, it was so thick.
Underneath it was piping hot.
In Vienna we had wiener schnitzel, beer and champagne.
We couldn't understand it when we got back home, our mothers cooking us eggs and bacon.
Frances not only developed a love for foreign food but an obsession for flying:
When I first went up, I had to sign a paper to say it was my  responsibility if anything happened.
I was wrapped up in an officer's uniform; you couldn't see me for fur and leather.
The pilot sat in front so I was in the back on my own.
It was all in the open in those days.
We went over the Alps.
We landed and a meal was set out and after our picnic, we went off again.
The Mangon Tillerettes with an unexplained child
When she arrived at the theatre that night she saw a note pinned up at the stage door stating that it had come to the management's notice that a Girl had been flying, which was forbidden!
There was no way she could get round the Captain now despite her talent for sewing.
With such exhilarating times, they found the Blackpool boys very ordinary on their return.
It was an impossible transition for many of them to make after years of travel.
Abroad they were feted, courted like film stars but always in the security of a group; then when they went back home they were expected to slip from their previous lifestyles into houses that sometimes had no hot water or inside w.c.
How could a working boy understand how a police escort had to be summoned in South America because there was such a large mob shouting and cheering for the ‘Ingleses’, or appreciate an imitation of Josephine Baker?
Their relations and old schoolfriends would tell them they had stepped out of their class, which in fact they had.
Some considered marrying their foreign boyfriends but hesitated:
It's a difficult decision but I knew if I married out there, well, there is a certain loneliness, yet going back to English life is unsatisfactory.
I knew an English woman who married in Sweden.
She had everything I wanted.
A beautiful home, it was lovely but she was so homesick, she would cry when she thought of London.
She had two children who only spoke Swedish, and she found she couldn't learn the language.
I was glad I knew her because I realized what would happen to me.
Many of course did marry and stay abroad.
Madame Derval, wife of the manager of the Folies, was Amy Campton, an early Tiller Girl.
Another became Countess Pierbalancourt.
But having courted and won a vivacious dancer the men usually wanted them to change:
When I got married, he wouldn't let me go to visit the Girls' Club.
I think he thought it was a brothel.
The French are so different.
I used to ask what I should do to fill the day and he'd simply say go to the park and knit.
We just had nothing in common and I couldn't communicate with his dull business friends.
Quite a few mothers nipped their daughters' dancing careers in the bud.
The very same women who had been all for their daughters travelling abroad seemed suddenly to get bored with the idea.
Perhaps it was because the glamorous life was too far away to show off their child to friends and relatives.
Perhaps they just became jealous.
Whatever the reason, the mothers often told their daughters that they should come home and look after them.
It was a common attitude:
After I left Tillers, I just came home and looked after my mother.
She wasn't terribly ill.
Why should I have to come home?
I had two sisters there already.
Poor Val Bryan never even managed to work abroad:
I worked in England but I always seemed to miss the good jobs abroad; every time I started rehearsing for something special, my mother would drag me away.
She seemed annoyed I was lucky.
Then when I was chosen with four others to go to the Folies, we were all excited about going then.
Jennie called me into the office and said that I couldn't go as she had received a letter from my mother.
Maybe the mothers were fearful that their daughters would marry and live abroad, the idea of permanent separation being too painful.
The answers will never be known as there were no confrontations.
The 1920s girl did as she was told and came home.
After two or three years of utter boredom in the bosom of their family, marriage seemed the only answer to those forced back home.
Many married shopkeepers and with typical Tiller discipline, enthusiasm and loyalty, they threw their energies into building good businesses with their husbands.
Years later friendship is their strongest memory:
We never had the chance to feel lonely.
We worked so hard together, chatted about our boyfriends, even shared our clothes.
We looked forward to going to the theatre every evening.
There was always something to talk about in the dressing-room.
If any wonder whether they made the right decision to come home and marry a British man, Dolly Howard who danced round the world had the wittiest appreciation of the difference between the continental men and the boys back home:
I went into the dressing-room and had to change with these men.
You can tell what men were like over there, they never bothered when they got changed.
I saw them putting on pale blue underpants.
I thought, That's funny, I've never seen pale blue underwear before.
Foreigners, they don't bother what they show.
‘We Were the Cream de la Crême’
WHEN WE first got to New York, the reporters met the boat and because they printed our names in the papers the Stage Door Johnnies started pestering us; they were a completely different sort from the European ones.
Bolder.
They would ring up and say, ‘I'm your uncle!’
I knew very well I'd not got an uncle in America.
What caused the men to be so desperate to contact the Girls?
John's strict paternalism fascinated the New York newsmen who described it as ‘Tiller's puritanical blue laws’.
The New York Herald headlined ‘These Girl's Don't Drink, Smoke or Flirt’ and printed an article, attributed to Mary, in which she explained how difficult it was for her to maintain discipline in a society where young girls were surrounded on every side by such bad examples of free and easy ways in all walks of life.
She claimed, and this certainly constituted a challenge to the American male:
No Tiller is ever seen with a man, she does not go out with a man, receive any man and the rule extends even to her father and brothers, no Girl holds a conversation with a man, inside or outside the theatre and if a man addresses her, she would say ‘Excuse me’ and walk away.
Going to America
She quoted from an address that John was supposed to give to his troupes whenever they were about to tour:
I now expect you young girls to keep bright and shining.
John Tiller expects each of his pupils to do her duty in keeping the Tiller standard flying high and white.
She reckoned that at this point, quite a few of them shed tears, but contrary to expectations there was apparently no Tiller flag hoisted or hymn sung.
The article went on to announce that although 35,000 had passed through the Tiller schools, not one Girl had been involved in a divorce, they had nearly all got married and to keep the record straight she hastily added, ‘Those that hadn't, all hoped to do so’.
Impressive reading it may have been for some, but tantalizing for the men and they certainly rose to the occasion.
Apart from receiving numerous phone calls, the Girls learnt about the male New Yorker's favourite pastime, the chase.
While window-shopping in Manhattan or on Broadway, they would find that they were being followed block after block, then, having sized up her figure and made certain the Girl was aware she was being followed, the man would walk ahead, glance round to check that her face was as good as her body and start a conversation.
Whether successful or not, the hunter would make a charming farewell and stroll off to make another conquest.
Often a second man would be standing by to perform the same ritual.
Some of the Girls enjoyed such encounters; others loathed them:
They were that cheeky.
In cafes they would come up and sit at your table and chat as though they had known you all their lives.
I didn't like that at all.
Those that hated the familiarity rarely went out and left the States as soon as their initial contract was completed.
Others went on dates and often married their suitors.
Despite publicity about their strict code of conduct, it was obvious that the rules had been broken because when the time came for the first troupe to go home, John was astounded to learn that eight out of the sixteen had married during the run and intended to remain behind and every one of the other eight was engaged.
In order to protect his investment in their training, he immediately inserted a clause into later contracts stipulating that no marriages take place during the booking.
Naturally this was publicized in the newspapers.
At the height of their popularity in New York, there were three lines working in Broadway.
As the Lollipops were finishing and preparing to go on tour, twenty-four Tiller Girls were in the Ziegfeld Follies and there were sixteen Sunshine Girls at the Globe Theatre.
Although reporters gave the impression that the troupes were new to the American stage, they had  in fact made their debut as far back as 1900 when George Lederer booked them to perform their original Pony Trot .
More recently Charles Dillingham and George White had visited the Palace Theatre, London and were so impressed that they booked the Girls to appear in Good Morning Dearie, George White's Scandals of 1923, the Nifties of 1923 as well as all the Fred Stone promotions.
The great Florenz Ziegfeld saw the forty-eight Girls in the Folies-Bergère in Paris and took them under contract for a six month spell into his own Follies which he extended to three years.
RKO studio shot showing Mary in charge
Mary Read, who had first worked in New York in 1916 with the Sunshine Girls , endeared herself to reporters by telling them of her great love of the city.
She persuaded John to open a school at 226 West 72nd Street which incorporated an office where negotiations to import Tillers could be conducted, and a rehearsal studio where she trained American pupils as well as the troupes.
She was a hard taskmaster but a considerably fairer one than la Belle Ethel.
Objective rather than objectionable was the unanimous verdict of the proletariat who always addressed her as Miss Read.
As soon as she gave up dancing in the line to supervise the school, her nubile appearance became plump as she enjoyed dining well, a  pleasure shared with John where the plumpness developed into fatness.
When Jennie did finally cross the Atlantic in 1925, a rare photograph of the two women together shows them looking remarkably like Tweedledum and Tweedledee.
John was as diplomatic as Mary when talking to the press.
When asked why the British Girls were so superior in his style of dancing he replied:
There are no girls on earth that have the beauty of face of the American girl, nor the peculiar charm of your lasses.
But I doubt if American girls have the perseverance required to compete with Tiller Girls in dance and drilling.
Of course America produces wonderful dancers, great soloists as the term goes.
By tactfully praising and criticizing at the same time, he had pupils flocking into the school, eager to train, rightly believing he had special abilities in this sphere.
But he never put an American girl into one of his troupes.
Ethel, with her good looks, height and dancing standards, was naturally one of the first to be sent across.
Finding that Mary Read was totally in control of all work out there, she swiftly gave in her notice.
She had the sense to realize there could not be two Queen Bees within one organization, even in such a large country, and anyway it meant being separated from her lover Mangon.
The sea voyage from Britain necessitated daily rehearsals to keep the Girls limbered.
These were usually called early in the morning to ensure that the other passengers were not disturbed.
The Girls were highly embarrassed though when John transported two Pekinese dogs as a gift for Mary.
Jennie always had two of the same breed yapping away in her office.
She made it plain to them that she was upset by his tactless gesture.
After disembarkation, the first appointment was always with the furriers:
Whether we wanted to or not, we had to have a fur coat.
I remember we arrived during a heat wave and had to go into this refrigerator where they kept the furs.
We had to buy one; it certainly wasn't given and don't forget we hadn't been paid a salary while travelling.
My friend had a leopard skin and I had a coney seal with a mink marmot collar and cuffs.
Years later my mother could hardly wait for me to pass it on to her.
It went all through the family.
After the furriers we all trooped off to the same dentist who X-rayed our teeth which was unusual in Britain then.
Apartments had been booked for them in one block and they shared in couples.
Most enjoyed the luxury of employing a cleaner to do their housework but a few took a puritanical delight in doing their own.
The wholesomeness of the Tiller Girls appealed to Fred Stone
It was theatre practice to put dancers in dressing-rooms situated at the top of the building which was totally illogical as troupes always had more changes of costume than solo acts and less time to complete them.
On Broadway they appreciated the benefits of the most modern theatres in the world.
Although still on the top floor, they now had lifts, or rather elevators, to take them up and once inside the dressing-room each Girl had her own mirror well lit by bulbs surrounding three sides just as they had seen in the films.
Instead of tripping over their shoes while doing quick changes, each chair had pockets where they could thrust them out of the way.
In theatres all over the world performers are expected to turn up at the ‘half’ to start making up.
In New York they were called an hour before the show opened, and once they had done their face make-up, they only had to put on tights rather than spend a long time carefully using wet white, which gave them longer to gossip.
There were no restrictions about hair length as wigs were worn for most numbers.
Fred Stone was a Broadway star who used Tiller lines in all his shows at the Globe Theatre;Tip Top, Stepping Stones, Criss Cross and Ripples .
His wife and daughter starred with him so the wholesomeness of the Tillers suited the family image he was anxious to present.
One Head Girl had to reprimand an avid garlic eater.
Unfortunately she had been placed next to Dorothy, Fred's daughter, in one routine.
She complained to her father, he in turn to the Head Girl.
Life had a feeling of unreality about it — as though they were acting in a film
Life-size photographs were displayed outside the theatre during final rehearsals and an enormous amount of publicity was generated before the show but Opening nights always took them by surprise.
American  audiences showed their appreciation as only they could.
The applause that greeted them was like a thunder clap and went on for so long that the Girls could not hear the music and had to count under their breath to synchronize their kicks.
After the production had opened rehearsals were held only once a week; it was a comparatively easy life after the work in cine-variety that most of them had done.
After the show they would stroll back to their apartments and on the way visit the drugstores for a sarsaparilla or an ice cream soda.
Life had a feeling of unreality about it, as though they were acting in a film all the time:
I was always broke.
Very often I dined on a banana split, which was enormous: it consisted of a whole banana, three scoops of ice cream, syrup and whipped cream and only cost 25 cents; we also lived on delicatessen sandwiches and salads and were so excited with the automats where we put our money in and out popped coffee.
No wonder I had a fat face.
Their salaries in America were usually $45 a week, the equivalent of £10.
Income tax was minimal; Marie Webster had an old demand showing that of a total of $604 only $3.90 was payable.
Through the Tiller office some lucky Girls received offers to advertise products.
Two promoted silk stockings and Florence Stack appeared in newspaper advertisements praising Tokalon beauty products.
Although most Tillers were spendthrifts and never had a ha'penny or cent to their names, Florence was a financial wizard.
She loaned them money, saved it for them or doled it out when necessary, all the transactions being written on the souvenir programme of whatever show she was appearing in.
The others said:
Where there was money, there she was.
She always had a sugar daddy.
She was the best dressed Girl in the line.
She even invested money in South Africa, listened and learnt what these men had to say.
We couldn't understand a blind thing when she tried to explain to us.
Many of the shows were successful and there were many invitations to parties.
They were thrilled when they suddenly realized that not only had Tom Mix and Gloria Swanson been in the audience on opening night but were in the same room with them at the party afterwards.
Despite Mary's claim in the press, they were allowed more freedom in New York than ever before with their own apartments and telephones.
There were certainly no more crocodile files or strictly supervised hostels.
New York is renowned for its effect on the personalities of outsiders and the Girls all went through a metamorphosis.
Because there was no language barrier, everything seemed the same yet it was so very different.
Their strengths and weaknesses were highlighted.
The shy, quiet ones withdrew even more and had no wish to prolong their contracts.
Yet when they did get home their families remarked how much more outgoing they had become.
Others could not wait to merge into the New World and when marriage seemed to an easy route, they were soon sporting engagement rings off-stage but definitely not when Mary was around.
Rarely did any Tiller Girl stand out in a glamorous way but stunning was always the word used to describe Violet Bryant nicknamed Ginger because of her glorious red hair, she could not possibly blend in with the others.
Those dancing next to her in the line always felt dowdy by comparison.
With her hooded eyes loaded with mascara she was often likened to Myrna Loy and was eventually given a film test, a frequent occurrence for beauties in the 1920s.
Nothing came of it as unfortunately she was not photogenic.
When a famous cartoonist wrote asking if he could draw her she had no hesitation in accepting.
With an unusual daring for a Tiller she took on the life of a Broadway dancer, the men flocked to her and she basked in their admiration.
In May the Girls would sit out on the steel fire escapes during shows and write home complaining about the unaccustomed heat.
Because New York in the summer was too hot even for the natives, shows would close for a couple of months when the Girls would be sent home for a holiday on half pay, which was better than the average salary in Britain.
After a few days swanking round relatives and old schoolfriends, the novelty of showing off the new clothes and slang such as‘She stinks on ice, kid,’ wore off.
The slower pace bored and irritated them so much that they longed to go back and their parents were almost glad to see them off.
When the Broadway productions finished, sometimes entire shows would go on tour.
It was a grand chance to see all the states and sometimes Canada, even if it was rather too fast moving.
The Lollipop timetable of  one night stands meant that they visited seventy-two venues in twelve weeks; although they did not venture further than St. Louis, it was exhausting and afterwards they could remember very little about each town.
A comparatively leisurely schedule of Yours Truly still entailed travelling to twenty-one cities in thirty-five weeks.
On this particular tour they were based in Chicago for seven weeks and expected to see gangsters shooting on the sidewalks every minute.
This they avoided as they followed their Head Girl's strict instructions to keep out of the rough areas.
They were astonished to find club owners using the city's violent reputation as a tourist attraction.
One man made a point of showing the Girls the bullet holes in the walls and in their tablecloth.
Another indicated the back of a diner and told them it was Al Capone.
Mary would have had a blue fit if she had known about Ethel Ramsden's adventure:
It was Prohibition times so I used to go to speakeasies.
You'd knock on the door and a little slit would open.
You never knew what you were drinking.
We went to a place that was called ‘Judges’.
There were two black entertainers banging away at a piano.
This owner called Judge, he got hold of me, promised me a motor car, a fur coat and I don't know what.
I was so green I didn't know what was behind it and boasted that I could become Judge's Baby when I got back to the dressing-room.
Of course the Captain forbade me to go anywhere near the place again.
The John Tillers were settled in the Ziegfeld Follies when the Lawrence Girls turned up in their practice outfits to join them.
Considerably more sophisticated, John's Girls swiftly nicknamed the newcomers the Tiller Babes.
The man in the dramatic pose is Herr Gross
The most remarkable booking was made in 1924 when Florenz Ziegfeld chose a troupe from both John and Lawrence to be in his Follies in New York.
When the Lawrence Girls arrived, John's tended to be considerably older, having had to work their way up through their hierarchy before being allowed into the promised land of show business.
Taking a patronizing look at the newcomers, all aged only between seventeen and twenty and dressed in little check practice outfits, they decided that they looked childish and immediately nicknamed them the Tiller Babes.
Not only did Amy always travel with them but John was regularly at rehearsals.
Fortunately the two groups only met at one session.
John roared, ‘Get that leg up’ and struck his cane on the floor with an enormous bang.
The Lawrence Girls froze with fear; their boss had often shouted but not with such force.
Then they relaxed.
John was chastising one of his own.
All the same, they made sure they lifted their legs as high as possible.
Apparently Ziegfeld spied on rehearsals by watching through a peephole in the wall.
Although there was very little difference between a ‘John’ and a ‘Lawrence’in dance technique, their attitudes were totally different.
John's firm having been established for nearly forty years by this time, the rival Lawrence Girls were definitely more earthy in character, with not a snob amongst them possibly because they did not have such a long tradition.
At the time when both troupes were staying together at the English Girls' Club in Paris, although the Johns were convinced there was a rule that they should not mix, it never entered the others' heads.
Free from outdated rules regarding outdoor clothing and morals, the Lawrences certainly had a more lively manner.
Whereas a John Tiller never expected fairness, the Lawrences did and would speak out.
Although the Johns were shaken to the roots when the youngsters turned up, they avidly watched their routines.
Having been brainwashed to think that all other troupes were inferior, they never ceased to be surprised when they managed to watch them dance.
Even the perfectionists were impressed and admitted they came away with their tails between their legs having learnt a great lesson about false pride.
Marriage was forbidden in their contracts too, but so many of the so-called babes broke the rule during the season that Amy found it impossible to replace them; not having a large pool of dancers back in Britain she decided to bring the unmarried ones back after the first year's contract was completed.
The Girls black up for one of their routines
It suits managers, producers and directors to encourage naïvety in their dancers.
That way, they query nothing and never answer back; as a result they are not known for their political judgement, but, during the Depression they were jolted into social awareness.
They saw men trying to make money by selling apples and oranges at street corners and the brave attempt of others to look smart with well-polished shoes, pressed suits and hidden frayed cuffs.
The obvious unfairness of such poverty side by side with conspicuous affluence reminded them of their vulnerable parents back home.
Mary Read continued to manage the school in New York after John's death.
Completely independent, she took and needed no advice in theatrical matters; she had listened well to John, accepted responsibility and took every chance that came her way.
She provided dancers for Criss Cross, The Three Musketeers in 1928 and Ripples in 1930.
When the Girls left to get married at the end of each show, rather than risk Jennie's haphazard choice of replacements, she sent over the two Head Girls who were almost resident in America, Rene Todd or Dorothy Sabine, to make their own selection.
John was proved wrong in his observation that American girls did not have the perseverance to train to his standards of precision.
After his death, the Missouri Rockets were formed.
They evolved into the famous thirty-six Rockettes at Radio City Music Hall.
Just as English dance directors eventually copied the Tiller style and undercut fees, so did the American managers.
The union representing the performers were militantly opposed to British dancers taking work from them and there was a lean period for the sixteen Girls left.
Trying to live on a half salary of $25 was difficult.
They moved to cheaper hotels where they were not supposed to have food in their rooms but took it in turns to get breakfast and hide tiny stoves in the wardrobes while waving the cooking fumes out of the window.
They would go to restaurants for their main meal and take advantage of the generous portions served to share a meal between two.
The ones able to secure ‘sugar daddies’ fooled the poor men into thinking that there was a Tiller rule that they only go out in twos and threes and so managed to get meals for their best friends as well.
Banana splits still solved acute hunger problems but gorgeous undies were forgotten for the first time.
Bravely they still tried to send a regular allowance home.
Their loyalty was rewarded when Mary signed a contract with RKO studios, initially for six months.
It was real progress in the entertainment business.
She negotiated a fee of $1,800 a week from which she had to pay the Girls' salaries of $45 each, netting considerably more for herself.
They really were going to be in pictures.
They were off to Hollywood!
Each member of the troupe had to sign the formidable contract.
It was strictly binding concerning their exclusive services to RKO so there would be no perks for performing at parties or advertising products.
As was to be expected in American contracts there was a paragraph prohibiting any act that would shock, insult or offend the community or degrade them in society.
One of the prettiest of this troupe was Bella Pilling; she was thrilled that her mother could buy the movie magazines that featured numerous  publicity shots of the troupe.
Each time she finished a film, she would tell Mum the title and once it reached the cinema, Mrs Pilling was to be seen at every performance.
Nicknamed Janet Gaynor by the make-up artists because of her resemblance to the star, she was generally liked not simply because of her sunny nature, but because she had a special hobby; she read the teacups.
It was a quick route to popularity and she was invited out more than the others.
When she was missing on the set, she could always be found in the stars' dressing-rooms.
Bella never put on airs and graces, remaining a real Blackpool girl.
The stars must have enjoyed her shouting out her catch phrase of ‘'old onto yer 'at’ followed by her infectious laughter as she launched into their futures.
After John's death, Mary proved she had listened well by signing a profitable contract with the RKO studios
The Girls were most impressed when Mary bought a Daimler and employed a chauffeur so they in turn bought a car between them and shared the running costs.
‘Tripping Tessie’, as they called it, was the pride and joy of their lives.
Richard Dix felt differently: ‘Don't you put that tin thing next to my car,’ he shouted as they parked.
They were thrilled to meet members of the Kennedy family, Mary Pickford, Charlie Chaplin.
Greta Garbo even asked to be introduced to them .
She wanted to know if they liked America and appearing in movies.
‘Just like a queen,’ was their description of her manner.
All of them had been trained by the School from the age of eight or nine, eight having made their debut at the Winter Gardens at Blackpool.
After working in all the major cities on the Continent, they could allow themselves a little self praise.
‘We were the cream de la crême,’ recollects one.
While working in films Mary set the pattern of work for the next fifty years.
She inaugurated the practice outfit that distinguished them in press photos — black pants, white blouse, ankle socks and the black bow tie that they were so nervous of mislaying.
More important was the style of dancing which was now defined by a shorthand record of steps.
They rarely performed as individuals; from now on they were to remain in line, arms linked behind each other.
Despite their renewed popularity in the 1950s, no Tiller troupe had the pleasure of visiting America again.
They appeared with Irene Dunne in many films:Three Cheers, Half Shot at Sunrise, Babes in Toyland and so on.
After the RKO contract expired the few unmarried Girls came home.
Florence, the financial wizard, subsequently worked as a hostess in clubs in London.
Bella married a butcher who displayed her photographs in his shop while she charmed the customers in the same way she had charmed the stars.
As a final tribute to the American male, one Girl literally jumped ship as the gangplank was being pulled away, leaving her sister to face the music with their parents.
And Ginger?
Well, she was to dance for another twenty years.
Mary Read closed the school after providing one final line-up in the Princetown Follies in 1935.
Then she married an American.
In 1956 she visited Blackpool and the Head Girl at the Opera House was detailed to entertain her.
She was never told by the London office or by Mary herself of the important part that Miss Read had played in the Tiller story.
At home in Manchester or Blackpool parents were thrilled to find numerous publicity shots of their Girls in movie magazines
For the few that returned to Britain, life would never be the same
‘The Mrs Carries On'
The Lawrence Tiller Girls in the Folies-Bergère Revue at the Victoria Palace
AFTER JOHN'S death in 1925 one New York newspaper ran an article describing how the Tiller business was progressing without the great man.
The headline was ‘The Mrs Carries On’ and so she did.
For many years, there had been no reason to scour the streets for pupils.
Due to an unending stream of publicity in all manner of publications, there were constant applications by post and from dancers simply arriving at the office.
To be a Tiller Girl was a golden vision.
Newspaper publicity always gave the impression that the school could train anyone from scratch with little or no dance experience so young readers felt that they could just turn up without an appointment and would immediately be seen by this apparently motherly woman called Jennie Tiller.
It was true; that was just the way it happened.
The fact that she was such an eccentric character meant that only those with strong personalities survived.
The audition of the Port twins was typical:
I was climbing up all these stairs to the office and thought by the time I get to her, I'll be too puffed to dance properly.
Knocked at the door and these Pekes starting yakking away.
Mrs Tiller said, ‘Take off your skirt, you can leave your hat on.’
Good job I had a good pair of drawers on.
I kept me beret on.
I did two kicks, cartwheels and splits then she told me to get dressed.
I thought no way have I got in, it was too quick but she said I could start the following Monday.
Although they saw other Girls rehearsing in troupe, Elsie and Eddie Port seemed to be the only pupils who were training at the School.
They laughed from morning to night:
We were taught by Jessie.
Laugh, we never laughed so much in our lives.
I always remember Jessie saying, ‘Come on twins, let's go over the tap,’ and we'd go through it to the tune Sitting On Top Of The World .
When Jennie came in and asked to see what we were doing, we were giggling so much, she would say, ‘What are yer giggling at, yer little monkeys?’
Jennie had other ideas apart from ordering ‘See tha' gets tha's privates washed before tha' gets my costumes on.’
She believed in building them up.
She always paid for their meals during rehearsals and they would troop off to the Express Dairy cafeteria opposite.
She stressed the importance of hot milk at night.
For aches in limbs she would hand them Epsom salts.
Next morning she simply would not accept they were still trembling all over but would just nod and say, ‘Oh yes, I can see you're much better, luv.’
She believed in the benefits of Turkish Baths for slimming.
‘Oh Jessie, she's no good,’ she would say in front of the poor, unfortunate Girl.
‘Look at her knees, they're like piano legs, aren't they awful?’
Then to the Girl, ‘Yer legs are too fat, luv; go and have a Turkish Bath,’ and hand her half a crown.
Elsie and Edith Port were so alike that Jennie dosed the wrong one with her cure for all ailments — castor oil.
Here are the twins with their sister, Birdie
Sunny Rogers showed Jennie such deferential treatment that she was uncharacteristically taken aback:
She was just going out of the door.
I ran like mad to open it for her.
‘What are yer doing that for?
I'm not the Queen,’ she said.
I thought, all right, I'd better not do that again.
Then when she was going out the next day and I made no attempt to open it, she said ‘Where's yer manners?‘
Sunny Rogers (sixth from right) remembers Jennie going along the line pouring disinfectant on their bleeding feet
She rarely attempted to create new routines but one idea she did think up had painful consequences.
She thought it would be clever for a team to kick ‘on pointe’(on their toes).
She knew they could kick well and seeing ballet dancers on pointe, not being a dancer, thought it would be simple to  combine the two.
She reasoned that if kicking dancers were so popular with audiences, the sight of kicking on pointe would astound them.
She forced the Girls through their paces for a complete day, at the end of which they fell exhausted in a line on a bench.
When they took their shoes off they found their feet were bleeding.
Jennie summed up the problem in an instant and walked along the row pouring a bottle of disinfectant on their injuries, doubling their pain.
Thankfully she did not persist in pursuing her mad idea.
Her methods of teaching were rudimentary, to say the least.
Maisie Williams was thrilled when she was told to turn up the following week:
I thought I wonder what for?
She never did tell people what they were going to be doing.
When I got to the first rehearsal she announced, ‘You're all going to be in the Command Performance.’
Well I'd never been on stage in my life before and there I was, suddenly going to be in front of King George and Queen Mary.
I used to get so tired, she would hold up my black practice pants around the waist, hoist me up and down saying ‘On yer balls, Girl, on yer balls.
’ I had to do extra rehearsals because I was new and she would daub my legs with methylated spirits and iodine.
I used to go home on the train with striped legs.
She was an absolute scream.
Her attempts to teach them a step was hysterical.
She would mince about in her old fashioned winkle-picker shoes not knowing the first thing about dancing.
‘Do this Girls, follow me.’
Behind her back they were all doubling up with laughter wondering what she meant.
‘Follow me, what are yer laughing at, yer daft things?’
As in all rehearsal studios there were large mirrors from ceiling to floor enabling the Girls to see their mistakes.
Their bodies generated so much heat that the mirrors steamed up.
Jennie did not realize the purpose of the mirrors and would shout, ‘Don't be looking at yerself, don't be admiring yerself in the mirror.’
If the Girls were ‘Tillerized’ into thinking of nothing but the Tiller organization, so was Jennie.
A line once appeared in Dublin in cine-variety  Afterwards the Head Girl reported back to her: ‘It went very well, Mrs Tiller, better than ‘Ben Hur !’
‘Who's Ben Hur ’?’ she enquired, thinking it was a rival act.
When Francis Mangon was put in charge of the Rex Cinema in Paris, he presented the Forty-eight Mangon Tillerettes .
The show was another cine-variety bill, even better value than the British equivalent offering two feature films as well as variety.
There were five shows a day, rehearsal starting sharp at 9 am, the show ending at midnight.
One minute's lateness would earn a strict rebuke.
They would even have to go through the new routines in between shows.
There was a canteen for snacks in the building but they preferred to go to a bar in rue Pigalle where an Englishman, Fred Payne, would dish up their favourite meal which was still egg and chips.
The day before opening night was the time they all dreaded.
The fact that Mangon fully deserved his title of Wizard of Lighting was of minor importance to the Girls who, due to his perfectionism, often only had a few hours' sleep in their dressing-rooms, and occasionally none at all.
They were unable to appreciate the spectacle in the auditorium.
Once seated the audience would see the theatre ceiling as though it were open to the sky at night; stars twinkling and a moon shining.
A silver stairway on stage led down to the stalls.
All Vera Manning knew was exhaustion:
We were dressed in net leotards covered with silver spangles, our gauntlets and berets too, from top to toe.
There was a famous operetta star singing Parlez-moi d'Amour .
We would start at the top of the stairs.
Come down with a hand on each other 's shoulders.
By the time we were halfway down they were applauding like mad.
When all forty-eight of us were on the stage, we couldn't kick in a straight line, so we danced in a semi-circle.
After we had rehearsed for three weeks, on the very last night of rehearsal, we worked till four in the morning then photos were taken of us in these spangled costumes; because they stretched from our ankles to our necks, we couldn't sit down.
Two or three hours in these we were.
In one shot I'm the only person not smiling, I was thinking ‘sod this for a bloody laugh!'
At one point there were sixty Tiller Girls on stage dancing to The Blue Danube , all in blue picture hats with ribbons, midnight blue leotards and chiffon skirts.
The orchestra was conducted by Oscar Straus.
He was almost the most elegant man many of them had ever seen.
Tall, slim, white-haired in perfect evening dress with the Star of Russia, an enormous ruby round his neck.
Mangon told them he had been unable to get work permits for a show at another venue.
He asked, well told them, to double.
So on top of the five shows and rehearsals every day at the Rex, they did another four at the Olympia and did not even receive double salaries but only one and a half.
The Rex/Olympia doubling soon finished but before they could relax to a comparatively simple regime of five shows a day, they were told to double at the Paramount.
Off they went again, attempting to complete nine shows a day and remain sane.
With greater experience they now organized themselves.
The first one on stage had to be the first off the  coach that trundled them to and fro.
Over all this exhaustion Ethel Helliwell reigned supreme, supervising her 160 Girls.
She frequently flew between Paris, Cannes, the Sporting Club at Monte Carlo and London for rehearsals.
Thanks to her relationship with Mangon, she was well paid for her services:
The secretary of the Mangon organization said, ‘Your salary is ridiculous; as far as you're concerned, I'm going to see you get £10 for every theatre you work in.’
So I made £70 a week.
Then he looked after the income tax, which was a bit of a headache.
Her unique status had given her unusual confidence for a Tiller.
By the 1930s she had stopped dancing in the line; there was hardly time in her schedule, but she and her sister Mabel would sometimes perform a fan dance duet in cine-variety bills.
‘Mabs’, as she was affectionately called, also did a great deal of choreography.
She had the same tall grace and was equally good looking in a gentler way with great soulful eyes.
Although Mabel was a more sympathetic personality than her sister Ethel, when it came to discipline she was equally strict, the difference being that she did not take pleasure in enforcing the ruthless repetition that was necessary to get the routines to perfection and consequently the Girls adored her.
Nine shows a day plus rehearsals was too much for them.
They were young enough to cope with the physical exhaustion but trying to memorize so many routines became unbearable.
They were glad to be sent to Cannes to recuperate with only one show a night.
It was a great shock to the Girls when Jennie died on 21 February, 1936.
Although she had been seen at the school less frequently over the past few years, rehearsals and contracts were organized so smoothly that the dancers had not noticed her gradual disappearance.
Whereas John's will had been full of retribution, Jennie in one sentence thanked the thirteen people she considered important in her life and asked that they should simply ‘share and share alike’.
It was truly democratic; she not only named six Head Girls, Mr Smith and Miss Doris but had not forgotten the loyalty of William.
She even charitably included Mary Read.
In fact she was following her husband's wishes that those who had helped create a fortune should now inherit it.
The decline of the entertainment business generally was reflected in her estate.
The houses in Blackpool, London and Manchester had been sold long ago.
The company flats and rehearsal studios were on short leaseholds.
The Tiller fortune had now dwindled to just over £3,000.
It was unlikely that anyone knowing Jennie would have agreed with the description of her occupation on the death certificate — widow of John Tiller.
For all her strange behaviour in rehearsals and in the office, she had held her position as director for eleven years and during that time the Tiller troupes still commanded the highest respect and dominated all other dance troupes.
Despite her eccentricity and the fact that they couldn't help laughing at her, the Girls would readily acknowledge that she gave them as much, if not more, affection than they had received from their own parents.
Her belief in their abilities and the ideas she instilled into them had carried them through situations that they would otherwise have found  impossible.
The bond was so strong that they would feel her presence all their lives.
She certainly did not live in the shadow of John; she was her own person and deserved to be described as more than a widow.
Although they knew they would never forget Jennie, the Girls wanted her to have a permanent memorial so they had a collection and made a most practical and fitting choice: a marble floor for the church of St Stephen on the Cliffs, Blackpool.
After Jennie's death, William's life seemed to take a rapid downward course.
He had become increasingly dirty and unkempt.
Without any reason he left the Firm of his own free will and went to live in Brighton.
He felt confident enough of the friendship of Doris and Mr Smith to visit them regularly but they felt distressed to see his appearance deteriorating so fast.
Mr Smith started to give him new clothes but soon realized that William had no wish to be clean, as on the next visit the new suit would be filthy.
Eventually he was taken into the West Sussex hospital and when Mr Smith visited him, he asked for some chlorodyne.
A nurse intercepted him before he left and queried whether William had requested it.
Apparently he had become addicted to it and the gradual disintegration of William was at last explained.
Now the full weight of responsibility fell on Doris.
Mr Smith had firmly kept to his intention of dealing only with the financial side of the business and absolutely refused to participate in the selection of Girls.
In many ways life was easier for both of them.
They no longer had to wait for the elusive Jennie to finish making a steak and kidney pudding before sanctioning an important business decision, but they had taken over in lean times and Doris began to find the strain intolerable.
For so many years, she had been tied morning, noon and night to Jennie.
Now it was a solitary life.
There was general unemployment in the country which in turn affected the attendance of audiences so offers of work were dwindling.
Lean times were getting leaner.
In cine-variety the mighty Wurlitzer replaced not only the orchestra but performers too.
To top it all Mangon and Ethel had a row which unfortunately affected the employment of a large number of dancers.
After years of blatant unfaithfulness, Mangon formed a serious relationship with a soubrette in the show.
Although he had dallied with other performers, this time it was the final straw for Ethel — this one, she considered, was rotten at her job!
The atmosphere between them was chilly enough for the most naive Girl to notice.
One day he threw a book at Ethel in front of them.
That was it; she stormed out, left Paris immediately, returned to Blackpool and married her childhood sweetheart.
She never danced again and rarely attended a theatre.
As far as the Tiller office was concerned, the quarrel was acute and the consequence far reaching.
they not only lost the services of Ethel but because Mangon stopped booking the Girls, all 160 jobs were lost.
The combination of so many factors contributed to a serious decline in the contracts on offer.
Quite a few Girls went into variety acts, sometimes forming their own.
The less courageous ones sat in the Express Dairy cafe with all the other out-of-work performers.
All through the week they gathered waiting for someone to pop his or her head round the entrance  and shout that there was an audition, and they were off like a shot, their audition clothes naturally packed in a case by their table.
Thursday was the highlight of the week.
The Stage was published on that day and they would sit at tables in threes and fours sharing a single cup of coffee Everyone was generous about sharing job information and they had the bonus of the Tiller name behind them.
If they were on their beam-ends the really desperate might brave an audition with the dreaded Sherman  Fisher.
Like many dance directors he imitated the Tiller style and by undercutting could offer some work.
No matter how long they had been unemployed, the Girls felt guilty when auditioning for other troupes.
The ghost of Mrs Tiller would loom above them telling them they were letting her down.
An unusual job was created by a national newspaper for publicity purposes.
A team called the Daily Mirror Eight toured seaside towns during the summer from June till the end of August.
Doris and the editor auditioned dancers who had to perform physical exercises along with acrobatic dancing.
They rehearsed at New Cross Stadium and had to get a suntan to look fit.
Once they were on the road they had their own coach, staying a day or half a day in each town.
It was free to the public, promoting the Daily Mirror .
They performed in the park if there was one and on the sand if there was not.
That proved difficult as they couldn't balance and the kicking routine was murder!
The audiences particularly loved the Indian clubs routine and after the show would come up and rub their suntan to see if it was real.
The Girls who got the contract loved it; they earned £8.10s a week and stayed in the best hotels.
At each town the Captain had to greet the mayor and they tucked in to an excellent meal afterwards.
The Girls were aware that there was considerably less work available but did not realize that the finances of the school were causing serious concern.
Francis Laidler was still using the troupes for his superbly lavish pantomimes.
He had been a loyal supporter for many years, his business relationship stretching back to the 1900s when he booked John's touring pantomimes.
Now he presented an average of five on his own, always booking the Girls.
Considering that he started his adult life as a wine and spirits salesman, he had certainly learnt the art of showmanship: whatever the fluctuating state of the theatre, he always managed to pay an enormous wage bill for his large casts.
Emile Littler was a much younger producer of rival pantomimes; feeling more than a little disloyal, Mr Smith wrote to him in desperation suggesting that he might be interested in his dancers.
Littler was a wily businessman who knew very well that things were difficult for them and realized how badly they needed his business.
Although he had no doubts about the Girls' standard of work he would only take up on Smith's offer if his organization was efficient.
He insisted that he should visit the Tiller office so that he could observe at first hand how things were run.
A deal was made which was of great benefit to both sides as Littler went on to present pantomimes for many years, sometimes as many as a dozen annually.
The fact that Laidler and Littler often had Tiller troupes in the same town without conflict said a great deal for the professional attitude of the producers concerned.
An outstanding Girl at this time was Phyl Blakeston.
Unusually tall, even for the Plaza troupe which was her line, her excellent dancing seemed to come so naturally to her, that the other Girls were full of praise for her work.
Littler was attracted by her elegance and firm authority when she was Head Girl in one of his shows and he persuaded her to work in his organization and leave Tillers.
She took the opportunity despite the fact  that many of her colleagues let her know that they judged her disloyal.
Phyl would have stayed in show business without the help of Littler but she was fortunate in that she met him at the right time, when he was building up his pantomime empire.
Unlike with Mangon and Ethel there were no angry scenes for the Girls to witness.
They had mutual respect and remained devoted friends till he died in 1985.
One of Phyl's Plaza chums, Mignon Harman had an unhappy life at this time; she had been adopted by a doctor and on the surface was a vivacious person spending her time playing cards and laughing with the rest of them.
She was supposed to be engaged to a wealthy young Jewish boy whom no one ever met, and they began to wonder if he existed.
She was unusually affected for a Tiller, wanting to be called Mignon Diamante.
Those outside the card-playing school viewed her suspiciously because she seemed to get embarrassing crushes on a few of her colleagues.
The friendship between the Girls can aptly be described as sisterly.
It was very undemanding, revolving round the borrowing of clothes, and helping each other with routines.
For Mignon it often meant more and her coworkers realize, looking back with the wisdom of a long lifetime, that she wanted a lesbian relationship with more than one of them.
Tragically she never chose anyone who cared to respond.
She attempted suicide several times, always while working and in highly dramatic circumstances, starting with threats at the top of the Commodore, Hammersmith.
Of course in such unenlightened days no one attempted to reason with her.
It was well beyond the comprehension of most ordinary people, let alone the inhibited Miss Doris.
After her third attempt she was sacked.
Years later at the age of thirty-eight, she finally killed herself.
The morale of the Lawrence Tiller Girls was high when they appeared in two Royal Command Performance shows before he retired in 1936
Life for Ginger had become a roller-coaster but she was a survivor.
Like other Girls back from America, she continued to accept whatever job was offered.
It must have been dull touring around Britain after Broadway but she knew of no alternative.
Her real sweetheart was an alcoholic but although he was her one and only true love she had impetuously married a  solicitor.
Quickly realizing that the relationship would never work, there was a terrible row in which she threw the wedding ring at him and stormed out.
Going back to her old love was impossible because of his drinking habits.
When he finally died of alcoholism, she returned to the only job she knew, dancing.
She was invaluable for remembering original routines, which she had learnt from old John Tiller himself.
She was made Head Girl and although it was not acknowledged by anyone in authority, she was already drinking too much.
The dilemma of whether to marry was more coolly assessed now.
Bandboys were fun but strictly barred by the Tiller office.
The unusually benevolent Mr Smith had strong words to say about them:
I never had a great respect for bandboys; they're all booze and troublesome.
I never like them.
They're all right individually I've no doubt.
Ethel of course had had her own way of dealing with their advances.
When exiting from the stage, a first violinist bent down in fake adoration to kiss her feet.
Without hesitation she kicked him under the chin, the full weight of the kick throwing him flat on the floor.
In fact Mrs Hylton, in her turn, forbade her musicians to fraternize with the dancers, but at least two Girls married her boys.
Nowadays, Girls would deny that they had ever even conversed with a man working backstage.
One Girl felt the full force of snobbery when she announced her wedding to a stagehand.
Knowing the troupe's constant hunger, she arranged an enormous spread for the reception and was hurt when no one from her troupe turned up.
The spiteful Head Girl had deliberately called a sudden rehearsal.
At least she had the satisfaction of a long marriage to a devoted husband.
‘All the Best’, Opera House, Blackpool, 1938
After the free and easy theatre life, marriage to a staid man could present problems:
My husband didn't like me talking about the theatre although he had encouraged me to do so when we were courting.
He was a flight lieutenant.
One of the lads asked me at a dance how I had earned my living before I had got married.
‘Oh, I was a Pro,’ I said.
Well you could have heard a pin drop.
Naturally I meant a ‘Pro’ in the theatre sense.
My husband was furious, so was 1.
When I got home I said, ‘They ought to know you better than think you would marry a prostitute.‘
Unless a dancer was resident for many weeks at a theatre, it was difficult to get to know a prospective husband.
The man had to have great financial resources and staying power to follow the Girl if she went on tour.
A considerable amount of objectivity was necessary if a really wealthy man decided to sweep a Girl off her feet.
During the difficult times in the thirties, the bread and butter money for Tillers was made at Christmas through the patronage of Laidler and Littler so an offer of a regular summer season was eagerly accepted by the office.
The wholesomeness of the Tiller dancers suited the Popplewell family who presented a variety show at the Gaiety Theatre, Ayr.
At that time a new dance director had risen through the ranks.
Her name was Barbara Aitken.
As a fourteen-year-old she had made her debut in a particularly sophisticated team, and went on to appear on Broadway.
Suddenly in the thirties she announced that she was both too thin and too old to dance any more.
Immediately Miss Doris decided to promote her to dance arranger.
It was an obvious and necessary position which should have been filled long before.
Since Ethel had left, no one had taken her place.
Numbers had been revived but no Head Girl was allowed to create new ones.
Ginger's character was too erratic to risk letting her have complete control so Barbara was the appropriate choice.
Wisely she was given the Popplewell season.
It was a simple enough brief and far enough away for mistakes not to be seen by West End producers.
When war was declared in September 1939 the Popplewells, like all other managements, closed their theatre immediately.
But in the beautiful autumn of that year, there was a feeling of unreality.
The country was at war and yet nothing seemed to be happening; everything looked so peaceful.
So the theatres reopened.
The Popplewells told Mr Smith that they would continue with the show but as the country was in such a state of uncertainty they would not be able to pay the Girls’ wages!
As he knew there would be no uncertainty about accepting the admission fees from the audience, he told them he would not accept and instead negotiated a nominal fee which at least kept the dancers in work.
The show continued until Christmas by which time Mr Smith and Doris realized they were facing up to a new way of life that would challenge them even more than the lean and difficult times of the thirties.