

The Tour de France is the most spectacular of all cycle races and the world's biggest single sporting event.
From the 4th to the 26th July, the Tour's riders will cover 3830 kilometres, from the start in San Sebastián to the grand finale in the Champs Elysées in Paris.
Two hundred riders will line up for this marathon.
Fewer will finish.
The Tour makes supreme demands on its competitors.
It takes them to the limits of physical endurance, then asks for more.
Even to finish is an achievement.
Those who triumph are assured of glory, huge financial prizes and a golden position in the legendary history of cycle sport.
Bike racing has always been a European obsession.
Now it has a global appeal.
A glance at the Tour map shows how the race starts in Spain and travels through Belgium, Holland, Luxembourg and Germany before returning to its traditional territory.
In the Alpine stage the Tour enters Italy.
The coureurs (competitors) will come from many more countries.
Cycling is the internationally popular sport of the 1990s and the 1992 Tour will extend its boundaries beyond France.
RULES OF THE RACE
The basic rules of the race are simple.
In three weeks' racing the riders are timed individually.
Their times are added after each day's stage.
The rider with the shortest overall time is the leader on General Classification.
He wears the yellow jersey of the leader of the Tour as a whole.
Only time counts, so it's possible for the eventual winner to triumph in Paris without having won a stage.
The 22 nine-man teams are timed as a whole for a team prize and there are a number of subsidiary competitions.
The green jersey is awarded for the winner of the race on points.
These are not calculated on time, but on daily placings.
The white jersey with a polka dot motif belongs to the leader of a more specialised race within the race, the Classement du Meilleur Grimpeur , always known as the ‘King of the Mountains’.
There are also competitions for the ‘Best Young Rider’ and the most combative rider, the Classement de la Combativité .
These are decided on a points system and the judgements of the commissaires (referees) who guide the race in conjunction with its parent body, the Société du Tour de France.
GIANTS OF THE ROAD
The modern Tour de France begins with the first post-war race in 1947.
Amidst patriotic excitement, it was won on the last stage by a Frenchman,Jean Robic .
Small, belligerent, Robic was one of those cyclists who look like a boxer and his slight build gave him an advantage in the mountains.
Specialist climbers are often short and light, like the Luxembourger Charly Gaul , who won the Tour in 1958, or Scotland's Robert Millar , who in 1984 took the Grand Prix de la Montagne, the only British winner of this prize.
But there are no hard and fast rules about the physique of a racing cyclist.
Big men can climb, too.
Diminutive cyclists can sprint.
Winners of the Tour have come in all sizes and shapes.
Their main qualification is that they are all-rounders.
Fausto Coppi
As was the Italian Fausto Coppi , to this day the most revered of all racing cyclists.
He took the Tour in 1949, defeating his great rival Gino Bartali , who had triumphed the previous year.
The next two Tours were won by Swiss riders,Ferdi Kubler and Hugo Koblet , popular men but without an impassioned following.
Then in 1952 Coppi was once more in the yellow jersey at the old Parc des Princes track in Paris.
This was the traditional end to the race before the last stage was moved in 1975 to provide the spectacle of the bronzed and battle-weary riders in a final surge up and down the Champs Elysées.
Eddy Merckx
Then followed the era of multiple winners, men who have won the Tour more than three times.
They roughly follow the decades.
The first of them was the Breton Louison Bobet , who rode into Paris at the head three times running from 1953–5.
In the 60s,Jacques Anquetil took the Tour four times.
The 70s were dominated by Eddy Merckx , who won from 1969–72 and again in 1974.
After this reign by the Belgian superchampion, it was once again the turn of the French.
Bernard Hinault had five victories between 1978 and 1985.
Another Frenchman,Laurent Fignon , who won in 1983 and 1984, was hailed as Hinault's successor.
But his career has faltered, especially since the astonishing arrival of the young American,Greg LeMond , victorious in 1986, 1989 and 1990; and in character, style and background quite unlike any other holder of the yellow jersey.
Jacques Anquetil
Louison Bobet
What do they have in common, these giants  of the road?
First of all, of course, great reserves of strength and stamina.
The ability to climb, to sprint, to ride a time trial, to lead the bunch at 40 kilometres per hour through a day's racing.
Then there is the necessity for being able to read a race, to see how one's own strength matches other people's tactics.
Bobet was a cyclist who knew just how far he could go before digging deep into his reserves.
Anquetil was a master tactician.
He might often have been beaten by his rival, the ‘eternal second’Raymond Poulidor , had he not possessed better judgement on the road — almost a second sight, some said.
And then the great leader must have a domineering personality.
He must be able to stamp his authority not only on his team but on the peloton as a whole, directing the whole tenor of the race before it is time for him to go to the front and win.
Eddy Merckx had more of this command than any other cyclist.
And finally, the great patron , the boss of the bunch, must have an overwhelming desire to win.
Merckx was known as ‘the cannibal’, so often did he scoop up the prizes, even in minor events when he might have been expected to allow minor or local riders to have their day.
Greg LeMond
‘I am not his father’— 1986, the Alps — Hinault torments LeMond
This greed for glory, the rage to be the victor — no-one was so fearsome in possession of this quality than the last of the great masters of the peloton , Bernard Hinault.
Nothing else can explain his attitude to the young Greg LeMond, who had the mixed fortune of being his teammate.
Hinault's career was nearing its end.
The last of his five victories in the Tour, in 1985, was partly owed to LeMond, who obeyed his manager's instructions to hold back when he could have taken the lead from an older man.
Hinault promised to assist the American in the next year's race.
Instead, he bewildered and tormented him with his tactical positioning, then launched attacks that showed a desire to win the Tour for a record sixth time.
Pedro Delgado
Robert Millar
‘I am not his father ’, said Hinault, when questioned about his motives.
True.
LeMond's career broke the traditional mould of the Tour.
He's American, while bike racing had been dominated by France, Italy, Spain, Holland and Belgium.
Secondly, LeMond seems to care only about the Tour, not the season's round of other events.
He's a long way from the roots of the sport.
But he's enormously increased its finances, and his own rewards are in millions of dollars.
LeMond is also a technical innovator.
Much of the new equipment used in the last five Tours is there because LeMond used it first.
So he's a creator of the new Tour de France — and without an enormous fan club, considering his record.
Last year he cracked in the mountains and  came in a disappointed seventh.
‘I'll start next year as favourite and will be racing to win ’, he declared.
No-one should underestimate him.
At 31, he wants to add to his total of three Tour wins.
And no-one can tell how well he's going.
He comes into form slowly, treating all other races as training preparation for his one target, the yellow jersey in Paris.
Miguel Indurain
THE CONTENDERS
In Italy and Spain, there's confidence that LeMond's day is done.
Both countries are in the middle of a rise in their cycling fortunes.
For many the real favourite is last year's winner, the Spaniard Miguel Indurain .
28 years old, he was calmly superior in every department of last year's race.
Indurain looked the master of his former captain,Pedro Delgado , who won the Tour in 1988, faltered since that victory but may be on the way back to the top.
And look out for a new Spanish star,Jésus Montoya , who showed so brilliantly in the Vuelta d'Espana in May.
Jean-François Bernard
Any of these three Spaniards could win in Paris.
All are capable of taking the mountains jersey.
But competition from Italy will be intense — even though the Italians may have drained some of their resources in their own tour, the Giro d'Italia in June.
Gianni Bugno , so powerful in the hills and the current world road champion, must be among the favourites.
But the word is out that this is Claudio Chiappucci's year.
Eccentric, say the purists.
A thug, say the riders he beats.
The fact is that the tactics of ‘Chiappa’ are his own.
He can blast a race open whenever he wishes.
Gianni Bugno
Other Italians to watch are 24-year-old Massimiliano Lelli and especially Franco Chiccioli , nicknamed ‘little Coppi’.
Such a nickname is not given lightly.
It looks as though the Italians have many more classy young riders than the French.
Jean-François Bernard is certainly coming back into form.
Charly Mottet ,Eric Boyer and former winner Laurent Fignon are still top-class coureurs .
But they'll take stage victories, not the big prizes, and may often be deployed as super-domestiques to younger and more eager men.
Sean Yates
Like our own Robert Millar .
These days the Glaswegian goes for consistency in the first ten places while riding as an understudy to a leader like LeMond.
Yet he could take an Alpine stage and finish high in the mountains classification.
Another super-domestique of great experience is Sean Yates from Sussex, who has won a long time trial stage in the tour.
That's the sort of strength he often uses to tow the pack along behind him.
But with a bit of luck, Sean is a rider who could win a stage the best way — with a long solo break.
Sean Kelly
Other English-speaking riders have been  around for some years.
Australia's Phil Anderson is a fine roadman.
The 1992 Tour will be a swansong for the two exceptional Irishmen,Stephen Roche and Sean Kelly .
Roche can never repeat his wonderful year of 1987, when he won the Giro d'Italia, the Tour de France and the World Championship within four months.
Kelly is no longer the most consistently successful roadman of recent years.
Both have been troubled by injuries.
And yet they are both still capable of anything.
Stephen Roche
Djamolidine Abdujaparov
All in all, though, it looks like the year when a new generation will take over.
And they'll come from countries comparatively new to the Tour.
There's Rolf Sorensen of Denmark, who led the race through the early stages last year;Erik Breukink of Holland and the Belgian Rudy Dhaenens ;Tony Rominger of Switzerland.
It's possible that 1992 will be a year for sprinters.
If so, the fight will be between Italy's Mario Cippolini and the brilliantly aggressive newcomer from Tashkent,Djamolidine Abdujaparov .
Mario Cippolini
BIKE LANGUAGE
Nowadays the Tour belongs to all nations, but its language is mainly French.
These are some of the expressions you'll hear.
Bidon Feeding bottle that slots into a light cage on the bike's frame.
Block The cluster of sprockets on the back wheel — usually 7 of them — that are part of the bike's gearing system.
They are changed for individual requirements, especially in the mountain stages.
Bonification Bonus.
Seconds deducted from a rider's overall time, generally as a reward for places in sprints at the end of a stage or in the intermediate ‘primes’, sometimes called ‘rushes’.
Broom Wagon In French,voiture balai .
The vehicle no rider wants to see.
It has a symbolic broom and drives behind the last man on the road, ready to sweep up those who abandon the race.
Casquette Light cotton racing cap.
Classement generale General classification.
Quickly computed at the end of each stage, each rider's overall time and standing in the race as a whole.
Classement par equipes Team classification, based on the times of the three fastest riders from each team on each stage.
Classement par points Points classification, calculated not on times but on finishing positions throughout the Tour.
An incentive for the sprinters, and for all-around roadmen too.
Commissaire One of the officials responsible for the rules of the race — essentially, a referee in a car.
Contre la montre Against the clock.
A time trial, when cyclists ride alone, starting at one-minute intervals.
Competitors are forbidden to give each other support and are individually timed.
Disc Wheel Solid wheels without spokes used in time trials.
Domestique Literally, servant.
A supporting rider in a team, who job is to give every kind of assistance to its leader or its two or three best-placed riders.
He will fetch water for them (domestiques are often called porteurs d'eau , water carriers), give them a wheel when they puncture, pace them back to the field if they fall behind the peloton , lead them out in the sprints and dog their rivals.
Reliable domestiques are the stars' most valued comrades — and by long tradition they share the stars' winnings.
Directeur sportif Team manager.
Usually, as in other sports, a former rider.
FICP Federation Internationale de Cyclisme Professionel.
Governing body of pro cycle racing.
Operates a complex points system that determines the status of every professional.
Accumulating a lot of these points is the basic way into major races.
Grimpeur Climber.
Giro d'Italia The Tour of Italy, second of the major stage races.
Lanterne Rouge Last rider on general classification, given a red lamp and a special cheer on arrival in Paris.
Maillot Racing jersey.
The maillot jaune is the yellow jersey worn by the leader on general classification, the maillot vert is the green jersey of the leader on points and the maillot à pois is the white jersey with big red spots worn by the leader of the Grand Prix de la Montagne, the specialist competition for climbers.
The maillot arc-en-ciel is the rainbow jersey worn only by the current world champion.
Musette Light cotton bag with a long strap, used for the food and drink handed up at feeding stations.
Pavé Cobbles.
A dreaded feature of minor roads in the north-east of France and the Low Countries.
Peloton The bunch.
The main grouping of riders at any time in the race.
Sometimes the field will be split into two or perhaps three separate pelotons before a regrouping takes place.
Prime Pronounced ‘preem’.
An intermediate sprint, whether at a mountain top or some other place along the route.
Prologue The time trial before the first real stage of the race.
Always short, it's used to introduce the riders individually, establish the general classification and thus give a pecking order to the team cars that follow the race.
Riders may be separated only by seconds, but a good prologue ride is a valuable psychological boost.
Rouleur Roadman.
Not a sprinting or climbing specialist but a strong all-rounder who can be guaranteed to force the pace in long stages, controlling the peloton or chasing down breakaways.
Soigneur A person who gives massage and every other kind of comfort to exhausted, injured or demoralised riders.
Essential to the morale of the team and an important link between the directeur sportif and his riders.
Vuelta d'Espana The Tour of Spain, earliest of the three big stage races and held in May.
THE ROUTE
THE SOUTH WEST
The curtain rises on the 79th Tour de France in the Basque resort of San Sebastián.
They call it ‘the Brighton of Spain’ and this city on the Bay of Biscay, where for years the Spanish royal family had their summer residence, will be in festive mood on this first Saturday afternoon of the Tour.
The bull-ring will be closed and beaches forgotten as crowds watch the riders' preparations for the Prologue.
All morning the world's top cyclists will have been  reconnoitring the course, selecting their gear ratios and the most suitable of their many bikes, looking at the route for the best way through corners, testing the strength and direction of the wind — looking for anything that will give them that little extra in this first trial of strength, which will be clocked in tenths and hundredths of a second.
In Stage 3 the Tour passes near Orthez, the town which cures the famous jambon de Bayonne.
Full-bodied, velvety Madiran wine is produced throughout this area .
Ttoro,the Basque version of bouillabaisse.
A soup made of tomatoes, red peppers, chili peppers, a variety of fish — including hake, sea-robin and conger eel — and shellfish — mussels, scampi and langoustines .
The riders' warm-up will be longer by far than the eight kilometre course itself, and then comes an anxious wait.
Racing cyclists generally like to meet their fans at the beginning of a stage, but don't ask for autographs today.
Before a time trial, riders are tense.
They concentrate on their inner reserves.
Some of them will be  practising meditation exercises before they swoop down the ramp from a platform to begin their few minutes of profound torture.
Silent amid the crowd's applause, they breathe deeply and steadily as they mount the bike, control the trembling of the hands and wait for the time-keeper's ‘Allez!’
The Tour has begun, and by evening we'll know who wears the first maillot jaune .
He'll be fighting to keep his lead the next day, for this first full stage, a circuit through the Basque country, will be fast, tricky, and an especial challenge for the Spanish riders.
This isn't a mountain stage, by the Tour's standards, but neither is it flat.
Expect his team to group around the yellow jersey, lots of nervousness and shoving in the peloton , while adventurous riders test their strength at the front.
It's incredibly dangerous.
And the winner of a mass sprint is a brave winner indeed.
Three favourites to win the Tour — Indurain (in the yellow jersey), Bugno and Chiappucci
This year the Tour doesn't climb to the heights of the Pyrenees, but the opening days will be long and exacting.
Especially if, as in recent years, there is not boss or patron of the peloton to keep the pace down, to stamp down the rebels and thus avoid unnecessary and strength-sapping chases.
As the bunch first of all climbs their one Pyrenean mountain, the Col de Marie-Blanque, then snakes through the hot foothills from Spain into France, 230 kilometres to Pau on Monday, then 200 kilometres from Pau to Bordeaux the next day, many riders will chance their arm to form a winning breakaway.
But the top men, the  team leaders, will be thinking of the coming team time trial at Libourne.
Many things can go wrong when a nine-man teams speeds along together, constantly changing position at the front.
But the most common problem is a team formation disintegrating because someone has ‘heavy legs’, the result of a chase for personal glory in the previous day or two.
The Sprint
Bordeaux is traditionally the arena for a thrilling mass sprint finish and on the long straight ride through the flatlands of Les Landes we may have the awesome sight of the whole peloton at full speed, driving along at up to 60 kilometres per hour, not in pursuit of a breakaway, but in anticipation of the finish.
The sprint can begin 40 kilometres from the line.
Someone starts to wind up the pace.
Another team responds, then another.
Then another, and now no-one can control the speed of the bunch.
The team leaders and specialist sprinters are in the middle of the flying swarm.
They are making their way towards its head, preceded by a domestique who will elbow a path through the bikes.
Huitres à la Bordelaise.
Oysters from the Bassin d'Arcachon, served with crépinettes truffées (pork sausages studded with truffles) and accompanied by a dry white Bordeaux .
The peloton approaches Bordeaux
This is physical stuff yet must be judged to a nicety.
If you touch a wheel, you'll fall in a slide and half the peloton will ride over you before they fall themselves.
It may take two kilometres to overtake one other rider.
Then, as the stage town is approached, team-mates will begin the lead-out.
The sprinters follow their wheels, taking protection before the final dash.
The domestiques expire, their work done, the master sprinters go for the line, weaving in front of each other, kicking the bike towards glory.
And the strongest of them can kick twice, not just 300 metres from the line but again at ten metres.
It's incredibly dangerous.
And the winner of a mass sprint is a brave winner indeed.
The Team Time Trial around Libourne takes the riders close to the classic vineyards of St-Émilion, Lussac and Pomerol, where the most sought after clarets in the world are grown.
Spare a thought for the weary riders, in need of sleep while revels go on under their hotel windows.
The Tour is the focus of a local fair wherever it goes and celebrations last into the night.
Every region is proud to show off its specialities when the Tour comes to town, both in food and wine.
In the Basque country shellfish from the Bay of Biscay; partridges, lamb, patés of goose and pork from the many small farms; trout fresh from streams swollen by Pyrenean snows.
A great tradition of the Tour is the family picnic, eaten at the roadside as the riders go by.
As the Tour enters France they will be serving thin slices of raw, cured ham known as jambon de Bayonne , the local specialties of oysters with garlic sausage, cheeses flavoured with peppers.
Nearer Bordeaux, home of the greatest wines, food has an aristocratic plainness.
Beef dishes are made to complement the clarets.
There are feasts of mushrooms and duck liver, wild strawberries from the woods.
Team Time Trial
Just north of Bordeaux, at the very centre of the wine-making country, the team time trial takes place on the roads around the ancient citadel-town of Libourne.
The 22 teams will leave the starting ramp at four minute intervals to cover 63 kilometres in tight formation.
The rules state that each team takes the time of the fifth man to finish.
Riders who are dropped face complex penalties.
Someone who trails in on his own faces the possibility of being over the time limit that eliminates him from the race as a whole.
The TTT therefore needs balance between the hectic pace of a nine-man group and the need to protect the weaker riders.
Team leaders often say that they could have gone faster on their own.
But this is not the point.
The TTT is a tyrannical examination of collective tactical ability.
Nobody likes it, except the spectators.
The results often distort the real standing of riders at the top of the general classification, and the stage is cruel to its victims.
So on Wednesday we'll learn something else about the Tour.
It's merciless.
Individual time trial
THE NORTH EAST
Now the scene moves from the warm south to quite different territory.
The race begins again in the chilly, wet, industrialised north.
The team cars and publicity vehicles will drive through the night.
Everyone else will go to Paris by plane.
All the riders hate these transfers, but they have become necessary.
The Tour is always enlarging its empire, and it likes to mix its traditional resting places with new stage towns.
The Tour has rested at Bordeaux many times, but this is the first time that the caravan has used Nogent-sur-Oise for the beginning of a day's racing.
Nogent is a small industrial town to the north of Paris and thousands of Parisians will travel there to see the Tour's heroes.
The fifth stage takes the riders to Wasquehal.
It's a journey between modern and older France.
Nogent is a centre of new technology while Wasquehal is part of greater Lille, now converting its older industries based on textiles and coal.
A sombre region, some say.
As the race approaches the Belgian border, the peloton will traverse the battlefields and cemeteries of both world wars.
For now we are in Flanders.
The vegetables of Picardy — cabbage, leeks, spinach, peas and potatoes — are the ingredients of this Soupe des hortillonages (market gardener's soup ).
San Sebastian
Into Flanders
Cycling in the north-eastern tip of France and in Belgium, which the Tour enters on Friday 10 July, has something of the character of the area.
It's gritty, tough, warm-hearted.
Local races that produce the cyclists of the Low Countries are characteristically kermesses , a large and mixed bunch of riders chasing round a small town-and-country circuit: all very physical, and without much time or inclination for tactics.
The cycling is cheered on by town crowds outside the cafes and brasseries, eating chips with mussels or andouillettes , the spiced sausages made of pigs' chitterlings, all washed down with beer: the Artois lagers or the rich dark malts of Belgium.
This is not the stylish and aristocratic racing cycling beloved by the Italians.
It's bike-racing for all comers.
And that's why this is traditionally the area where British bikers have broken into the world of continental racing.
The top Irish and Australians also begin their careers in Flanders and it shows in the way they ride.
Even the huge ring roads around Lille, Tourcoing, Roubaix and Courtrai seem more basic than their southern counterparts.
Then there's the freezing wind, the sudden, vicious hills known as murs , rain and lanes that become cart tracks.
Rognons au genièvre (kidneys with gin )is a traditional Flemish dish, served on a bed of potatoes.
Both gin and white wine are used in the sauce .
In the North, road racing starts to resemble cyclo-cross, its country winter-sports version.
The riders fit heavier wheels and tyres, fatter layers of tape on the bars to absorb the constant juddering.
The magic of luck comes into play, mostly bad luck.
Punctures and spills are inevitable, especially in the wet, and in these roads a rider is liable to lose contact with his teammates and the team car.
So perhaps they'll use the tiny radio transmitters that cyclists have begun to put in their helmets.
If so technology will change tactics.
But no doubt there will still be the shouting, the rumours that spread through the peloton , the slow and then maddened driving by the directeur sportif 's car, the blackboard held up behind a motorbike with scrawled details of a breakaway.
The Tour Abroad
This is the tenth time that the Tour has visited Brussels.
For years France's national event has made forays beyond the country's frontiers, but the 1992 version is especially international.
In its first week the Tour made acknowledgement to Spain.
Now there is an almost ceremonial procession beyond France's eastern borders.
It takes us from Brussels to Valkenbourg, which the Tour visits for the first time, a town at the centre of the ‘Dutch Alps’; then to Koblenz in Germany, where the Moselle meets the Rhine; to Luxembourg, then to Strasbourg, the most German of French cities; and finally to Mulhouse, where the riders have a day off the bike as they transfer to Dole, the beginning of the Alpine stages.
This is new territory for the Tour.
As usual, though, the route has been carefully planned by the organisers, who can always predict how a race is likely to develop and are not inclined to let anyone have an easy ride.
Not until the 11th stage between Strasbourg and Mulhouse are there any major climbs.
yet there is plenty of varied country of the type the French call terrain accidenté as the race goes southwards, and the two successive stages, each of 180 kilometres, from Brussels to Valkenbourg and then to Koblenz, will be test of strength and stamina.
Two Belgian cyclists share a bottle of water
The Tour winds through pretty Alsace villages
The Tour has long since given up those occasional easy days known as promenades , when the peloton idled along, especially on the Mediterranean coast, as though on a club run.
In Luxembourg and Alsace, home of white wines like Riesling and Traminer and the fruit brandies Kirsch and Framboise, drinks that accompany the matelotes of freshwater fish and the hearty choucroute of cabbage with sausage, pork, goose — in this delicious country the pace of life after lunch is slower.
But expect five days of fast, highly tactical racing between Brussels and Mulhouse.
The non-climbers will be trying to amass points towards possession of the green jersey, the prize awarded for placings rather than time.
Intermediate sprints help towards this prize and the peloton will be split time and again.
Or on any of these stages a small breakaway group will try to sweep up all the points and — with luck — smuggle a rider up the general classification to a position within striking distance of the leaders.
Choucroute à l'Alsacienne —sauerkraut with smoked pork and sausages, flavoured with bacon, onions and juniper.
Best accompanied by a Riesling from the vineyards in the foothills of the Vosges mountains .
At this point notice that some of the pure sprinters, the lesser riders, the young and first-time competitors, will have ridden themselves out.
Little wonder, after 12 days in the saddle.
Some others, though, among them the winner in Paris in two Sundays' time, will be mysteriously gathering rather than losing strength.
The supreme Tour de France riders will have bad days in their three weeks of competition but they will also become more powerful.
Many factors are at work: physique, training, careful preparation months before in the Vuelta d'Espana or the Giro d'Italia (rarely both), self-knowledge, confidence, the constant assistance of domestiques and then more distinguished teammates.
But finally there is something else, as the winner begins to seize his opportunities.
The Tour de France makes more demands than any other sporting event that mankind has devised.
The person who wins the race in Paris is not just stronger than his rivals.
He is also a great man.
When can we see who is going to win?
The position will be a little clearer after the first of the two individual time trials around Luxembourg on Monday 13 July.
Team work now has no part in the outcome.
Alone on the road, forbidden to take shelter from any other rider, each man will be assessed for what he is.
This race against the clock is of an intriguing length, 68 kilometres, perhaps a little too short for the top men in the discipline.
Noone can win the Tour without being able to ride a very good time trial.
But only a supreme effort over this distance will produce more than two or three minutes' advantage.
That's a lot of time on the flat stages, not so much on the fierce and extended mountain climbs that are to come.
The greatest pressure in Monday's time trial will be on the yellow jersey.
He will be the last man off, since riders begin in reverse order of positions on general classification.
Tension mounts throughout the day.
The overall leader knows that he has little to gain and much to lose.
Above all he must conserve his overall lead.
Irregular things may happen on the next stage, the 200 kilometres to Strasbourg.
It's Bastille Day, the French national holiday, and every 14 July there's a battle for a French winner, whatever the team positions and loyalties.
There's more to worry about for the team leaders and their directeurs sportifs .
They won't be interested in the speeches about Strasbourg as the seat of the European Parliament.
Tomorrow we enter the mountains, and everything will change.
Alsace
250 kilometres separate Strasbourg from Mulhouse — by the Tour's route.
There's a more direct way along the valley of the Rhine but the riders of the Tour will climb through the Vosges mountains, granite and sandstone covered with beech and fir.
Each of the cols traversed by the peloton is harder than the one before.
First there's the Col de Kreuzweg, 708 metres high, followed by three higher peaks until the final ascent of the Mont Ballon, the highest point of this mountain chain at 1424 metres.
If you want comparisons, think of Ben Nevis which, at 1343 metres, is the highest point in the British Isles.
At the top of the Mont Ballon the Tour has extensive views over Germany and the Plain of Alsace.
But a look at the scenery is out of the question for the hard men over the top.
The Vosges have presented real climbs, but these mountains do not compare with the haute-montagne , the really difficult mountain stages.
It has been known for a tough roadman-sprinter to control the race in these big hills, not to lose much time on the Ballon, then rejoin the leading group, dominate them on the long downhill run into Mulhouse and win the stage.
If such a rider — or two or three such riders — are at the head of the field on the descent then all bets will be recast.
The Tour may now display a hero, but it's also likely that this long and complicated race shelters a secret.
THE ALPS
The Alps!
The land of clear air, snowy peaks and glaciers, chamois and ibex, perfect wild flowers, magnificent vistas, deep valleys and winding roads…
Everyone feels healthier there, and so many visitors love the freshness of the high altitude, giving them appetite for the local gratin dishes, the carp and pike, the best butter in the world, light white wines like the Seyssel of Savoy — and of course the famous liqueur, Chartreuse.
Col du Galibier
Colombian riders, Herrera and Parra, dominate this gruelling climb through the Alps
Racing cyclists know all this too, for most teams have winter training camps in the mountains.
They relax with a lot of skiing, the favourite off-bike way of keeping fit.
The Alps may be friendly in winter, but they are feared in the summer.
Everyone in the peloton wakes on the morning of an Alpine stage with a feeling of dread.
Any cyclist can climb a difficult hill: you just change gear.
Top cyclists ride over hills rather than up them, the gradients scarcely  affecting their rhythm, the gears helping to keep the pedalling rate more or less constant.
But the great mountains are different.
A climb may be 20 kilometres long.
On the 13th and 14th stages the Tour will encounter ten of these terrible obstacles.
Even for the world's fittest men, riding up them and surviving is like being battered onto your hands and knees.
Since this year's race avoids the Pyrenean peaks, all the hard mountain climbing is concentrated into these two days.
First of all there is the 280 kilometre run between Dole and St Gervais, just below Mont Blanc.
This includes the climb of Mont Salève, 1176 metres high.
Now consider the next day of the haute montagne , the 254 kilometres to Sestriere.
It takes in the Col Des Saisies (1633 metres), the Cormet de Roselend (1968 metres), the Col de l'Iseran (2770 metres and the highest point of the Tour), the Col du Mont Cenis (2083 metres) and finally the climb to the ski station of Sestriere in Italy, 2033 metres above sea level.
There is no rest after these labours.
The next day the riders encounter the Col de Montgenèvre (1850 metres), the Col du Galibier (2646 metres), the Col du Télégraphe (1670 metres) and the Col de la Croix de Fer (2068 metres).
Finally, 21 hairpin bends lead up to another ski station, l'Alpe-d'Huez.
In this 14 kilometre climb, we will witness wonderful feats of bravery — and many a rider abandoning in tears, simply unable to continue, even so close to the finishing line.
Onion soup flavoured with Gruyère, one of the many excellent Alpine cheeses, and accompanied by a light, refreshing Savoy country wine.
In effect each rider lifts his own body weight, plus the weight of his bike, all these thousands of metres, while trying to maintain the highest pace and also to outwit his rivals.
The higher they go, the less help from domestiques .
With lesser riders far down the slopes, the brutality of the attacks on other riders becomes more apparent.
The hard men ride shoulder to shoulder at the front, trying to wear each other down: one jumps, another responds then jumps away himself.
It is as though they are exchanging blows.
Or one rider will dog the wheel of another.
It's not much protection from wind at this slower speed, but you can unnerve the man in front of you, wait for a moment of weakness and spring past.
To pull back just a few metres on an Alpine climb is a dozen times harder than on the flat.
One mark of the climber is the ability to change to a higher gear and accelerate towards the end of a long ascent.
Another — and this is one of the most perfect sights in all cycling — is the silken action of one of those men who can sit perfectly still, hands lightly on top of the handlebars, and spin his legs beneath him as though their motions came from a quite different source of power.
A rare gift.
Usually, riders use all their body in a long ascent, willing strength from every limb into the legs.
Rising from the saddle, cycling en danseuse as the French call it and in the less elegant English term ‘honking’, the coureurs change their position, holding the brake levers in this sort of effort, then after a while return to the saddle.
Notice the rider who gets out of the saddle briefly.
It's to recover a pedalling rhythm that has been temporarily lost.
Maintaining your own rhythm and upsetting other people's is the basic art in the mountain climb that can last more than half an hour.
Far down the mountain, the peloton and its stragglers have a different rhythm.
Team loyalties are thrown aside as they form a group they call l'autobus .
It's a bunch that rides steadily, guided by experienced domestiques who know how to keep going and not lose so much time that they will be eliminated from the Tour as a whole.
Only the riders who endanger the whole group are left behind.
L'autobus includes all sorts of riders: champions, people who go well in the flat, the injured, the suffering, the defeated.
They are all out of the top positions.
Yet they all want to reach Paris.
Riders who abandon the Tour often leave cycling altogether, so shattering is the experience.
So this can be a comradely peloton , and amid their shared pain many will be starting to think of next year's teams and contracts.
Delgado leading a threatening group up l'Alpe-d'Huez
Back at the top of the mountain the atmosphere is intense.
Spectators are there in thousands and have been since the previous day, before the roads were closed for the Tour's progress.
They have klaxons, banners, national flags.
The names of their heroes have been written in chalk and car-spray on the steeply-rising road.
As the riders struggle up through the hairpins, you can hear the screams of encouragement from below.
Fans weep as they see the torment on the faces of their countrymen.
There's a sort of audience participation because nobody can control these crowds.
The riders climb through a tunnel of cheers.
This support can be frightening.
Riders are sometimes slowed to a walking pace and punch the supporters who try to embrace them.
The motorbikes clear a way but fans still jump into the road, running behind their favourites and pushing them.
Theunisse, Indurain and Chiappucci
Down the other side the coureurs go so fast through the hairpins that team cars can't follow.
Descending at 80 kilometres per hour is the most dangerous part of the race, especially with the precipitous drops at the side of the road.
Now there are only seconds between the sharp bends.
The riders spring, swoop, brake, turn, sprint, swoop, brake, turn, sprint, swoop…
The rims of their wheels are burning hot through the friction of braking.
Sometimes tyres roll off and the rider will lose control.
Alpine roads are better surfaced than they were, but still a patch of grit can start a front wheel sliding.
The best descenders (often they're not family men) have a suicidal nerve.
It could be worth the risks.
A nerveless downhill rider can take two minutes out of a cautious descender in just 20 kilometres.
Grated Gruyère provides texture and colour in the regional speciality , gratin Dauphinois —potato slices flavoured with nutmeg and garlic and cooked in cream .
You hit the bottom of the valley, wait for the arms to stop shaking from the effort of holding the bike's front wheel to its course and take on food from the station de ravitaillement .
Soon another major climb will begin.
Riders have to learn to cope with the contrasts of the Alpine stages, dropping like a stone or plodding upwards like an old soldier.
In the Alps blazing heat is quickly replaced by chill.
Exhilaration is followed by fear.
The Alpine stages are not for youngsters.
It takes about five years for a top amateur to become a real Tour de France rider.
Mental maturity is essential.
A racing cyclist must know how to recover from humiliations.
He must also think clearly when he has triumphed.
Hence the importance of the team's master-strategist, the directeur sportif ; and, very often, the greater importance of the soigneur who gives the post-race massage.
On the massage table even the strongest rider in the world confesses everything.
CENTRAL FRANCE
At the foot of l'Alpe-d'Huez is the little Alpine town of le Bourg d'Oisans, the beginning of the 15th stage.
The route leads to St Etienne, a distance of 195 kilometres, over the wooded slopes of the Vercors National Park and down into the valley of the Rhône, the majestic river that flows between the foothills of the Alps and the Massif Central.
It's vineyard country, a land of hot summers and mild winters, the home of Côtes du Rhône wine and of Beaujolais and with food as varied as its wines: calves' sweetbreads flavoured with sorrel, artichokes, soufflés of chicken liver, thrush paté, chicken served with crayfish; peaches, apricots and goat's milk cheeses.
Quenelles de brochet à la lyonnaise (pike dumplings ),a mixture of ground pike, butter, flour, eggs and milk, which is poached, covered in cheese, cream or wine sauce and finished in the oven.
In Stage 15, the riders cross the northern Rhône valley, racing through the Hermitage vineyards which produce classic red and white wines .
Unlike other tourists, we must not linger over these delights.
Although the peloton has left the high Alps, there is still much tension.
There are many kilometres to Paris and much to be decided.
One begins to appreciate the Tour as a true marathon, seeming to pack a lifetime's experience into one sporting event.
In the five stages before the crucial individual time trial on Friday 24 July, the theatre of the Tour will present many dramatic scenes and ask us to follow a number of sub-plots.
The ‘King of the Mountains’ prize may be decided on the 16th stage between St Etienne and La Bourboule, which ends with the Col de la Croix Morand (1401 metres) and the Côte de Charlannes (1147 metres) in the strange volcanic uplands of the Auvergne.
There will be much skirmishing for points towards the green jersey, the prize for consistency in daily placings.
The overall leader will find it difficult to ride defensively.
Expect to see his yellow jersey drawn into battle after battle.
La France Profonde
From La Bourboule to Montluçon and Tours we traverse what used to be called la France profonde , a deep and unchanging rural France unaffected by progress and modern life.
That's no longer true and the Tour de France itself helps to show us a new society.
The race has always been known as le grand boucle , the great belt, a circuit binding together a large and various country whose distant regions — Provence and Picardy, Brittany and Savoy — knew little of each other.
today the Tour embraces the European Community and the world beyond, including the Americas and the old USSR.
The Tour is always an epic as well as a bike race.
In the 1990s it's a symbol of the contemporary world.
Falette (stuffed, rolled veal breast ),a speciality of the Auvergne, is traditionally served with green lentils from the Puy .
A fast ride on a racing bicycle is the nearest thing in this world to man-powered flight.
On the roads towards Tours spectators along the roadside, watching television or replaying the action on video, will have the vision of the escapes, the pure flights from the peloton we call breakaways.
Everyone loves a solo break, one person alone in front of the field.
It's heroic.
Connoisseurs of bike racing prefer breaks by more than one rider, especially when they're in different teams, for then riders ‘sit in’, not taking their working turn at the front, conserving energy and slowing the break, thus wearing down other riders in favour of a team-leader back down the road in the peloton .
Not heroic, but it can be superbly done.
Especially when such a rider turns the tables.
In breakaways all sorts of temporary alliances are  formed and quickly broken.
The many hours on the road give cyclists the opportunity to employ tactics varying from the subtle to the murderous.
And all at high speed, through no fewer than 3830 kilometres before the race finishes on the Champs Elysées.
One stage will be very important tactically.
On Thursday 23 July there are 230 kilometres between Montluçon and Tours.
No great difficulties on the road, which is mainly flat and straight.
But see the difficulties the riders will make for each other.
Tarte aux poires.
The many mouth-watering desserts of Touraine are based on fruits.
Between Tours and Blois the races passes through the renowned vineyards of Vouvray .
Towards Paris
If more than one man is still in contention for the yellow jersey by the time the reaches Tours, then Friday's time trial will be the decider.
The leader needs some four minutes' advance to feel safe.
So it could be tight.
The bikes will have spokeless disc wheels, with their flywheel effect, for the 60 kilometre sprint along the Loire valley to Blois, plus every other new development on bike technology.
Everybody will be looking for a smooth, powerful ride that minimises wind resistance and gives the most direct transfer of muscular power to amazing speed along the road.
Abdujaparov, Indurain and Chiappucci display their winners' jerseys as the '91 Tour enters Paris
At then end of the day, the victor of the whole Tour should be known.
Except that this gripping race still offers the opportunity to dislodge its leader.
Saturday's stage to Nanterre, another 210 kilometres to the suburbs of Paris, need not be a triumphal procession.
Similarly with the final run-in, another 130 kilometre circuit from La Défense to Paris.
The Tour has been won twice on the last stage.
This year's race is the most open for a decade.
It's possible that the man who stands on the winner's podium on the Champs Elysées on the afternoon of Sunday 26 July will have come to the fore in the last two days.
But whoever it is, waving to the exultant crowds, he will have become a legend.
Watch the Tour de France on Channel 4
Phil Liggett reports on the highlights of the day's racing every evening Monday-Saturday from 6.30 to 7.00pm.
On Sundays during the tour there is extended coverage from 5.30 to 6.30pm.
The Tour de France photographs in this guide are by Graham Watson, Britain's best known cycling photographer, who has followed the Tour for more than a decade.
His photographs feature in several books and he is currently photographer for Cycling Weekly .
Writer Tim Hilton, art critic of The Guardian , is a passionate cyclist who saw his first Tour in 1955 and has followed it ever since.
He has written a number of books, among them a study of Picasso.