

The information provided in this prospectus is correct at the time of going to press, but the course programme is subject to continuing development and the University reserves the right to make changes at any time, before or after a candidate's admission.
As much notice as possible will be given of such changes.
All enquiries in relation to application and admission should be addressed to:
The Admissions Officer University of Ulster Cromore Road Coleraine Co Londonderry BT51 1SA Tel: Coleraine (0265) 44141 ext 4221 Telex: 747597 University of Ulster, 1991 Published by Information and Publications, University of Ulster Printed by: W & G Baird Limited, Antrim Design Consultants: Creative Image 
Foreword
by the Vice-Chancellor, Sir Derek Birley MA
I am glad of the opportunity to offer a few words of introduction to this, our latest prospectus.
They will be a very few words because the prospectus has an increasingly difficult job of compressing into its allocated space all that has to be said about a University that gets bigger every year and that those of us who work in it are biased enough to think gets better every year.
More neutrally it is certainly true that the range of courses we offer continues to increase.
In this sense we are a microcosm of the university system as a whole.
This complicates the issue of choice but is essentially a good thing from the point of view of potential students.
Less good news is that, when demand increases, as it does each year, standards of admission inevitably rise.
We try to offset this by widening access through alternative routes, multi-level patterns and so forth, as described in later pages, but the essential problem of supply and demand remains.
By the same token the essential requirement for tackling this kind of problem is to gather and to analyse as much relevant information as you can.
There are all sorts and conditions of universities and other institutions of higher education, and their prospectuses will repay wide and careful study.
If you are interested in coming to our University we shall be very glad to find a place for you if we can, and most certainly to welcome you if you are admitted.
We are a very big institution — over 11,000 full-time equivalent students — but still, I think, a friendly place.
We shall assume that you have come to work but not to do it all the time.
Whether you come to the University of Ulster or not, I hope you find this prospectus useful.
(We should be glad to have suggestions about ways in which it can be improved.)
In any event I wish you every success and happiness in your chosen course and your future career.
Using the Prospectus
The General Information section of this prospectus presents an introduction to the University, its facilities and services.
You will find there full details of application and admission procedures and a list of members of staff who would be pleased to provide further information on particular aspects of the work of the University.
This is followed by seven sections containing detailed information about our faculties:
Art and Design
Business and Management
Education
Humanities
Faculty of Informatics
Science and Technology
Social and Health Services
These sections present an introduction to each course, an outline of its content, and details of its duration and location.
You will find a list of the contents of the prospectus, commencing on page 6.
A full index of undergraduate courses with their appropriate course codes is on page 41.
A subject index , designed to provide easy reference to courses for users of the prospectus who have a subject of particular interest in mind, is provided in the Appendices.
Other Publications
In addition to the undergraduate courses listed in this prospectus, the University offers a full and expanding programme of postgraduate courses, professional courses, degrees, diplomas and certificates, by a variety of modes of study.
Details are available in a series of publications which may be obtained free of charge from:
The Admissions Officer University of Ulster Cromore Road Coleraine Co Londonderry BT52 1SA Tel: Coleraine (0265) 44141 ext 4221 Telex: 747597
Typical ‘A’ Level Grades
In response to requests from potential entrants for an indication of typical ‘A’ level offers made to applicants for degree courses, a table of degrees and typical asking grades is published on page 47.
Faculty Colour Codes
As a visual aid to quick and easy identification, each section in the prospectus has been assigned its own colour code.
A strip of the relevant colour appears on the outer edge of each page within the sections.
The colours assigned to each section are as follows:
General Information Red
Faculty of Art and Design Yellow
Faculty of Business and Management Green
Faculty of Education Pink
Faculty of Humanities Peach
Faculty of Informatics Purple
Faculty of Science and Technology Orange
Faculty of Social and Health Sciences Turquoise
GENERAL INFORMATION
The University
The University of Ulster offers courses at four campuses in Northern Ireland; these are Coleraine, Jordanstown, Belfast and Magee College, Londonderry .
Over 13,500 full-time and part-time students are currently enrolled for courses at all levels, from doctoral studies to part-time certificate programmes.
These studies are undertaken by a wide variety of modes of study.
Each of the courses — academic and professional — is both intellectually challenging and vocationally attractive.
The University has a reputation for innovative course programmes, resourceful scholarship, and an active and mutually rewarding relationship with local industry, commerce and professional life.
The University relates theory to practice through sandwich courses and industrial placements, and research and consultancy resources are used to develop and strengthen relationships with the wider community.
This serves not only to allow the University to contribute towards the revitalization of the economic life of the province, but to develop courses that relate directly to contemporary society.
There is a strong sense of community amongst the self-governing student body.
Although the majority of students — some eighty per cent— come from the province, there is a cosmopolitan character about the student population.
This is because students from other parts of the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland are joined at each of the four campuses by a growing number of overseas students, reflecting the reputation of Northern Ireland for offering warm hospitality to its visitors and the tradition of the University of Ulster as a host to students from other countries.
The University Experience
Possession of an academic qualification is evidence of intellectual ability, of assiduous and successful study, and of readiness to assume a creative and responsible role in society.
The university experience, however, is more than merely attending lectures and seminars; it allows and encourages each student to make contacts and gain experience which will be useful in later life; it teaches participants to think logically, to approach problems with an open and enquiring mind, to form lasting friendships and to organize, perhaps for the first time, their own financial, academic and social affairs.
The pages that follow outline the modern facilities available to each student for study and research and for recreation and personal development.
This includes the full range of academic facilities, personal services, recreational and sports amenities, the cultural affairs programme and the Students' Union.
The University asks much of its students.
In return it tries to ensure that the quality of life at each of the four campuses offers a rewarding, pleasurable and fulfilling experience to each member of the student community.
The Campuses
Coleraine
The administrative headquarters of the University are located to the north of Coleraine, a pleasant market town on the River Bann.
The main complex houses a range of services including a shopping precinct with post office, bank, laundrette, supermarket and bookshop.
The Diamond, the largest hall in the University with a seating capacity of over 1,500, is a popular venue for major choral and orchestral works and has a splendid organ which is used regularly for major recitals.
Beside the Diamond is a smaller hall known as the Octagon, an excellent venue for chamber music, which also contains a purpose-built exhibition area for the visual arts.
Beyond the Diamond is the main catering complex which incorporates two refectories, a snack bar, a coffee lounge and a suite of private dining rooms.
The fine purpose-built Riverside Theatre is linked to the catering complex.
The campus' South Building houses recently refurbished Students' Union facilities and a minor sports hall.
To the north of the campus are the Residences, beautifully situated with views down to the mouth of the river and the distant Donegal hills.
Jordanstown
The 114-acre Jordanstown campus is situated in the borough of Newtownabbey, a few miles north of Belfast.
The grounds lie at the foot of the south Antrim hills, and the land fronting the main buildings slopes down to the shores of Belfast Lough.
The excellent road system of the greater Belfast region means that Jordanstown is merely a few minutes' drive from the capital, allowing students to take advantage of the social life and the living accommodation available in the city.
The main building at Jordanstown is designed around a central Mall, itself a spine for the 17 blocks of academic and recreational facilities and accommodation.
On the Mall are the bank, bookshop, catering outlets, post office, supermarket, Students' Union, Sports Centre, Library and Chaplaincy.
The Student Services building nearby houses the Accommodation, Health and Counselling Services.
The Music Department is housed in the elegant 19th-century Dalriada House, adjoining the modern and well-equipped headquarters of the Department of Adult and Continuing Education.
Belfast
The Belfast campus, some seven miles from the Jordanstown site of the University, houses the majority of staff and students of the Faculty of Art and Design.
Students at the Belfast campus have the opportunity to enjoy the many social and recreational facilities available in the capital of Northern Ireland.
The city of Belfast has a magnificent setting, ringed by high hills, sea lough and river valley.
Some 400,000 people, over a quarter of the population of the province, now live in Belfast.
The city is being redeveloped and much of the centre is pedestrianized.
The wide choice of theatres, cinemas, museums, art galleries, leisure centres and parks is as exciting and interesting as one would expect in the province's leading city.
The southern part of Belfast, where much of the student accommodation is found, is especially good for excellent yet moderately-priced restaurants, pubs, theatres and shops.
Students at the Belfast campus take advantage of its proximity to Jordanstown to share the excellent facilities for sport and recreation available there.
Magee College, Londonderry
Magee College is set on a hillside overlooking the River Foyle in a mainly residential quarter to the north of the old walled city of Londonderry, the second city of Northern Ireland.
The campus is within half a mile of the city centre.
The neo-Gothic main building dates from the foundation of the College in the mid-19th century.
It is flanked by a group of handsome Victorian residences and looks towards the new Phase I building which provides studios, laboratories and workshops for the faculties of Art and Design, Science and Technology and Informatics.
The recently completed Phase II building houses the College's new library and Students' Union.
A third phase, comprising recreational facilities and additional teaching space, lies farther ahead.
Since September 1984 the University has been undertaking a major development plan at Magee, rapidly increasing student numbers and establishing a range of innovative, career-orientated courses with an emphasis on cross-disciplinary scholarship involving all faculties.
Most courses feature placement elements; all seek to relate theory and practice.
Full-time courses are set alongside part-time programmes, short courses and extra-mural study, ensuring a student population balanced in age, varied in background and experience and strong in commitment to study and achievement.
As construction progresses and old buildings are refurbished, the most modern equipment and facilities are being installed.
Academic Services
The Library
The University Library operates on each of the four campuses, providing stock and services related to the needs of users.
The total stock consists of approximately 540,000 books and some 5,000 current periodicals and newspapers; this is augmented by borrowing some 13,000 items from other libraries each year.
In most cases books are interchangeable between campuses.
A computer-based catalogue of the library stock on all campuses can now be accessed from terminals in the libraries and elsewhere in the University.
Special collections at Coleraine include the Henry Davis gift of early printed books and fine bindings, the Headlam-Morley library of books, pamphlets and manuscripts relating to World War I and the Peace Treaty, the Paul Richard library relating to World War II, the Henry Morris collection of Irish material, the microfiche English linguistics collection and the Stelfox natural history collection.
The John Hewitt library and the Francis Stuart archive of literary manuscripts are recent additions.
Particular strengths in the collection at Jordanstown include materials to support American and Women's Studies and also UK, USA and Irish radical newspapers and periodicals on microfilm.
There is a good Irish collection at Magee College , and Belfast has strong collections on art and design, including exhibition catalogues.
Other forms of recorded knowledge, such as microfilm, tape and disc recordings, film strips, slides and videotapes are kept in the library.
In particular, there are significant microfilm collections at Jordanstown and Coleraine and 30,000 slides at Belfast .
A modern library makes extensive use of information technology and it is frequently the case that students are tentative in making full use of such technology or are unaware of the wide range of services available.
The University library staff, organized on a subject basis, are fully aware of the needs of all students.
Specialist advice and assistance is readily available.
The staff particularly welcome enquiries and requests for assistance from first-year students.
Audio-Visual Services
Audio-Visual Services assist in the development of effective teaching/learning through an educational technology approach.
An extensive range of audio-visual facilities and equipment is available on each campus.
Specialist resources include the following:
Belfast
Dark-room and photographic studio; facilities for recording and editing live and off-air television; high-fidelity sound recording and mixing facilities; viewing facilities for video, cine and tape/slide programmes, cine cameras and animation.
Coleraine
Colour television studio, gallery, editing suite, cine cameras, audio-visual language laboratories, facilities for receiving and recording satellite transmissions.
Master production using desktop publishing equipment.
Central audio-visual loan, support and maintenance centre.
Operational centre for videoconferencing between campuses.
Jordanstown
Graphics centre with computer-generated graphics and desktop publishing facility, photographic studio and darkroom, television studio with three colour cameras, lighting grid and cyclorama, control room, editing suite and caption generator, location cameras and editing suites to high-band standards, off-air recording facilities, audio-visual aids workshop with self-instructional materials, facilities for the production of audio-tapes, 35mm slides and video programmes.
There is also an audiovisual language laboratory and facilities for receiving and recording satellite transmissions and for videoconferencing.
Magee College
Graphics design centre, photographic studio and darkroom, television studio and viewing room, sound recording studio, audio-visual language laboratory, workshop for production of audio-tapes, 35mm slides and video programmes, off-air television recordings; videoconferencing.
Computer Services
Computer Services provide a comprehensive computing and data communications service to all sections of the University community.
There are terminal and microcomputer facilities at all four campuses, with over 3000 students registered at any given time for use of the central DEC VAX range of computers.
Multiuser IBM and Unix systems are also available for specific parts of the undergraduate teaching programme.
The central computing facilities are accessible twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week from more than 600 access points throughout the University, or by external telephone or telecommunications links.
Additionally, almost all students make use at some time or other of one of the thirty or so departmental micro laboratories, with about 900 micro computers to choose from, ranging from standard BBCs to powerful SUN and Apollo workstations, and from MS-DOS PCs of varying types to Apple Macintoshes.
Recently-equipped laboratories include PCs networked to local file servers, which makes for easy loading of software of guaranteed integrity, and secure storage of data.
Some micro rooms duplicate as terminal laboratories to the central systems, using software terminal emulation packages for text, colour graphics and micro-to-mainframe file transfer links.
The University has, on account of its dispersed geographical locations, one of the finest internal University computer networks in the UK, including Cambridge Rings, Ethernets and X25 local area networks, with high-speed inter-campus X25 links connecting the main computing facilities.
Students can address networked printers, plotters, laserprinters and micro subnets from whatever campus they are resident on, or from other campuses.
Computer-aided design and advanced graphics supported by dedicated systems at Jordanstown and Belfast can equally well be accessed from appropriate workstations at any campus.
The software library supported by Computer Services not only promotes general facilities that are found in modern computing departments (such as languages and compilers, mathematical and scientific routines, databases, spreadsheets and word-processors), but also includes a large inventory of teaching software covering the spectrum of academic activity at the University.
Social Skills Training Centre
The Social Skills Training Centre at Jordanstown provides training in interpersonal communication for, firstly, students following courses leading to professional qualifications in areas where dealing with people is an important aspect of the work and, secondly, those interested in the academic study of face-to-face interaction.
The Centre is equipped with extensive closed circuit television and video-recording facilities which are used in the refinement of a range of social skills and the systematic analysis and study of interpersonal behaviour.
Student Services
Most students have little difficulty in adapting to university life, and any problems they may encounter can almost certainly be dealt with by Student Services, which provides information and assistance in the following areas:accommodation, counselling, health, child-care services and income support .
These interrelated services are strictly personal and confidential, and their objective is the complete well-being of students and staff.
For advice or guidance on any aspect of student life, or merely a friendly chat, you are invited to contact Student Services.
Overseas Students
During the academic year, overseas students need to have access to a wide range of information and support in order to adjust to a different culture and benefit fully from their education.
On each campus, there is a designated member of Student Services staff who can assist with any queries or put the overseas student in touch with an appropriate source of help.
Mature Students
The University benefits from a substantial number of mature students.
Adapting to higher education, perhaps after a gap in formal education, can lead to special needs for advice and support.
Student Services organizes sessions for mature students on a regular basis on subjects such as the improvement of study skills and enhancement of self-confidence.
Accommodation
Coleraine
Residential accommodation is available on campus for nearly 280 students, and the Students' Housing Association Co-operative (SHAC) provides excellent accommodation nearby.
A number of students reside in flats and other lodgings in Coleraine; others live in the nearby holiday resorts of Portrush and Portstewart, where there is a reasonable supply of competitively-priced accommodation in the October–June period.
The Accommodation Office maintains a regularly-updated list of registered lodgings.
Those who want to rent a privately-owned furnished flat or house must make their own arrangements, but each student can obtain a rent card from the Accommodation Office or from the Students' Union.
Jordanstown and Belfast
On-site accommodation at Jordanstown is provided for about 680 students in residential blocks, six-bedroomed houses, flats and study bedrooms in Halls.
All have shared self-catering facilities.
First-year students are allocated most of these places.
There is also a register of ‘off-campus’ accommodation in lodgings and furnished houses and flats, and details of vacancies can be obtained from the Accommodation Office.
As at Coleraine, SHAC provides attractive accommodation close to the Jordanstown campus.
The Accommodation Office staff at Jordanstown are available to answer queries and provide help with accommodation problems at any time.
Magee College
There are currently 103 residential places available.
These are located in three Halls of Residence on and immediately adjacent to the campus.
Students not in residential places usually rent accommodation or take lodgings in the city.
SHAC provides 250 bed places in two modern residences close to the campus.
The Student Services Assistant at the Resource Centre adjacent to the main building of Magee College provides a comprehensive accommodation advice service.
Counselling, Welfare and Studies Advice
A confidential individual and group counselling and psychotherapy service is available for use by all students and staff members or their families.
Depending on personal choice, the service can be used for brief or longer-term counselling and for dealing with any problems which might interfere with personal achievement and well-being.
Each student is allocated a studies adviser with whom they meet regularly to discuss academic or other problems.
Particularly difficult problems can, with the student's consent, be referred by the studies adviser to the specialists within Student Services.
The Counselling Service offers a number of group workshops and skills acquisition classes during the academic year.
These include: Learning, Study and Examination Workshops; Relaxation and Stress Control Sessions; and Mature Students' Groups for older students returning to education after an interruption in their career.
Health Service
The Student Health Service at Coleraine is situated in the Student Services Department on Level One of the Tower.
It provides a family doctor service with access to specialist and hospital facilities for each student who is registered with the University physicians.
A qualified nurse is available to treat injuries and general illnesses and to advise on health matters.
Students from overseas countries should contact Student Services upon arrival at the University to obtain further information on National Health Service reciprocal agreements.
At Jordanstown , qualified nurses are available in the Health Centre on the ground floor of the Student Services Building to treat injuries, minor illnesses, and to advise on health matters.
Patients are referred to the Medical Officer and to local hospitals where necessary.
This service is also available to students at the Belfast campus.
At Magee College , a local Group Practice provides a medical service for all registered students.
Students living away from home are required to register with the Medical Officer or a local doctor of their choice.
This applies particularly to students on long-term medication and those registered as disabled persons.
Child-care Services
The Student Services Department runs two nursery playgroups, at Jordanstown and Magee College.
All staff are professionally qualified and the play areas and crèches are supplied with a wide range of play materials and approved equipment.
A crèche playgroup also operates on the Coleraine campus, under the management of the Nursery Welfare Association.
For details of these services, see p 32.
Income Support
The Student Services Department administers the Access Fund which is available to students normally resident in the United Kingdom to assist in access to higher education and continuation of studies.
An interest-free loan fund is also available to students who find themselves in unforeseen financial difficulty.
Enquiries
Enquiries should be addressed to:
Dr Brian Caul Head of Student Services University of Ulster Cromore Road Coleraine Co Londonderry BT52 1SA Tel:(0265) 44141 ext 4397.
Chaplains
The University chaplains contribute to community life at each campus.
They believe firmly in promoting trust and respect between the different churches and the chaplains work together in the conviction that such an approach best serves the interests of the students and staff.
It is a tradition at the University that the chaplains, as pastors and friends, enter fully into student life.
There are four chaplains at Coleraine.
Their facilities include a room near the main foyer and a prayer room.
There are four chaplains at Magee College and a further four serve Jordanstown and Belfast.
The Jordanstown chaplains' suite is situated on the University Mall.
They also manage a student club, MIXERS (a non-alcoholic bar), in the Village Hall in the heart of the Student Village at Jordanstown.
These meeting places serve as a central focus for chaplaincy activities and group meetings, but chaplains also visit students in the residences and in their off-campus accommodation.
Full details of chaplaincy activities and services are provided for students at the time of registration and on chaplaincy noticeboards.
Students' Union
Each student registered on a course leading to a formal qualification is automatically eligible for Student Union membership.
The Union is the main focus of student activity in the University and the principal vehicle of communication and representation for the student body.
For many, the Students' Union will be the first opportunity to participate in making decisions on matters which will significantly affect their student lives.
The activities and policies of the Union are decided by the students through discussion and votes at meetings on each of the four University campuses.
Student activities cover the range of social, academic, political, cultural and sporting interests of the Union body which complements life at university.
The Union also elects student representatives to sit on the principal decision-making bodies of the University, the Council and Senate, and their major sub-committees.
The Students' Union is supported financially by a grant from the University and by the income it generates itself through commercial services.
Nine elected students form the overall Executive who are paid a wage and given a year off from studies to work full-time on behalf of their fellow students.
They are supported by professional staff and part-time Union officers to run the Union on every campus at the direction of the Union General Council.
The Union fulfils an important campaigning role in the University and wider community, and is regularly active on matters concerning student funding, accommodation and issues of government policy.
Most of its energies and resources however are concentrated in the areas of Clubs and Societies and student welfare services, improving communications between students (there are five student publications) and in developing a social programme to suit the tastes of members across the four campuses of the University.
The President of the Students' Union meets the Vice-Chancellor of the University on a regular basis
Coleraine
At Coleraine, the Union occupies a large section of the South Building complex, adjacent to the University administrative headquarters.
The Union area includes a main hall, modern lounge bar facilities, a travel office, shop and cafeteria and disco-bar.
The Union also has the advantage of a location adjoining the University Sports Centre with immediate access to first-class facilities and playing pitches.
Full-time student officers are available to give advice and make representation to the University on behalf of members.
A full-time welfare and education office is complemented by administrative and site executive offices which cater for the day-to-day operation of the Union and provide typing and photocopying facilities.
The tradition of sporting excellence at Coleraine is reflected in the extensive list of clubs currently supported from Union funds.
Sports and societies range from hockey to hurling, and from the Physics Society to the Women's Group.
Coleraine has produced a number of outstanding athletes who have participated in the Commonwealth Games and the World Student Games.
Water sports are particularly well catered for with the advantageous siting of the University overlooking the River Bann.
Jordanstown
The largest University campus houses excellent Students' Union facilities in Block 11, adjacent to the Sports Centre.
The Union facilities include a large social club, lounge bar, games area with pool and video games, full-size snooker tables and a hot food cafeteria.
The Union offices accommodate the elected officers and staff who are available to give advice and information on grants, accommodation and problems with courses.
A typing and photocopying facility is also available.
Elected full-time officers are on hand to make representations or answer queries on behalf of individual students.
The Union at Jordanstown also houses the Print Shop and desktop publishing facilities which service the student members and societies on all four campuses.
A Union Shop is augmented by a Student Travel Office, an Insurance Centre and Bank Service Till.
As an extension to the social facilities, the Union uses the Main Hall of the University to put on big-band events with well-known groups from both the local and international scenes.
The traditional Freshers' Ball is one of a series of such events.
There are others at Christmas, Rag Day and St Patrick's Day — all guaranteed full houses.
The Union employs an Entertainments Manager based at Jordanstown to organize and co-ordinate an entertainments programme across the four campuses.
Sporting achievement and participation is high at Jordanstown, with outstanding performances in recent times in hockey, Gaelic football, basketball and squash.
Thirty-three sports clubs and thirteen societies receive Students' Union support and all students are encouraged to play a full part in their affairs.
Belfast
The Belfast campus has benefited from a steady increase in student numbers and significant development of facilities.
The Conor Hall development offers an excellent social and recreational complex, including a modern bar, in the centre of the University campus.
The Union provides one full-time officer who is elected from within the Belfast members each year and is supported by a full-time member of staff.
The Union also operates a coffee bar and snack facility along with an art shop designed to help keep costs of study and materials to a minimum.
A photocopying service is also available.
A growing number of clubs and societies such as the movie-makers, art appreciation and folk club, all receive Union subsidy.
Welfare and Education advice is available through the Union Officer and an elected Site Committee looks after many of the day-to-day decisions.
Magee College
The Students' Union occupies the ground floor of the most modern building in the University.
Directly below the library, the spacious facilities accommodate the ever-expanding student population with a cafeteria, large function room, lounge bar and committee rooms.
A full-time Union Officer is supported by seven members of staff.
Together they provide the student welfare, typing and photocopying services, along with catering and club bar facilities.
A wide range of sports clubs and societies is active within the student community, and the University has its own playing fields nearby.
Social, cultural and sports activities (all of which are open to members) are organized throughout the academic year and subsidised through the Union.
Playing A Full Part
The Union places a firm emphasis on the importance of a full and rewarding social and recreational life in support of academic achievement.
With a thriving network of committees, sports clubs and societies, each student is encouraged to play a full part in this aspect of student life.
Among the clubs and societies are the following:
Amateur Radio
Art Appreciation
Athletics and Cross Country
Badminton
Basketball
Camogie
Canoe
Caving
Chinese Society
Conradh na Gaeilge
Cricket
Cross-cultural
Debating and Literature
Drama
Environmental Health Science
Equestrian
Films
French
GAA
Geography
German and French
Golf
Hill Walkers
Hockey
Irish Traditional Music and Culture
Judo
Karate
Motor Club
Mountaineering
Netball
PALS
Politics and History
Ramblers
Rock Music
Rowing
Rugby
Snow Ski
Soccer
Squash
Sub Aqua
Surfing
Swimming and Water Polo
Table Tennis
Trampoline
Transport
Volleyball
Windsurfing
Women's
Youth Work
Staff and students organize a variety of charity events
Health Fair at Magee
Rag Day
Sport and Recreation
At the University, students are encouraged to take part in a sport or recreational activity of their choice and at a level which brings pleasure and satisfaction, whatever their ability or commitment.
The staff of the Sport and Recreation Department are pleased to advise on how maximum benefit can be obtained from the wide-ranging programme on offer.
The choice is varied and students may take advantage of tuition in many sports or alternatively may organize their own programme of activities and book the various sports facilities at times which suit their academic timetables.
The specialist advisory service includes the sports scientists in the Human Performance Laboratory at Jordanstown and the physiotherapists who staff the Sports Injuries Clinic.
The Sport and Recreation Department offers some of the finest indoor sports facilities and outdoor playing fields in the province.
Students at the University are eligible to apply for sports bursaries which are awarded each year to those students who have already shown that they have exceptional sporting ability and who wish to achieve further excellence.
Details of the bursaries are available from the Sport and Recreation Department.
At Jordanstown , the Sports Centre offers two large sports halls, a fully-equipped gymnasium, a dance studio, a weight training and physical conditioning room, six squash courts, an eight-lane swimming pool and a hydrotherapy pool.
This suite of indoor sports facilities caters for a wide range of sports and recreational activities including archery, basketball, fencing, martial arts, badminton, table-tennis, netball, indoor soccer, indoor hockey, indoor tennis, and keep-fit.
The playing fields are on campus and accommodate a wide variety of sports including athletics, camogie, gaelic football, hockey, hurling, rugby, soccer and tennis.
These excellent facilities are used by the University sports clubs for practice and for matches in the local leagues.
Water sports, with the exception of swimming and water polo, are provided for at a local marina and on the River Lagan.
Students on the Belfast campus share the Jordanstown sports facilities, although they are also able to visit the social and recreational facilities available in the capital city.
The Coleraine campus offers a wide range of high-quality facilities for sport and recreation.
The Sports Centre has a medium-sized sports hall and an adjoining minor hall, which are used for basketball, indoor tennis, indoor hockey, martial arts, netball, table-tennis, badminton, fencing, and fitness training.
It also includes five squash courts, a weight training room, and a sauna.
The playing fields are close to the Residences and are serviced by a spacious pavilion.
They provide a training area for athletics, pitches for camogie, gaelic football, hockey, hurling, rugby, soccer, and tennis courts.
Floodlights have been installed on a soccer pitch and a hard porous hockey pitch, enabling matches and practice to take place in the evenings.
The carefully planned cross-country course, which takes advantage of many excellent natural features, has been used to host the World Student Cross-Country Championships as well as other local competitions.
Rowing, sailing, canoeing, sub-aqua, and water skiing, are centred in the Water Sports Centre, which is sited on the banks of the River Bann.
Sporting excellence at UU
At Magee College , the playing fields, which are convenient to the campus, are used for gaelic football, rugby and soccer.
For indoor recreation a local leisure centre and a swimming pool are hired on Wednesday afternoons by the University for the exclusive use of students.
Magee College is well situated for students who are interested in outdoor activities, with sailing at Fahan, rowing and canoeing on the River Foyle, and walking and climbing in nearby Donegal.
The Sport and Recreation Department is responsible for the management of the University's sports facilities and has permanent officers on the Jordanstown and Coleraine campuses and a part-time officer on the Magee College campus.
Professional staff keep in contact with the student officers on the Belfast campus to provide an advisory service on all aspects of the sport and recreational programme.
Crèche and Playgroup Facilities
Coleraine
The Nursery Welfare Association organizes a crèche and playgroup for children (aged from one month to five years) of students and staff.
There are ten sessions each week — Monday to Friday, morning and afternoon — except on days when the University is normally closed.
The morning session is from 8.30 am to 12.30 am.
The afternoon session is from 1.00 pm to 5.00 pm (4.30 pm on Fridays).
As the number of places is limited, those requiring a place are advised to contact the crèche as far in advance as is practicably possible.
Further details may be obtained by telephoning (0265) 44141, ext 4240 .
Jordanstown
A well-equipped nursery playgroup caters for children aged from six weeks to five years.
Qualified and experienced staff provide full day care from 8.30 am to 5.30 pm (4.30 pm on Fridays) on Monday to Friday during the academic year (September to June).
A special advantage is the involvement of University staff and students with a professional interest in child development.
There is usually a waiting list, so places should be booked as early as possible.
Further details may be obtained by telephoning (0232) 365433 ext 2539 .
Magee College
A new crèche, based at Gate Lodge on the Magee College campus, provides places for children aged from infancy to five years.
Full day care (8.30 am–5.30 pm Monday to Thursday; 8.30 am–4.30 pm Friday) is provided by trained staff in bright, comfortable and fully-equipped accommodation.
At present the crèche operates during term time only but it is envisaged that it will eventually open outside term, subject to demand.
Further details may be obtained by telephoning (0504) 265621 ext 5218 or (0504) 371527.
Student parents are eligible for financial assistance with sessional fees, and should contact the Students' Union Education and Welfare officers at Jordanstown (0232) 365131 ext 2400/2452 or Coleraine (0265) 44141 ext 4323 for advice.
Adult and Continuing Education
The headquarters of the Department of Adult and Continuing Education are located in a modern, well-equipped centre close to the main building at Jordanstown.
As the title of the Department implies, the University recognizes the fact that university education is not merely for the undergraduate but for all who retain an interest in learning, whether at a highly academic or purely recreational level.
Each faculty plays a part in organizing courses and the programme ranges from Microelectronics, Civil Engineering and Building Technology to Yoga, Olympic Gymnastics and modern languages.
The Department offers courses on all four campuses of the University.
This provision includes the Certificate in Foundation Studies for Mature Students for those whose formal education is incomplete.
The successful completion of this Certificate at an appropriate level provides a second chance for such students to enter higher education or other forms of advanced, further and professional training.
The University collaborates with colleges of further education in extending the opportunities presented by Foundation Studies courses to all parts of the province and as a result courses are offered at Magee College and at Newry, Enniskillen and at three locations in Belfast.
The Department also organizes the extra-mural programme for the University and this involves the teaching of a wide variety of courses for adults throughout Northern Ireland.
A programme of short courses, conferences and workshops provides opportunities for professional, community and other groups to further their knowledge in particular fields such as the formation of cooperatives or local history.
The Department offers major provision in the field of women's education.
The range of programmes includes the very successful ‘Time for Me’ which introduces women to a series of career change options.
Another innovative programme, ‘Women and Information Technology’, which is designed to increase the female participation rate in this vocationally important field, forms part of the provision.
Staff have a strong interest in and involvement with research into Adult and Continuing Education and offer supervision for study leading to the degrees of Master of Philosophy and Doctor of Philosophy.
Staff from the Department work with the University's Faculty of Education in the provision of postgraduate programmes leading to the awards of MA and Diploma in Adult and Continuing Education.
Students on these programmes, which are offered at Coleraine, Jordanstown and Magee College, may be teachers in further education, school teachers with a role in community education or practitioners of any of the professions which have education as part of their functions.
It is clear that adult and continuing education will grow in importance over the years.
The University has already taken steps to promote this growth and the Department will play the major role in these activities.
In particular, it is concerned with the barriers adults face in finding access to higher education.
The Department intends to develop a wide range of activities for the community and to work closely with other bodies in the field to ensure the fullest use of resources.
In this respect, liaison with individuals, groups or other institutions is both invited and encouraged.
For full details of programmes and other information about Adult and Continuing Education, please contact:
The Administrative Officer Department of Adult and Continuing Education University of Ulster at Jordanstown Shore Road Newtownabbey Co Antrim BT37 0QB Tel:(0232) 365131 ext 2680 
Participants are encouraged to contribute to tutorial discussions
Newry College Outcentre participants visit the Jordanstown facilities
Careers Advisory Service
The Careers Advisory Service offers a service to help students with their careers and future employment.
Students will already know that there are jobs in work areas such as Electronics and Physiotherapy where the subject requirements are quite specific and those who decide to enrol for one of these courses will have effectively chosen their career at the same time.
Just as there are many degree courses which have no specific vocational links so also there are many careers which require the application of intelligence and the disciplines learned during time at university rather than specific subject knowledge.
Whatever a student's course, employers will seek a combination of intellect, relevant abilities and personal qualities developed through the rigour of academic study and the prudent use of leisure time and vacations.
The Careers Advisory Service has information libraries and advisers on the Jordanstown, Coleraine and Magee College sites.
A specialist adviser visits the Belfast campus where careers information is currently held in the Library.
Each year the Service works closely with employers and with the providers of postgraduate courses to ensure that all students are aware of the opportunities available to them.
Please take early advantage of the facilities offered.
Cultural Affairs
Social activities and a varied arts programme contribute much to the quality of university life.
All four campuses of the University are involved in the programme of arts and cultural activities.
This provision ranges widely in form and presentation with major concerts, recitals, plays, celebrity lectures, opera, dance, films, demonstrations, exhibitions of works of art and even an award-winning Summer Festival of Extra Mural Activities designed for visitors and tourists.
Nearly all of these events are ‘open door’ activities which encourage the local communities to join our students and staff.
Accordingly, such events have brought many internationally acclaimed and distinguished artists to the province to perform and to demonstrate their art through master classes.
Coleraine is the home of the Riverside Theatre and the multipurpose Diamond Concert Hall.
Magee College hosts a programme of special events that includes art exhibitions and concerts by folk musicians of local and national reputation.
The Guildhall, rialto, St Columb's Hall and the Orchard Art Gallery are the major venues in the city centre which regularly host entertainment and cultural groups of national and international interest.
The newly-opened Students' Union area offers catering and recreational facilities.
Jordanstown is the base for the University Orchestra and Choir, and the foyer at the University of Ulster at Belfast houses frequent local and international art and sculpture exhibitions.
The thriving film societies at Coleraine and Jordanstown offer a weekly programme of films for every taste — from the popular to the esoteric — which can be enjoyed by everyone, at very reasonable prices.
The Riverside Theatre
In addition to the events staged at all four University campuses, the University also houses the excellent Riverside Theatre, which is situated at the Coleraine campus.
It is one of the most prestigious of Northern Ireland's theatres and is a focus of artistic activity in the North-West of the province, serving both the University and the wider community.
In doing so, the Riverside has forged strong links between ‘town and gown’.
The Riverside programme incorporates drama, music recitals, rock bands, chat shows, variety, professional snooker, children's shows, pantomime and recordings for television and radio shows (it is planned this year to record BBC TV's ‘Question Time’).
There is an art gallery in the foyer which hosts regular touring and locally produced exhibitions.
There is also a licensed bar, and in the Riverview Lounge a variety of studio events, workshops and demonstrations take place.
Student involvement in the arts is especially encouraged and as well as the theatre being used regularly by the Department of English, Media and Theatre Studies for productions and teaching, the University Drama Group and the Ballet and Contemporary Dance Society regularly use the Riverside for their own public presentations.
The steady increase in lunchtime events offering snacks and other refreshments has resulted in the theatre becoming in every sense a social centre for meeting and encounter throughout the day.
Musical Offering — playing baroque music at the Octagon Gallery, Coleraine
Remembrance by Graeme Reid, Riverside
Ned Sherrin on a recent visit, with the Arts Director and the Provost, Coleraine
Chitty Chitty Bang Bang, Riverside
The Brindisi Quartet
David Puttman, top film producer visited the University's Annual Film Weekend
Courses
The Charter of the University of Ulster permits the University ‘to provide a range of courses of study, academic, professional, technical or other, at higher degree, degree and non-degree levels, leading as appropriate to qualifications awarded by the University or by national or professional bodies’.
This prospectus contains information on full-time undergraduate courses which lead to a degree, diploma or certificate or fulfil in part the requirements of a professional body.
Course Flexibility: Transfer and Delayed Choice
A special feature of many of the courses offered by the University is the opportunity allowed for transfer.
In appropriate cases, depending on academic performance, students may transfer from the course to which they were originally admitted to a related course at a different level.
For example, reciprocal transfer between related degree, diploma and certificate courses may be permitted in certain cases.
In addition, some courses contain an element of delayed choice.
For example, a number of humanities courses allow the student to postpone a decision to opt for a single subject or interdisciplinary course, or a major, joint or minor programme until the beginning of the second year.
Possibilities for transfer or delayed choice are outlined, where applicable, in the course information sections.
Degree Courses
First degree courses are usually of three years' duration but are, in many instances, extended to include periods of professional training (in industry, commerce or the public service) or time spent abroad.
The majority of degree courses lead to the honours classifications of first, second (upper or lower division), or third class.
The University also awards an ordinary degree on successful completion of certain courses.
First degree courses may be single subject, interdisciplinary or combined subject.
Diploma and Certificate Courses
In addition to first degree courses there is a wide range of undergraduate courses leading to higher diplomas, diplomas and certificates, of which a large number carry with them awards of national bodies such as the Business & Technician Education Council (BTEC).
BTEC exists to advance the quality and availability of work-related education for those in, or preparing for, employment.
The fundamental aim of the Council is that students on BTEC courses should develop the necessary competence for success in their careers in their own, employers' and the national interest.
The University is engaged in a number of collaborative ventures with further education colleges in the provision of higher level BTEC technician courses in Northern Ireland.
Detailed information on these courses is given in the section on Application and Admission and under the appropriate individual course entries.
The University also awards a Diploma of Higher Education (DipHE), which is a worthwhile qualification in itself and allows for progression to further studies.
Sandwich Courses
The University is committed to the sandwich principle and indeed its Charter explicitly endorses this belief.
The sandwich principle, co-operative education and industrial or clinical placement are different terms for essentially the same thing: an extended period of work experience which is built into courses of study and by which students gain knowledge of current working practices and new developments in industry and the professions.
Sandwich courses may be ‘thin’ or ‘thick’, generally lasting for three or four years with the interleaved periods of placement in industry or the public sector varying from three months to one year.
Successful completion of a year of placement, and successful completion of the undergraduate course undertaken, leads to the award of the Degree and the Diploma in Industrial Studies.
One third of all full-time courses at the University of Ulster require students to undertake a period of professional or industrial placement during which they do not receive grant aid but are remunerated by the employing organization.
In addition many courses involve periods of unpaid professional practice and work experience within the academic year.
About 1000 students from the University are to be found annually gaining mainstream industrial and clinical experience in both paid and unpaid placements.
Many students so placed may be offered permanent employment on completion of their courses, subject to the availability of a suitable position at that time.
Study in Europe
A growing number of the University's courses provide an opportunity for a period of study in another country of the European Community.
This is true not only of Humanities and Business and Management courses such as Applied Languages, International Business Communication, and European Business Studies but increasingly of courses offered by other faculties, for example Biological Sciences, Environmental Science, Geography, European Regional Development, and Engineering,Ab initio language training is available for students of these courses.
Many of these exchanges receive support from the EC ERASMUS programme.
Teaching Methods
The basic method of teaching at undergraduate level is by courses of lectures but considerable emphasis is also placed on teaching in small groups such as tutorials and seminars.
In the Faculties of Art and Design, Business and Management, Education, Informatics, Science and Technology, and Social and Health Sciences, practical work is considered an important part of the courses; although this broad term serves to cover a wide variety of activities.
In the Faculty of Humanities, the use of language laboratories and other teaching aids is increasingly important.
Data storage, processing equipment and computational aids are used widely in undergraduate teaching and all courses aim to include an element of information technology.
The University seeks to include in its courses activities which promote enterprising qualities in its students by encouraging them to take more responsibility for their own learning, setting their own goals and targets through personal assessment and career planning.
The Enterprise in Higher Education Initiative for Northern Ireland has made funding available for a programme of curriculum and staff development, and co-operation with industry and commerce, with the aim of extending opportunities for students to engage in such activities and to study relevant aspects of commercial and economic awareness and enterprise initiatives.
Ethical and environmental considerations are an important part of this innovative programme.
Through this Initiative, the University hopes to develop in its graduates and diplomates qualities which will enable them to play a positive role in an increasingly competitive and changing world.
Examinations
Examination methods and timetables naturally differ from course to course but, in general, candidates are assessed both on written examinations and on course work during the year.
Class tests may also be held from time to time.
The relative weight given to examination performance and course work varies from course to course as does the method of determining the final result.
Course regulations specify the examination pattern for each course and are available to students on registration.
Examinations of Professional Bodies
Those who enter a course leading to the qualifications awarded by a Professional Association (such as Membership, Associateship or Fellowship) should make themselves familiar with the regulations of that body, as it is their personal responsibility to comply with them.
Provisional Courses
The University is committed to a process of evaluation for both new and existing courses.
Courses for which evaluation has not yet been completed are marked provisional in this prospectus.
Application may be made for entry to these courses in the normal fashion.
Applicants and principals of schools and colleges are advised as soon as approval is granted.
Field Trips and Vacation Courses
Residential term-time and vacation courses or field trips form an integral part of many University course demands.
Students obliged to meet these requirements will have their travel and any additional subsistence expenses reimbursed by the University in accordance with agreed scales.
Typical Grade Offers
This listing gives details of typical ‘A’ level offers made to applicants for entry to courses.
(For example, CCC means that candidates are liable to be asked for three ‘A’ levels at grade C.)
Only those full-time initial degree courses included in the 1992 entry UCCA handbook are listed.
The information given reflects the University's admissions policy at the time of going to press, and may be subject to change.
Grades shown are typical of offers made at the time of initial application.
They are intended as a general guide for applicants.
However, special circumstances in individual applications may have a bearing in some cases on the offer which the University makes.
Applicants should note that ‘AS’ levels are also accepted as part of the general entry requirements for admission to first degree or DipHE courses (see page 51), and may also be acceptable in place of an ‘A’level in a specified subject for the purpose of satisfying course requirements.
(See individual course descriptions.)
The University receives a high proportion of applications from candidates offering BTEC qualifications and Republic of Ireland Leaving Certificate.
As a general guideline the following levels of attainment in BTEC National Diploma and Republic of Ireland Leaving Certificate at Higher level are taken to be equivalent to the ranges of ‘A’ level grades shown:
Particular course offers may include the requirement to obtain a Distinction in BTEC National Diploma or a Grade B at Higher Level in the Republic of Ireland Leaving Certificate in specific subjects as part of the entry requirements eg. in a modern language for admission to some courses which include a major language component 
Application and Admission
Application through UCCA
Application for entry to all full-time undergraduate degree courses (except those listed below under Art and Design Degree Courses .
BSc Hons Professional Development in Nursing and BTech degrees — see Application using the University's Direct Entry Form, p 50), should be made through the Universities Central Council on Admissions (UCCA) in accordance with the procedure described in the Council's handbook ‘How to Apply for Admission to a University’.
The UCCA handbook and an application form should be obtained from your school or college.
With effect from 1992 entry this will be a joint UCCA/PCAS application form.
If you are not at a school or college, write after 1 June in the year preceding entry to PO Box 67, Cheltenham, Glos.
GL50 3SF, for a handbook and joint application form using the tear-off sheet at the end of this prospectus.
The opening date for the receipt of applications for admission in October 1992 by the UCCA office is 1 September 1991.
The closing dates for the receipt of applications are:
15 October 1991 for candidates including Oxford or Cambridge or both among their entries;
15 December 1991 for candidates not including Oxford or Cambridge among their entries.
When filling in the UCCA form, applicants will be asked to list their choice of universities in institution code number order (ie the order in which the universities are listed in the UCCA handbook).
The UCCA code names ULS/followed by the campus abbreviation (CE, JN or ME) should be entered in Section 3A(a) and the UCCA university code number 92 in Section 3A(b).
Applicants must not attempt to indicate a preference for any particular institution.
Applicant's Fee
The £7 applicant's fee (or £14 if applying to both UCCA and PCAS) must be sent to UCCA/PCAS with the completed application form.
Overseas Candidates
Overseas candidates who are applying from the following countries are advised to submit their applications to UCCA through the appropriate overseas students' office in London as listed in an appendix to the UCCA handbook: Cyprus, Ghana (private candidates only), Guyana, India, Luxembourg, Mauritius, Tanzania and Thailand.
Candidates from other countries should send their applications directly to UCCA.
Art and Design Degree Courses
Applicants seeking admission to one of the following courses:
BA Hons Combined Studies in Art and Design
BA Hons Design
BA Hons Fine Art
BA Hons Fine Craft Design
BA Hons Textile and Fashion Design
must apply through: The Art and Design Admissions Registry (ADAR) Penn House, 9 Broad Street, Hereford HR4 9AP England.
It is recommended that forms be obtained by schools, colleges and individuals from the Art and Design Admissions Registry.
Application to Courses Taught in Collaboration with Further Education Colleges
(a)
The first year (and in some cases the sandwich year also) of the following courses are provided by the local further education colleges listed:
Further details are given under the individual course descriptions in the faculty sections of this prospectus.
Application for admission to the first year of these courses should be made on the University's direct entry form directly to the University of Ulster.
Applicants should indicate, where appropriate, their preference of location in a bracket after the title of the course, for example:
(b)
The BTEC HND course in Engineering (Mechanical/Production Specialisms and the Electronics and Electrical Engineering stream) may also be taken, in full, at Belfast College of Technology.
At North-West College of Technology the Mechanical Engineering and the Electronic and Computing Technology streams are available in full.
Further details are given under the individual course descriptions.
Application forms for these courses are available from and should be returned to the appropriate college.
Addresses are given in the ‘Useful Addresses’ section of this prospectus (p 270).
Application using the University's Direct Entry Form
Applicants seeking admission to any of the following courses should use the University's direct entry form:
BSc Hons Professional Development in Nursing
HND/BTech courses
Higher National Diplomas
Diplomas and Certificates
Copies of the direct entry form are available at all schools in Northern Ireland or may be obtained from:
The Admissions Officer University of Ulster Cromore Road Coleraine Co Londonderry BT52 1SA Northern Ireland Tel: Coleraine (0265) 44141 ext 4221.
It is advisable to apply as early as possible, and preferably before 31 January of the proposed year of entry to the University, though application may be considered up to the date when a course begins, subject to the availability of places.
Those awaiting examination results may have a provisional place allocated to them.
Interview
Applicants will have the opportunity to discuss their course(s) during a visit to the University.
For many courses a formal interview is an essential part of the selection procedure.
Admission
Entry Requirements for First Degrees and DipHE Courses.
In order to be considered for admission to a first degree or DipHE course at the University of Ulster, candidates should be in a position to satisfy:
(a)
the general entry requirements of the University; and
(b)
such additional requirements as may be prescribed for admission to particular courses of study
.
The general entry requirements are set out below, and particular course requirements are given in the course information section of the prospectus.
To satisfy the general entry requirements for first degree and DipHE courses applicants must:
(a)
have obtained in examination for an approved General Certificate of Education or equivalent, examination passes in two subjects at ‘A’ level and grade A, B or C in three other subjects in the GCSE&sup1;
or
a pass in one subject at ‘A’ level, passes in two subjects at ‘AS’level, and grade A, B or C in two subjects in the GCSE&sup1;
or
passes in four subjects at ‘AS’ level and grade A, B or C in one subject in the GCSE&sup1;
or
passes in three subjects at ‘A’ level and grade A, B or C in one subject in the GCSE¹
or
passes in two subjects at ‘A’ level and passes in two subjects at ‘AS’level
or
a pass in one subject at ‘A’ level and passes in three subjects at ‘AS’level
or
hold other educational qualifications approved by the Senate as being of an equivalent standard
and
(b)
provide evidence of competence in written and spoken English&sup2; and (where appropriate) the required level of numeracy&sup3;.
NB: No subject may be counted at more than one level.
The University will accept as equivalent qualifications under (a) above:
1.
A BTEC Business National Certificate or Diploma.
2.
A BTEC National Certificate or Diploma in the fields of Science or Technology which includes passes with merit in at least three units with a mathematical and scientific content.
3.
A BTEC Certificate or Diploma in Art and Design in appropriate subjects together with a folio of work or other evidence of achievement demonstrating degree potential.
4.
A SCOTEC Diploma in Science and Technology with (i) either passes at grade 5 in four subjects including Mathematics, Science and Technology or (ii) passes at grade 5 in three subjects including Mathematics, Science and Technology with passes at grade 7 in two other subjects.
5.
A Scottish Certificate of Education with the following grades gained at not more than two sittings of the examination:
(a)
band A, B or C in four approved subjects at the Higher grade, or
(b)
band A, B or C in three subjects at the Higher grade, together with either band A, B or C in two subjects at the Standard grade&sup4; or grades 1, 2 or 3 in two subjects at the Ordinary grade&sup4;.
(Up to three subjects in the Certificate of Sixth Year Studies may be accepted as equivalent to Higher grade subjects.)
¹.
Or Grade A, B or C in GCE Ordinary level or Grade 1 in CSE or a pass at AS level.
².
GCSE or GCE ‘O’ level English language at grade ‘C’or above is regarded as ‘Evidence of competence in written and spoken English’.
Other acceptable qualifications are listed on p 52.
³.
GCSE or GCE ‘O’ level Mathematics at grade ‘C’or above is regarded as ‘Evidence of the required level of numeracy’.
Other acceptable qualifications are listed on p 53.
This is not a requirement for all courses — please see individual course descriptions.
4.
Or Band D in Higher grade papers.
6.
One full credit at foundation level obtained in an Open University course.
7.
A Diploma of Higher Education of a United Kingdom university or of the CNAA.
8.
The European or International Baccalaureate.
9.
An Irish Leaving Certificate with passes in four approved subjects at grade C Higher level.
10.
Satisfactory completion of a full-time foundation course in Art and Design of not less than one academic year in duration.
11.
Satisfactory completion of a foundation course of the University, eg. Certificate in Foundation Studies for Mature Students, Certificate in Foundation Studies in Science.
NB: No subject may be counted at more than one level.
Applications from persons who hold qualifications not included in this list will be considered on their merit.
English Language Qualifications
The University will accept from home students the following English Language qualifications as evidence of competence in written and spoken English:
UK Boards
GCSE/GCE ‘O’ level in English Language at grade ‘C’or above
CSE in English, English Language or English Studies grade I
CEE grades I, II and III
Use of English
‘A’ level in English Literature (but not a GCSE/GCE ‘O’level pass)
Associated Examining Board
‘O/A’ level in English Language (Professional and Business Use)
‘A’ level in English Language and Literature
Joint Matriculation Board
‘O/A’ level in Additional English
‘A’ level in General Studies
University Entrance test in English (Overseas)
GCSE/GCE ‘O’ level in Humanities
Scottish Certificate of Education
Scottish Certificate of Sixth Year Studies in English.
Business & Technician Education Council
Level I and II in General and Communications Study unit
Level I (General Award) if with credit
Level II and III (Higher National Award) or equivalent BTEC qualification
International Baccalaureate
Higher or subsidiary level in English Language (grade 4 or better)
Irish Republic Awards
Leaving Certificate at Ordinary level (grade A, B or C) achieved in or after 1977.
In the Leaving Certificate at Higher level a grade D pass or above is acceptable.
A pass in the Leaving Certificate awarded up to and including 1976 is regarded as approximately equivalent to a Northern Ireland GCE ‘O’ level pass.
Royal Society of Arts
Stage II or III
Northern Ireland
Schools Senior Certificate with Credit.
‘O’ and ‘O/A’level qualifications must be at grade A, B or C. CSE must be at grade I and CEE at grade I, II or III.
An ‘O’ or ‘N’level pass gained at ‘A’level is acceptable.
English Literature at ‘A’ level is deemed to meet the ‘O’level English Language requirement but an ‘O’level pass awarded in ‘A’level English Literature is not.
Applicants whose first language is not English should consult the section in this prospectus for overseas students (see page 55).
Mathematics Qualifications
Where a particular level or competence in numeracy is a course requirement, the following qualifications in Mathematics will be acceptable:
Any UK Board
GCSE/GCE ‘O’ level in Mathematics at grade ‘C’or above
CSE in Mathematics grade I
CEE grades I, II and III
‘A’ level (or ‘O’or ‘N’level achieved at an ‘A’level subject with Mathematics in its title
‘A’ level Statistics (but not an ‘O’or ‘N’level pass obtained at an ‘A’level sitting)
‘O/A’ level in Additional Mathematics
‘aO’ Additional Statistics
‘aO’ Statistics
‘aO’ Pure Mathematics with Statistics
Associated Examining Board
‘O’ level in Commercial Mathematics; General Mathematics; Modern Mathematics; Technical Mathematics; Technical (Building) Mathematics
London
‘aO’ level in Applicable Mathematics; Mathematics and Theoretical Mechanics; Pure Mathematics and Probability
Oxford and Cambridge
‘O’ level in General Mathematics
‘aO’ level in Mathematics for Biology
Joint Matriculation Board
‘O’ level in Commercial Mathematics
‘aO’ level in Mathematical Studies
Southern Universities Joint Board
‘O’ level in Commercial Mathematics and Statistics
Scottish Certificate of Education
Scottish Certificate of Sixth Year Studies in Mathematics
Open University
M100, M101 and MS283
ONC/OND
Acceptable pattern of achievement in Science, Mathematics or Technology
BTEC
Mathematics Level N (Higher National Awards).
International Baccalaureate
Higher or Subsidiary level in Mathematics (grade 4 or better)
Institute of Mathematics and its Applications
Polymaths Diploma
Irish Republic Awards
Leaving Certificate at Ordinary level (grade A, B, C) achieved in or after 1977.
In the Leaving Certificate at Higher level a grade D pass or above is acceptable.
A pass in the Leaving Certificate awarded up to and including 1976 is regarded as approximately equivalent to a Northern Ireland GCE ‘O’ level pass.
Entry Requirements for Other Undergraduate Courses
The entry requirements for diploma and certificate courses at undergraduate level are specified in the course information sections of this prospectus.
Notes for Schools Regarding the Introduction of ‘AS’ Levels
The first ‘AS’ level examinations were held in June 1989.
The University of Ulster welcomes the ‘AS’ proposals as a means of broadening ‘A’level studies and has incorporated them into its General Entry Requirements for admission to degree and DipHE courses.
In certain cases the University may accept an ‘AS’ level pass in place of an ‘A’level in a specified subject for the purpose of satisfying course requirements.
Details are given where applicable in each course description.
Courses of Study and Criminal Records
Any applicant for a course of study who has a criminal record should at the time of application inform the Academic Registrar who will advise the applicant whether or not he or she is likely to be able to satisfy certain eligibility requirements for the course.
Any advice offered by the Academic Registrar must not be construed as an undertaking by the University that the applicant, if admitted to the course and if his or her academic progress thereafter is satisfactory, will be eligible to complete all parts of the course.
Mature Students
Persons of at least 21 years of age at the date of entry to a course who have useful experience to bring to university studies but who do not satisfy the entry requirements may apply for admission to an undergraduate course.
The University has a sympathetic attitude towards such applicants.
The major concern is to ensure that they have a realistic chance of completing a course: this is clearly of special importance both to them and to the University.
Such applicants may be asked to take a test or take part in some other selection procedure to assess whether they are likely to be able to cope with the work expected of a university student.
The Department of Adult and Continuing Education (see page 33) offers a Certificate in Foundation Studies for Mature Students both at Magee College and Belfast.
Similar part-time courses including some in science/technology subjects leading to a University Certificate are offered by several Colleges of Further Education.
As the University has been approved by the Access Courses Recognition Group (ACRG) as an Authorised Validating Agency all these courses are nationally recognized by way of a kitemark.
The kitemark and logo of the ACRG signify that successful students have completed a planned programme of studies involving at least 500 study hours by which they have achieved a level of attainment appropriate for admission to higher education.
Disabled Students
Physically handicapped students may be assured that their applications will be considered on the academic grounds applying to all candidates.
The University is committed to providing a suitable learning environment for every student, and a Disabled Students' Interest Group, affiliated to the National Bureau for Handicapped Students, has been established to promote their interests.
Disabled applicants are encouraged to come to whichever campus they hope to study at, meet the staff from the Student Services Department and academic departments and weigh up the issues of facilities and ease of access for themselves.
Occasional Students
The University will be happy to consider applications from persons wishing to attend courses but not to sit the University examinations.
Enquiries should be made in the first instance to the Academic Registrar.
Overseas Students
The University welcomes applications from overseas students.
All students from overseas are encouraged and helped to play a full part in the life of the University community and to take every advantage of the academic and recreational facilities available to them throughout their periods of study.
A specially arranged programme of talks and visits at the start of the academic year is organized to introduce overseas studies to their new environment and to the University, its services and surroundings.
Fees and Subsistence
As the cost of subsistence and accommodation for a student unaccompanied by his or her family is unlikely to be less than £65 per week, it is recommended that an overseas student embarking on a course should have at least this amount available.
Before registration, an assurance will be sought from a government body, official agency, or from private sources, that such financial support will be forthcoming.
For details of course fees, please see page 56.
English Language Qualifications
Applicants whose native language is not English and who do not hold a recognized qualification in English will be required to provide evidence that they are sufficiently competent in the use of the English language.
The following language tests may be used:
AEB Test in English for Education Purposes (TEEP)
Cambridge Certificate of Proficiency in English
Cambridge/British Council English Language Testing Services (ELTS)(minimum grade 6.5)
Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL)(minimum 550 points)
RSA (Advanced)
Other evidence may be accepted at the discretion of the University.
Facilities are provided to enable students holding only the minimum qualification in English language to increase their proficiency in the language.
Medical Fitness
Overseas applicants are required to provide evidence of medical fitness; such evidence, in the form of written verification from a medical officer that the applicant is deemed fit to undertake studies at the University, must be received in advance of registration.
Fees and Grant Awards
Fees
Full-time undergraduate, postgraduate, diploma and certificate students are required to pay, prior to enrolment, a composite annual fee as prescribed from time to time by the Council of the University.
This includes charges for registration, tuition, supervision and examination.
Full-time Students
The scale of fees for the academic year 1991/92 were:
Fees for longer or shorter courses are calculated on a pro rata basis.
Occasional Students
Full-time occasional students (other than those participating in an Inter-university Co-operation Programme under the EC ERASMUS scheme) are required to pay the same annual fees as full-time students.
Part-time occasional students are required to pay a fee fixed by the Finance Officer.
Grant Awards
Grant Awarding Bodies
For those students resident in England, Wales and Northern Ireland who are taking first degrees (including teacher training) or certain diploma courses, the usual grant-awarding body is the local education authority.
Grants for their counterparts in Scotland are administered by the Scottish Education Department.
All enquiries and applications should be made directly to the grant-awarding body; the correct address of the local education office is generally available from schools and public libraries.
The addresses to write to in Northern Ireland are:
Application should normally be made to the appropriate education authority for grant aid before 1 June of the year in which the student wishes to enter a course, even though at that time the student may not have been offered a place.
Students from overseas countries should obtain information on scholarships from the Ministry of Education of their own country or from a representative of the British Council if one is available locally.
Transfer of Awards
When a student in receipt of grant aid transfers on educational grounds — on the recommendation of the University — to another designated course either at the same university or another institution, the grant will be continued for the period required to complete the new course, provided that the transfer takes place within 16 months of the date of the student's registration on his/her initial course.
National Insurance and Social Security
Prospective students are advised to consult the leaflets ‘FB23, Young Peoples Guide to Social Security’ and IS20 ‘Guide to Income Support’available from DHSS offices, which will also be able to provide further guidance.
European Community Students
Students who are nationals of one of the member states of the European Community (other than the United Kingdom) and who are accepted on undergraduate courses at the University of Ulster will, in most cases, be eligible to receive a mandatory award to cover the payment of fees.
Prior to enrolment at the start of their first year, the University will send to all EC students forms to enable them to apply for a mandatory award.
The completed forms should be returned to:
The North Eastern Education and Library Board, County Hall, 182 Galgorm Road, Ballymena, Co Antrim BT42 1HN
Students are not eligible under this scheme if they: have not been ordinarily resident within the European Community for the three years preceding the start of their course at the University; or are on an exchange programme where fees are waived; or have attended a course normally lasting more than two years and have received a UK statutory award for this study.
In addition, mandatory awards are not available for students on the following courses:
Certificate in Foundation Studies in Art and Design, BTEC HNC Engineering (Electronics & Communication).
Students accepted for these courses should apply directly to the North Eastern Education and Library Board by 30 June for a discretionary award for payment of fees.
Students accepted on to the Diploma in Social Work will be considered for payment of fees by the Department of Health and Social Services only if they are allocated a quota place by the University.
Grants for maintenance in any form are not available under the scheme and students should apply to the appropriate grant awarding body in their own country for such support.
The question of eligibility for fee support can be complex.
Any students who feel they may not be eligible may contact the University to seek clarification of their position.
The Academic Year 1992/93
These dates may vary according to the requirements of particular courses.
Students will be informed of exact attendance requirements when accepted for courses.
Paintings reproduced by kind permission of James Macintyre
Officers and Deans of the University at 31 December 1990
Travel Notes
Excellent road and rail systems connect the four campuses.
Belfast International Airport at Aldergrove and Belfast City Airport at Sydenham offer frequent flights to all parts of the British Isles and farther afield.
There are daily sailings from the ports of Belfast and Larne to many other parts of the United Kingdom.
The Province
Northern Ireland is justly famous for its great natural beauty and the warmth and hospitality of its people.
The province offers an excellent network of regular bus and train services and its main roads and motorways are among the best in Europe.
The region around each campus has its particular attractions; wherever a student is based, the surrounding area is waiting to be explored and enjoyed.
Near Coleraine , for instance, there is the striking landscape of the Giant's Causeway — a geological formation of over 40,000 stone columns created by volcanic action.
The magnificent beaches of Portrush and Portstewart, two very popular holiday resorts, are within five miles of the University — the night life in these towns is a good source of off-campus student entertainment as well.
Jordanstown is ideally placed for quick trips to Belfast, the capital city, or for an exploratory tour of Carrickfergus, with its perfectly preserved 12th-century castle, Elizabethan parish church and modern marina.
Heading farther north, a journey along the 60 miles of coast road is rewarding for its spectacular views.
Belfast has many attractive Victorian and Edwardian buildings including the City Hall, Belfast Cathedral, the famous Ulster Bank in Waring Street and the beautifully refurbished Grand Opera House.
Visits to the Ulster Museum near the city centre and the Ulster Folk and Transport Museum at Cultra are a particularly rewarding way to spend some enjoyable and inexpensive leisure hours.
The historic city of Londonderry, location of the Magee College campus, is famous for, amongst other things, its massive 17th-century walls.
The lovely Roe Valley Country Park, with its old mills, bleach greens and watch towers, is within easy reach; to the east of Londonderry are the blue Sperrin Mountains, while west and north lies County Donegal.
Dunluce Castle, Co.
Antrim
Carrickfergus Castle
Mussenden Temple, Downhill
Belfast City Hall
Glenoe Waterfall near Larne
Further Information
For further information, you are invited to contact any of the following officers at the locations shown below.
They will either deal with your enquiry or direct you to the appropriate department in the University .
FACULTY OF ART & DESIGN
Introduction
The Faculty of Art and Design is unique in its size and breadth within the United Kingdom university sector, and in combining the experimentalist traditions of British art and design education with the resources and organization of a major university.
This provides the opportunity to devise courses on a variety of bases and to introduce new and innovative combinations of study.
From the original provision of foundation and degree courses the Faculty has developed a comprehensive range of degree and non-degree courses at various levels.
It has also co-operated with the further education sector in Northern Ireland to develop BTEC courses at National Diploma level, both as an expansion of existing provision and as an alternative to the Certificate in Foundation Studies offered by the University.
The Faculty is located on two campuses — at Belfast, where most of the staff, students and facilities are based, and at Magee College.
The Belfast campus comprises two large and well-equipped buildings close to the centre of the city.
The Faculty accommodation at Magee College is situated on the top floor of a new, purpose-designed building overlooking the River Foyle.
Three departments are responsible for the range of courses and research within the Faculty:
Department of Communication Arts
Department of Design in Industry
Department of Fine and Applied Arts
At postgraduate level the Faculty offers an MA Fine Art, a Postgraduate Diploma in Applied Arts, an Advanced Diploma in the History and Theory of Art and Design, and extensive opportunities for research studies.
Degree Courses
There are five degree programmes, designed to provide either a specialized or interdisciplinary pattern of study.
All five degree courses are organized and integrated within a common Faculty framework which makes it possible for students to opt for certain units outside their main subject area.
This means that students can take full advantage of the Faculty's wide range of academic and material resources.
Every effort is made to provide each student with an informed pathway of study through the successive levels of a course.
The Faculty works very closely with the wider community, and courses provide opportunities for students to relate to the world of work and professional practice.
Foreign visits or visits to other parts of the UK and the Republic of Ireland are an integral part of each course.
All courses offer the possibility for a number of students to undertake a year's supervised work experience between the second and final year of the undergraduate programmes.
Successful completion of this placement year qualifies the student for the supplementary award of the Diploma in Industrial Studies.
Higher National Diplomas
The Faculty offers HND Design courses at the Belfast and Magee College campuses.
These courses are strongly orientated towards industry and professional practice.
Transferability
Transferability between degree programmes is accommodated with maximum flexibility in the interests of the progress of each student, subject to the discretion of the Course Committee.
Course Profile
Courses in Art and Design are personally and vocationally rewarding.
However the demands they make of each student are rigorous and varied.
One course of study may ask much of the imaginative powers or experimental skills of a participant, while another may place emphasis on intellectual resourcefulness or strong self-motivation.
The chart on page 70 provides an informal profile of each course and an indication of the qualities it asks of each student.
It is designed to help each applicant to make an informed decision before applying for a particular programme of study.
Application for Admission to Art and Design Courses
Certificate in Foundation Studies and Higher National Diplomas
Application for entry to the Certificate in Foundation Studies in Art and Design and Higher National Diplomas should be made on the University's Direct Entry form which is available at all schools in Northern Ireland.
Alternatively, a form may be obtained from:
The Admissions Officer University of Ulster Cromore Road COLERAINE Co Londonderry BT52 1SA Tel: Coleraine (0265) 44141 ext 4221
The closing date for the receipt of applications for the Certificate in Foundation Studies in Art and Design is 31 January of the proposed year of entry to the University.
Application for admission to HND courses should be made as early as possible, and preferably before 31 January of the proposed year of entry to the University.
However applications may be considered up to the date when a course begins, subject to the availability of places.
Degree Courses
Application for admission to degree courses should be made to The Art and Design Admissions Registry on a form obtainable from:
The Art and Design Admissions Registry (ADAR) Penn House 9 Broad Street HEREFORD HR4 9AP ENGLAND
The closing date for the return of application forms is 31 March of the proposed year of entry to the University.
BA Hons Combined Studies in Art and Design Application through ADAR
The Course
There is a need for graduates with a wide range of practical, theoretical and managerial skills in Art and Design.
Not all students wish to specialize in one area of Art and Design; some seek to make an informed study of several aspects of the disciplines.
Students on this course are full members of the Faculty's degree programmes, enjoying the advantages of study and travel available in all other degree courses.
In addition they are expected to spend more time on Art and Design History and Theory and on Management and Administration.
There is scope for strongly motivated students to create a pathway which best combines the facilities of the University as a whole and relates to personal interests.
This course, with its strong academic emphasis, is a possible alternative to degree courses in the History of Art for those students who still seek to retain an involvement with practical work in Art and Design.
For the range of subjects available, please see the entries for the four other degree courses of the Faculty — Design, Fine Art, Fine Craft Design, and Textiles and Fashion Design.
Students take units from three of these courses in their first year, and from two of them in their second year.
In the final year students are free to select their units, subject to the guidance of a member of staff.
All students undertake industrial or arts administration placement.
Some students may spend a full (the third) year in placement.
In their final year students concentrate on two major areas of work.
Routes to the Degree
The degree is available by two routes.
After a common two years, some students undertake industrial or professional placement in their third year, thereby gaining an awareness of current professional practices and emerging industrial and commercial developments.
These students return to the University for a fourth and final year of study to complete the degree.
Those who successfully complete the period of industrial placement receive the additional award of Diploma in Industrial Studies and are entitled to use the designatory letters DIS.
Students who do not undertake the period of industrial placement complete the degree in three years.
Entry Conditions
Applicants must satisfy the general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Most will have taken a Foundation course in Art and Design, but applicants from a wide range of backgrounds are welcome, including those applying direct from sixth forms.
Each applicant is asked to supply a portfolio of work at interview.
This should provide evidence of interest and motivation in as many areas as possible of art, craft, design and architecture.
The portfolio need not demonstrate the same level of skill as is required for entry to the specialist Art and Design degree programmes.
Location and Duration
Belfast.
The courses are of three or four years' duration.
(See Routes to the Degree.)
BA Hons Design Application through ADAR
The Course
This course offers students the opportunity to study design within a progressive framework which allows concepts and ideas to be tested through informed discourse and practice.
Individual abilities may be applied to studies in one or more of the three major subject areas: Visual Communication; Environment; Product Design.
Elective design projects are offered in the areas of Advertising; Lens-based Media; Illustration; Graphics; Domestic Consumer Durables; Furniture; Packaging; Interiors; Urban Landscape; Exhibition.
The industrial emphasis of the course, closely allying technical application with creative design development, is further strengthened by an integral Business and Marketing input which aims to develop, during the three taught years, the economic and professional awareness now so essential to the practice of designing.
While curiosity is a fundamental quality for a designer, it must be accompanied by a wide-ranging interest in the social, cultural and industrial transformations that are constantly taking place.
The historical context and social implications of design are therefore highlighted and discussed throughout the study units.
The course aims to develop in students a holistic approach to design.
The study units therefore incorporate a core of information and practice relevant to the whole field of design and a choice of projects related to specific aspects of design for Visual Communication, Environment or Product.
Industry requires competent design practitioners in specific or related fields of design; but equally valuable are design graduates with an entrepreneurial approach to the subject.
The course is therefore structured to prepare students whose aspirations may be either single discipline orientated or who wish to pursue a more diverse route.
Routes to the Degree
The degree is available by two routes.
After a common two years, some students undertake industrial or professional placement in their third year, thereby gaining an awareness of current professional practices and emerging industrial and commercial developments.
These students return to the University for a fourth and final year of study to complete the degree.
Those who successfully complete the period of industrial placement receive the additional award of Diploma in Industrial Studies and are entitled to use the designatory letters DIS.
Students who do not undertake the period of industrial placement complete the degree in three years.
Entry Conditions
Applicants must satisfy the general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see p 51), and will normally have undertaken a Foundation Course in Art and Design.
However, of primary importance is the portfolio of work presented at interview.
This should provide evidence of ability to conceive and develop ideas; skill in design; accomplishment in drawing and an appreciation of two and three-dimensional values.
Location and Duration
Belfast.
The course is of three or four years' duration.
(See Routes to the Degree.)
BA Hons Fine Art Application through ADAR
The Course
This broad-based course encompasses both innovative and traditional approaches to study.
Students are encouraged to take an individual pathway through the course, encountering a range of disciplines which stimulate self-realisation and expression of ideas through a wide range of media.
Interaction with other Art and Design degree programmes in the Faculty is encouraged, and students may select a broad or specialist route.
Many Fine Art graduates take up professional practice as artists, and this course encourages them to consider their role as artists in the community by providing opportunities for short-term placements outside the Faculty.
As well as entering professional art practice, students from the course take up work in education, publishing, arts administration, community arts, entertainment, the media, and business, and placements can be arranged in these areas.
Course Content
Available units in Fine Art encompass traditional disciplines including Painting, Sculpture and Printmaking as well as Time-based Studies, Performance Art and Computer Studies.
The course units are designed to reflect the multidisciplinary basis of the course, and to encourage the integration of theoretical and practical aspects of a subject.
Students are encouraged to identify and develop their aptitude for either specialist or interdisciplinary projects both in relation to the basic resources of the course, and by extending their studies to include other relevant resources which the Faculty has to offer.
Students may take units in other Art and Design disciplines available in the Faculty.
Routes to the Degree
The degree is available by two routes.
After a common two years, some students undertake industrial or professional placement in their third year, thereby gaining an awareness of the artist in a community and industrial context.
These students return to the University for a fourth and final year of study to complete the degree.
Those who successfully complete the period of placement receive the additional award of Diploma in Industrial Studies and are entitled to use the designatory letters DIS.
Students who do not undertake the period of industrial placement complete the degree in three years.
Entry Conditions
Applicants must satisfy the general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51), and will normally have completed successfully a Foundation Course in Art and Design.
However, of primary importance is the portfolio of work presented at interview, which should display evidence of high potential creative ability and accomplishment in drawing as well as two and three-dimensional work.
Location and Duration
Belfast.
The course is of three or four years' duration.
(See Routes to the Degree.)
BA Hons Fine Craft Design Application through ADAR
The Course
The concern of this course is with the creation and design of beautiful things and the exercise of a high degree of skill in the handling of materials.
Base and precious metals; enamels, plastics and wood; threads and fabrics; clays and plaster and any other materials used singly or in combination are the bases for experiment: character, judgement, experience and knowledge are what we bring to them.
The course, which can be taken in a specialist or more general mode, seeks to give students a thorough grounding in Fine Craft Design, to give them a firm basis for thinking about their work and a useful introduction to business practice.
Fine Craft Design staff are all practitioners of their various subjects; experienced technical staff support each discipline.
The course, which is unit-based, allows students to take available units in the Fine Craft Design disciplines of Embroidery, Ceramics, Silversmithing and Jewellery, as well as units from the other Art and Design disciplines, plus a compulsory first-year unit covering cultural and historical context.
All Fine Craft Design units are project-led in years one and two and student-led in year three, where one of the units takes the form of a dissertation.
A high standard of achievement qualifies students to apply for entry to postgraduate taught courses and research studies.
A substantial community of craftsmen and women now exists locally, headed by many ex-students of the Faculty.
Other graduates now pursue successful careers in the United Kingdom, Europe and the USA.
Careers for which this degree provides a basis include design/production, conservation and museum curatorship, the public service and teaching.
Routes to the Degree
The degree is available by two routes.
After a common two years, some students undertake industrial or professional placement in their third year, thereby gaining an awareness of current professional practice and emerging industrial and commercial developments.
These students return to the University for a fourth and final year of study to complete the degree.
Those who successfully complete the period of industrial training receive the additional award of Diploma in Industrial Studies and are entitled to use the designatory letters DIS.
Students who do not undertake the period of industrial placement complete the degree in three years.
Entry Conditions
Applicants must satisfy the general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51), and will normally have undertaken a Foundation Course in Art and Design.
However, of primary importance is the portfolio of work presented at interview.
This should provide evidence of ability to conceive and develop ideas; skill in design; understanding of two and three-dimensional structure; and an appreciation of detail.
Location and Duration
Belfast.
The course is of three or four years' duration.
(See Routes to the Degree.)
BA Hons Textiles and Fashion Design Application through ADAR
The Course
This course is industrially orientated, incorporating the closely-related disciplines associated with designing for fashion fabrics, fashion garments and accessories, fabrics and allied materials for interiors.
The course structure allows for both individual ‘one-off’ expressive designs and designs for the mass market.
It aims to provide an informed foundation for the future professional development of fashion and textile designers.
Students are encouraged to enjoy and express colour, pattern harmony, form and textural qualities in a fresh and uninhibited manner, and to apply creative energy to questions of production and marketability.
The range of syllabus options in each of the study units is such that a single subject route or a more interdisciplinary pathway may be followed, depending upon individual abilities and aspirations.
Students may, by careful selection, build a course of informed specialization or one of reflective overview.
In either case, the course is intended to be an informative and challenging experience in its own right.
Industrial experience is gained through ‘live’ project work supported by local industry and is further informed by visits to manufacturing companies and retail outlets.
A comprehensive Business and Marketing lecture/seminar programme and practical technical studies enhance this understanding.
While professional design practice is seen as a career goal for many Textiles and Fashion Design students, other career opportunities in teaching, retailing and management can be equally rewarding.
Routes to the Degree
The degree is available by two routes.
After a common two years, some students undertake industrial or professional placement in their third year, thereby gaining an awareness of current professional practices and emerging industrial and commercial developments.
These students return to the University for a fourth and final year of study to complete the degree.
Those who successfully complete the period of industrial placement receive the additional award of Diploma in Industrial Studies and are entitled to use the designatory letters DIS.
Students who do not undertake the period of industrial placement complete the degree in three years.
Entry Conditions
Applicants must satisfy the general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see p 51), and will normally have undertaken a Foundation Course in Art and Design.
However, of primary importance is the portfolio presented at interview.
This should provide evidence of ability to conceive and develop ideas; skill in design; accomplishment in drawing and an appreciation of colour, pattern and style.
Location and Duration
Belfast.
The course is of three or four years' duration.
(See Routes to the Degree.)
BTEC HND Design (Communication) BT 7130
The Course
This course provides a national qualification for employment in the graphic/photographic design field for students whose educational background differs from those entering the degree programme.
The course teaches the techniques of design, drawing, model-making, paste-up, photography, rendering, typography, video and computing, and relates them to the equally important techniques of the publishing and manufacturing industries.
Theory of design, perception and colour, together with the history of design and style promote the designer's way of thinking.
This is then developed through exercises and projects which encourage both systematic and intuitive work.
Each student may choose to concentrate on either Graphics or Photography.
Business and management elements are built into the course, and it points to a range of employment and self-employment opportunities in design and other creative practices.
There are further opportunities in design-related employment in government, manufacturing and retailing.
Some 60 per cent of the course is devoted to design studies and 40 per cent to related studies.
Industrial visits and other opportunities to acquire appropriate experience are part of the course.
Upon completion, diplomates are well qualified for a career in design, or for further studies in design.
Entry Conditions
Candidates will be interviewed.
A portfolio of work will form part of the interview process.
Applicants must possess:
a BTEC National Certificate or Diploma of the Design Board with pass level in all units;or 
one GCE ‘A’ level and three GCE ‘O’levels/GCSE passes at grade C or above, reflecting both practical and theoretical ability;or 
a certificated Foundation Studies course in Art and Design;or 
Irish Leaving Certificate with five passes including two at higher level, all passes being at grade C or better.
Location and Duration
Belfast.
The course is of two years' duration.
BTEC HND Design (Graphics and Product) ME 7131
The Course
This course provides a national qualification for employment in the broad design area of Graphics and Product Design.
It has been designed especially for students with a different educational background from those entering the degree programme.
The course has a similar structure to the HND Design (Communication), but there is a choice of emphasis between Graphics and Product Design.
It therefore includes, for those students choosing Product Design, studies in three-dimensional model-making, drawing office practice, three-dimensional modelling on computer, plus aspects of engineering and materials technology.
For those opting for the Graphics element, a range of presentational techniques, drawing and illustrative skills, photography, desktop publishing, and typographical processes are studied.
Opportunities for employment for which this is an excellent qualification are found in the areas of general design, graphics, interiors, furniture, photography, packaging and product design, or related areas of employment, or in the retail and wholesale industries and government design offices.
Some 60 per cent of the course is devoted to Design Studies and 40 per cent to Related Studies.
Industrial visits and other opportunities to acquire appropriate experience form part of the course.
Students who achieve an acceptable standard may have the opportunity to progress to degree studies.
Entry Conditions
By interview.
A portfolio of work will form part of the interview process.
Applicants must possess:
a BTEC National Certificate or Diploma of the Design Board with pass level in all units;or 
one GCE ‘A’ level and three GCE ‘O’levels/GCSE passes at grade C or above, reflecting both practical and theoretical ability;or 
a certificated Foundation Studies course in Art and Design;or 
Irish Leaving Certificate with five passes, including two at higher level, all passes being at grade C or better.
Location and Duration
Magee College.
The course is of two years' duration.
BTEC HND Design (Surface Pattern) BT 7132
The Course
This course provides a national qualification for employment in the textiles, decorative paper and related industries for students whose educational background differs from those entering a degree programme.
The curriculum includes production techniques for the surface decoration of textiles and paper products; design methods and computer development of design; pattern movement and colour modulation — essentially relating these to industrial practice.
Business and marketing elements, history and theory of design, colour theory and the development of predictive colour usage, are integral to the course.
The programme of study encourages individuals to develop their ideas and design progression over a range of fashion, furnishing and domestic textiles, carpet, wallpaper, laminates and decorative papers.
The course provides the facilities to acquire a fundamental knowledge of textile and paper design, manufacture and usage.
Diplomates from this course should find self-employment or employment within organizations concerned with the design and/or production of floor coverings, wall coverings and wallpapers; textile printing; packaging; laminate printing; plastics colouration; and other related areas such as marketing; trend forecasting; testing and retailing.
Approximately 70 per cent of the course is devoted to design and technology studies and 30 per cent to related studies.
Industrial visits and other opportunities to acquire appropriate experience form part of the course.
Students who achieve an acceptable standard may have the opportunity to progress to degree studies.
Entry Conditions
By interview.
A portfolio of work will form part of the interview process.
Applicants must possess:
an appropriate BTEC National Certificate or Diploma of the Design Board;or 
one GCE ‘A’ level and three GCE ‘O’levels/GCSE passes at grade C or above reflecting both practical and theoretical ability;or 
a certificated Foundation Studies course in Art and Design;or 
Irish Leaving Certificate with five passes, including two at higher level, all passes being at grade C or better.
Location and Duration
Belfast.
The course is of two years' duration.
Certificate Foundation Studies in Art and Design BT 7101
The Course
Foundation Studies is one of the means of admission to the degree and diploma programmes of the Faculty (see page 68).
The aim of the course is to provide a comprehensive framework for practical and theoretical study in Art and Design.
Students have the opportunity to develop areas of interest with which they may have some familiarity from secondary education but they will also experience new attitudes, techniques, materials and concepts.
Students learn to work as individuals and in groups, moving towards a fuller understanding of their own skills and personal interests, and towards an awareness of the wider functions of the disciplines which form Art and Design.
Foundation Studies follows the Faculty pattern of an academic year made up of six units.
This means two terms of taught work followed by a short third term for further personal development and final assessment.
In the first term students have an intensive introduction to the fundamentals of drawing, printmaking, photography, painting and three-dimensional work in wood and metal, and to the history of art and design.
Units in all these areas are prescribed.
In the second term the units of study relate much more to the major areas of interest of the Faculty, with students planning their own route through the available specialist units.
Consequently the projects and the emphasis of work will be determined jointly by staff from the Foundation course and from all other programmes of study in the Faculty.
Work is completed in time to allow students to apply for degree and diploma courses in the Faculty or in other institutions of Art and Design.
Entry Conditions
Normally a minimum of five GCE passes at ‘O’ level or five GCSE passes at grade C or above.
Normally, but not exclusively, applicants will be invited to an interview during the spring term.
Each applicant must provide a portfolio of work which demonstrates breadth of interests and abilities in art, craft, design and other related work.
Location and Duration
Belfast.
The course is of one year's duration.
Application
All applicants must apply on a University of Ulster application form by 31 January of the proposed year of entry (see page 50).
Grant Aid
Application should be made for a discretionary award to the appropriate local grant-awarding authority preferably by 1 June but not later than 30 June of the year of proposed entry to the course.
FACULTY OF BUSINESS & MANAGEMENT
Introduction
The demand for graduates in the disciplines of Business and Management has dramatically increased in recent years.
This is reflected in the range of courses offered by the Faculty of Business and Management, at undergraduate and postgraduate levels.
Each of these courses is vocationally attractive, academically challenging and personally fulfilling.
Together they comprise a course programme which in range and choice is amongst the best in the United Kingdom.
The Faculty is one of the largest of its type in Europe, consisting of six Departments in which are located some 180 members of academic staff, each contributing to the strength of the Faculty with their scholarship and expertise.
The Departments are: Accounting and Finance; Applied Economics and Human Resource Management; Banking and Commerce; Hotel and Catering Management; Marketing and Business Organization; and Public Administration and Legal Studies.
The Ulster Business School provides the focus for a cohesive approach to management teaching and training.
The School consists of the Northern Ireland Small Business Institute, which supports the development of the small business base in Northern Ireland; the Centre for Management Education, which promotes management education through a range of relevant MBA programmes; and the Centre for Executive Development, which concentrates on in-company and executive development.
The Faculty offers courses on all four campuses of the University and has its headquarters at Jordanstown.
Its excellent resources and facilities provide the support students require to help them to realise their full potential and to obtain the qualification most suited to their interests and abilities.
The Faculty of Business and Management has a strong commitment to economic regeneration and an established track record in contributing to the revival of the economic life of the province.
The mutually rewarding relationship enjoyed with all areas of industry, commerce and professional life is reflected in research and consultancy assignments and commissions and in a successful series of part-time, post-experience and short course programmes for business owners and senior executives in both the private and public sectors.
Members of the Faculty undertake substantial consultancy, research and development work in Northern Ireland, Great Britain, Europe, the United States and in many developing countries.
These activities enrich the course programme by informing undergraduate courses with the latest principles and practices emerging from international boardrooms and marketplaces.
There are a number of important features of the Faculty's courses.
Firstly, there is a deliberate effort made to provide courses that are vocationally relevant.
This is achieved in a variety of ways, including the design of the courses and the teaching methods adopted.
In addition, most of the courses include a period of placement with employers, which enables students to relate their studies to real-world problems, as well as affording them an opportunity to gain some experience of dealing with these problems.
This is one feature of the Faculty's programmes highly regarded by students, as it appreciably enhances their employment prospects.
Secondly, the Faculty is conscious that the world of business is global, consequently many of the courses have units explicitly concerned with Europe.
In addition, there is the European Business Studies degree, with links to France, Germany and Spain, and the Asian Business Studies degree, which links to Japan.
Thirdly, most of the courses are available on two levels — degree and diploma — with scope for transferability between courses and an element of delayed choice built into all appropriate programmes of study.
The Faculty also provides a range of postgraduate courses, including three Master of Business Administration programmes, six MSc programmes, two MA programmes, and four postgraduate diploma courses.
Accounting
The Faculty asks much of its students; in return it offers a course programme that rewards and repays resourceful study and academic success.
Each Department plays a part in creating a stimulating environment where creativity and enterprise are valued and encouraged and where a sense of internationalism is evident in all areas of work.
The work of the Faculty and its course programme are, for the convenience of potential students, broken up in the following pages into the three divisions of Accounting; Business and Related Studies; and Hotel and Catering Management; each with its own introduction to the range of studies available.
Accountants are increasingly influential in the boardrooms of large and small companies throughout the world.
Their role as financial information providers is permeating all aspects of business.
Thus, employment prospects for students graduating in the accounting field are excellent.
Graduates are widely sought after and experience little difficulty in securing employment with excellent career prospects.
The University offers a programme of high-level courses in the area of accounting and related studies.
In addition to the degree and diploma courses described below, there is a wide range of professional and postgraduate courses.
The Department of Accounting and Finance is one of the largest accounting Departments in the British Isles.
With 18 qualified accountants as members of academic staff, it has a close relationship with the major professional accountancy bodies, and a continuing involvement in the development of their education and training programmes.
The Department has always sought to provide students with a knowledge of those areas most relevant to the present and future needs of the modern accountant.
Undergraduate courses in particular match the needs of the professional syllabuses, and the widespread use of computers at this level ensures that graduates have a strong foundation in the use of the modern tools of accountancy.
BA Hons Accounting (with specialisms in Computing and Public Sector Financial Studies) ULS/JN N400 ACC
The Course
This degree programme has a two-fold objective.
It is designed:
(a)
to prepare participants for successful graduate careers in accountancy; and
(b)
to provide the basis for graduates to take up postgraduate courses to doctoral level.
The course was the first accountancy degree offered in Ireland and it is recognized by the accountancy bodies as a ‘relevant degree’.
Surveys have shown that a ‘relevant degree’, one which includes a high proportion of accountancy subjects in its content, is the best entry method to the profession for students aspiring to a professional accountancy qualification.
The degree programme has three distinctive features built into the structure set out below.
As well as including a wide range of subjects relevant to the study of accountancy, the course includes a practical computer workshop in each year of the degree.
These computer workshops have been included to ensure that graduates will have ‘hands on’ experience of the accounting and business software that is of increasing importance to the accountancy profession.
A second distinctive feature of the degree is the dissertation/project which is undertaken in the third year of the programme.
This feature provides the student with the opportunity to pursue supervised research in a chosen accounting area and may involve the use of software packages and the design of computer-based models.
A final attractive feature of the degree is the choice of options available to students in the third year.
These options allow undergraduates to tailor their final year's studies to reflect more closely their specific career aspirations in the areas of private practice, industry and commerce or in the public sector.
The Structure
Year 1
Accounting
General Principles of Law
Quantitative Analysis
Economics
Information Storage and Retrieval
Organization Studies
Practical Workshop
Year II
Financial Accounting
Management Accounting
Company and Partnership Law
Managerial Economics
Information Processing and Systems Analysis
Taxation
Practical Workshop
Year III
Advanced Financial Accounting
Management Accounting — Planning and Marketing
Dissertation/Project
Practical Workshop
Plus at least one subject from:
Option A
Auditing
Financial Management
Plus not more than two subjects from:
Option B
Business Policy
Information Systems Design
Decision Support Systems
Public Sector Accounting
Public Sector Economics
Public Sector Finance
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally a GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE pass in Mathematics at grade C or above is required.
Location and Duration
Jordanstown.
The course is of three years' duration.
Transferability
The Course Committee may arrange, in appropriate cases, for transfer between this course and other related degree and diploma courses in the Faculty.
Employment Prospects
There is considerable and growing demand for accountants in business, industry and the public service.
This degree will provide the graduate with an excellent basis for pursuing a professional qualification with one of the accountancy bodies.
A qualified accountant may take up a position as:
a public practitioner, providing audit, accountancy and taxation services to a variety of business enterprises and individuals;
a financial or management accountant in a large industrial or commercial enterprise;
a financial or management accountant within local or central government service;
a taxation specialist;
a management consultant;
an educationalist.
Professional Exemption
The degree is recognized by all of the professional accountancy bodies.
Graduates will receive maximum appropriate exemptions from the professional examinations of these bodies.
DipHE Accounting ME 3120
The Course
This course, which is the only one of its type in Northern Ireland, is designed to cater for students who wish to study accounting and other related subjects before deciding whether they want to embark on the study of professional accountancy, or who wish to acquire sufficient knowledge of accounting before taking up employment.
Course Structure
Year I
Financial Accounting I
Economics
Quantitative Analysis
Business Law
Organization Studies
One option:
French
European Studies
Production Design
Year II
Financial Accounting II
Management Accounting
Managerial Economics or Company and Partnership Law
Data Processing and Systems Analysis
Financial Analysis and Control
Entry Conditions
Students will normally be 18 years of age or above and must have a minimum of:
five GCE/GCSE passes at grade C or above (including English Language and Mathematics), of which two must be at ‘A’ level of at least grade C. Equivalent qualifications will be considered.
Location and Duration
Magee College.
The course is of two years' duration.
Transferability
Students who demonstrate appropriate levels of ability may transfer to the BA Hons Accounting (Jordanstown), BA Hons Business Studies (Jordanstown), BA Hons Applied Economics (Jordanstown), BA Hons Banking and Finance (Coleraine), or the part-time BA Hons Business Studies (at both Jordanstown and Magee) with exemptions.
Employment Prospects
There is considerable demand for accountants in business, industry and the public sector.
This diploma provides the diplomate with an excellent basis for pursuing a professional qualification with one of the accounting bodies.
Professional Recognition
Diploma holders who attain a satisfactory standard may register with the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Ireland, and will be exempt from the first level examinations.
Exemption from first level examinations has also been granted by the Chartered Institute of Management Accountants, and the Institute of Accounting Technicians in Ireland.
Business and Related Studies
The Faculty offers a programme of high-level courses in the areas of business and related studies.
Recent innovative courses include degrees in Economics, Retail Distribution, Business Enterprise Development, Asian Business Studies, and Clothing Industry Management.
Economics has traditionally been one of the core disciplines in business and management.
The emphasis within this degree is on acquiring analytic techniques, and applying them to real-world problems.
Retailing is one of the fastest growing sectors of the economy, and faces enormous challenges with the imminence of the Single European Market.
The industry is concerned that its future trainees should be graduates appropriately equipped as potential managers, especially in the small business sector.
The Business Enterprise Development degree is concerned with producing graduates with a flair for purposeful enterprise.
The Asian Business Studies degree responds to the reality of the increasing economic power and influence of Japan and other countries in Asia.
The proposed Clothing Industry Management degree has its origins in the perceived need in the clothing industry for well-educated managers to ensure a viable future.
Other long-established courses in the Faculty include the degree in European Business Studies, and the BTEC Higher National Diploma in Business and Related Studies.
The European Business Studies degree prepares students for the European fields of business activity, and has always attracted a high calibre of student with language skills and an urge to do business in the varied market places of Europe.
The BTEC HND courses consistently and successfully attract students of a more practical than academic inclination, and develop them to the stage where their natural pragmatic talents have been enhanced with a rigorous regime of integrated business skills.
BA Hons Applied Economics ULS/JN L100 App Econ
The Course
This course provides graduates with the relevant knowledge and skills for a wide range of employment opportunities.
Students have the opportunity to study a broad range of subjects in the first year including economics, law, accounting, information processing and statistics.
In the second and final years of study specialist themes are taken up.
The operation of the economy and its individual markets, the history of the economy, the development of its regions, its external trading links, and the operation of the public sector are all areas of second and final-year study.
Year I
Economics
Accounting
Quantitative Analysis I
Political Economy of the UK
General Principles of Law
Information Storage and Retrieval I
Practical Workshops
Year II
Principles and Problems of Microeconomics I
Principles and Problems of Macroeconomics II
Quantitative Analysis II
Public Sector Economics
Urban and Regional Development
Economic History
Year III
A valuable feature of the course is its placement year.
Students have been placed throughout the United Kingdom in both the public and private sectors.
Year IV
Principles and Problems of Microeconomics II
Principles and Problems of Macroeconomics II: Current Issues
Financial Markets and Institutions
Economics of New Business
International Trade and Competitiveness
Project/Dissertation
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally a GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE pass in Mathematics at grade C or above is required.
Location and Duration
Jordanstown.
The course is of four years' duration.
Transferability
The Faculty also offers a BTEC Higher National Diploma in Business and Related Studies requiring one ‘A’ level for entry.
It is envisaged that in some cases there will be transfer in both directions between this course and the above degree course (see page 97).
Diploma in Industrial Studies
Successful completion of the year of placement leads to the award of the Diploma in Industrial Studies upon graduation.
BA Hons Asian Business Studies ULS/CE NT15 ABS
The Course
The need for the UK to develop its trading links with Asia reflects the growing economic importance of that region.
There is thus a need for graduates familiar with the distinctive — and often unique — features of trading with Asian countries.
The aim of the Asian Business Studies degree is to prepare students for a career in industry, commerce or government focusing on the opportunities for international trade with the rapidly growing economies of the Far East.
The course provides a balanced combination of business studies and area studies centred on the social, political and cultural environment of that region.
Students have an opportunity to study the language of an Asian country, and to undertake a period of work experience in the UK with a firm or other organization currently involved in trade with the Far East.
Year I 
Asian Business Studies I
Business Economics
Quantitative Methods
Accounting
Business Organization
Japanese I
Year II 
Asian Business Studies II
Management Accounting
The Far East
Modern and Contemporary Japan
Modern Japanese Economy
Japanese II
Year III 
Marketing
Business Information Systems
Preparation for Placement
Work Experience
Year IV 
International Marketing
International Trade and Finance
Business and Commercial Law
Business Policy
Dissertation
and either Japanese or Asian Economic Development.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally a GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE pass in Mathematics at grade C or above is required.
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of four years' duration.
Diploma in Industrial Studies
Satisfactory completion of the year of placement leads to the award of the Diploma in Industrial Studies upon graduation.
BA Hons Banking and Finance ULS/CE N300 Bank/Fin
The Course
This course has been developed in collaboration with the major professional bodies involved in the financial services sector throughout the British Isles.
It has been designed to respond to the rapid growth of banking and financial services both within the regions and at national and international level, and the increasing demand from banks, insurance companies, building societies and other financial institutions for relevant graduates.
The degree aims to provide students with a sound knowledge of the basic principles, concepts and techniques of business management, with specific reference to their application in the banking and financial services industry; an understanding of the structure and operation of the industry in a European context; and the critical, analytical, communications and inter-personal skills needed for a successful career in this rapidly developing field.
Students are required to complete 3 months of relevant work experience; this is normally undertaken during the summer vacation between Years II and III.
Year I 
Business Economics
Accounting I
Commercial Law
Quantitative Analysis I
Business Information Systems
Business Organization
Year II 
The Business Environment
Accounting II
Quantitative Analysis II
The Practice of Banking
Financial Institutions and Markets
Corporate Finance
Year III 
Dissertation
Financial Engineering
International Finance
Financial Services: Marketing and Human Resource Management
Financial Services: Legal and Regulatory Environment
Monetary Theory and Practice
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally a GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE pass in Mathematics at grade C or above is required.
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration.
Transferability
The Course Committee will make arrangements in appropriate cases for reciprocal transfer between this course and other degree, diploma and certificate courses in the Faculty.
Professional Recognition
Approval is being sought from the Institute of Bankers (London) and the Chartered Institute of Secretaries for recognition of the degree; graduates of the course would then obtain appropriate exemptions from the examinations of these bodies.
BA Hons Business Enterprise Development ULS/ME N122 Bus Ent Dev
The Course
The role of small firms in the economy is of rapidly increasing importance.
The skills and expertise required to manage or advise them are in many respects different to those required in a large organization.
This degree course is designed for those who wish to work as managers in a small business and also for those who would like to follow a career in government departments or other agencies concerned with enterprise development.
Emphasis is placed on experiencing the problems associated with small business management and development at first hand through working closely with local companies and agencies, especially during the sandwich year of industrial placement.
Year I 
Economics
Quantitative Analysis
Accounting
Business Law
Business Organization
Enterprise Development
Year II 
Management Accounting
Production Management and Manufacturing Technology
Human Resource Management
Marketing
Business Information Systems
Enterprise Studies
Year III Work experience Year IV 
Business Policy
Small Business Management
Regional Development Policy
Exporting Project/Dissertation
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally a GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE pass in Mathematics at grade C or above is required.
Location and Duration
Magee College.
The course is of four years' duration.
BA Hons Business Studies ULS/JN N120 Bus St
The BA Hons Business Studies is a qualification which is widely accepted and respected by industry, commerce and the public sector.
Over the years graduates of the course have found employment in the United Kingdom and a number of overseas countries in a wide range of occupations.
These include positions in purchasing, sales, marketing, personnel, general management, operations management and accounting.
Other graduates have preferred career paths in banking, insurance and building societies.
Opportunities are also available for those who wish to pursue higher diplomas and degrees in a full-time or part-time capacity.
Each year some graduates take this opportunity while others study for a professional qualification.
The Course
This four-year course is characterized by its practical nature with attention placed on the application of knowledge as well as on theoretical concepts.
The course is broadly based on the disciplines relevant to business studies but also offers an opportunity to undertake some specialization in the final year.
Course Structure
Year I
Organization Studies
Economics
Accounting
Quantitative Analysis
Business Law
Information Technology
Options — one from:
European Language
Product Design
European Business Studies
Year II
Enterprise Studies
Economics and Organizational Analysis
Management Accounting
Business Information Systems
Marketing/Operations Management
Human Resource Management
Business Seminar
Year III
Industrial Placement
This year will be spent in an organization in Northern Ireland, the Republic of Ireland, Great Britain or, in a limited number of cases, in Europe and North America.
Year IV
Business Policy
Economic Policy, or Management of Change
Business Seminar
Dissertation
Plus one elective from:
Accounting and Finance
Marketing
Personnel
Operations Management
Small Business or three subjects chosen from the electives other than Small Business.
(Except for Small Business each elective comprises three subjects.)
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally a GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE pass in Mathematics at grade C or above is required.
Location and Duration
Jordanstown.
The course is of four years' duration.
Professional Exemption
The course is recognized for the purposes of exemption by the main professional accounting bodies.
Graduates have also been granted exemptions by the professional bodies in personnel, marketing, banking and insurance.
Diploma in Industrial Studies
Satisfactory completion of the year of placement leads to the award of the Diploma in Industrial Studies upon graduation.
BA Hons Clothing Industry Management* ULS/ME N940 Cl Ind/Mgt
The Course
Clothing is one of the largest sectors of UK industry and is particularly important in Northern Ireland, where total employment in the industry represents a substantial proportion of all those employed in manufacturing.
This course is designed to give graduates a sound grasp of the core material of management together with the specific knowledge and skills needed to prepare for a managerial career in the clothing industry.
Emphasis is placed on providing practical experience of the issues and problems associated with all aspects of management in the industry, especially during the sandwich year of industrial placement.
Year I 
Economics
Quantitative Analysis
Accounting
Business Law
Business Organization
Clothing and Textile Technology I
*Provisional Year II 
Management Accounting
Production Management and Manufacturing Technology
Human Resource Management
Marketing
Management Information Systems and Computers in the Clothing Industry
Clothing and Textile Technology II
Year III Work experience Year IV 
Fashion and Design for Managers
Operations Management
Marketing Management
Financial Management
Strategic Planning
Project/Dissertation
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally a GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE pass in Mathematics at grade C or above is required.
Location and Duration
Magee College.
The course is of four years' duration.
Diploma in Industrial Studies
Satisfactory completion of the year of placement leads to the award of the Diploma in Industrial Studies upon graduation.
BA Hons European Business Studies ULS/CE N140 EBS
The Course
This degree relevant to the Single European Market of the 1990s has operated successfully since 1981.
It was established in response to a number of surveys of graduate opportunities which indicated a need in Northern Ireland for graduates with the ability to follow a career in business within a multilingual environment.
The course prepares students for executive careers in their home country as well as in Continental Europe.
The programmes combine the acquisition of a language (French, German or Spanish) with study of the basic disciplines traditionally associated with Business and Management.
These include the origins, institutions, policies and implications for business of the EC and the development of the ability to communicate effectively in the language of another member state of the EC.
It also includes periods of work experience and study abroad.
Year I 
Business Economics
Accounting
Business Organization
Business Information Systems
Language
Year II 
The European Community
European Business Studies (half unit)
Management Accounting
Marketing
Business Law (half unit)
Area Studies (a language unit)
Language
Year III 
Study year abroad at a selected European Institution of Higher Education:
either : one period of academic study/one period of work experience
or , two periods of academic study.
Year IV 
European Business Studies II
International Trade and Finance
International Marketing
European Law
Language
Dissertation
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally a GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE pass in Mathematics at grade C or above is required; also French, or German or Spanish at ‘A’or AS level (or equivalent).
In exceptional circumstances, students with German or Spanish at ‘O ’/GCSE; level may be accepted, but these students will be required to undertake additional classes in German or Spanish in their first year of study.
Applicants should indicate in section 3A(f) of their UCCA form their preferred language option.
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of four years' duration.
The third year of the course is undertaken at a selected European Institution of Higher Education.
BA Hons Retail Distribution Management ULS/CE NN59 Ret/Dis Mgt
The Course
An outstanding feature of the UK economy in recent years has been the rapid growth in employment in the service industries.
Within this broad sector, the opportunities represented by retailing and distribution are of major importance.
This course is designed to prepare graduates for careers at managerial level in a wide range of organizations in the retail and distributive trades.
A feature of the degree is that students are required to complete a minimum of three months' work experience in the industry.
This is normally undertaken during the summer vacation between Years II and III.
Year I 
Principles of Retailing
Economics
Accounting
Quantitative Analysis
Business Information Systems
Business Organization
Year II 
Practice of Retailing
Commercial Law
Management Accounting and Quantitative Business Methods
European Business Studies
Human Resource Management
Marketing of Services
Work Experience
Year III 
Financial Management
Business Policy and Retailing
Dissertation
Logistics and Computer Technology
Retailing and Society
International Retailing
Entry Conditions 
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally a GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE pass in Mathematics at grade C or above is required.
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration.
BTEC HND Business and Related Studies JN 3211
The Course
This three-year sandwich course is integrative, problem-solving and activity-based in its approach.
Students follow a general course in their first year, and in the final year they select one of three specialist areas of study.
Each area is administered by its own BTEC Board, as follows:
BUSINESS AND FINANCE BOARD — for those seeking employment in general administration, personnel or marketing, and for those seeking careers as accountants and company secretaries.
DISTRIBUTION STUDIES BOARD — for those interested in a career in distribution.
PUBLIC ADMINISTRATION BOARD — for those seeking careers in the public services.
Students take three compulsory core units and four optional units in each academic year.
The core units are designed to inculcate the special skills and knowledge that are indispensable to those seeking employment in the area covered by a particular Board.
The optional units allow students some freedom to suit personal aptitude and particular career intentions.
During the sandwich year, students are placed in suitable employment and are required to undertake an industrial project.
Entry Conditions
Applicants must normally be at least 18 years of age and should possess:
a BTEC National Award;or 
a Certificate in Distributive Management Principles;or 
GCE passes in four subjects — at least one subject should have been passed at ‘A’ level (after enrolment, candidates offering ‘A’level and mature student qualifications must undertake a BTEC approved conversion programme before they are admitted to the main course);or 
a qualification considered by BTEC to be equivalent to any of the above.
GCSE passes at grade C or above will be regarded as equivalent to GCE ‘O’ level passes.
Exceptionally, a student who is over 21 years of age at the start of the course may be admitted without these minimum qualifications, at the discretion of the Course Committee.
All candidates must satisfy the University that they are competent in the use of the English language and have acquired an acceptable level of numeracy.
Location and Duration
Jordanstown.
The course is of three years' duration, including an industrial placement year.
Students with suitable work experience may, at the discretion of the Course Committee, be exempted from the placement year.
The first two years of this course are also available at the following Colleges of Further Education: Fermanagh, Newry and North Down & Ards (Bangor).
The final year is undertaken at the Jordanstown campus.
The first two years of the course in Business and Finance/European Studies at offered at Ballymena, and Distribution Studies/Retailing at The Belfast Institute of Further and Higher Education, Tower Street, Belfast.
The final year will be completed at the Coleraine campus.
(See Application below.)
Transferability
Students who show evidence of sufficient merit may on completion of the course and at the discretion of the Course Committee be given the opportunity of transferring to the second year of an appropriate degree programme within the Faculty.
Application
Application for admission to this course is made directly to the University, not through UCCA.
A direct entry application form is available from the Admissions Officer (see page 50).
Those wishing to enrol at Ballymena, North Down & Ards, Fermanagh, Newry or The Belfast Institute of Further and Higher Education, Tower Street, Belfast, should apply directly to the University, and indicate their choice of centre on Section 3 of the form.
Further information is available through College Registrars (for addresses see page 270).
Important
‘A’ level entrants and mature students who wish to join the HND course must enrol for the three-week Conversion Course (two weeks of which are residential at the Jordanstown campus early in September).
Hotel and Catering Management
The University offers a programme of high-level training courses in Hotel and Catering Management (or Hospitality Management as this vocationally important area is increasingly known).
This provision comprises two honours degrees and two diploma courses,(one in conjunction with the NI Hotel and Catering College), offered under the aegis of the Department of Hotel and Catering Management.
Each of these courses is designed to educate, train and equip ambitious and resourceful young men and women to pursue careers in one of the most buoyant areas of economic life, locally and nationally.
The hotel, catering and tourist industry is the second largest employer in the United Kingdom, a major contributor to the balance of payments, and one of the few industries which is showing, and will continue to show, real growth.
The industry provides food, accommodation and other services at all levels for all parts of the community in a wide variety of locations and situations.
Employment Prospects
Employment prospects are excellent, as the industry is facing a long-term shortage of academically trained managers.
Consequently graduates from the Department of Hotel and Catering Management are highly sought after in all areas of the industry.
Final-year students are helped to find the best junior and trainee management positions available in the industry.
Career progression from trainee and junior management levels can be rapid, with managers in their mid to late 20s being responsible for departments or units with annual sales of between £250,000–350,000.
Graduates may opt for departmental or unit management, or specialize in personnel, marketing, finance of general administration within a larger company.
Graduates with a specialism in Tourism and Leisure may take up employment in the management of tourism ventures, or in managing tourist flows.
Graduates with specific research interests are encouraged to continue their research as postgraduate students working with staff of the Department in a variety of areas of specialism.
BA Hons Hospitality Management ULS/JN N720 Hosp Mgt
The Course
This course is designed to prepare graduates for careers as Hospitality Managers in hotels, restaurants, industrial catering, school meals catering, and other major institutions such as hospitals.
The first and second years of the course provide an overall understanding of the industry, its economic, legislative and social environment, its customers, its products and the processes involved in balancing customer satisfaction with commercial success.
This stage of the course develops an effective knowledge of subjects specific to Hospitality Management, supported by a mix of carefully selected general business studies subjects which are necessary to attain a basic operational grounding and competence in supervisory and first-line management.
The third or professional year is spent on placement in selected sectors of the hospitality industry.
This helps students to relate theory to practice and enables them to make more informed career choices.
During this period students may opt to undertake placement-related studies leading to the award of the additional qualification of Diploma in Industrial Studies, thus further integrating their academic and applied knowledge and enhancing their career prospects.
Many graduates have in the past been offered their first permanent employment through contacts made during their industrial placement period.
The final year of the course prepares students for higher-level management careers in the hotel and catering industry.
In this year students apply higher-level business, analytical and technological techniques to the total management of most styles of operations within the hospitality industry.
Course Content
Year I
Catering Studies
Technology in Catering
Organization Studies
Information Technology
Economics
Quantitative Analysis
Hospitality Law
and one option from European Language and Public Sector Studies Year II 
Management of Hospitality Operations
The Hospitality Industry
Accommodation Studies
Accounting
Marketing
Personal Studies
Information Technology
Year III 48 weeks' Industrial Placement Year IV 
Hospitality Management
Hospitality Marketing
Financial Studies in Hospitality Management
Management of Human Resources in the Hospitality Industry
Information Technology
Dissertation
and one option from Food Studies and The Hospitality Industry — Structure and Change
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for entry to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally a GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE pass in Mathematics at grade C or above is required.
An interview will normally form part of the selection process.
Location and Duration
Jordanstown.
The course is of four years' duration.
Transferability
The Course Committee may arrange, in appropriate cases, for transfer between this course and other related degree and diploma courses in the Faculty.
Professional Recognition
The award of this degree is recognized by the Hotel, Catering and Institutional Management Association for full exemption from all examinations necessary for membership of the Association.
A graduate will be recognized as a licentiate member and will be granted full professional membership after two years' appropriate management experience.
Diploma in Industrial Studies
Satisfactory completion of the year of placement and the associated academic work leads to the award of the Diploma in Industrial Studies upon graduation.
BA Hons Hotel and Tourism Management ULS/ME N740 Htl/Tour
The Course
This course is designed to prepare graduates for management careers within either hotels at unit and head office level, or within travel firms, tour operators or tourist organizations.
The first and second years of the course provide participants with an overall understanding of the hotel and restaurant sector of the industry and of tourism in general.
Students examine the economic, social and legislative environment, the needs of customers, and the products and processes involved in satisfying customers and achieving commercial success.
Throughout this state of the course students acquire knowledge of subjects specific to Hotel and Tourism Management, backed up by an appropriate blend of general business studies subjects necessary for basic operational skills and competence in supervisory and first-line management.
The third or professional year is spent on placement in selected hotel or tourism companies.
This professional year helps students to relate theory to practice and later to make more informed career choices.
During this period, students may decide to undertake placement-related studies leading to the award of the Diploma in Industrial Studies, thus further integrating their academic and applied knowledge as well as enhancing their career prospects.
Through contacts made during their industrial placement, many graduates subsequently obtain permanent employment.
The final year of the course prepares students for a management career in the commercial hotel and restaurant sector or in the management of tourism activities and ventures.
In this year students apply higher-level business, analytical and technological techniques to management within the hotel operations and tourism ventures.
Course Content
Year I
Hotel Operations I
Tourism I
Economics
Law
Quantitative Analysis
Organization Studies
Information Technology
Year II
Hotel Operations II
Accounting
Marketing
Personnel
Information Technology
Language I
and two options
Year III
48 weeks' Industrial Experience
Year IV
At least 4 from the following:
Hotel Management
Financial Management
Marketing Management
Personnel Management
Tourism Management
Leisure Studies
Information Technology
and 1 option Options:
Information Systems
European Business Studies
Public Sector Studies
Tourism II
Food Studies
Language II
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for entry to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally a GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE pass in Mathematics at grade C or above is required.
An interview normally forms part of the selection process.
Location and Duration
Magee College.
The course is of four years' duration.
Transferability
The Course Committee may arrange, in appropriate cases, for transfer between this course and other related degree and diploma courses in the Faculty.
Professional Recognition
Subject to the student's choice of final-year topics, the award of this degree is recognised by the Hotel, Catering and Institutional Management Association for full exemption from all examinations necessary for membership of the Association.
Graduates with appropriate subject profiles will be recognized as licentiate members and will be granted full professional membership after two years' appropriate management experience.
Diploma in Industrial Studies
Satisfactory completion of the year of placement and the associated academic work leads to the award of the Diploma in Industrial Studies upon graduation.
DipHE Hospitality Management JN 3230
The Course
This course is designed to prepare participants for careers as Hospitality Managers at department and unit level in hotels, restaurants, industrial catering, school meals catering and other major institutions such as hospitals.
The first and third years of the course provide a basic understanding of the industry.
Participants thus acquire knowledge of specific subjects supported by the mix of general business subjects required to equip diplomates with the necessary competencies in supervisory and first-line management in the local and catering industry.
The second year of the course is spent on industrial placement which helps students to relate theory to practice and to make more informed career choices.
Many graduates and diplomates have in the past been offered their first permanent employment through contacts made during their industrial placement.
Course Content
Food and Liquor Studies
Accommodation Studies
Hospitality Law
FACULTY OF EDUCATION
Introduction
The Faculty of Education is concerned with teaching and research in all aspects of the contemporary study of Education, as well as in Consumer Studies and Sport and Leisure Studies.
Teaching is provided at certificate, diploma, undergraduate and postgraduate levels by three departments: Pre-Service Education, In-Service Education, and Further and Vocational Education.
The initial teacher training undergraduate course in the Faculty is a BA honours degree inclusive of a professional teaching qualification for primary teachers.
The Faculty also offers BA honours degrees in Consumer Studies and Sport and Leisure Studies which include a year of industrial placement.
A Postgraduate Certificate in Education is available for graduates holding relevant degrees who wish to teach in secondary schools.
The teaching areas include: Art and Design, Home Economics, Music and Physical Education (at Jordanstown), and English/Drama, Geography and History (at Coleraine).
The Faculty has a fully-equipped resource centre at Coleraine which provides access to all audio-visual materials including microcomputers, a micro-teaching suite, laboratories for science education, a large workshop for art education, and many other facilities.
BA Hons Education ULS/CE E601 Educ
The Course
This course allows students to gain an honours degree and professional teaching certification.
These qualifications are recognized by the Department of Education (NI) and equivalent bodies in all parts of the British Isles and in many other countries.
The course has been designed for students who wish to become teachers in primary schools (that is, to teach children in the age range 4/5–11 years).
The course has five main components:subject studies, curriculum studies, educational studies, primary studies and practical studies .
These are outlined below.
Subject Studies:Academic subjects (normally two) are studied throughout the course.
Students usually pursue one or more of the subjects which they have studied at ‘A’ level, such as Art, Drama, English, French, Geography, History, Irish, Mathematics, Music, Religious Studies and the sciences.
Much of the work in subject studies is taught by staff of faculties in the University other than Education.
Curriculum Studies:An important element of the course is the examination of how studies taken as ‘subjects’ are taught to primary school age children.
Thus, for example, students who have taken subject studies in English and History will also take courses in the teaching of those subjects.
In this way, students can develop a semi-specialism, as well as the more general skills of the primary teacher.
Educational Studies:In this part of the course, students learn something of the context of teaching and learning in the primary school.
Many topics will be considered, such as the growth and development of children, the roles and responsibilities of teachers, questions of gender and social class, the issues of multi-cultural education and the education of children with special needs.
Primary Studies:As primary school teachers are generalists, and not specialist subject teachers, a substantial proportion of the course is devoted to studies of all the relevant areas of the primary curriculum.
In addition to the study of English and Mathematics, the course includes work in Religious Education, Art, Drama, Music, Physical Education, Science, History and Geography and other aspects of the primary curriculum (for example, the use of computers).
The Religious Education component of the course provides an appropriate and recognized qualification for teaching the subject in both maintained and controlled schools in Northern Ireland.
Practical Studies:School-based work is a central component of the course.
In each of the four years, students spend some time teaching in primary schools (two weeks in the first year, four weeks in the second, four weeks in the third, and eight weeks in the fourth) under the supervision of school and University staff.
Students also engage in school observation, make use of the micro-teaching facilities, and spend some additional time in school-based activities as part of practical studies work.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Please note that GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE passes at grade C or better (or equivalent) in English Language and in Mathematics are essential for admission to initial teacher training courses.
Applicants, when provisionally accepted, are also required to furnish a satisfactory medical report in accordance with the regulations of the Department of Education for Northern Ireland.
This requirement includes a chest X-ray examination.
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of four years' duration.
Professional Recognition
Full professional recognition is granted by the Department of Education for Northern Ireland, the Department of Education and Science, and the Scottish Education Department.
BA Hons Consumer Studies ULS/JN N752 Cons Studs
The Course
Consumer Studies brings together the disciplines governing the design, development and management of consumer goods and services (with particular reference to food, textiles and the home) and explores the interdisciplinary relationship of these to the needs and responses of consumers.
The course seeks to provide an academically challenging and vocationally relevant education for those who wish to follow careers in Consumer Studies and related professional areas.
After a two-year common course students elect and are selected for either a three-year honours degree in Consumer Studies or a four-year sandwich degree in Consumer Studies which, as well as leading to the award of an honours degree, includes a Diploma in Industrial Studies (DIS) awarded for the successful completion of a year's industrial placement.
Students who complete either of the degree programmes will be eligible to apply for admission to the Postgraduate Certificate in Education, appropriate for teaching in secondary schools.
In Part I of the course (ie. the first two years) theoretical perspectives from the social, physical and biological sciences are applied to the study of the interaction and communication of consumer needs, behaviour, goods and services.
An understanding of technology as it is applied in the design, development and management of consumer goods and services is developed.
Opportunities are provided to appraise academic theory and integrate it with the practical skills required of graduates in professional situations.
Students who undertake the four-year sandwich course spend the third year in industrial placement.
The final year (Part II) will allow in-depth research into chosen areas relating to the consumer such as Food Science and Technology; Textiles and Technology; Family and Community Studies; and Marketing Management.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree (see page 51).
Normally GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE passes at grade C or above in Mathematics and a science subject (and, as part of the general entry requirements, English Language) are required.
Exceptionally, candidates with other qualifications will be considered for admission to the course.
Applicants wishing to be considered for the Postgraduate Certificate in Education must however have GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE passes in both English Language and Mathematics at grade C or better (or equivalent qualifications).
Location and Duration
Jordanstown.
The course is of three or four years' duration.
BA Hons Sport and Leisure Studies ULS/JN X206 Sp Leis
The Course
This degree, which includes a sandwich year option, reflects the primary importance of sport and leisure in contemporary society.
It provides a general theoretical and practical foundation which prepares graduates for career opportunities in education and the public and private sectors of sport and recreation.
This course is unique in providing vocational training suitable for specialist physical education posts in schools and for a range of professional roles in the leisure industry.
All students are initially selected for the BA Honours Sport and Leisure Studies degree.
The course is structured to allow students who have completed Part I of the course, ie. the first two years, to elect and be selected for one of the following options:
a three-year honours degree in Sport and Leisure Studies;
a four-year honours sandwich degree, which includes — for those who are interested in a career in leisure and recreation management — a one-year period of placement in the third year in the area of public or private leisure provision (successful completion of this year leads to the award of a Diploma in Industrial Studies);
or a three-year honours degree in Sport and Leisure Studies followed by a Postgraduate Certificate in Education appropriate for teaching in secondary schools.
Students who complete the four-year sandwich degree will also be eligible for admission to the Postgraduate Certificate in Education.
Career opportunities include teaching in schools, lecturing or administration in further and higher education, administration of recreation in local authorities, the management of recreation in sports centres, youth and community work and research.
In Part I of the course, taken during the first two years, students undertake an analysis of sport and leisure from a range of inter-related theoretical and practical perspectives.
Specific modules include Individual Performance and Sport, Interpersonal Relations, Social Organization, Issues in Sport, Vocational Studies and Practical Studies.
Vocational Studies allow students to make an informed choice of career options.
Topics covered in the final year include Issues in Sport, Innovation and Change in Sport, Individual Performance and Sport, Practical Studies, Management, Policy Making and Planning.
As part of their overall assessment, students will be required to select and undertake a substantial research project in their chosen area of professional practice.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE passes at grade C or above in Mathematics and a science subject (and, as part of the general entry requirements, English Language) are required for admission to the Sport and Leisure Studies programmes.
However applicants wishing to be considered for the Postgraduate Certificate in Education must have GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE passes in both English Language and Mathematics at grade C or better (or equivalent qualifications).
Applicants, when provisionally accepted, are also required to furnish a satisfactory medical report in accordance with the regulations of the Department of Education for Northern Ireland.
This requirement includes a chest X-ray examination.
Location and Duration
Jordanstown.
The course is of three or four years' duration.
During the vocational element, students visit selected schools and institutions involved in the provision of sport and leisure.
FACULTY OF HUMANITIES
Introduction
The Faculty of Humanities has five Departments: English, Media and Theatre Studies; European Studies and Modern Languages; History; Music; and Philosophy and Politics.
Through these Departments the Faculty offers an unusually wide range of courses and options.
A special feature is the principle of delayed and informed choice by which students gain a broad foundation in the study of the humanities and do not have to commit themselves to their degree programme until the end of the first year.
This allows each student, with the help of their Adviser of Studies, to develop the programme of study best suited to their individual aptitudes, interests and objectives.
The essence of the humanities is the study of how we have interpreted the world about us, how we have expressed our understanding through language, literature, philosophy and the arts, and how differing views of human life and various forms of society have shaped our history.
Courses in the humanities help the student to develop skill in identifying and analysing problems, in collecting and handling information, criticising theories and interpretations, and in forming judgements and conclusions based on evidence and logical argument.
The emphasis in some courses is upon contemporary history, or current problems in politics, or on present day dilemmas in morality and ethics.
Other courses deal specifically with contemporary problems, for example, Peace and Conflict Studies; Irish History, Politics and Society; Geography.
Some disciplines, for example, American Studies, Asian Studies, and European Studies are especially relevant to the world today.
Many courses have a strong practical or vocational orientation, such as Applied Languages, International Business Communication, Media Studies, Music, and Theatre Studies.
All courses relate theory to practice, and interdisciplinarity is a principle of the design of all courses, exemplified in Humanities Combined and in Modern Studies in the Humanities.
Most courses include training in the use of computers and other aspects of information technology and the majority include project work in the final year.
A number of courses give students an opportunity to go on a short relevant placement in an organization outside the University, where they gain experience of the world of work and in applying the skills they have learnt.
This helps to prepare them for their careers.
The academic staff of the Faculty are actively engaged in research, which produces publications of high quality and enhances their teaching.
The objective of all the Departments within the Faculty of Humanities is to set before students the example of the highest standards of performance, to teach them to think for themselves, to develop their individual abilities, and to express their ideas cogently and objectively.
All these skills are much in demand in society and are qualifications for a wide range of vocations and employments.
Single Subject Degree Courses
Students study three subjects in the first year, after which they may continue with one of these subjects for an honours degree.
Selection takes place at the end of the first year.
Particular conditions relating to a course are shown when appropriate.
BA Hons English ULS/CE Q300 Eng
The Course
This course offers students a wide choice of units of study, with emphasis on literature from the Renaissance onwards.
Students take two units in English in the first year.
These units, which introduce ideas about narrative, language, form and meaning, and link the study of literature to its background, give a foundation for the study of English.
Three units are offered: in the first term, a compulsory introductory unit on the novel; and in the second term, two units (of which students choose one) on Literary Interpretation and on Anglo-Irish Literature.
In each of their second and third years, students of the single-subject English course takes a series of four core units which have as a focus the relationship between literature and its background.
All students are required to study Shakespeare.
For their remaining units, students choose from a wide range including Anglo-Irish Literature; American Literature; Creative Writing; Modern Literature; Chaucer; Romantic Poetry; The Literary Bestseller; Critical Theory.
In their third year, students take a special topic on which they prepare a substantial piece of work.
Students are encouraged to go on placement to gain experience of the world of work in the third term of their second year.
Recent placements have been in journalism, the broadcasting media, and with publishers.
A special feature of the English course is the stress laid upon writing and creativity, and the subject sponsors an annual publication of new work called Writing Ulster .
There are active links with Media and Theatre Studies, with units on news and journalism, acting and directing.
A degree in English is an excellent qualification for a career in many fields, from local and central government to business, commerce and the media.
The study of English trains students to be critical, to evaluate different points of view, and to present considered judgements in a cogent and incisive way.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration.
BA Hons Modern and Contemporary History ULS/CE V100 Mod/Con Hi
The Course
The course is designed to provide a sound academic basis for a variety of careers, fostering skills which are much in demand in today's society.
Its emphasis is on modern and contemporary history, exploring and analysing many of the major developments which have shaped the late 20th-century world.
Students are encouraged to study European, British and Irish history, and also the history of the United States, the Middle East, India, China and Japan.
The course has strong elements of international, social and comparative history.
In the first year, students must take two history units.
There is a compulsory unit on Europe and the Wider World 1850–1945; students then choose between the Origins of Modern Society and the Emergence of Modern Ireland.
In the second year, students take a unit on historical sources, methods and interpretations.
In addition they choose from units which permit them to study those national and regional histories of which they have some prior knowledge, as well as less familiar societies and cultures, and from units in which the emphasis is on a particular aspect of or approach to history, for example, the history of the Origins of Modern Science, of Modern Political Thought or of Mass Communication and Society.
There is also a unit which introduces students to the use of computer methods in the study of history.
Towards the end of Year II, some students undertake a six-week period of placement or work experience in a record office, museum or folk park; others follow a specially-designed short course which prepares them for Year III and for the world of work beyond graduation.
In the third year, students choose a special subject which they study in depth and on which they prepare a substantial dissertation.
They choose from a number of thematic units — Revolution, Popular Culture and Nationalism, and from special topic units on The General Crisis, Restoration and Revolution in Europe 1815–1848, and European Fascism.
Although history is not primarily a vocational subject, the skills of analysis and writing which its study develops are much in demand.
In addition to the writing of essays and a dissertation, students are encouraged to develop their verbal skills in small teaching groups.
History graduates find employment in a wide variety of careers including teaching, central and local government, museum and library work, journalism and public relations, and as management trainees in industry and retailing.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration.
BA Hons Modern and Contemporary History with Diploma in Area Studies ULS/CE V173 Mod/Con Hi
The Course
The course follows a very similar pattern to the single honours degree in Modern and Contemporary History, with the distinction that it involves the acquisition of language skills and an extra year of study which is spent in a university in another EC state.
Its objectives are those of the single subject degree in Modern and Contemporary History but additionally, with the demands of 1992 and the opportunities offered by the Single European Market firmly in mind, this course is designed to foster language skills and to allow students to experience History teaching from a different perspective.
An additional qualification, the Diploma in Area Studies, is awarded for the completion of this aspect of the course.
Thus the first two years of this course are as described in previous course with the addition of language units appropriate to the European university chosen.
The third year is spent abroad and the fourth year follows the pattern of the final year of the single honours degree.
Entry Requirements
The general entry requirement for admission to a first degree course, together with some evidence of aptitude for foreign languages, normally a pass at GCSE or GCE ‘O’ level, grade C or above in a foreign language.
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is for four years' duration.
Diploma in Area Studies
Satisfactory completion of language units and the intercalary year leads to the award of the Diploma in Area Studies upon graduation.
BA Hons Philosophy ULS/CE V700 Phil
The Course
It is the task of Philosophy to confront questions which are posed in a variety of areas, to consider to what extent their answers are to be found in such subjects as Mathematics, Physical Science, Sociology, Literary Studies or Religion, and to determine how else they might be answered — where these can furnish no complete answers.
This course is designed to provide a solid grounding in Philosophy as a central part of our cultural heritage, as a highly-developed academic discipline with its own distinctive concepts and methods, and as an activity which attempts to deal with fundamental aspects of the theoretical and practical problems facing us today.
A distinctive feature of the course is the emphasis on ethical concerns and in particular on applied ethics in each year of study.
In addition the course provides students with some practical experience of computers through the use of computer-aided instruction in logic in Year II.
In the first year, students take two units, Introduction to Philosophy and Contemporary Moral Problems, and two units from each of two other subjects.
In the second year, students take a range of units which provide the necessary framework for philosophical activity — in the epistemological and metaphysical considerations of the rationalist and empiricist traditions, in logic and in traditions of ethical thought.
The applied ethics strand is represented by a unit concerned with moral problems relating to conflict between persons, groups and societies.
Opportunity is also given for consideration of philosophical problems concerning the nature and status of different branches of enquiry, and of the nature of art and its connection with morality and social issues.
Students in the third year use this background of study to engage in discussion of the Kantian synthesis, of contemporary philosophy, and of ethics and the philosophy of religion.
The applied ethics unit concentrates attention on ethics and the community.
An important feature of the work of this year is the opportunity to undertake a supervised project on a philosophical topic.
Philosophy, as a discipline, helps to develop and nurture students' analytical abilities and broaden their intellectual horizons — qualities which today are much in demand from prospective employers.
The skills gained in a Philosophy course have a high degree of ‘transferability’ and Philosophy graduates have a good record in achieving employment in a very wide range of careers.
Careers in management, the tax inspectorate, accountancy, computing and in central and local government have been prominent amongst those chosen in past years by graduates.
Special seminars on career orientation for students take place in Year II.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration.
BMus with Hons Music ULS/JN W302 Music
The Course
This forward-looking course allows students to pursue the academic study of music together with practical training on two instruments, taught as an integral element.
Distinctive features of the course include the study of modern methods of analysis, composition in a wide variety of styles, the practical study of early music, knowledge of information technology, and an emphasis on music of our own century including popular music and jazz.
The first and second years of the course give students a thorough grounding in basic musicianship and develop their practical skills.
Students also take integrated courses in music history up to 1860, compositional techniques and analysis.
There are introductory courses in free composition, acoustics and computing, and opportunities to gain experience in ensemble playing and directing.
In the second year, optional courses allow students to study electronic composition or modern American music, or to increase their knowledge of early music.
In the third year, students take three units in Musical History and Compositional Techniques and Analysis, concentrating on late 19th and 20th-century music.
They must also complete a project on a topic of their own choice.
They make up the rest of their programme by choosing two options from Advanced Performance, All-round Performance, Performance, Analytical Theory, Composition, Studies in Polyphony, Popular Music in Contemporary America, or a Special Topic.
Music is taught in Dalriada House, an elegant Georgian building with a recital room, lecture room, seminar and teaching rooms, a practice-room suite, a keyboard laboratory, and a well-equipped electronic studio.
There is a full range of instruments available including crumhorns, a chest of viols, baroque violins and cello, many keyboard instruments and, in the Assembly Hall, a recently-installed 3-manual organ.
Distinguished visiting tutors give tutorials and masterclasses, and there is a busy lunchtime and evening concert programme with opportunities for solo and group performance.
While many students subsequently enter the teaching profession or work as professional musicians, they find that the study of music as a discipline trains them intellectually to work successfully in other professions, for example, business, personnel management, arts administration, the civil service, computing, the careers service, librarianship and journalism.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally an ‘A’ or ‘AS’level pass in Music or a recognized diploma (ie. ARCM, LRAM, LRSM, ARCO, LTCL, LGSM, LLCM), or grade eight practical together with grade eight theory is required.
The University offers a one-year part-time Certificate in Foundation Studies for Music, at Jordanstown, comprising aural, historical, technical and practical studies.
This qualification, normally with Commendation, is also acceptable for entry to the degree course.
Further details are available from the Department of Music.
Candidates offering ‘AS’ level music, and mature applicants who do not offer the above qualifications, may be required to take a written test.
All applicants for the degree course are required to demonstrate by audition a performance standard approximately equal to that required for grade eight on an instrument (or voice), and preferably should have some experience in keyboard playing (equivalent to grade three).
Location and Duration
Jordanstown.
The course is of three years' duration.
Interdisciplinary Degree Courses
The following programmes each integrate two or three disciplines into a vocationally attractive course of interdisciplinary study leading to an honours degree.
BA Hons Applied Languages ULS/CE T901 App Lang
The Course
This course gives students the possibility of taking two languages together with a vocationally oriented study of aspects of modern Europe.
The languages offered are French (post ‘A’ level), Spanish (post ‘A’level) and German (which may be taken either post ‘A’level or ab initio ).
Recent surveys suggest that these are the foreign languages at present most in demand by employers.
The main emphasis is on the study and use of modern languages as a preparation for professional life, either as a career linguist or in other language-related posts in business and the professions.
In the first two years, the post ‘A’ level language programmes introduce students to a wide range of social, political and economic registers, with an emphasis on oral as well as written skills.
After a preparatory study of advanced oral/aural work in Year I, bilateral interpreting begins in Year II.
Aspects of socio-political and economic life in the countries concerned are also examined.
The ab initio course in German involves an intensive study of the language including a summer course in Germany at the end of Year I. All students undertake a basic unit in computing in Year I to acquire an awareness of this key area of modern technology.
In Years I and II, students take three units introducing them to political and socio-economic aspects of the countries of the EC and they also consider the mass media in Europe.
Year III is spent abroad, divided equally between the two language areas.
In each case, there is a period of study at another university which normally includes a short placement of work observation.
The University has agreements with institutions in France, Germany and Spain and has received ERASMUS support for its exchange programme.
As far as possible, students will be given some choice of location.
While abroad, students research a project in each of their languages; this may be an extended piece of advanced translation (with analysis and commentary) or a topic concerned with the country or area of residence.
In the final year, the study of the two languages is continued.
An option in one language includes an introduction to specialist translation, machine translation techniques and interpreting.
The study of Europe is continued with an in-depth consideration of contemporary trends and issues, and an examination of Europe's role in an international context.
Opportunities exist for graduates in a variety of fields using languages, either as the main focus of the post or as an ancillary skill.
Linguists may be found working in a range of national and international organizations where foreign language skills and knowledge of other cultures are seen as a good foundation for a career.
This course provides a valuable preparation for entry to areas such as industry and commerce, public administration, education, and the media.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally an ‘A’ or ‘AS’level pass is required for French and/or Spanish.
Students who have not taken ‘A’ or ‘AS’level German, but who can provide evidence of linguistic ability, may study this language ab initio .
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of four years' duration.
BA Hons International Business Communication ULS/ME Y460 Int Bus Comm
The Course
This interdisciplinary course for linguists is designed to prepare students for a career in the business world of post-1992 Europe.
Students become fluent in two of the languages of the United Kingdom's trading partners, while at the same time acquiring a good knowledge of information technology (computing for business), administration and marketing, and word processing, typing (multilingual) and shorthand (optional).
Given the revolution in business technology over the last twenty years and its implications for all aspects of business, there is a need for experts in the field of business communication.
Graduates of this course will acquire such expertise, together with the capacity to communicate across cultural and linguistic boundaries.
In all four years of the course, students take units of study in languages, computing and business studies.
Secretarial skills are taught in Years I and II.
The third year is spent in France.
All students take French as the major language and choose either Spanish or German as the minor language.
During the first two years, students acquire a knowledge of both general and vocationally related registers of the languages.
They also study the economic and social structures, institutions and culture of the relevant countries.
Language work in the final year is more specialized than in the first two years and includes translation and précis writing in administrative, technical and commercial registers of the languages, as well as some interpreting.
The Information Technology elements of the course introduce the theory and practice of problem-solving with computers.
In the first year, the application of computing to information processing tasks is studied in two units: Data Processing and Systems Analysis.
In Year II, students are given a solid grounding in programming (Programming Languages) and computer architecture (Programming Systems).
In the final year, the concepts underlying Advanced Information Systems are studied, along with recent developments in business technology (Office Software Technology).
Business Studies elements of the course in Years I and II focus on administration, and are taught at the North West College of Technology.
In Year III students attend business colleges (Instituts Universitaires de Technologie) in France, and in Year IV marketing is taught by the Faculty of Business and Management at Magee College.
The secretarial skills components of the course are also taught at the North West College of Technology.
There is an introductory intensive skills course which begins on the Monday before the first week of term.
Students spend the third year of the course in France.
Six months are spent studying at an Institut Universitaire de Technologie specializing in Marketing, Management/Personnel or Computing, and this is followed by a 3-month integrated work placement.
The final-year project is based on some aspect of the student's work placement.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally an ‘A’ or ‘AS’level pass in French at grade C or better, and GCSE/GCE ‘O’level passes at grade C or above in Mathematics and a language other than French are required.
Candidates offering ‘AS’ level French may be required to take a language aptitude test.
For students who have no second language, beginners' courses in German and Spanish are available.
Location and Duration
Magee College.
The course is of four years' duration.
BA Hons Irish History, Politics and Society ULS/ME V147 Ir/Pol/Soc
The Course
This course combines units of study in Irish History, Politics and Society.
History is the major discipline of the course; politics also forms a substantial part, and there is a subsidiary social science component.
The course is designed to provide an integrated study of the development of Irish history, politics and society, from the 16th century to the present day.
In addition, there is an important comparative element, so that Ireland's development may be viewed within a wider perspective by examining related problems in Europe and Asia.
In the first year of the course, students take two units in each of History, Politics and Sociology.
These units include studies in Irish History of the Early Modern Period and in the Social Structure of Modern Ireland.
Irish History in the Later Modern Period and the Politics of Modern Ireland are studied in the second year.
A unit of Religion, Politics and Society in Early Modern Europe provides comparative background.
Detailed consideration is also given to the role of the computer in the study of Irish history, including regular ‘hands on’ experience in the computer laboratory.
The third term includes a period of placement, normally in Ireland or Great Britain, arranged by the University.
These placements are of value in allowing students to add a practical dimension to their theoretical studies of the working of different aspects of Irish society, and in providing work experience which may lead to improved career opportunities.
In the third year there is a choice of four special subjects in Irish History or Politics, each of which leads to a supervised dissertation in the second term.
The comparative element is continued in studies of nationality problems in modern Europe, of the politics of divided societies and of the record of partition as a problem-solving technique.
Although it is not primarily vocational, the course provides a valuable training in analytical techniques and writing skills which makes it a valuable preparation for a wide variety of careers, including the media, central and local government, and industrial and commercial management.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Location and Duration
Magee College.
The course is of three years' duration.
BA Hons Irish Studies ULS/CE Q530 Irish
The Course
This course gives students the opportunity to study in-depth the cultural and historical forces which have been operating in Ireland since the 17th century.
It is unique in having a core of units of study in Irish language and literature which are integrated with the study of Irish history and Anglo-Irish literature.
A choice of optional units is also available from other relevant subject areas.
In the first year of the course, students take three units of study in Irish language and literature, one in Irish History, and two in Irish/Anglo-Irish Literature (one of which is the Irish Oral Tradition).
The second and third years include units on the Irish Language, Modern Irish Literature, Irish Language and Literature of the 18th and 19th Centuries, Classical Irish and the Irish of the 17th Century, Irish History and Aspects of Local Studies.
Optional units on other aspects of Irish Studies and on Minorities in Europe are also available.
Irish language and literature units are conducted through the medium of Irish, the others through English with seminars, when relevant, in Irish.
Written and oral accuracy in Irish is developed by guided individual practice, and a large collection of taped materials is available for private practice.
Students spend up to 60 days of residence in Gaeltacht communities, in vacation time, during the course.
Progress in cultural awareness and linguistic achievement is assessed.
The structure of the course gives students the greatest possible opportunity for pursuing studies in accordance with a variety of abilities.
Career prospects include central and local government, teaching, the mass media, development agencies and librarianship.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally an ‘A’ or ‘AS’level pass in Irish of at least grade C is required.
Applicants who do not meet this requirement may be admitted to the Diploma of Higher Education in Irish Studies (see page 151).
Candidates offering ‘AS’ level Irish may be required to take a language aptitude test.
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration.
Transferability
Transfer to the BA Hons Irish Studies is possible for students who successfully complete the first year of the Diploma of Higher Education in Irish Studies (see page 151).
BA Hons Media Studies ULS/CE P400 Media Stud
The Course
This interdiscipliniary course is designed to promote the study of the mass media and to introduce students to practical problems encountered by professionals in the field.
Its main concerns are with film, television, radio and the press.
The course combines sociological, historical and critical analysis of the mass media with media production work and research studies.
The first year has six required units which introduce students to the concepts and methods of analysis central to the study of mass media.
In the second and third years, students engage in theoretical studies and in media practice and are able to focus on specific media through either an academic or practical emphasis.
Students are required to spend up to one-third of their time on practical projects in radio, television and film and to complete a dissertation in the final year.
In the third term of the second year all students have a period of placement, during which they have the opportunity to gain appropriate work experience.
A number of students may opt instead to spend this term at one of the following European universities — Amsterdam, Ghent, Autonomous University of Barcelona, as part of an ERASMUS exchange project.
There are fully-equipped television and sound studios and opportunities for student work on photography and film.
Graduates from this course enter the communications industry, journalism, radio and television, as well as a range of professions in education, the arts and business.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration.
BA Hons Modern Studies in the Humanities ULS/JN Y321 Mod Stud
The Course
This course allows students to extend their knowledge and understanding of the modern world, and to gain an appreciation of the elements which characterize the 19th and 20th centuries.
The course will stimulate interest in the study of modern society, its politics and history, ideas and literature, and provide an appreciation of the contemporary cultural heritage through the study of one of four strands: American Studies; The Individual and Society; Literature, Culture and Society; and The Modern State.
In the first year, students follow a common course giving an introduction to the four strands which form the basis of subsequent study.
There is also a unit dealing with Methods of Inquiry and Understanding in the Humanities, and a unit providing an introduction to Computing in the context of the study of the Humanities.
In the second and final years, students concentrate on one of the strands.
In addition, there are opportunities to take elements from others, or to undertake elective units (such as further studies in Computing or a study of ‘Clear Thinking’).
For students taking the American Studies strand, a particular feature of the course is the intercalary year which is taken at a university in the United States between the second and final years.
As the number of places available on the intercalary year is restricted, it may be necessary to limit the number of students admitted to the American Studies strand in the second year.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Location and Duration
Jordanstown.
The course is of three years' duration (or four years if the American Studies strand is taken after the first year).
BA Hons Modern Studies in the Humanities: American Studies ULS/JN Y321 Mod Stud
The Strand
The first-year American Studies unit introduces students to the interdisciplinary study of the United States and provides an overview of some of the major ideological and cultural issues which have given shape to the nation in the 20th century.
The relationship of the individual to the American state and the emergence of national consciousness is examined.
Students study selected material drawn from history, literature, music and film.
Second-year units concentrate on America in the 20th century, and prepare students to undertake third and fourth-year interdisciplinary studies at a more demanding level.
In addition to core units in History and Literature, there are units on Music, Film and Drama.
There is also one interdisciplinary unit dealing with the Depression in American Culture, which examines the period through Literature, History, Film and Music.
The third year is an intercalary year in which students undertake an approved programme of study at a university in the United States.
Students select from a wide range of American Studies units.
The year provides students with a personal knowledge of American culture, making them aware not only of its European origins but also of how distinct it is from its parent cultures.
The final year offers a choice of interdisciplinary units.
For example, a unit on the Vietnam Era and American Culture studies the subject through Film and History.
Other units study the US Presidency in the 20th century, the Afro-American Experience, the USA and the Postwar World, Popular Music in Contemporary America, Hollywood, and the South in the 20th century.
BA Hons Modern Studies in the Humanities: The Individual and Society ULS/JN Y321 Mod Stud
The Strand
The individual and Society strand introduces students to a critical understanding of the relationship between the individual and society in the modern world.
It confronts a range of moral and political issues arising from this relationship, and acquaints students with the various arguments, theories, principles and concepts which help to explain and evaluate these issues.
It familiarizes students with those theories by which they may better understand themselves, the society in which they live and their role within it.
The first-year unit exemplifies the approach and aims of the strand as a whole, by concentrating on a number of accessible and contentious issues such as the media, censorship and freedom of information, the environment, and the ethics of medical and scientific research.
Second-year units involve both a treatment of general theories and concepts, and discussions of more concrete and practical issues such as Women.
Family and the State, Ethical Issues in War and Peace, and Issues in Sport and Leisure.
Final-year units also treat general theoretical and practical concerns but at a more advanced level, and in a more concentrated manner.
In these units, themes which have emerged throughout the first two years receive a more considered and advanced analysis: Theories of Society, Political Ideals, Women, and the Ethics of Individual Responsibility.
BA Hons Modern Studies in the Humanities; Literature, Culture and Society ULS/JN Y321 Mod Stud
The Strand
The Literature, Culture and Society strand traces the dynamic relationship between literary texts and the forces of cultural, political and technological change.
The texts studied are modern and contemporary, and include transitions of important European literature as well as European literature written in English.
The strand also provides opportunities for the study of film as a significant element of 20th-century culture.
The first-year unit highlights the various responses of authors to such central issues as the loss of faith, and of shared cultural values.
There is an appropriate emphasis on the quest for new literary forms to give expression to the consciousness of the modern age.
The unit gives a broad introduction to issues and problems which are treated in more detail in the second and final years.
Second-year units take up specific issues such as nostalgia for lost innocence and order, the literature of political commitment, the relationship between artistic form and cultural change, and the significant emergence of women as producers of literature.
The final-year units provide further opportunities to develop these perspectives in a way which allows students to pursue special areas of interest.
Thus, for example, the special study on the literature of the Spanish Civil War offers a clear line of development from concerns raised in the first and second years.
The Cultural Production and the Mass Media unit acknowledges the significant contribution of television to 20th-century culture and seeks to equip students with the methodological tools to analyse this contemporary artistic form.
In addition, final-year units emphasize issues which serve to synthesize the three years of study.
These include the impact of major technological changes on literary production, and the study of contemporary theoretical perspectives on the relationship of literature, culture and society.
(A fragment of the manuscript of A Portrait of the Artist given by Joyce to Harriet Weaver.)
BA Hons Modern Studies in the Humanities: The Modern State ULS/JN Y321 Mod Stud
The Strand
The first-year unit integrates the approaches of historians and political scientists by focusing on the changing characteristics of the state as it has emerged in the modern world.
This unit introduces concepts which are explored in greater depth in later years and seeks to make students aware of the range and interdependence of the cultural, political and economic factors involved in a critical study of the modern state.
In the second year, the state is approached by means of units on comparative government which analyse the institutions and practices of the major powers in the contemporary developed world, and thematic units examining the relationship of war and nationalism respectively to the emergence of the modern state.
In addition, one unit specifically examines the role of economic change in shaping the state.
Final-year units present students with an opportunity to study in some depth particular problems and aspects of the state of the contemporary world.
How does revolution affect notions of legitimacy?
In what ways have moves toward integration affected the state?
What are the implications for the state of such contemporary issues as security, regionalism and the international character of the economy?
In addition, a Special Study is offered each year on a theme such as Intelligence and National Security in 20th-century Britain; Science, State and Society; or Ethnic Conflict.
BA Hons Peace and Conflict Studies ULS/ME M930 Pax/Conf Stud
The Course
The interdisciplinary course offers a new and attractive way of studying at undergraduate level such subjects politics and history by focusing on the notion of conflict and the particular political and social problems arising from conflict, and in so doing seeks to identify ways of resolving them.
It is concerned with all types of conflict, many of which give rise to overt violence, but always in terms of the wider context within which such conflicts occur.
This involves students in the examination of conflicts between and within societies, and draws on the insights of political scientists, historians, social scientists and philosophers in looking at the origin and nature of such conflicts and the means of resolving them.
Consideration is given to the distribution of resources in the world and to the problems of development.
A particular feature of the course is a commitment to looking at practical and relevant problems and to confronting the need for their solution.
In the first year, students are introduced to the disciplines on which the course is based, notably History, Politics and Sociology, and some subsidiary Psychology and Philosophy.
Subsequent years of the course include historical and theoretical perspectives, comparative study of the main themes in international relations, in community conflict and in industrial conflict, and some particular case studies.
The conflict in Ireland is the most important of the case studies, and some of the broader themes have been selected to provide a wider perspective on this issue.
Students are also given a substantial introduction to a range of practical skills which assist them in applying their academic understanding of the problems of peace and conflict more effectively in their future careers.
These skills include the use of the computer to analyse social data, the management of small organizations, and social skills training.
Most of the third year is spent on placement with a variety of agencies, in order to gain course-related work experience and to do fieldwork for the dissertation in the fourth year.
Thus, all students will spend from January to June on such placements in Northern Ireland, Great Britain, the Republic of Ireland or Europe.
Students have been placed with the European Secretariat in Luxembourg, with Amnesty International, Oxfam, Third World Development agencies, and with parliamentary representatives, thus combining theoretical studies with practical work experience.
Peace and Conflict Studies graduates are particularly well qualified for careers with, for example, public and private agencies concerned with conflict and its resolution, or with a variety of international organizations and institutions.
In general, graduates of the course possess a valuable flexibility of mind acquired through interdisciplinary study which, combined with the analytical skill of humanities graduates, makes them ideally suited for careers in a wide variety of public and private sector employment.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Location and Duration
Magee College.
The course is of four years' duration.
BA Hons Theatre Studies ULS/CE W420 Theat Stud
The Course
This is a new programme, extending and developing the popular and successful Theatre Studies option of the BA Hons Humanities Combined degree course.
Since the social basis of theatre as a performing art is the group, collective activities and ensemble work form an integral part of the course.
A typical ‘theatre’ student will therefore be one who can direct or discipline her or his individual skills towards a corporate aim.
Students are however also encouraged to develop personal initiatives, and to assume increasing responsibility for well-motivated and independent study.
The course has a strong practical bias, and seeks to emphasise the value of transferable skills and the need to see ‘theatre’ as relevant and topical in its application to social and community contexts.
Distinctive aspects of the course include a placement (in the third term of Year II, usually in a theatre or media organization); a field course; and an integrated careers orientation programme.
The course is based in a modern, dedicated Studio complex on the Coleraine campus.
In the first year students take three units on the theory and practice of modern theatre (these units in effect constitute one production unit) supported by two other units on the tradition of the Illusory and the Non-Illusory Theatre.
Three further units are taken from a range of options offered in the Faculty, providing the opportunity for students to set theatre studies in a wider social and intellectual context.
In the second year, two production units are supported by units in the theory and practice of acting (the ‘Stanislavski’ tradition and the ‘Brecht’tradition), a skills-based Stage Management unit and a further unit chosen from a wide range of electives offered by the Faculty.
In the third year students undertake a Dissertation on a subject of their choice, and a practical project as a member of a self-organized ensemble.
In addition students choose a total of four units from: Theory and Practice of Direction (2 units), Theory and Practice of Community Drama (2 units), Administration and Management (1 unit), Press, Publicity and Print (1 unit)(the last two units are placed in the context of theatre), as well as a range of elective units from the Faculty programme.
Theatre Studies also runs a province-wide annual arts/cultural festival — Theatre Studies Week — around Easter.
Students of Theatre Studies contribute in a significant way to the management and organization of this event.
Graduates in Theatre Studies tend to seek work with a vocational bias, but not exclusively so.
The course's wide range of activities and diversity of forms of assessment encourage students of Theatre Studies to develop flexible approaches to job seeking.
Graduates have gone into business, media, theatre management, retail management, the civil service and TEFL (teaching English as a foreign language) in Belgium, Spain and Japan; and into postgraduate courses in acting, stage management, teaching and advertising.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration.
Humanities Combined Degree Course
Students take three subjects in the first year and in subsequent years continue with two of these subjects either as joint or major/minor options for the honours degree.
Selection takes place at the end of the first year.
BA Hons Humanities Combined ULS/CE Y320 Hum Comb
The Courses
At the end of their first year of study, students may continue with two of their first-year subjects either as major and minor subjects or as joint subjects in the combined courses leading to the award of BA Hons Humanities Combined.
Students who wish to enter a combined course must complete the first year satisfactorily, with passes in two units in each of the two subjects which they wish to combine.
Students should note that in some subjects, the number of places available for entry into the second year will be limited.
Entry Conditions
In deciding which combinations to take after the first year of study, applicants should be aware of the entry requirements for both subjects.
In the course descriptions on the following pages, the particular entry requirements for each subject are given under that subject heading.
BA Hons Humanities Combined: Asian Studies ULS/CE Y320 Hum Comb
The Course
Asian Studies may be combined as a major, joint or minor subject with: English, European Studies, French, Geography, History, Irish, Media Studies, Philosophy, or Theatre Studies, or as a major subject only with German.
The course in Asian Studies examines some of the most influential and developing regions of the world: it focuses on the history, nature and problems of the Middle East, India and Pakistan, China and Japan.
The course also provides an opportunity to study Japanese, the language of the second most important economy in the world.
In their first year, Asian Studies students take two units simultaneously: Japanese for beginners and an introduction to Asian Studies which provides an outline of the history of Asia in the 20th century.
Asian Studies in the second and third years conforms to the normal pattern of Humanities Combined programmes.
Major students take four units of Asian Studies in each of their second and third years, joint students take three units, and minor students two.
Major Asian Studies students continue to learn Japanese whilst joint and minor students may choose to do so.
In addition, there is a wide range of area studies units which examine the history, politics, social and economic structures and cultures of the Middle East, India, China and Japan.
In their third year, major students write a 10,000 word dissertation on an Asian subject; joint students may opt to do so.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirement for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration (or four years if Asian Studies is taken as a joint or minor subject with French).
Translation —‘Peace and consummation’
BA Hons Humanities Combined: English ULS/CE Y320 Hum Comb
The Course
English may be combined as a major, joint or minor subject with: Asian Studies, European Studies, French, Geography, History, Irish, Media Studies, Philosophy, or Theatre Studies; or as a major subject only with German.
In the first year, students take two units in English.
These introduce ideas about narrative, language, form and meaning, and link the study of literature to its background, giving a foundation for the study of English.
Three units are offered: in the first term, a compulsory introductory unit on the novel; and, in the second-term, two units (of which students choose one) on Literary Interpretation and on Anglo-Irish Literature.
Students take a series of core units in their second and third years.
Those majoring in English take three core units, and those taking English in a joint programme of study take two.
For students taking English as a minor option, there are no compulsory units.
The core units introduce central concerns which help students to develop a coherent approach to the subject, but there is also a wide range of other units to choose from.
The areas covered include Renaissance, Anglo-Irish, American, Romantic and Modern Literature, Creative Writing, and Critical Theory.
The emphasis is on the 19th and 20th centuries.
The core units focus on the relationship between literature and its background.
The study of Shakespeare is compulsory for major and joint programmes.
A special feature of the English course is the stress laid upon writing and creativity, and the subject sponsors an annual publication of new work called Writing Ulster .
There are active links with Media and Theatre Studies, with units on news and journalism, acting and directing.
This option trains students to be critical, to evaluate different points of view, and to present their own considered judgements in a cogent and incisive way.
It is an excellent preparation for a career in many fields, from local and central government to the media, business or commerce.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration (or four years if English is taken as a joint or minor subject with French).
BA Hons Humanities Combined: European Studies ULS/CE Y320 Hum Comb
The Course
European Studies may be combined as a major, joint or minor subject with: Asian Studies, English, French, Geography, History, Irish, Media Studies, Philosophy, or Theatre Studies; or as a major subject only with German.
The aim of this option is to give students a broad understanding of modern and contemporary Europe, with special reference to the process of Western European integration, the main developments in Eastern Europe, and the place of Europe in the wider world.
Membership of the European Community governs to a rapidly increasing extent the daily lives of the people in the British Isles.
Within it, the citizens of member states are provided with markets and employment opportunities much wider than national frameworks.
Externally, the Community stands in the forefront of the changing relations between East and West, and the North-South dialogue between the world's advanced industrial states and the developing countries.
Knowledge of the issues and problems facing the peoples of the Community, both in relation to each other and to the rest of the world, is essential for anyone seeking a career in, for example, business, politics, languages, the national and international civil service, and journalism.
In each year, two units on the history, politics, culture and society of modern and contemporary Europe as a whole are provided as a core.
In the second and final years, these core units are supplemented by others aimed at deepening the student's awareness of the continent's major sociological trends, the latest developments in political thought, and the problems of regional and cultural minorities.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration.
However, for students taking French as a major or joint subject with European Studies, the duration is four years, involving a year abroad in an appropriate country.
Students taking French or German as a minor subject with European Studies are expected to spend from four to six weeks abroad, normally at the end of the second year.
BA Hons Humanities Combined: French ULS/CE Y320 Hum Comb
The Course
French may be combined as a major, joint or minor subject with: Asian Studies, English, European Studies, Geography, History, Irish, Media Studies, Philosophy, or Theatre Studies; or as a major subject only with German.
The course includes units in French Language, Literature, Culture and Society which may be combined in a variety of ways.
All students of French are required to take the language units each year and, in addition, to choose an integrated programme of study from other units.
In the first year, the language work concentrates on basic skills and stresses both oral and written French.
The study of the language is closely linked with issues of contemporary France.
Students are introduced to the study of French Literature and Society.
In the second year, language work extends students' oral and written skills, with increased attention to style and idiom, and also prepares them for the year abroad.
The other units introduce the mass media in modern France (and the contemporary issues shown in them), and French theatre and fiction.
Students taking French as a major or joint subject are required to spend their third year in a French-speaking country.
Students are normally placed as English language assistants in schools or enrolled as students in a French university.
During the year, students prepare a dissertation dealing with a linguistic or literary topic or with some other aspect of life in France.
Students taking French as a minor subject are expected to spend four to six weeks in a French-speaking country, normally in their second year.
The final year follows the same principles, whilst allowing students the opportunity to choose more specialized themes for study, particularly in the literature, thought and society of 19th and 20th-century France.
There are language classes conducted by native French speakers, and extensive use is made of the most modern facilities in the language laboratories and mediathèque , including satellite television.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally an ‘A’ or ‘AS’level pass in French of at least grade C is required.
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration if French is taken as a minor subject and of four years' duration if taken as a major or joint subject.
BA Hons Humanities Combined: Geography ULS/CE Y320 Hum Comb
The Course
As part of the BA Hons Humanities Combined degree course, the Department of Environmental Studies (Faculty of Science and Technology) offers major, joint and minor options which combine elements of the Geography and European Regional Development degrees (see p 198.
Geography in Humanities Combined may be taken as a major, joint or minor subject with: Asian Studies, English, European Studies, French, History, Irish, Media Studies, Philosophy, or Theatre Studies; or, as a major subject only, with German.
In the first year, students take one unit which examines contemporary issues in development, and another which studies recent developments in Geography.
In the second and third years, they have an opportunity to concentrate their studies on particular aspects of human geography, including population geography, historical geography, regional development in the European Community, Third World development, environment, conflict and planning in the countryside, population mobility, and the conservation of natural and man-made elements of the urban and rural heritage (particularly in Ireland).
Fieldwork, both at home and abroad, forms an integral part of the course, and there is also an opportunity to gain experience of survey techniques, cartography, data analysis, computing and remote sensing.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration (or four years if Geography is taken as a joint or minor subject with French).
BA Hons Humanities Combined: German ULS/CE Y320 Hum Comb
The Course
German may be combined as a minor subject with: Asian Studies, English, European Studies, French, Geography, History, Irish, Media Studies, Philosophy or Theatre Studies.
German may be taken from ‘A’ level or ab initio .
Students with no previous knowledge of German are required to enrol for an intensive beginners' language course in their first year.
All students of German take the language units in each year and, in addition, choose an integrated programme of study from the options available.
The course includes units in German language and German history, politics and society.
Emphasis is placed on language proficiency.
Contemporary German is studied and practised in language classes conducted by native German speakers.
Some seminars are held in German and extensive use is made of the most modern facilities in the language laboratories and mediathèque , including satellite television.
The focus of the course is on modern and contemporary German history, politics and society.
Students are expected to spend four to six weeks in a German-speaking country, normally at the end of their first year.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
For students entering the post ‘A’ level stream, an ‘A’or ‘AS’level in German of at least grade C is normally required.
Admission to the ab initio German course is conditional on a satisfactory performance in a language proficiency test and interview.
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration (or four years if German is taken in combination with French).
Brandenburg Gate (1901)
BA Hons Humanities Combined: History ULS/CE Y320 Hum Comb
The Course
History may be combined as a major, joint or minor subject with: Asian Studies, English, European Studies, French, Geography, Irish, Media Studies, Philosophy, or Theatre Studies; or as a major subject only with German.
The emphasis is on modern and contemporary history.
Units of study include International, Political, Social and Intellectual History, and attention is given not only to the history of Europe, including Britain and Ireland, but to the history of the United States, the Middle East, and South and East Asia.
In addition to deepening and extending historical knowledge and understanding, units are designed to provide a fuller understanding of the discipline of History and of the manner in which historians conduct their work.
In the first year, students are required to study a unit on Europe and the Wider World from 1850 to 1945 and to choose between units on The Origins of Modern Society and The Emergence of Modern Ireland.
In the second year, students choose from units which permit them to study national and regional histories of which they probably have some prior knowledge, as well as less familiar societies and cultures.
In addition, students choose from other units in which the emphasis is on a particular aspect or approach to history, for example the history of the Origins of Modern Science, of Political Thought, or of Mass Communications and Society.
There is also a unit which introduces students to the use of computer methods in the study of history.
Towards the end of the second year some major or joint students of History undertake a six-week period of placement or work experience in a record office, museum or folk park; others follow a specially-designed short course which prepares them for the final year and for the world of work.
The more specialized work of the third year allows major and joint students to follow a special subject which is taught in small groups and includes the writing of a dissertation.
Students choose from a number of thematic units — Revolution, Popular Culture and Nationalism — and from special topic units, The General Crisis, Restoration and Revolution in Europe 1815–1848, and European Fascism.
Minor students have a free choice of final-year units but do not write a dissertation in History.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration (or four years if History is taken as a minor or joint subject with French).
BA Hons Humanities Combined: Irish ULS/CE Y320 Hum Comb
The Course
Irish may be combined as a major, joint or minor subject with: Asian Studies, English, European Studies, French, Geography, History, Media Studies, Philosophy or Theatre Studies; or as a major subject only with German.
This option is of particular interest to students who wish to increase their awareness and understanding of the cultural and historical forces which have been operating in Ireland since the 17th century.
The course consists of compulsory units of study in Irish Language and Literature, and a choice of optional units is available from other relevant areas of study.
Irish language and literature units are conducted through the medium of Irish.
Written and oral accuracy is developed by guided individual practice at all levels of achievement and a large and varied library of taped materials is available for private practice.
Students spend up to 60 days of residence in Gaeltacht communities during the course.
Progress in cultural awareness and linguistic achievement is assessed.
The literature units foster a critical awareness and appreciation of contemporary writings in Irish.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally an ‘A’ or ‘AS’level pass in Irish of at least grade C is required.
Successful completion of the first year of the Diploma of Higher Education in Irish Studies (see page 151) will satisfy the entry conditions.
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration (or four years if Irish is taken as a joint or minor subject with French).
BA Hons Humanities Combined: Media Studies ULS/CE Y320 Hum Comb
The Course
Media Studies may be combined as a major, joint or minor subject with: Asian Studies, English, European Studies, French, Geography, History, Irish, Philosophy or Theatre Studies; or as a major subject only with German.
This option aims to promote study of the mass media in society and to encourage students to examine the problems encountered by professional workers in the field.
The course combines sociological, historical and critical analysis of the mass media.
The first year has two required units which introduce students to the concepts and methods of analysis central to the study of mass media.
In the second and third years, students follow the pattern outlined below depending on whether they are taking Media Studies as a major, joint or minor option.
Major:four units of Media Studies each year, one of which is a dissertation in Year III.
Joint:three units of Media Studies each year.
Minor:two units of Media Studies each year.
Students may also take a workshop unit in media production in term three of Year II of their course.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration (or four years if Media Studies is taken as a minor or joint subject with French).
BA Hons Humanities Combined: Philosophy ULS/CE U320 Hum Comb
The Course
Philosophy may be combined as a major, joint or minor subject with: Asian Studies, English, European Studies, French, Geography, History, Irish, Media Studies or Theatre Studies; or as a major subject only with German.
This option allows students to combine the study of Philosophy with another subject in a number of ways.
Within the range of Philosophy units offered, there is a distinctive ethical focus.
There is an Applied Ethics unit available in the first year of the course, and units in both Moral Theory and Applied Ethics in each subsequent year.
Within the range of units available, a historical perspective is adopted and contemporary themes and problems are seen as arising from important currents of thought within the Western tradition.
Students select from the range of units offered within the BA Hons Philosophy course (see page 122).
In the first year, students take two units, Introduction to Philosophy and Contemporary Moral Problems, with two units from each of two other subjects.
In the second year, students choose from a range of units which provide the necessary framework for philosophical activity — in the epistemological and metaphysical considerations of the rationalist and empiricist traditions, in logic and in traditions of ethical thought.
The applied ethics strand is represented by a unit concerned with moral problems relating to conflict between persons, groups and societies.
Opportunity is also given for consideration of philosophical problems concerning the nature and status of different branches of enquiry, and of the nature of art and its connection with morality and social issues.
Students in the third year can use this background of study to engage in discussion of the Kantian synthesis, of contemporary philosophy, and of ethics and the philosophy of religion.
The applied ethics unit concentrates attention on ethics and the community.
An important feature of the work of this year is the opportunity to undertake a supervised project on a philosophical topic for students taking major or joint Philosophy.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of three years' duration (or four years if Philosophy is taken as a joint or minor subject with French).
BA Hons Humanities Combined: Theatre Studies ULS/CE Y320 Hum Comb
The Course
Theatre Studies may be combined as a major, joint or minor subject with: Asian Studies, English, European Studies, French, Geography, History, Irish, Media Studies or Philosophy, or as a major subject only with German.
Theatre Studies is predominantly a studio-based option with a modern and contemporary focus.
Its methodology centres on an examination of the relationship between theory and practice; teaching stresses the value of teamwork and collaboration.
In the first year, all students take one unit in each of the two teaching terms.
Both are survey units.
The first unit takes a macroscopic view of basic theatre spaces and playing areas from the point of view of their influence on the nature of performance and presentational style.
The second unit looks at formal developments in modern European theatre.
In the second year, all students opting for Theatre Studies follow the two Core Studies Units, one during each term.
Major students take a further two units and joint students an additional one, in Theatre Production.
In these units, students are encouraged to experience, at first hand, specific theatre practices, and to relate this work to the Core Studies work on the Theory and Practice of Modern Theatre.
In the third term of Year II, major students are placed in a theatre or theatre organization in the British Isles for an intensive six-week programme of work experience.
Placements in recent years have included the Royal Shakespeare Company in Stratford, the Royal Court, the Glasgow Citizens' Theatre, and the Abbey Theatre, Dublin.
The final-year programme is structured to encourage students to develop their own initiatives, to extend their particular career interests, and to synthesize the work of the course as a whole.
To facilitate this process, there is an increased range of Core Studies options.
All students follow either units in applied theatre (Community Drama), or in the theory and practice of directing.
Major students take a further two units.
One of these is a dissertation, and the other a practical project carried out as a group activity.
Joint students do either a dissertation or a practical project.
Theatre Studies is taught in its own modern studio complex with a full range of excellent technical facilities, including a workshop, dressing rooms and showers.
The Riverside Theatre, which is the University's professional venue, is used to stage major productions.
FACULTY OF INFORMATICS
Introduction
The word ‘informatics’ has been adopted rapidly throughout the world to describe the extensive range of disciplines associated with information technology and computing.
Industrial development and economic progress increasingly depend upon computing and applied mathematical skills and expertise, and on today's information technology.
Areas of application — from the computing industry itself to traditional industries which have been liberated from routine to the new technology — continue to proliferate.
Computing is truly international in its store of knowledge, in the ‘tools of its trade’ and in its leadership of industrial regeneration.
The Faculty of Informatics has four departments: Applied Computing, Computing Science, Information Systems, and Mathematics.
Together they offer a range of courses devised in partnership with industry, commerce and the public sector to provide a fulfilling programme of study and training which takes full account of the needs of the individual and the demands of information technology today.
Regular review of the Faculty's courses ensures their relevance to the workplace.
A key feature of all the Faculty's full-time first degree courses is the Industrial Placement Year, a year spent in industry under joint academic/industrial supervision.
This experience generally contributes significantly to both the student's personal development and to his/her understanding of the subject and its applications.
Another important feature of all undergraduate courses is the final-year project.
This requires the completion of a substantial piece of work which can be of either a practical or research nature, prepared within a strict timetable and documented and presented to an appropriate professional standard.
All the Faculty's students will, by the time they graduate, have been trained to bring to their work an awareness of informatics as a key force in social change and economic advance.
Experience has shown that our graduates are much in demand by industry and the professions.
An additional attraction of studying informatics is that graduates may now also achieve chartered engineer status through the British Computer Society, a body which has been nominated to register individuals with the Engineering Council.
Computing is a subject open to applicants from a wide range of academic backgrounds spanning the arts and sciences.
Third-level study of the subject is not just for the scientist or the mathematician, or for those with previous experience of computing.
The Faculty welcomes applications from candidates with qualifications in all subject areas.
(An exception to this is mathematics, in that those applying for mathematics courses do need ‘A’ level or equivalent knowledge of the subject.
The Faculty's mathematics courses will appeal, however, to those who, rather than following an orthodox mathematics course, want to apply mathematical and statistical methods in a vocationally relevant way to real industrial, commercial and other problems.)
Good teaching is informed by good research, and in addition to offering courses the Faculty also provides a focus for research activities.
These often involve academic colleagues from other faculties within the University as well as partnerships with industry, research establishments and other institutions in the UK and other EC member states.
Among current activities is research into software engineering and parallel computing, transputers, mathematical modelling, database architectures, human computer interaction, information systems and artificial intelligence.
The results of this research are being applied in many fields.
The University's computer facilities are first rate.
Students have access to facilities which include the University's main multi-access computer system based on VAX 8700 computers, as well as the Faculty's own specialized facilities which include an IBM 9370 system for Expert Systems work.
Extensive laboratory facilities are available, including terminal laboratories with up-to-date equipment as well as laboratories specializing in areas such as software development and computer graphics.
Students can expect to spend a substantial part of their courses doing practical laboratory work.
There is also a range of sophisticated workstations available both for advanced undergraduate and research activities.
Students have the opportunity to network across campuses and, through the central facilities, to access networks in other universities and research establishments in the UK and beyond.
Systems can be developed in a range of languages including ADA, PASCAL, COBOL and MODULA.
A range of modern program development tools and environments is available — the laboratory facilities are a reflection of what students will find available to them on entering employment.
Careers in computing are for people with common sense, the ability to think clearly and logically, the capacity to adapt readily to change, and the skill to communicate and work closely with others.
Qualifications in computing have international currency; this is becoming more and more important as the worldwide skills shortage in computing and related professional areas acquires greater significance.
Well-qualified computing and mathematics professionals have career opportunities of exceptional breadth and depth.
Locally and nationally, the expanding software and computer applications industrial sector offers challenging and rewarding employment prospects.
In particular, the growing software industry in Northern Ireland is providing many new and interesting jobs.
Companies are being attracted to the province by the availability of well-qualified graduates whose temperament, knowledge and practical skills are equal to the best.
The informatics graduate can expect to be at the forefront of the development of new software products and tools or to follow a career in developing technology applications for a range of areas — from industry to the public sector and from health care to agriculture.
As the computer takes more responsibility for routine and mundane processes and tasks, the computer professional has yet more opportunity for creative effort.
The keywords of the new information technology include software engineering, intelligent knowledge-based and expert systems, human computer interaction, computer-aided design and systems design methodologies.
They describe the tools and techniques used to create, design and build systems and programs which meet the real needs of users.
Graduates not only contribute to industry with their knowledge and practical experience of current practice and methodologies, they bring new ideas to that industry.
The course programme offered by the Faculty of Informatics — supported by a strong research record and excellent facilities — prepares students for challenging careers in one of the world's youngest, and most demanding, industries.
The Faculty is keen to attract young women and men with the intelligence and flexibility of mind to play their part in the development of information technology and to maximize its application.
BEng Hons/MEng Software Engineering JN G530 Softw Eng
The Course
As the technology of computer hardware becomes more established the emphasis will fall increasingly on the power and potential of software to create new techniques and opportunities.
Northern Ireland has established a reputation as a centre of excellence in the international software industry.
Local software companies are important members of national and international groups, supplying customers worldwide.
It is projected that the numbers involved in the industry will double over the next five years.
Most European countries predict shortages of software specialists.
This course will meet the needs of the software industry for professionals whose educational background emphasizes technical aspects such as hardware, systems and communications.
It will prepare students for a career in a software engineering environment in industry or research.
A particular feature of the course is the option for students to take the extended course leading to an MEng with an emphasis on software project management and team leadership.
Year 1
The first year will provide the theoretical basis of the course, and will cover foundation material in hardware and software systems.
Year II
The second year will build on earlier work to provide a competence in modern software engineering methodologies supported by the necessary theoretical base.
At the end of this year the selection process for BEng or MEng will take place.
Year III
The third year will be an industrial training year in which students will be placed with companies working within a software engineering environment.
Here they will have the opportunity to apply their knowledge to practical situations and to evaluate company practices.
BEng
Year IV
The final year will present the opportunity for in-depth study of a small number of specialized topics.
Students will also undertake substantial projects during this year.
MEng
Years IV and V
In addition to an in-depth study of a number of selected specialisms, students will also study management issues and undertake extensive project work.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree (see page 51).
A GCE ‘O’ level/GCSE pass at grade B or above in Mathematics is required.
Location and Duration
Jordanstown.
The BEng (Hons) course is of four years' duration.
For students who proceed to the MEng the course is five years long.
Transferability
At the end of their first or second year, a limited number of students may transfer to this degree course from the BTEC HND in Computer Studies (Code JN 1210)(see page 165), on the basis of academic performance and after completion of some additional work during the long vacation.
Professional Exemption
Approval is being sought from the British Computer Society and the Institution of Electrical Engineers for exemptions from their professional examinations.
Diploma in Industrial Studies
Satisfactory completion of the year of placement leads to the award of the Diploma in Industrial Studies upon graduation.
BSc Hons Computing and Information Systems ULS/JN G520 Comp Inf Sy
The Course
This course has been designed to address the continuing worldwide requirement for highly-educated and skilled graduates to play leading roles in the design and development of computer-based information systems.
Distinctive features of the course are its professional emphasis, the considerable element of computing laboratory work and the year spent in industry.
The course is recognized for producing graduates who are immediately employable and who can play leading roles in the development of computing.
Years I and II
The first two years of the course have been designed to provide a strong foundation in the principles and practice of information system design and implementation, an understanding of basic concepts in computing and supporting studies, and the practical skills and experience required to perform a useful role in industry.
Much of the practical work, which occupies about thirty per cent of the study time, is concerned with program design and system development.
Established computing laboratories, providing terminal/minicomputer-based and micro-computer-based systems, are extensively used.
Subjects studied include:
Systems and Analysis and Design
Information Management
Algorithms and Data Structures
Logic Programming
Discrete Mathematics
Computer Organization and Data Communications
Software Systems
together with supporting studies in:
Communication Skills
Business Organization
Accounting
Behaviour Science
Professional Issues
Year III
The third year is spent on placement in a computer installation.
As well as having the opportunity to learn about industry, students may enhance their career prospects and demonstrate their potential to become leaders in the application of computing to business and commercial problems.
Year IV
The fourth year is concerned with an advanced treatment of a number of important topics in information systems design and implementation.
A major element is a project, involving a substantial task requiring inventiveness, knowledge and critical evaluation.
Subjects studied include:
Information Systems Engineering
Data Management Systems
Software Engineering
Project
In addition two options are chosen from:
Human-Computer Interaction
Artificial Intelligence
System Performance and Evaluation
Distributed and Concurrent Systems
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally a GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE pass in Mathematics of at least grade B is required.
Location and Duration
Jordanstown.
The course is of four years' duration.
Transferability
At the end of their first or second year, a limited number of students may transfer to this degree course from the BTEC HND in Computer Studies (code JN 1210)(see page 166), on the basis of academic performance.
Professional Exemption
Successful completion of the BSc Hons Computing and Information Systems leads to exemption from Parts 1 and 2 of the British Computer Society professional examinations.
Diploma in Industrial Studies
Satisfactory completion of the year of placement leads to the award of the Diploma in Industrial Studies upon graduation.
BSc Ord Applied Computing BSC Hons Applied Computing ULS/ME G510 App Comp ULS/ME G545 App Comp
The Courses
Success in a computing career has particular prerequisites: knowledge of computing principles (these change only slowly), understanding of how the power of computers can be exploited (this is continually changing), and skill in using hardware and software to achieve organizational goals.
The availability of opportunities for graduates in computing subjects is assured; surveys confirm current shortages of appropriately trained staff and the expectation of even greater demand in the years ahead.
These courses prepare students for careers in the 1990s and beyond.
Course content has been selected to give graduates the necessary knowledge, skills and experience to equip them for careers in software development, application systems development, and in using computer systems to further organizational goals.
Acquiring familiarity with the work of computer professionals is an important goal of the courses.
This is achieved by professional workshops where students working in groups address problems taken from industrial, commercial and public sector organizations.
The placement in Year III is an opportunity to practise new skills and learn how people in employment use and develop computer systems.
A personal computing project is undertaken by all students during the final year.
Year I
During this year students take a multidisciplinary programme which addresses basic computing skills as well as business organization, accounting, mathematical and communication skills.
Programming is the context used to develop an understanding of many aspects of the application of computers.
The year includes the presentation of a methodical approach to programming and contact with different programming environments.
Year II
Computing skills are consolidated and further developed.
The software engineering theme continues with a study of a modular approach to designing computer solutions.
The applications theme, through the Systems Analysis and Design unit and Database unit, considers how best to deal systematically with organizations' needs for computerized information systems.
The technology theme (Operating Systems, Data Communication) extends students' knowledge of systems hardware, software and distributed computing principles and practice.
Year III
Students of both the ordinary and the honours degrees spend this year on a paid industrial placement.
This provides experience of applying computing solutions in an organization and deepens students' understanding of the theoretical parts of the course.
Year IV
In the final year, the course focuses on two themes.
The first of these is Software Engineering which is approached through studies in Software Specification, Programming Methods and Tools and a unit in Interactive Programming.
The second theme, the Application of Computing, is supported by units in Information System Design, Human Computer Interaction and Artificial Intelligence.
Final-year Honours students may also select from a range of optional units which includes Image Processing, Software Design, Distributed Systems and Advanced Information Systems.
The programme for students completing the final year of the Ordinary degree contains, in addition to the two themes above, a unit in Industrial Computing Systems, which focuses on the use of a range of systems in industrial environments.
All final-year students also undertake a project.
This is a major piece of work which is carried out under the guidance of a project supervisor.
Topics for the project come from many sources.
They can involve further investigation of a problem or need identified in the placement year, or they might be related to staff research interests.
All projects involve a significant element of software development.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51), A GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE pass at grade C or above in Mathematics is required.
Location and Duration
Magee College.
Teaching takes place in new purpose-built accommodation including a suite of laboratories equipped with the latest hardware and software.
The courses are of four years' duration.
Transferability
There is provision for transfer between the ordinary honours degree courses, and from the HND Computer Studies courses (see page 166) on the basis of academic performance.
Professional Exemption
Successful completion of the BSc Ord Applied Computing leads to exemption from Part 1 of the British Computer Society professional examinations.
Successful completion of the BSc Ord with commendation leads to exemptions from Parts 1 and 2.
Exemptions are being sought in respect of the honours degree.
Diploma in Industrial Studies
Satisfactory completion of the year of placement leads to the award of the Diploma in Industrial Studies upon graduation.
BSc Hons Computing BSc Ord Computing ULS/CE G500 Comp ULS/CE G502 Comp
The Courses
These courses involve the study of the development of software and hardware for a variety of areas of application.
Graduates will be highly skilled in the development of quality software and will be prepared for careers in software production in a variety of positions in, for instance, software houses, data processing and industrial computing.
These courses are also a preparation for work at the hardware/software interface and provide the potential for work in hardware design.
Both courses include a placement in Year III which allows students to apply the knowledge and skills they have gained in Years I and II in an industrial or commercial setting.
In addition to taking ‘core’ studies, which are essentially the first two years of study and the final-year project, students may choose from optional units.
The wide range of options includes software development, hardware systems, and business and management computing.
Units are also available from courses in accounting and psychology, thus broadening the employment prospects of graduates.
The first two years are intended to provide a solid foundation in the basic elements of computing such as software development, computer systems, an introduction to the organizational context for computing and concepts of basic programming.
Students are provided with a secure foundation for the placement, including the ability to develop software in a number of languages; expertise in working at the hardware interface; and experience of database, graphics and communication systems.
The third year is spent on paid placement, working in the computing function of an organization.
Students gain valuable practical experience and have the opportunity to learn more about the range of careers available.
In the final year there is a common core of two units, and a wide range of optional units from which honours degree candidates choose four units, and ordinary degree candidates choose three half-units.
A benefit of the course structure is that students can choose topics of special interest in their final year depending on their results in Years I and 2 and their experiences on placement.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
A GCE ‘O’ level or GCSE pass normally at grade B or above in Mathematics is required (‘A’level Mathematics is not a specific requirement for entry to these courses).
Applicants offering qualifications other than those acceptable for an honours degree will be considered for entry to the ordinary degree.
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The courses are of four years' duration.
Transferability
There is provision for transfer between the ordinary and honours degree courses and from the BTEC HND Computer Studies (Code CE1112)(see page 167) course at Coleraine to the degree course, on the basis of academic performance.
Professional Exemption
Successful completion of the BSc Ord Computing leads to exemption from Part 1 of the British Computer Society professional examinations.
Successful completion of the BSc Ord with commendation or the BSc Hons leads to exemptions from Parts 1 and 2.
Diploma in Industrial Studies
Satisfactory completion of the year of placement leads to the award of the Diploma in Industrial Studies upon graduation.
BSc Hons Mathematics, Statistics and Computing BSc Ord Mathematics, Statistics and Computing ULS/JN G900 Maths Stats Co ULS/JN G902 Maths Stats Co
The Courses
Graduate mathematicians and statisticians, especially those able to exploit modern computing facilities, are very much in demand by industry and commerce.
Both of these courses have a distinctive vocational emphasis and aim primarily to produce graduates to meet this demand.
Graduates of the honours course will also be ideally placed, after having obtained a postgraduate certificate in education, to enter teaching.
The courses place special emphasis on the development of expertise in mathematical modelling, that is, in the analysis and mathematical representation of practical problems arising in all areas of the world of work.
The role of the computer in solving such problems is stressed and solution techniques are taught in conjunction with the relevant foundations in applicable pure mathematics.
A major feature of both courses is the year spent in industry.
The extra experience gained during this year places graduates in a very favourable position when they come to seek permanent employment.
Years I and II
The honours and ordinary degrees have their first two years in common.
During this period a strong practical foundation is laid in four main subject areas: mathematical methods, computing science, applied statistics, and operational research (ie. optimal decision mathematics).
Units involving practical case studies in mathematical modelling unify the work in these four subject areas and aim also to develop the personal skills sought by employers, namely the abilities to communicate, to make decisions, and to work effectively either individually or as a member of a team.
Year III
Students normally spend their third year in salaried placement, undergoing professional training in an industrial or commercial environment.
Year IV
The final year is offered both at honours and at ordinary degree level.
In both cases students may choose either to continue their studies to an advanced level in all four main subject areas or to drop some and specialize in others.
Options are also available in modern applied mathematics.
All candidates undertake an extensive project.
The honours and ordinary degree courses differ in the number and level of units of study undertaken in Year IV; candidates for the honours degree are required to follow a more demanding programme than that undertaken by ordinary degree students.
Entry Conditions
The general entry requirements for admission to a first degree course (see page 51).
Normally a GCE ‘A’ level pass of a good standard in Mathematics is required.
Equivalent qualifications are acceptable.
Applicants offering qualifications other than those acceptable for the honours degree will be considered for entry to the ordinary degree.
Prerequisite Knowledge
Detailed knowledge of the pure mathematics common core of the GCE ‘A’ level Mathematics syllabus is assumed.
Previous study of statistics, computing and applied mathematics is not a requirement.
Location and Duration
Jordanstown.
The courses are of four years' duration.
Transferability
There is provision for transfer between the ordinary and honours degree courses.
Students who have performed well in Year II of the BTEC HND in Mathematics, Statistics and Computing (code JN 1111)(see page 168) may proceed to the second year of the honours degree course.
Professional Recognition
Graduates are eligible to join the Institute of Mathematics and its Applications, either as Graduate Members (if they obtain a good honours degree) or as Licentiates.
Holders of the honours degree are eligible for partial exemption from the professional examinations for membership of the Institute of Actuaries.
Diploma in Industrial Studies
Satisfactory completion of the year of placement leads to the award of the Diploma in Industrial Studies upon graduation.
BTEC HND Computer Studies JN 1210 (with placement)
The Course
This course is designed to provide a broad base for students who intend to seek employment in a commercial information processing environment.
Employment opportunities include not only work with the traditional large-scale centralized business system but also involvement in database systems, distributed systems and small business systems.
The successful diplomate should expect to find employment in a range of areas, as a commercial programmer, small systems manager, business analyst or database administrator/programmer.
To this end the course concentrates on the basic skills of programming, systems analysis and design within the coherent framework of the business environment rather than on any one application specialism.
Students will become familiar with simple networks or distributed systems, and will become competent in the use of business packages and database management systems.
A previous knowledge of computing may be of some advantage initially but is not a prerequisite for entry to the course .
Year I
Year I develops a thorough understanding of programming principles, and provides a sound basis on which to build further programming experience.
In addition, students acquire an understanding of the role of the computer in a commercial environment, are encouraged to develop a methodical approach to the evaluation of computer systems, and learn the basic mathematical and statistical techniques in the context of business computing.
Units studied include:
Business Data Processing
Systems Analysis and Design
Organization Studies
Programming and Data Structures
Architecture and Operating Systems
Quantitative Methods
Year II
Year II is spent in industrial training in a computing environment which allows students to apply the skills and knowledge gained in the first year of the course to real day-today situations and problems experienced by organizations using computer-based information systems.
Year III
During Year III a number of areas are studied in detail.
There is continued emphasis on good programming practice, while aspects of systems design, business computing and software application are developed in more detail.
The study of database management systems provides a knowledge of the facilities and functions of databases both in centralized and in distributed systems.
Units studied include:
Systems Analysis and Design
Software Systems
Commercial Programming
Databases and Distributed Systems
A major feature of this year is a project which enables students working in teams to draw together their knowledge, skills and experience.
Years I and III incorporate a microcomputer workshop.
Entry Conditions
Applicants should possess: GCE or GCSE passes at grade C or better in Mathematics and three other subjects, at least one of which must be at ‘A’ level (or an equivalent AS level qualification);
or
a BTEC National Diploma in Computer Studies;or 
A BTEC National Certificate or Diploma.
Location and Duration
Jordanstown.
The course is of three years' duration.
The first year of this course is also offered at Portadown College of Further Education and at Belfast College of Technology.
Transferability
At the end of the first year of this course students may, subject to satisfactory performance, transfer to the second year of the BSc Hons/Ord Applied Computing at Magee College (see page 160).
Students whose performance is exceptional may transfer to the second year of the BSc Honours Computing and Information Systems course at Jordanstown (see page 159).
Professional Exemption
Successful completion of this course leads to exemption from Part 1 of the British Computer Society professional examinations.
Application
Application for admission to this course should be made directly to the University (see page 50).
A direct entry application form is available from the Admissions Officer (see page 63).
BTEC HND Computer Studies CE 1112
The Course
This course is designed to develop the skills and abilities which are important to Information Technology (IT) practitioners.
An IT system is one which satisfied the information requirements of an enterprise by bringing together a relevant combination of technologies which capture, generate, transfer, store or process information.
The IT industry has been subject to rapid development in recent years and it is confidently expected that this trend will continue.
This development has created a national and international shortage of staff with appropriate IT skills.
In designing the course, full account has been taken of the need to provide students with the skills necessary not only to make a contribution to the current environment, but also to be sufficiently adaptable to the exciting future of the industry.
The successful diplomate will thus expect to find a wide range of career and employment opportunities, especially in the industrial/commercial sector.
Course Content
The first year of the course concentrates on providing a grounding in the tools and techniques of IT; this is subsequently developed in the second year, when the emphasis is on the application of the technology and its environment.
As the course is vocationally based, there is a high practical content.
In Year I of the course, students acquire skills in areas such as computer hardware and software, and IT systems.
These skills are further encouraged and developed in a workshop environment.
Year II sees the technology applied to a range of topics such as information management and human computer interface, with students drawing together the skills acquired on the course by undertaking an individual project in an area of particular interest.
Entry Conditions
Applicants should possess: GCE or GCSE passes at grade C or better in Mathematics and three other subjects, at least one of which must be at ‘A’ level (or an equivalent AS level qualification);
or
a BTEC National Diploma in Computer Studies;or 
a BTEC National Certificate or Diploma.
Location and Duration
Coleraine.
The course is of two years' duration.
Transferability
At the end of the first or second year of the course students may be considered for transfer to the BSc Hons/Ord Computing at Coleraine, on the basis of academic performance (see page 162).
Professional Exemption
Approval is being sought from the British Computer Society for exemption from Part I of the professional examinations.
BTEC HND Mathematics, Statistics and Computing JN 1111
The Course
This is a broad, vocationally-biased course which is designed to develop problem-solving skills, to give students a knowledge of relevant mathematical and statistical models, and to make them proficient users of appropriate computer software.
The teaching methods of the course include not only lectures and tutorial classes but also: the extensive use of case studies which have been developed in partnership with local industry; the use of expert computer systems in statistical analysis; and project work emanating from the research activity of the Department of Mathematics, including statistical research on financial trends.
Although some prior knowledge of programming and/or statistics is an advantage, it is not a prerequisite for the course.
On completion of the course, students will be conversant with the advanced mathematical, statistical and computing skills necessary to gain employment in a wide range of jobs.
They will also have the ability and confidence to tackle professional problems, to communicate their ideas and to work effectively both individually and as members of a team.
Course Content
Students' previous mathematical knowledge is extended and they are introduced to new areas of mathematical studies such as probability and statistics, the application of statistical methods to the collection and analysis of data, computer programming and the use of custom-built software packages.
Attention is also paid to the thought processes involved in problem-solving activity.
Entry Conditions
Applicants should possess five GCE passes (or GCSE passes at grade C or above), one of which must be at ‘A’ level or two at ‘AS’level.
The latter should include an ‘A’ level pass in a Mathematics subject containing at least fifty per cent Pure Mathematics or an ‘AS’level pass at grade C or above in an approved Mathematics examination.
Other qualifications deemed by the Course Committee to be equivalent to the above may be accepted.
Location and Duration
Jordanstown.
The course is of two years' duration.
Transferability
Students who successfully complete the course may transfer to the second year of the BSc Hons Mathematics, Statistics and Computing course at Jordanstown.
Professional Recognition
Holders of the Diploma may expect to obtain exemption from various parts of the examinations of the professional bodies, the Institute of Statisticians and the British Computer Society.
They may join the Institute of Mathematics and its Applications as Licentiates.