

TEACHING METHODS AND MEDIA FOR LIBRARY USER EDUCATION
This chapter will describe a number of teaching methods and media.
These will be considered in relation to factors affecting the learning process.
The use of the various methods and media in library user education will then be discussed.
Teaching methods may be roughly divided into those which are suitable for group instruction, those suitable for individual instruction, and those suitable for both (see figure 4).
Choice of teaching methods and media depends on the learning/ teaching situation, the subject material, the students and the teachers.
No single method could be suitable for all occasions.
Factors affecting the learning Process
Education was described in the previous chapter as a process which changes the learners.
This process can be affected by a wide variety of factors.
However, as has been pointed out by Hills, there are four main factors that affect learning in practical situations: motivation, activity, understanding, feedback.
These factors can be considered in relation to the programme of library education:
Motivation
Instruction should be given at a point of high motivation, as for example when the student wants to obtain information in connection with a particular project.
Activity
Active work on a problem — learning by doing — is likely to be more effective than simply being told how to do a particular piece of work.
Understanding
Library education will be more effective if the student understands what he is doing and why he is doing it — that is, if new facts can be related to existing knowledge.
Feedback
Feedback, information on the progress being made should be available to the student.
In addition, factors affecting the neurophysiological sensory input can be considered.
Teaching methods may, for example, use visual or auditory stimulation or a combination of both.
Methods which make use of a combination of sensory inputs are likely to be more effective than those which relay on a single channel of communication.
The possibility for the student to control the rate of flow of information, in a given learning situation, is another factor which affects the learning process.
Interaction between individuals concerned in the teaching/learning situation also affects the learning process.
This interaction can be roughly divided into teacher-student and student-teacher interaction.
Thus, for example as Revill has pointed out, in programmed instruction students work as isolated individuals; there is little or no interaction with other students, or with the teacher.
This might be an advantage for some, but these factors ‘may not favour the extrovert student who prefers the companionship and competition of the classroom.
Research does indicate that introverts learn more easily from programmed learning than extroverts’.
In table 2 an attempt is made to consider various teaching methods for library education  with respect to the factors affecting the learning process, the number of sensory inputs utilized, and student-teacher, student-student interaction.
From this it can be seen that no one method is suitable for all learning/ teaching situations or for all individuals.
The various methods and media should be used to supplement each other in any given programme of education.
Enright has pointed out with regard to media that ‘too much attention has been given to the possibilities of the new media supplanting the book, and far too little to the ways in which each can and does supplement the other’.
The timing of user education
It is extremely important to provide education at a point when the user experiences motivation.
Library orientation and instruction should be available when the user feels an interest or need to visit the library.
A good time for orientation in the academic or school library is the beginning of the academic year when students are being introduced to all the available facilities.
Instruction in methods for finding information is most likely to be successful if provided at a point when students are working on a non-library project or course which requires a literature search.
This is known as course-related education .
s A related term is   course-integrated instruction in which the library component is closely interwoven into the non-library course.
In both these forms of education there is co-operation between library and academic staff.
This is particularly so in the case of course-integrated instruction and this ideal is more seldom reached in practice than course-related education.
Motivation can be increased in another way — by introducing credits for library instruction courses.
A number of American institutions have introduced competency-based education, with library involvement, in programmes concerning communication and information skills.
Students are required to show competency in these skills in order to obtain a degree.
Recent trends in library education in many countries are towards the introduction of compulsory courses in information retrieval.
Whatever the timing of the library orientation or instruction, learning is facilitated if the student is given information about the progress that he/she is making.
Sensory stimulation
Figures taken from an American survey indicated that ‘learners retain about 10% of what they read, 20% of what they hear, 30% of what they see, 50% of what they see and hear, 70% of what they say as they talk and 90% of what they say as they do a thing’.
On neurophysiological grounds one would expect there to be considerable differences between different individuals with regard to the most effective channels of learning; therefore, one must regard statements such as that quoted with a certain amount of scepticism.
Nevertheless teaching methods which make use of a combination of sensory inputs are likely to be more effective than those which rely on a single channel of communication.
Traditional library instruction has made considerable use of the lecture method for large groups, the guided tour for smaller groups, and individual help to the student who asks for this at the information desk.
During recent years there has been an increased use of audiovisual media such as tape-slides, films and video-tape, and to a certain extent computer-based instruction.
Which methods are likely to be best?
With regard to library education, table 2 shows that certain methods appear to be more suitable than others for this type of instruction.
Such methods are small group methods — seminars and demonstrations, practical exercises, and programmed instruction.
Other methods which should prove useful are lectures, the use of printed media, self-instruction methods, individual tape-slide instruction, and individual help.
It appears that the guided tour and various audio-visual methods such as films and video-tapes would be less suitable.
In the following sections the use of various methods and media for library user education will be considered in detail.
The lecture
Lectures are one of the traditional forms of teaching in higher education.
They are used for teaching large groups of students and they make use of both auditory and visual sensory inputs (via the blackboard or overhead projector).
The lecture method has the great disadvantage that the speed of delivery of information cannot be controlled by the receiver, and repetition is not possible unless printed handouts are provided, the student manages to write a synopsis, or some recording is made of the actual lecture.
If attendance is voluntary, students who come to a lecture must feel some motivation.
They play a fairly passive role, though the taking of notes involves the student actively in the learning process, particularly if an attempt is made to record the main points of the lecture in a logical sequence.
The lecture gives the student a possibility to relate new facts to existing knowledge but provides no feedback as to whether this has occurred or not.
The lecture as a form of communication in higher education has been strongly criticized, not least by students themselves.
Yet as has been shown by, amongst others, Hills, in an investigation of some applications of self-teaching systems, lectures do have considerable appeal for students.
Attendance at lectures does not appear to be affected by the availability of outline notes.
Both students and lecturers said that they felt that lectures gave an opportunity for personal contact.
Students were able to note which points were stressed by the lecturer and staff were able to obtain some feedback from the students.
With regard to orientation in library use, Ford states that ‘the lecture commonly given to freshmen students at the beginning of their first session, must surely be a waste of time.
The library, with its vague connection with academic work, can hold little attraction for a student struggling to adjust to university life’.
What part could the lecture play in a course in information retrieval?
The lecture is a particularly unsuitable method for conveying information about bibliographic aids.
Lectures about this type of library material tend to sound like a catalogue of unfamiliar names — the ‘catalogue aria’.
Accompanying illustrations are, even with the help of an overhead projector, difficult to make clear.
However, lectures can be used as a stimulus, to present an overall view and to convey enthusiasm about the subject.
Moreover, lectures can be used for groups of different sizes — an advantage in practical timetabling.
Thus lectures might be suitable for providing a general introduction to a course on information retrieval.
Seminars, tutorials and demonstrations
Seminars, tutorials, and demonstrations are given to smaller groups of students than the average lecture.
The atmosphere tends to be less formal and there is greater opportunity for integration both between staff and students and between the students themselves.
It is possible to provide motivation and to see that students are actively involved, say in a practical exercise during which they receive feedback as to their progress.
An attempt can be made to relate new information to existing knowledge.
It is very difficult and extremely inefficient to explain the use of various specific tools for information retrieval in the absence of the source materials.
This would be rather like trying to explain the use of the cathode ray tube in the absence of laboratory equipment or studying music without actually listening to it.
Demonstrations might prove to be a good way of teaching small groups of about five or six students the use of various tools used for information retrieval.
Students could be given the opportunity of actively searching for information about some topic in which they are interested.
The guided tour
The traditional approach to library orientation is the so-called guided tour, in which students are given a short tour of the library, during their first weeks as university students.
Harlan has described a guided tour as follows: ‘Batches of students — I have seen as many as thirty in a group — are herded through a dozen or so stations.
The guide is not always a librarian, nor is he always well-prepared.
‘This’, he says with a wave of his hand, ‘is the Periodicals Room, that’, with a nod, ‘is CBI, a universal English language bibliography, dictionary arrangement with author, title and subject entries: You must remember that the main entry is author’…
Small wonder that at the third and fourth station, most of the students stop listening.
Libraries and librarians, they conclude, are as bad as anticipated.
Obviously one's efforts are best applied in finding ways of avoiding, not utilizing the library.
The type of orientation described above is often given when students have little or no motivation actually to use the library.
The students themselves take little active part in the teaching/learning process, but tend to follow passively round the various stations.
From the point of view of library administration the guided tour type of library orientation makes heavy demands on library staff time.
There is also the problem, common to courses with high-recurrent frequency, that the guide does not remember exactly what has been said to each particular group.
A very good method for a short library orientation is the self-paced printed or audio tour , followed by appropriate exercises.
This method brings library users into the actual building, where they carry out a series of practical tasks concerned with location of materials, photocopying, use of catalogues, borrowing routines and so on.
In this way students acquire confidence in using the library and have the opportunity to meet friendly library staff in a pleasant environment.
Exercises can be varied to minimize ‘group solutions’.
Self-guided tours have been used successfully in many libraries in the US and their use has now spread to other countries such as Australia and Sweden (see figure 5).
Audio-visual methods
During recent years there has been an increasing interest in the use of audio-visual media such as films, video-tapes, tape-slide presentations and audio-tapes for library user education.
Two INFUSE publications ‘Audiovisual teaching methods in user education: an annotated bibliography’ and ‘A catalogue of AV media and CAI software for user education and librarianship’both published in 1982 provide up-to-date information in this field.
Recent surveys have been carried out in the United States by Hardesty (1978) and in the UK by Malley and Moys (1982).
In library education, however, there are few areas where it is necessary to use moving images.
The information can be conveyed in a series of units such as slides or overhead transparencies or printed illustrations.
This would suggest that the tape/slide medium or the use of audio-tape in conjunction with printed material, as in the point-of-use teaching devices at the Barker Engineering Library at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, would be particularly suitable for library user education.
The advantages of tape-slide productions are:
1
Flexibility.
Tape-slide productions can be used for both group teaching, as for example, an illustration of a lecture or seminar, or for individual tuition, as in preparation for a course or for repetition.
2
Constant availability.
The use of the material does not depend on the presence of a lecturer or a librarian.
It can be used by the student when the need arises.
3
The presentation of the material is not complicated.
The tape-slide material is easy to project and easy to store.
4
Speed of presentation can be controlled — either by the lecturer in group instruction, or by the individual student.
5
They are easy to update.
It would appear that the tape-slide productions, which enable colour to be shown, but not motion, are particularly suitable for use in library education programmes.
They can be used in a variety of ways, combined with other methods of instruction such as lectures and programmed learning.
They make use of a combination of two sensory inputs.
Production costs are not too great and production can be undertaken at may libraries by the library staff themselves without external professional help.
However, Hills found, in the investigation of self-teaching methods referred to above, that when tape-slide presentations were used as a substitute for normal lectures, these were ‘not well received’.
Both students and staff were critical of the impersonal nature of the tape-slide lectures.
In contrast, when tape-slide presentations were used for individual instruction, students found them more acceptable.
This favourable attitude to the individual use of tape-slide material has been observed in other studies.
Individual presentation allows the student to control the rate of information and to repeat parts of the presentation, if this is necessary.
In Britain there has been a growing interest in the use of tape-slides, for library instruction, resulting in part from the SCONUL co-operative scheme.
The use of a number of the SCONUL tape-slide presentations for user instruction has been experimentally tested on Swedish users.
User reactions to the tape-slide medium were very positive.
Tape-slide presentations appear to be a suitable medium for conveying the type of information used in library education.
The use of other audio-visual media in library education should also be considered.
Filmstrips possess many of the advantages of the tape-slide presentations, but they have a number of disadvantages, one being that the pre-set sequence compels the pictures to be shown in a given order.
They are easily damaged — by scratching or heat — and are difficult to repair.
They are also difficult to update.
When one frame is outdated the whole filmstrip must be remade.
Films possess the ability to convey both motion and colour.
However, in library instruction, one seldom has the need for conveying motion, and the use of moving images may well prove a distraction, rather than enhancing the learning effect.
Everyone is familiar with the expensively produced ciné film, and library instruction films will be compared, usually to their disfavour, with commercial products.
To make a successful film is time-consuming and expensive.
However, films can be used to create an atmosphere of reality, which could be useful for students prevented, say by distance, from visiting  a certain university library.
It is significant that the Open University in Britain made two films on the use of libraries — one showing the use of the public library and the other, produced for those students who were to attend summer school at some university, on the use of the university library under these conditions.
The latter film has a playing time of twenty minutes.
These films are technically well produced and create an atmosphere of reality, useful for the student who has no opportunity actually to visit the library at the time of seeing the film.
In the case of the Open University it is obviously worthwhile to produce well-designed audio-visual material that can be used for teaching thousands of students.
Video-tapes , like films, can be used to convey both motion and, in some cases, colour.
They possess one considerable advantage over film material.
It is possible to re-use the tape, thereby making updating less expensive.
However, it should be noted that updating of videotapes is a time-consuming activity.
Quality of product will, as in the case of films, be compared with commercial film and television products.
Video-recording can be used, as with films, to create an atmosphere of reality and convey moving images, but these are requirements seldom met with in library instruction.
Short video-recorded programmes might well be used to illustrate lectures, as a means of creating interest.
Video-recording can make use of tape, film or discs for the actual storage of the recorded material.
One of the problems facing libraries in the use of video material has been the lack of standardization between different systems.
It would appear that cassette systems are easier to use, as audio-cassettes, in library education.
There are at present two types of TV-cassette systems, for playback alone, and systems for both recording and playback.
The chief problem facing the purchaser of video equipment is the incompatibility between different systems.
If standardization were possible it would be easier to concentrate on the production of a series of high quality products for a wider distribution.
Video recordings can be played on internal TV systems.
The advantages of these methods are that they allow for careful preparation of material and can make use of the best teachers available.
As the material is recorded it can be used many times.
Internal TV systems can use displays suitable for audiences of different sizes.
On the other hand the personal contact of the lecture, tutorial or seminar is lost.
The student cannot stop the programme and ask questions and discussions may be difficult to organize; the instruction tends to place the student in a rather passive situation.
Books and printed guides
Printed information in books, bibliographies and guides has the advantage that it is available for use, as and when required.
Individual users can work at their own pace, repetition is possible and visual display in the form of diagrams is easy to achieve.
Printed material is suitable for both orientation and instruction and it has the advantage of ease of use for casual library users and those too shy to ask for help.
Many libraries provide printed guides on the use of the library as part of their orientation programme.
The basic library guide should be based on the library's orientation objectives and should always be written with the user in mind (see figures 5–11, 18 and 19).
It is essential to avoid the use of jargon.
Printing and presentation should be as attractive as possible — after all the library is an attractive place isn't it?
If guides are to be distributed to students, the timing of this should be planned.
Students receive an overwhelming mass of information during their first weeks at college or university, so this is perhaps not the best time to distribute library handouts.
Printed material such as bibliographies, subject-based literature guides, handbooks on specific media as, for example, the use of patents and reports, are frequently used in library instruction courses (see figure 12).
The size and scope of these tools varies considerably.
Printed guides are used by the motivated user who is actively searching for information.
A guide to the use of the literature in any given subject should be based on a logical concept and thereby facilitate understanding by providing the opportunity to relate new information to previous knowledge.
If the guides are used for a literature search, the student gets feedback on understanding, in that he/she discovers whether or not he can find the information required.
The production of bibliographies and handbooks is a time-consuming process.
If it is possible to use the same basic pattern for a number of guides, this has the advantage of both saving the librarian's time and making it easier for the user to transfer search techniques from one discipline to another.
Short printed leaflets, such as pathfinders, subject guides or topical guides on subjects of current interest can be made available for use as and when required.
They are often placed near the tools they describe — library catalogue, abstracts or indexes — or near the reference desk.
This ‘point-of-use’ material provides a brief introduction, emphasis is, however, often on the ‘how’rather than the ‘why’in relation to the tool or subject they describe.
Examples of commercially produced subject guides are Library Pathfinders, originally   developed as part of the Model Library Project at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and the LO Science Tracer Bullets from the Reference and Technology Division of the Library of Congress.
Many libraries have developed their own series of guides, an example of these is given in figure 13.
As can be seen from table 2, practical exercises ought to be one of the best methods for library user education.
When carrying out such exercises, students are actively involved in the learning process and they receive constant feedback about their progress.
Exercises can be carried out by individuals or as a class activity with the possibility of interaction between the students and teachers.
Practical exercises can be completed at the pace of the individual user.
An extension of the self-paced tour with exercises is the workbook , which consists of a combination of text and appropriate exercises.
Workbooks can be of several types, ranging from those covering basic library skills based on the holdings of a specific library, to subject-related workbooks.
The introductory and basic skills workbooks far outnumber those that are subject-oriented.
Library workbooks are particularly popular in academic libraries in the US and their widespread use can be traced to developments of Miriam Dudley's workbooks used at the undergraduate library at the University of California at Los Angeles.
In the late nineteen-sixties, Dudley designed a workbook for use in the ‘High Potential Program’ for minority students.
This workbook was further developed to become the Basic Skills Workbook, in 1974, and it has served as a model for many library workbooks throughout the world.
A workbook is relatively cheap to prepare and produce.
If credits are given for completion, students are motivated .
The completion of the exercises involves them in an active learning experience.
Individual students can work at their own paces and the exercises can be completed at convenient times within the student's schedule of studies.
Marking the completed exercises for large numbers of students can be time-consuming, but this can be overcome by such methods as multiple-choice answering.
One disadvantage of general library skills workbooks is that they tend to teach the use of the library and its resources in isolation from other studies.
The importance of subject-orientation and relationship to other studies was pointed out by Kolding Nielsen in 1974.
Workbooks have been found to be particularly useful in institutions where it is necessary to teach large numbers of students.
They have been most commonly used for students in the humanities and social science disciplines.
Workbooks are also useful   aids in the small library where not many staff are available to take part in library user education.
Workbooks or exercises are available in some of the multi-media commercially available ‘packages’ for library instruction, such as those produced by the Travelling Workshops at Newcastle-upon-Tyne Polytechnic in the UK.
Programmed instruction
Programmed learning can be carried out by the user of a variety of media — books, automatic projection of slides, or by means of a computer-aided instruction (CAI).
programmed instruction possesses many advantages for library instruction.
Students work at their own individual pace.
They actively participate in the learning process and receive direct feedback as to the progress that they are making.
It is also possible for the teaching staff to obtain a record of the student's progress.
But students work as isolated individuals; there is little or no interaction with the rest of the group or with the lecturer.
This might be an advantage for some, but as has been pointed out, the factor of isolation may not favour the extrovert student who prefers the companionship and competition of the classroom.
The use of CAI in library instruction has been developed largely in the USA.
Axeen rewrote the material that she used in her course ‘Teaching the use of the library to undergraduates’ in fourteen units of instruction, each requiring two hours' use of the terminal.
She compared the results of students who had taken the regular lecture course with those of students using the computer-based programme and found no statistical difference in the amount of learning.
CAI library instruction has been used at a number of American libraries such as the Ohio State University and the University of Denver.
As is pointed out by Clark, ‘there is no doubt that writing long courses is time consuming’ and the participation of the librarian ‘should be confined to teaching library skills’, leaving the programmer and educational technologist to work out the coding of the material.
There is a great advantage in combining programmed instruction with practical exercises, as has been carried out by Wendt at Southern Illinois where use is made of a sample catalogue drawer.
Computerised library courses certainly teach the student how to interact with the terminal and use computer dialogue.
At MIT in Project Intrex use was made of the computer to teach the user how to carry out an information search.
The development of computer-based public access systems to the  holdings of one or more libraries, together with advances in online bibliographic searching, have increasingly led to the use of CAI programmes for user training, yet use of CAI programmes can hardly be said to be widespread.
Kirkendall's 1980 survey on current trends in library use education found that, in 1979, only 18 libraries out of 830 completing the LOEX questionnaire, made use of CAI in their education programmes.
At the University of Denver Computer-Assisted Library instruction was developed in 1972 and used until 1977.
The programmes consisted of 21 mini-courses covering topics such as the use of the card catalogue, the use of abstracts and indexes and how to do a research paper.
The CAI programmes have now been replaced by direct information retrieval systems — the Query Analysis System and the Public Information System.
Huston-Miyamoto developed a CAI package which has been  operational since 1979 for users of the Library Computer System (LCS) at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Utilizing the instructional capabilities of the PLATO computer-based education system, the course trains users how to carry out searches on the library shelf-list database.
The lesson was designed to present a question to the student after every one to three screens of text.
The questions were of the multiple choice type, which allowed for routeing according to response.
The objectives for this CAI programme were based on findings from a study which identified errors commonly contributing to unsuccessful LCS searches.
A number of CAI programmes have been developed to teach online bibliographic searching.
At the University of Pittsburgh, Caruso developed the CAI TRAINER, which is used to teach online searching, by means of simulated searching from three files.
Another system, an instructional mode for training users to carry out bibliographic searches, is IIDA — Individualized Instruction for Data Access, developed at Drexel University and the Franklin Institute in Philadelphia.
At the National Library of Medicine, the CAI programme MEDLEARN has been developed to teach the use of MEDLINE.
Teaching methods for online information retrieval will be described in greater detail in Chapter Four.
Signs and informational graphics
Sign systems and informational graphics are one of the most basic ways available for providing orientation about the use of the library.
Yet sign systems in libraries are often poor and ill-planned.
In a recent study of British libraries carried out by the Graphic Information Research   Unit at the Royal College of Art for the British Library (1977), it was found that ‘the general standard of graphics was poor…signs in particular tended to vary in design and construction’.
Similarly, Renford and Hendrickson state, with reference to the US ‘Earlier books on library planning and design seldom mention sign systems’.
There has, however, been a marked increase in this important aspect of user education in recent years, and a number of handbooks and guides have been produced:
Reynolds and Barrett Signs and guiding for libraries 1981.
Sign System Manual The Van Pelt Library, University of Pennsylvania, 1981.
Pollet and Haskell Sign systems for libraries — solving the wayfinding problem 1979.
Spencer and Reynolds Directional signing and labelling in libraries and museums— a review of current theory and practice 1977.
Carey Library guiding — a programme for exploiting library resources 1974.
Librarians are gradually beginning to apply a systems approach in which different types of sign are used to illustrate different functions such as orientation, direction, identification, instruction, prohibition or regulation and current awareness.
These functions fall into two main types: signs related to direction finding and signs related to the use of library resources.
If signs are to be effective for user orientation, they must be carefully planned with regard to position, content and presentation.
The aim should be to use clear and attractive signs containing the minimum amount of information to enable the user to find his way or to be able to use a given tool or resource.
Signs based on colour-coding systems have been used in a number of libraries, for example at Hatfield Polytechnic Library, England (one of the pioneers in this field) and Chalmers University Library, Sweden.
Colour coding in both these libraries was used to reinforce clearly printed visual signs.
The colour coding was linked to differently shaped symbols for different types of material.
Another example of a library with a particularly well-designed functional sign system is the Van Pelt Library, University of Pennsylvania, USA.
Signs are constantly available to help motivated users who are actively searching for some form of information.
They can be used by people too shy to ask questions of the library staff.
Well-designed signs are expensive, but this expense is a good investment in that the signs will last a long time and help overcome the physical barriers of the library.
Coloured guiding lines or tracks are related to signs as ‘self-guiding’ devices.
These tracks can be used either in connection with self-guided library tours or for linking parts of the library with similar functions but physically separated from each other.
Individual instruction at the reference desk
The assumption is often made that the best form of library instruction can be given by the personalized service at the reference desk.
This is because the student asks a question about the use of some part of the library when he/she is motivated to learn that particular point.
The student is actively involved in the learning process and is receiving tuition from an expert.
However, this idealized picture takes little account of reality.
The reference librarian may be harrassed by several simultaneous enquiries, the telephone ringing, and so on.
Many students are shy, and, if they see that the librarian is busy, don't like to explain that they didn't really understand what was being said.
They hope that it will sort itself out with time — it is even more difficult to ask a second time.
The real difficulty about this type of individual help is that it may provide immediate relief but not necessarily the understanding to cope with the same or similar situations in the future.
During the evaluation of the undergraduate course in information retrieval at Chalmers Library, a series of interviews were carried out with students participating in the course as part of an attempt at illuminative evaluation.
Among the unexpected aspects that came to light was this situation with regard to individual help.
One of the students had tried to carry out a literature search during the summer, before coming on the course.
He said that he had no idea how to use the catalogues:
I had to ask a librarian and I managed to use them, but it is an advantage to know how to use them yourself.
So you knew how to carry out a literature search before you came on this course?
Oh no, not at all, I had received help from the librarian before, but I didn't know any more for that…about the right techniques and so on .
The student went on to say that, though he had received help for a specific question, he had not obtained enough understanding to cope with his future library problems.
This interview was typical of the situation described by several students.
The students, both in this series of interviews, and in another pre-structured evaluation interview, said that the main advantage of the course in information retrieval had been to give them an overall, systematic view of scientific information flow, which helped them to understand how to look for the information they required:
Well, the best thing about the course is, I think, that you get an all-round view of how it's arranged and the time aspect of the information flow — that it takes a long time for information to reach the books and compendia etc.
You get an idea of the tune perspective of the whole thing.
At most libraries student numbers have increased but there has been no corresponding increase in the number of librarians.
As a result, there is rarely the time to provide adequate explanations as to why a particular step is carried out.
In the words of Lubans, only ‘bibliographic first aid’ is provided.
Thus it can be seen that individual help at the reference desk has both advantages and disadvantages as a method of library user instruction.
Summary
Choice of teaching methods and media depends on the learning-teaching situation, the subject material, the students, and the teachers.
The  methods and media for library user education should preferably involve the active participation of the student, at a point where he/she feels motivation to use the library.
An opportunity must be provided for understanding — to relate new facts to existing knowledge.
Students should be provided with information on their progress during their active problem-orientated work.
In practice a combination of teaching methods and media can be expected to provide the best basis for programmes of library user education, different methods being adapted to different parts of the programme and to the teachers and students concerned.
EDUCATION FOR ONLINE INFORMATION RETRIEVAL
Introduction
As long ago as 1973, Lancaster pointed out that: ‘a critical factor affecting the success or failure of an online information retrieval system is the effectiveness of the procedures employed to teach people how to use the facilities’.
Up to 1980, online education was primarily directed towards intermediaries, but in recent years an increasing amount of attention is being devoted to teaching end-users how to carry out online searching.
During the last ten years there has been a rapid growth in availability of computer-based online information retrieval systems.
Databases — computer-stored information files — are produced by many organizations, such as the American Chemical Society (Chemical abstracts ), the American Psychological Association (Psychological abstracts ), the US National Library of Medicine (Index medicus ) etc.
These databases are now widely accessible for information searching from local terminals which are linked to the central computer store via a telecommunication network.
The first generally available databases were often produced as a stage in the computer-based printing of abstract and index publications and contained, therefore, bibliographic references.
Other types of information are also available: information about on-going and recently completed research projects (the Smithsonian Science Information Exchange), information on currently available grants, information on patents, factual information stores — fact databanks — have been produced within a number of subject fields, such as the Chemical Information System for mass spectrometry and crystallography, Toxicology Data Bank (TDB) and the Registry of Toxic Effects and Chemical Substance (RTECS) for information on toxicity, the Electronics Components Data Bank, and Business International for marketing and statistical data.
The use that will be made of the online information retrieval systems depends in part on the education of users about the availability and functioning of this method of information retrieval.
The growth in computer-based online information retrieval has been accompanied by an ever-increasing number of promotion, training and education courses.
A survey of online educational and training programmes, organized by database producers, systems operators and academic institutions, has been carried out by Keenan in 1976 and 1977, for the Commission of the European Economic Communities.
This study was updated and extended to include the United States and Canada, in 1978.
Keenan describes a considerable number of programmes, training courses, seminars and printed instructional material and concludes that ‘There is a great need for rationalization and cooperation between the systems, services and producers to determine the responsibility for promotion, training and educational requirements for effective use of online services’.
In the Annual review of  information  science and technology , McCarn (1978) and Wanger (1979) have reviewed training and education for online information retrieval and Caruso (1981) has written about computer aids to learning online retrieval.
Also in 1981, Tedd described teaching aids developed and used for education and training for online searching.
Hawkins has produced the Online information retrieval bibliography, 1964–1979 and this has been supplemented by annual updates, which include a section ‘user education and training’.
The fourth update (1981) and the fifth update (1982) contained 41 and 49 references respectively under the heading ‘user education and training’.
The aim of this chapter is to examine the goals and objectives for online user education and to suggest and give examples of methods, media and training programmes suitable for achieving these goals and objectives.
Groups involved in online education
Several groups are concerned in online orientation, training and education (see figure 14):
1
database producers
2
systems operators
3
institutions responsible for terminal operation, for example libraries or information centres within academic institutions
4
library schools
5
intermediaries
6
end-users
In 1976, Williams identified a similar set of groups as being concerned with online education, training and marketing programme s:
1
database producers
2
database processors
3
search service managers
4
searchers/intermediaries
5
users.
The motivation for each of these groups was analysed and shown to vary considerably.
Williams pointed out that, in many cases, motivation for providing or taking part in training or education was, at least in part, financial, and closely linked to the sale of a specific product — database or information system.
These differences in motivation would naturally lead to differences in formulations of objectives by the various groups.
As has been pointed out in Chapter Two, an integrated education programme should be based on the views of all the people participating in the various educational processes, but the final success of a given course depends, to a large extent, on the motivation of the students.
The goals and objectives should, therefore, be in close accordance with the needs of that group.
Thus particular attention must be given to the needs of the target population — the end-users and intermediaries.
An attempt has therefore been made to formulate goals and objectives for online user education from this point of view.
Goals and objectives for online user education
Goals and objectives can be divided into three main groups: cognitive, concerned with understanding; affective, concerned with feelings and attitudes; and psychomotor, concerned with co-ordinated motor activity.
All three of these types of goals and objectives are involved in online user education.
Thus, in the cognitive domain, the user should know how to make use of specific databases and information systems for information retrieval.
In the affective domain, objectives are concerned with how the user feels about using the system and if he/she continues to use this method of information retrieval after training.
Psychomotor objectives are concerned with activities such as the use of terminals and modems.
An online education programme can be divided into two main parts.
Orientation is concerned with enabling the user to learn of the existence of computer-based information retrieval and the services available (what is available,where the searching can be carried out and  how a search is carried out).
Orientation is also concerned with the creation of a positive attitude to this kind of information retrieval.
Instruction is concerned with enabling the user to learn in detail how to carry out computerized information retrieval.
It is possible to express the goals and objectives for online user education in terms of the two main ‘student’ groups — the end-users (E) and the intermediaries (I).
Main goals
(E)
To enable an end-user to carry out online information searches, either himself or with the help of an intermediary, within his own subject field, as, and when, required in connection with information needs.
(I)
To enable an intermediary to carry out online information searches, for end-users, within many different subject fields, from the available databases, on the various information retrieval systems.
It can be seen that these two main goals overlap to a considerable extent, but that emphasis for the end-user lies within a subject area and is therefore closely dependent on subject knowledge, whereas emphasis for the intermediary lies on breadth of knowledge — on the coverage and organization of many databases and the operation of a number of processing systems.
The intermediary must be able to interpret the needs of the end-user and to understand and describe subject content within a large number of subject areas.
The similarities and differences between the two groups can be seen even more clearly if an attempt is made to formulate specific short-term objectives.
Objectives for online orientation
After orientation the student should:
1
Be aware of the existence of computer-based online methods for information retrieval.
2
Have some knowledge of the type of information available — for example bibliographic information, factual information.
3
Be aware of the relationship between computer-based and manual methods of information retrieval.
4
Be aware of a place, or places, where online searches can be carried out.
5
Have the ability to understand the general principles for how to carry out an online information search.
These first five objectives are cognitive and common for both end-users and intermediaries.
They are followed by a very important affective objective.
After orientation, the end-user should: Want to carry out an online information search, either alone, or with the help of an intermediary.
After orientation the intermediary should: Want to extend the general knowledge obtained according to objectives 1–5, in order to carry out searches on may different databases, via different processing systems, for end-users.
As the objectives for online orientation are so similar for both end-users and intermediaries, it is reasonable to assume that orientation programmes can be produced which can be useful in the teaching of both groups.
Short-term objectives for instruction in online information retrieval
The short-term objectives for instruction in online information retrieval, for end-user and intermediaries, are set out in a user-orientated manner in table 3.
As can be seen from the table, many of the specific objectives are similar for the two groups.
This means that it should be possible to design training modules that will be equally useful in the training of end-users and intermediaries.
Such modules could be devised for the cognitive objectives 2, 3 and part of 6 and 7, and for the psychomotor objectives 3 and 4.
The intermediary requires a greater depth in instruction.
An end-user need only deal with information retrieval within a limited area.
The production of instruction and training programmes suitable for the use of both end-users and intermediaries would result in considerable savings in production costs.
Methods
Having defined the goals and objectives for online training and education, it is necessary to choose suitable methods and media for implementation.
As online information retrieval is an interactive process, special attention must be paid to methods which permit the display and experience of this interaction.
The general factors affecting the learning process: motivation, understanding, activity, feedback on progress made, auditory and visual stimulation, control of speed of instruction, and student-teacher and student-student interaction, have been described in Chapter Three.
The presence of as many of these factors as possible facilitates effective learning, whether of manual or of online methods for information   retrieval.
The methods which have been described in detail in Chapter Three will be dealt with briefly here and emphasis will be placed on methods particularly suitable for online training.
Lectures, seminar and demonstrations
While lectures can be used as a stimulus or to ‘set the scene’, the lecture has the severe disadvantage that without adequate equipment for display, the interactive element of online searching cannot be presented.
Small group methods such as seminars or demonstrations appear to be more suitable for teaching about online IR.
In demonstrations of searches, it is essential to ensure that the audience can actually see the search being carried out — all too often one sees a large group of students clustered round a single teletype terminal.
Group size must be adjusted to the available display possibilities.
Use of suitably placed video-monitors greatly improves display potential, and when the cost of this equipment is compared with the cost of staff hours for teaching, it can be seen that provision of suitable display equipment is a relatively cheap way of increasing the cost-effectiveness of an online teaching programme.
Audio-visual media
In order to demonstrate online information retrieval, it is necessary to be able to show moving images generated in the computer search, thereby creating a feeling of reality.
Films and video-tapes can be used to convey both motion and colour.
Films are expensive to produce and update, and are therefore only within the range of the large commercial systems operators or database producers.
The European Space Agency information retrieval organization, in Frascati, Italy, produced a film on information retrieval, as did the Institute of Scientific Information, Philadelphia.
Video-tapes of searches have been made by many organizations and institutions of higher education.
One of the problems in the use of video-tapes is the lack of standardization and resulting incompatibility between equipment for the different systems.
The DIALOG Information Services, California produce a DIALOG video-tape in three different formats — U-matic, Beta and VHS.
Multi-media audio-visual teaching packages have been produced for use with the MEDIATRON unit developed by Vickery and Pratt at the University of London, in 1977.
The MEDIATRON is a modified stereo-cassette recorder, which is designed to carry out simultaneous recording of audio-signals, trigger pulses for photographic slides and  digital signals from a computerized information retrieval system.
This allows for the display of a recorded online search, with voiced commentary and explanatory slides.
(See figure 15).
MEDIATRON presentations have been developed by Vickery and Batten, Keenan and Fjallbrant.
The technique permits a highly realistic presentation of replicas of searches.
The equipment is relatively cheap and simple to use.
The advantages of films, video-tapes and MEDIATRON programmes are that they allow the careful preparation of material which is recorded and so can be used many times.
It is possible to record a search which is designed to emphasize particular features of an information system, or a particular database.
These audio-visual methods have the added advantage of being independent of the availability of the system.
They can be used even when the host computer/node/telecommunication lines are down.
Anyone who has given online demonstrations and experienced systems breakdown, will appreciate the advantage of having alternative ready prepared demonstration material!
The disadvantage of recorded searches is that they do not allow the student personally to experience the interactive capacity of a computer-based information retrieval system.
Recorded searches, displayed via audio-visual media, would appear to be particularly suitable for demonstrations such as those needed in orientation programmes.
Self-instructional programmes have been developed for use with the MEDIATRON unit.
The user is verbally instructed by the program to  carry out various operations on the terminal, and user response is compared with the programmed correct answer.
During the use of such programs, the user becomes familiar with the layout of the keyboard and typing in information, as well as with search program commands.
These self-instructional programs can be produced in modules suitable for both the end-user and the intermediary.
They provide an inexpensive method for the realization of psychomotor objectives together with some of the cognitive objectives for online instruction.
Printed material
Printed material, available in many forms, has the advantage that it is available for use, as and when required.
Students can work at their own pace and repetition is possible.
There is a wide range of printed material dealing with online information retrieval:
promotional leaflets describing systems and databases
newsletters
system user manuals
database user manuals
sample searches
handy reference tools such as check lists of commands etc
thesauri
structured workbooks
textbooks
In 1981, Unruh carried out a study of database user aids which includes a list of examples.
Unruh found that the commercial database vendors provided more reference material than either non-profit or government producers, with the exception of controlled vocabularies.
The latter are available in a range of forms — from simple lists of terms with ‘use/used for’ references as, for example, Pollution Abstracts User Aid and BYGGDOK term list, to thesauri such as the INSPEC Thesaurus with clearly defined structural relationships between terms.
The systems manuals contain both information on system commands and procedures and detailed descriptions of the available databases.
Both systems operators and database producers give out newsletters in which changes and ‘new’ techniques are introduced.
Wanger et al.found, in 1976, that about half the searchers who learned to use online systems informally, first learned from the user manuals.
This gives an indication of the potential impact of this type of instructional material.
Many of the products described above are produced and distributed by the systems operators or the database vendors.
Such products are often of excellent educational design, but they do not provide comparisons between competing systems or databases.
There is a need for objective textbooks that will help both end-users and intermediaries to compare the advantages and disadvantages of different systems for information retrieval.
During recent years a number of textbooks on online searching have been published, for example Henry et al.
Online searching: an introduction in 1980 and the textbook by Cochrane and Meadow Basics of online searching in 1981.
The latter includes many examples of database descriptions and search aids.
A somewhat shorter textbook was written by Fenichel and Hogan Online searching: a primer also in 1981.
Printed material, in all its diversity of forms, is one of the cheapest and most effective methods for individual instruction about the various aspects of computerized information retrieval.
Printed material, however, has the disadvantage that it does not give the user the opportunity to experience interactive searching.
Computer assisted instruction (CAI)
Online information retrieval is an interactive dynamic process.
It would appear likely that some form of Computer Assisted Learning would have considerable educational potential for instruction and training in online information searching.
The objectives for instruction in online information retrieval have been outlined above.
A method is needed for the rationalization of the instruction, in terms of sequencing, presentation and feedback as to progress.
Computer Assisted Instruction (CAI) can be used to present the subject matter in logical online searches as an articulated hierarchy of tasks.
The user can receive instruction in a number of cognitive modes, whilst at the same time training in the use of the tools — modems and terminals — and experiencing the interaction of an online system.
A review of ‘computer aids to learning online retrieval’ has been written by Caruso in 1981.
This extends the earlier more general overview on education and training for online searching written by Wanger in 1979.
Computers can be used in a number of ways to assist users:
1
as a training or instruction device (CAI) in which the computer acts as a link between the instruction programme and the student.
The instruction programme can be either linear or branched.
In the former the student is given one unit of instruction and then tested.
In the latter the student is routed to appropriate parts of the instruction programme based on the responses made and the learning need.
The branched design utilizes the interactive capacity of the computer more fully than the simpler linear mode;,
2
as an interface between the user and the real online system.
A computer is used to simplify the search procedure and process for the user, for example by translating commands in one language into commands appropriate for other systems;
3
to provide practice on a real online system using a subset of a database or several databases;
4
by providing diagnostic messages and responding to the HELP command during online searching.
These features which have been originally built into online systems to improve system performance are of considerable instructional value to searchers.
CAI Programmes
At the National Library of Medicine (NLM) an early CAI program was designed at the beginning of the seventies in conjunction with the  George Washington University Medical Centre.
This program was called ***MEDLEARNF*** and its testing by novice users has been described by Soben and Tidball in 1974.
This early CAI program was further developed to form the software package known as *MEDLEARN* (Eisenberg et al.1978).
*MEDLEARN* is used to provide training in the use of MEDLINE-MEDLARS (Medical Literature Analysis and Retrieval System) online.
*MEDLEARN* gives tutorial dialogue, drill and practice and testing.
In addition, two MEDLINE simulations are available, in which the student has the opportunity to formulate and execute a search and have it evaluated.
*MEDLEARN* is maintained on the NLM computer in Washington and it can be accessed via TYMNET or TELENET.
Kassebaum and Leiter state that *MEDLEARN* is used by about 400 users per year, with 200 connect hours per month.
It has been noted at the NLM that there are an increasing number of end-users — medical practitioners — who are interested in using the MEDLINE system themselves.
Another early use of CAI for online instruction was at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, as part of Project Intrex.
Amongst other things, the computer was used to display a conventional set of instructions that could equally well have been provided in a printed form.
The Intrex findings showed that users had a strong preference for online instruction over offline manuals (Marcus et al).
Mogdham found, in 1974, that a thirty minute tutorial program, available on a campus computer, was ‘a far more effective medium than printed instructions’ in teaching transient users searching on the New York Times Information Bank, at the University of Pittsburgh.
Caruso, also working at the University of Pittsburgh has developed the TRAINER program of computer assisted instruction.
TRAINER has seven tutorial modules for teaching the most commonly used commands of the DIALOG and ORBIT search languages.
File selection and search practice are carried out on two emulated systems (DIALOG and ORBIT).
Caruso states that ‘As the trainee uses the emulators, he learns to relegate the problems of command language and syntax to a background level of processing, and to focus his conscious thinking on interpretation of system feedback for more effective exploitation of the particular file being searched’.
TRAINER provides instruction in terminal use, telecommunications protocol, access procedures and logging in.
TRAINER has been used at a number of institutions (Caruso 1981).
It is available through the EDUNET network to some 150 colleges and universities in the USA.
Use has been made of CAI for training at the Library of Congress in the use of the SCORPIO (Subject Content Oriented Retriever for Processing Information Online) and MUMS (the Multiple-Use MARC System).
End-user training in the use of SCORPIO has been developed by Griffith and Norton.
Use has been made of PLATO software.
PLATO is the acronym for Programmed Logic for Automated Teaching Operations.
Use of the PLATO CAI program was started in 1980 and the tutorial runs for six to seven hours.
Comparison with teaching in a traditional classroom course of the same length of time led to the use of CAI for all the SCORPIO training.
Use of PLATO has the disadvantage that special PLATO terminals have to be used for the instruction; this means that users cannot be taught in their own congressional offices and carry out the training as and when required.
PLATO has been used for other library user education applications such at teaching the use of online catalogues (see Chapter Three).
At the Central Information Service at the University of London, Vickery has developed a series of interactive online simulation programs using microcomputers — the Commodore PET and the Superbrain.
These programs include ‘DIALOG with PET’, MicroBLAISE, MEDLINE and ELHILL command language and ‘Search Strategy’— an interactive self-teaching program for use on the Commodore PET microcomputer.
The program ‘Search Strategy’ is intended to teach new users search strategy design for online systems which make use of Boolean logic.
At the University of Sheffield, Wood has been responsible for the design and development of a number of simulations of online services: FOSSILS, a simulation of DIALOG, BLAISERS a simulation of BLAISE MARC, MUTE-MEDLINE User Training Exercise and SSDC a simulation of SDC.
These computer programs have been written in BASIC by postgraduate students at the Department of Information Studies, and they are mounted on a Prime 400 minicomputer.
The programs have been successfully transferred to a wide range of computers including microcomputers.
Training modules in the use of ESA-QUEST and CCL have recently been produced at Sheffield.
This series includes nine modules of increasing complexity.
In Britain there has been considerable development of teaching aids for online education and training.
This is largely due to support provided by the British Library Research and Development Division which during 1978–1980 funded projects in seven UK library schools based on the use of the HP2645A.
A variety of demonstration programs and interactive programs have been produced.
In France a CAI program has been developed at the Claude Bernard University in Lyon for use in teaching how to use PASCAL with QUEST Marx et al.are working on CAI programs for new and non-frequent users of CANCERNET.
The CAI consists of four modules:
1
Basic principles of online searching
2
Initiation to online searching
3
Improved study of this software
4
Use of a specific database.
So far module 2 has been realized.
It consists of six parts: Connection commands; selection of a database; constitution and use of indexes; truncation and direct searches in inverted files; use of Boolean operators; online and offline prints.
The Individualized Instruction for Data Access (IIDA) developed at the Drexel University School of Library and Information Science and the Franklin Research Center, Philadelphia, contains a CAI instructional mode.
As with the TRAINER device IIDA provides training for the user and includes a practice mode, but during the latter the student using IIDA is connected to the DIALOG information system.
IIDA uses the following command types for instructional purposes:
1
Index search (EXPAND SELECT w/single term)
2
Logic formation (SELECT w/full-text capability, COMBINE, etc)
3
Record display (TYPE)
4
Procedural (BEGIN, LOGOFF, FILE)
5
Diagnostic (HELP, EXPLAIN, etc).
The first three of these categories are represented in the order of the IIDA tutorials (Meadow et al.1982).
A limited number of commands are taught, then users are encouraged to start on ‘real’ searching.
CAI possesses many advantages for online user instruction.
Students work at their own individual paces.
They participate actively in the learning process and receive direct feedback as to the progress they are making.
It is also possible for teaching staff to obtain a record of the student's progress.
One of the objections frequently made about CAI is that it does not permit student-student interaction.
This objection can easily be overcome by allowing two students to work together at the terminal — a method which appears to facilitate learning.
In this co-operative situation, the students often help each other solve simple problems about terminal operation etc without having to ask for advice from a teacher.
One very important advantage in using CAI packages for online user training is that they reduce the ‘stress’ feeling, which is present in the use of real online systems.
The use of such systems  involves high costs for telecommunications, database royalties and CPU time.
The feeling that the instruction is costing £X per minute creates a stress element which is very disadvantageous in learning situations.
End-user online interfaces — aids for the user
In recent years considerable effort has been devoted to making the computerized information system more ‘user friendly’, that is, simpler to use in order to carry out efficient information retrieval.
One approach has been the development of a computerized intermediary, or interface, between the end-user and the information retrieval system.
An example of such a computerized search aid is the CONIT — COnnector for Network Information Transfer developed by Marcus at the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, MIT.
Users make their requests in a simple command language.
These requests are translated by the computerized intermediary into the appropriate command language of the IR system to be used.
The search aids include a search save process and a multiple database/system regeneration and repeat facility, an automated search technique developed from natural-language phrases via stemming and Boolean AND operation to automatically give a variety of searches based on the original phrase, aids to searching a number of individual databases, and a facility for automatic database selection.
Marcus and Reintjes carried out a detailed analysis of the use of CONIT by end-users with no previous experience of computerized information retrieval systems.
It was found that end-users were able to master the basic commands of the interface sufficiently well to be able to retrieve references on search topics within their fields of interest.
Marcus and Reintjes attributed the success of the end-users to the use of ‘a simple command language, adequate online instruction, and a simplified natural language, keyword/stem approach to searching’.
They concluded that user-friendly interfaces can encourage the use of existing computerized IR systems in a cost-effective manner, particularly for inexperienced end-users.
The IIDA system — Individualized Instruction for Data Access — has been briefly described above, with special reference to its training mode.
In addition, IIDA functions as an interface — an assistance mode — in which diagnostic procedures are applied to users' commands and responses.
Messages to the user are generated when IIDA ‘recognizes’ an error or poor search procedure.
The IIDA system was  tested on a group of industrial end-users in 1980.
The following comments were made: ‘The most significant conclusion is that there is a great interest in online searching by both scientists and engineers’; ‘The study participants seemed to like using IIDA and online searching, which tends to support one of our hypotheses that end-users will like the idea of doing their own simple searches’.
Further experiments with IIDA have been carried out and Chapman (1981) concluded that the use of IIDA as the sole training method produced searchers who used similar patterns of searching, whereas the use of another training method plus IIDA appeared to produce searchers with more ‘varied’ styles of searching.
One of the difficulties in designing this type of interface has been pointed out by Caruso, in that the design of IIDA was finalized prior to DIALOG's introduction of SS — Select Steps command — so these are not included in IIDA.
At the Information Retrieval Research Laboratory of the University of Illinois, Preece and Williams have worked on the development of a microcomputer-based intelligent terminal for interface to a model search system.
User aids are envisaged as part of the model.
A prototype The Searcher's Workbench (TSW) has been produced and the design of a production version considered.
Another approach to creating a user-friendly system has been worked on by Doszkocs at the National Institute of Health: CITE (Current Information Transfer in English) is a natural language query capability for the MEDLINE database.
With the aid of CITE, the search query can be presented in English in free form — as sentences, phrases, lists of terms etc.
No special syntax forms are imposed on the searcher.
The CITE system translates the original query into MESH terms and allocates weights based on the frequency of occurrence in the lists of postings.
Searching is performed and the retrieved documents are displayed in a ranked order, according to the satisfaction of the expressed search query as represented by the terms processed.
In Europe, in 1981, there were over 500 databases and databanks available from over 50 hosts.
Over 30 of these hosts were accessible via EURONET.
Right from the early planning of EURONET, it was clear that the availability of a considerable variety of user-system interfaces could present severe problems for users.
It was therefore decided to design and develop a modular software package which could be implemented within the various existing information retrieval systems.
This package would enable the user to make use of a common search language for addressing the host systems — the Common  Command Language (CCL).
This CCL was not based on the capabilities of any one system, and it attempted to provide for all the facilities through any existing bibliographic information system.
The aim is to have all hosts implement CCL, and by 1981 some 12 hosts had done so.
Larsson has described the implementation of CCL within the 3RIP search system at the Royal Institute of Technology Library in Stockholm.
Auber has compared two implementations of CCL on GRIPS/ DIRS3 (GRIPS — General Relation-based Information Processing System written by DIMDI — the German Institute for Medical Documentation) and the European Space Agency's IRS' Eurolanguage.
Auber points out that the minor inconsistencies can cause the user confusion and makes a plea for standardization.
The use of CCL as a common type of interface for many systems is based on the provision of translating software somewhere in the communication channel between host and the user, rather than in the user's own terminal equipment, as in the previous examples.
In recent years a number of microcomputer software packages have been written to assist the searcher in carrying out online information retrieval.
The features of such systems are:
Automatic log-on procedure.
This involves the storage of terminal identifiers, network user identifiers, addresses and passwords.
Offline search profile construction.
This allows for the careful construction and editing of search statements and profiles, before block transmission at optimum speed to the host computer.
Storage of search output on disks to allow editing or reformatting to meet individual requirements.
Examples of such systems are the USERKIT developed by Williams, the SMART terminal package designed by Livsey at Leeds Polytechnic for a Tandy TRS-80 model 1 Microcomputer, and a program developed by Petrie and Cowie, at the University of Strathclyde, for a Z-80 based microcomputer with CP/M.
This type of help via an intelligent terminal or microcomputer is particularly valuable for the relatively unskilled end-users, in that it not only reduces the time taken to enter and transmit a search, but also allows correction of any typing or strategy errors before going online, thus removing some of the stress commonly associated with online searching.
Online instruction via a real live system
The ultimate goal of online instruction, for both end-users and intermediaries, is to be able to carry out information searches online.
Therefore, at some point in the instruction, it is essential to practise on a real system.
This forms part of the ‘learning by doing’ concept, which is also important in other forms of library user education.
The need for live online instruction has been recognized by systems operators, who have provided various aids for teaching.
In the MEDLINE system, for example, the user can interactively ask for instructions at the beginning of the search, or for assistance during the search, when part of the original instructions are given as requested.
The System Development Corporation provides an online database over databases, DBI (the DataBase Index) where the user can type in the subject area of interest and receive information as to the appropriate databases, ranked in order of suitability for searching.
DIALOG's DIALINDEX can be used in a similar way.
Some systems operators provide so-called tutorial files, in which users can practise searches at low cost.
The Dialog Information System, for example, provides the ONTAP files for Online Training and Practice.
ONTAP originated at the ERIC Clearinghouse on Information Resources at Syracuse University.
There are a number of ONTAP files available: ONTAP ERIC (Educational Resources Information Center); ONTAP CA SEARCH and ONTAP CHEMNAME; ONTAP COMPENDEX; ONTAP ABI/INFORM; ONTAP PTS PROMPT; and ONTAP DIALINDEX.
The ONTAP ERIC file includes a set of presearched questions of varying difficulty, so that the user may compare his/her results with those of an expert.
Recall and precision scores are calculated for each search.
All the system features are available on the ONTAP files, with the exception of print features and save and store searches.
The European Space Agency Information Retrieval System provides three practice files for INSPEC, PASCAL and CHEMABS.
System operators and database producers provide various training courses for new and advanced users, where, in many cases, ‘free’ search time is given to the participants.
One of the most common ways of providing training for intermediaries is by letting them observe and work with a trained searcher.
This is usually regarded as an essential part of intermediary training.
However, as was pointed out by Mogdham, in 1975, there are disadvantages with this method, the most obvious being the high cost of this form of training.
Other disadvantages have been described by McCarn  of the National Library of Medicine, in connection with the training of the medical community in the use of MEDLINE.
The staffs lack of ease in dealing with the novice user.
Inexperience in teaching.
Preservation of the status symbol for the instructor (who may feel that he may no longer be of service if the ultimate user becomes fully proficient in the handling of the system).
The instructor's low estimate of patron capability.
The instructor's personal interpretation of the ‘proper’ use of the system.
Real ‘hands-on’ training in online searching is an important element in the education of end-users in computerized information retrieval.
Students are highly motivated , participate actively in the learning process and receive feedback as to the progress made.
Teacher-student interaction is present and the actual carrying out of an online search increases the students' understanding of the concepts of information retrieval.
The high costs involved in this form of education are sometimes given as a reason for not allowing end-users this form of training.
The use of search aid tools such as user-friendly interfaces, together with the possibilities for cheaper training rates should lead to increased online training for end-users.
At Chalmers University some 600 undergraduates and 50 postgraduates now receive hands-on training in online information retrieval every year.
This has been made possible by the use of Scandinavian databases, available via SCANNET, and the negotiation of special cheaper rates with systems operators and database producers who are concerned with marketing their products to potential future users.
Conclusion
Choice of teaching methods and media depends on the learning/teaching situation, the subject material, the students and the teachers.
The methods and media chosen for online education should preferably involve the student in active participation.
Student motivation is of prime importance and feedback as to progress increases the learning effect.
Small-group methods, individual audio-visual programmes, computer-assisted instruction and direct online training would seem to be particularly suitable for online education.
Choice of method is often dependent, not only on the learning effects, but also on availability of equipment and cost of use.
Whatever the methods chosen for online education, it is desirable to carry out careful evaluation to study the effects of the instruction.
EVALUATION IN A USER EDUCATION PROGRAMME
This chapter provides an introduction to evaluation in library user education.
The purpose of evaluation is discussed and is followed by a brief description of the targets, scope, methods, and timing.
Examples of previous evaluation of library user instruction are then given.
The final part of the chapter is a case study of the evaluation work carried out in connection with the development of a programme of user education at Chalmers University of Technology Library.
This example of evaluation is related to the parameters laid down in the first part of the chapter.
What is evaluation?
Evaluation has been described in many different ways by educational research workers.
Many of the definitions given are very general, for example that of Scriven: ‘evaluation attempts to answer certain types of questions about certain entities’.
This type of definition is not very helpful for an understanding of evaluation.
Evaluation is concerned with the collection of information about the effects of an educational course or programme.
It often involves the comparison of observed effects with expectations or intentions.
It is important to consider why evaluation is carried out, when attempting to understand what evaluation is.
Evaluation is concerned with the collection and analysis of information about the input, in terms of education potential, the variables affecting the educational process, and the end product or output.
Evaluation can be directed towards the various aspects of the educational course or programme.
Thus attention may be focused on the educational process or on the output or product of this process.
The purpose of evaluation is to collect and analyse information that can be used for rational decision making.
This definition of the role of evaluation does not include the element of judgement, which is part of educational  decision making.
Stake has pointed out that ‘most evaluation specialists have chosen not to judge’ even though many educationalists try to get them to do this.
Scriven has charged evaluators with the responsibility for judging the merit of an educational practice.
He makes the point that it is not sufficient to ask ‘How well does the course achieve its goals?’ one must consider whether the goals are worthwhile or not: ‘How good is the course?’
The latter question is concerned with a judgement of the aims of the course rather than with the functioning of the course.
It is apparent that course evaluation and judgement of aims both form part of the wider area of educational decision making.
Many recent evaluation studies do include a judgement element.
In the context of library user education, evaluation is also concerned with the economic use of specific libraries and information systems in general.
Does the library education programme result in an increase in, or more efficient use of, the library?
The goals and objectives for a successful programme of library user education must be based on a synthesis of the needs of students, academic staff and library staff.
Evaluation, which is based on attempts to measure the realization of pre-specified goals and objectives, must, in this case be multi-faceted , concerned with library use and information skills, attitudes to libraries, effects of various instructional programmes, and use of a given library or information resources.
The effects of educational courses and programmes become harder to evaluate the further one moves from the initial point of instruction.
The purpose of evaluation has been described by Astin and Panos as follows: ‘the fundamental purpose of evaluation is to produce information that can be used in educational decision making’.
Educational decisions hike other administrative decisions) involve choices between available alternatives which are based on both educational and economic factors, and which often involve subjective judgement and value decisions.
The role of evaluation is to provide information which can be used for rational decision making.
Thus evaluation can be used for decisions about whether to continue or terminate a given course, about the modification necessary for an existing programme, about the use of various teaching methods to achieve a pre-specified goal, or about the adoption of an innovation.
The targets of evaluation
Evaluation can be directed towards the educational process , for example, the use of certain teaching methods or media, or the functioning of a  specific library instructional course.
Evaluation can also be directed towards the educational product the outcome of one course or of the instructional programme.
The educational course or programme can be diagrammatically represented as in figure 16.
A distinction may be made between assessment and evaluation.
Individual assessment is concerned with the specific achievement of the individual student with regard either to his contemporary student group or to pre-specified goals.
Evaluation is concerned with the effects of a given educational course, programme or system.
In terms of figure 16, assessment is concerned with individual output measurement.
However, as can be seen, total individual output for a given course, with regard to pre-specified goals, can be used in the measurement of the effects of educational processes, if other variables are controlled.
The scope of evaluation
Evaluation can range from the study of details such as the use of given teaching methods or media, through the effects of specific courses, whole library instructional programmes, education within an institution, to the extreme of general educational systems.
An example of the latter is Husén's International study of achievement in mathematics , where the aim was to evaluate differences in achievement in mathematics in    twelve different countries, with regard to such variables as school expenditure, teacher training, type of school organization and degree of urbanization.
Figure 17 (a and b) are diagrammatic representations of the ranges in scope for library user education evaluation viewed from two different aspects.
The effects of educational courses and programmes become more difficult to evaluate the further one moves from the initial point of instruction.
Thus it is relatively easy to measure the immediate learning effects of a given method of instruction but far harder to try to evaluate the influence of a short course in information retrieval on the information gathering habits of the participants, some years later.
Methods of evaluation
Evaluation can be classified according to the method used for the collection and analysis of information.
Three main types of evaluation can be described (cf Howe and Delamont): the psychometric; the sociological or management; the illuminative or responsive.
Psychometric evaluation
Psychometric evaluation has evolved from the psychological discipline.
During the latter part of the nineteenth century and the early part of the twentieth century, the application of quantitative methods of science was extended to psychology and so to education.
This period saw the development of the ‘test’ phenomenon, which culminated in the test boom of the 1920 to 1930 period.
Enthusiasts regarded the tests as providing ‘objective’ information which could be used in assessing the efficiency of a given educational programme or of the teachers.
Psychometric evaluation is based on the assumption that it is possible to expose experimental and control groups to different treatments, while all other variables are controlled, and to measure changes by means of psychometric tests, achievement tests or attitude scales.
Thus the experimental group may be exposed to a new type of physics course, whereas the control group follows the traditional course; in every other respect the two groups are exactly comparable.
Pre-tests and post-tests are given to both groups, and the analysis is concerned with establishing significant differences in the performance of the two groups.
These are then attributed to the variable being studied — the new course.
This method assumes that ‘irrelevant’ variables can be controlled, an assumption which is, in many cases, completely unjustifiable.
In addition, this evaluation procedure is concerned with measuring output in terms of pre-specified goals and no attention is paid to unexpected effects.
Sociological evaluation
The management or sociological approach to educational evaluation has developed from the discipline of industrial sociology.
This method is used in the study of changes in the structure of an organization or the roles of the participants in an educational programme or a specific institution.
This type of evaluation makes use of interviews and questionnaires.
Participant observation is employed in many cases as a complementary method.
Attention is focused on the organization undergoing change, rather than on comparison with any control group.
A recent example of the sociological approach to evaluation is to be seen in Gross's study of the fate of an educational innovation in a specific American primary school.
Illuminative or responsive evaluation
During recent years there has emerged a third type of evaluation which emphasizes participant observation and interviews as a means to  obtaining an overall view of education programmes.
This type of evaluation has been called illuminative evaluation by Parlett and Hamilton, and responsive evaluation by Stake.
Illuminative evaluation is not limited by the initial formulation of aims, but allows for the expression of unexpected results.
The actual implementation of an innovation is regarded as the most important part of the study.
Research is focused on what is actually happening in response to the innovation.
Illuminative evaluation is concerned not so much with testing an educational programme but rather with describing and understanding the way in which the programme works, and how the participants are affected by it.
Observational studies and explorative interviews are often used to obtain this information.
Questionnaires and achievement scores may be used but they are rarely given high priority.
One objection that is raised with regard to this type of evaluation is the difficulty of being objective.
The timing of evaluation
Scriven has pointed out the distinction between formative and summative evaluation.
This distinction is partly based on the timing of the evaluation, and partly on the purpose for which it is intended: formative evaluation is carried out during the development of a course or programme and provides direct feedback about the functioning of the different parts of the programme, thereby giving information which can be used to modify the educational process.
Summative evaluation is concerned with the evaluation of the educational programme as a final product.
Thus formative evaluation provides information which can be used to improve a course, whereas summative  evaluation can be used to provide information about the overall worth of a given course, to help in the decision as to whether or not the course should be continued.
Discussion
The learning/teaching situation is usually complex and dependent on a variety of factors, many of which are random and unpredictable.
Evaluation of the functioning of an educational programme closely parallels the situation in medical diagnosis — evaluation of the functioning of a complex individual.
In both cases it may be difficult to acquire sufficient information for a complete evaluation of the situation.
The actual evaluation/consultation is a factor that may affect the existing situation.
In both cases decisions may have to be taken as a result of the information collected.
In educational evaluation one may attempt to avoid the judgement aspect — but decisions may then have to be  made by some other group, decisions that will be influenced by the information collected and its presentation.
Certain parts of this information can be collected by means of tests, for example in medical diagnosis, blood-pressure measurements, heart rate etc, but other information has to be collected by observation and by means of case histories.
All these ways of acquiring information are valuable and complementary — they contribute to an evaluation of the total situation.
Each method has limitations; it is possible to collect detailed information by means of tests, but if the tests are concerned with some aspect that is of little relevance to the total situation, then the value of the results will be limited.
In many cases it is extremely difficult to carry out tests under truly controlled conditions, because the external conditions are changing throughout the time period in question.
An example of this is to be seen in a developing educational programme.
Detailed observations and discussion provide valuable information but they are time-consuming and therefore expensive.
The evaluation methods chosen will depend on the purpose of the study and the resources available.
However, the greater the variety of the methods used, the greater will be the chance of obtaining a complete picture of the educational course being evaluated, as the interaction of the various methods will produce a ‘triangulation’ effect — the same question being answered in different ways.
The need for the evaluation of library instruction
From the general account of evaluation given above, it will be obvious that all teachers evaluate.
Attempts are made to improve existing courses, either as a result of personal observations, or from discussions with participating students.
During recent years, librarians have become more aware of the need to evaluate programmes of library instruction.
For example, Revill states that ‘there is a great need for proper evaluation of the various teaching methods adopted in the library’, and Lubans has pointed out, in 1972, that ‘the results of evaluation not only present possible alternatives for better programmes but should also provide standards of performance for such instruction’.
In 1976 Brewer and Hills stated that ‘It is time for librarians to take evaluation more seriously and to think more professionally about their teaching commitment’.
Has evaluation kept pace with the growing number of courses and programmes in user education?
In 1974, Lubans observed that ‘instructional programmes in all types of libraries have been infrequently evaluated, their need and effect have not been measured except in a few  isolated cases’.
The authors quoted above, Brewer and Hills, stated that ‘It is significant that there are few references to evaluation in the literature of reader instruction and until very recently they have been virtually non-existent’.
This statement is no longer true in 1983 — there is a growing literature on evaluation in relation to library user education.
Yet there is evidence that evaluation has not kept pace with the development of courses in bibliographic instruction.
In a 1975 survey on library lectures and their evaluation, Hernon found that about two-thirds of the responding libraries were not evaluating their library lecture programmes.
In Lindgren's 1978 survey on user education in liberal arts colleges in the USA half the respondents had tried to evaluate the outcome of their instruction.
This evidence is confirmed by Kirkendall's LOEX data.
In 1979, about a half of the 830 respondents said that they did not evaluate their bibliographic instruction programmes.
Fjallbrant's 1981 survey of user education in Australian academic libraries showed that 40% evaluated the orientation programmes, 60% the manual information retrieval courses and very few libraries evaluated courses in computerized information retrieval.
A corresponding survey, carried out in Sweden in 1981, found that orientation courses had only been evaluated in 8 libraries of 34, one-third of the libraries had evaluated courses in manual information retrieval and about half the libraries with courses in computerized information retrieval had carried out some form of evaluation.
Examination of the bibliographies and handbooks on user education reveals that evaluation is less well documented than other aspects, for example, Lockwood's 1979 bibliography on library instruction has separate headings for ‘Planning a library instruction program’ and for 12 types of ‘Teaching methods and formats’yet no separate heading for evaluation.
Similarly, Renford and Hendrickson's handbook on bibliographic instruction has chapters on ‘Planning for an instructional Program’ and excellent descriptions of methods and types of instruction, yet no chapter on evaluation.
Early review articles on evaluation were written by Stevenson in 1973 is Crossley and Clews in 1974, and Brewer and Hills in 1976.
The Pierian Press Library Orientation Series includes two numbers — four and nine — where evaluation is a major theme.
In 1980, Werking wrote a very useful critical review on evaluating bibliographic education.
This review dealt with why, what and how to evaluate giving a wealth of examples.
The problems inherent in evaluation were discussed.
Werking concluded that ‘It is reasonable to assume that some research may  now more satisfactorily come to terms with library use and its relation to bibliographic education’.
It would appear that, while there is a growing increase in awareness about the importance of evaluation in library user education programmes, many librarians still do not systematically evaluate their programmes.
Examples of evaluation of library user education
The learning/teaching situation implicit in library instruction is complicated and the goals and objectives envisaged by students, academic staff and librarians often differ.
This is particularly marked in the formulation of the broad aims and goals for a programme of user education.
It is, therefore, perhaps not surprising to see that many of the evaluation studies described in the library literature give accounts of the evaluation of specific methods and media which have been used in library instruction rather than evaluation of programmes of instruction.
An example of such evaluation can be seen in the studies on the audiovisual ‘point-of-use’ aids developed at the Barker Engineering Library at MIT, and described by Stevens and Gardner.
Similarly, an evaluation of tape/slide instructional programmes ‘How to find a book’, ‘How to find a periodical’ has been carried out by Lubans at the University of Colorado Libraries.
A research programme concerned with the evaluation of the SCONUL tape/slide instructional programmes produced by a number of British university libraries, has been carried out, from 1973 to 1975, at the Institute for Educational Technology, University of Surrey.
In this evaluation project great emphasis was placed on the formulation of specific objectives.
Use was made of pre- and post-instructional tests to measure short-term learning performance with regard to these objectives.
User attitudes to specific presentations and to the tape/slide method of instruction were also studied.
A recent example of evaluation of tape/slide programmes is the 1977 study of Hall et al.on first-year pharmacy students at Ohio State University, where pre- and post-testing was used to evaluate a tape/slide on reference books.
An interesting technique for improving the effectiveness of tape/slide programmes has been evaluated by Baldwin and Rudolph, 1982, at the University of Toledo.
The use of self-paced and self-guided tours for library user orientation has been evaluated by a number of librarians: Sin 1976, Dash 1977 and Fjällbrant et al.1981.
The use and evaluation of a simulation game  for library user education at Trent Polytechnic Library, UK, has been described by Adams.
The use of videosonic machines for library instruction was evaluated by Genung in 1967.
The effects of computer-assisted  instruction in libraries has been studied and evaluated by, amongst others, Axeen, Culkin, Hansen, Johnson and Plake, Meadow, and Williams and Davis.
These evaluation studies on the use of various media have been directed towards the educational process involved in a specific learning/ teaching situation.
Psychometric methods were used to collect and analyse the information.
Psychometric methods have also been used in comparisons of two or more methods of library instruction.
These comparative studies are particularly prevalent in the USA.
In 1971, Kirk compared two methods for instruction of students in introductory biology: lecture-demonstration and programmed instruction.
This evaluation was carried out by means of performance studies and examinations on library skills and the measurement of students' attitudes towards the programme.
Kirk concluded that neither of the two methods showed superiority over the other.
Kuo carried out a comparison of six versions of library instruction: lecture, audio-taped lecture, tape/slide presentation, television presentation, audio-visual instruction (audio-tutorial plus follow-up lecture, using overhead transparencies), and audiovisual instruction followed by a discussion with a librarian.
Results indicated that the combination of self-paced audio-visual study, followed by verbal discussion with a librarian, was the most effective way of increasing student achievement in the ninety question test designed to measure course retention.
It is interesting to observe that Kuo found that the slide presentation of visual material was more effective than television presentation of the same material.
It is very difficult to provide identical conditions for the measurement of six different forms of instruction, therefore it is not entirely surprising to see that Baldwin and Rudolph found, in contrast to Kuo's results, when comparing a tape/slide show and a library tour, that the former was not necessarily superior as a method of instruction.
Other recent examples of comparative studies are those of Lowe — independent study modules and lecture tours, in 1981.
Phillips and Raup — comparing methods for teaching the use of periodical indexes, in 1979.
Suprenant's 1982 studies on lectures versus programmed instruction, and Weir, 1980 — comparison of the effects of an audio-tutorial method and a lecture/laboratory method in a course on basic reference materials.
Psychometric tests which attempt to measure students' ability to use the library have been developed and made use of primarily in the USA.
These tests have been used for individual student assessment and as instruments for the product evaluation of instructional programmes.
The most widely used of these tests have been described in a review by Bloomfield.
One of the tests constructed during the 1930s is the Peabody Library Information Test designed by Shores and Moore.
Another widely used test is the Feagley Library Orientation Test for College Freshmen designed in 1955 by Ethel M Feagley and others.
Attempts have been made to compare various tests and to examine their reliability and validity.
Thus the Peabody Test was examined by Deer, in 1941, using 1300 students.
He concluded that the test gave satisfactory results for diagnostic purposes.
Perkins carried out a study, in 1964, on the determination of the correlation between the Peabody and the Bennet Library Tests.
Correlation was found to be as low as 0.385.
Criticisms of this type of library test can be made.
They are artificial and do not adequately measure the students' ability to use the complex information tools available and thereby gain the information that would be of use for their studies.
The question can be raised ‘What do the library tests actually measure?’
Bloomfield states that librarians have so constructed tests on library skills that it appears that ‘we librarians have a poor understanding of the value of the library for our students’.
Thus emphasis has often been placed on the use of the card catalogue as a major source for locating material, out of all proportion to its value for obtaining information when compared to other tools for information retrieval.
Werking's 1980 review of the state of the art with regard to evaluation provides an up-to-date account of the use of tests in library user education.
The difficulties in the design of suitable tests for library use — in obtaining information that is of interest to the user — may well be partly due to the aforementioned confusion of objectives between librarians, academic staff, and students.
However difficult it is to measure short-term effects of library instruction, it is far more difficult to measure the long-term effects of the instruction given.
The long-term effect on the student and his/her ability to obtain information, is, however, of much greater interest than the measurement of short-term skills with regard to the use of specific bibliographic tools.
Evaluation studies at Chalmers University of Technology Library, Gothenburg, Sweden
During 1975–1981, a three.stage programme of user education was developed at Chalmers University of Technology Library.
This Programme consists of: orientation for new users; an introductory course in information retrieval for undergraduates; and an advanced course in information retrieval for postgraduates.
The programme was evaluated in a number of different ways, in order to produce a triangulation effect and thereby obtain as full a picture as possible of the functioning of the courses.
As the programme of library education was in a state of active development, many of the methods used were intended to provide formative evaluation on which course modifications could be based.
The part of the programme which had received highest priority was the introductory course in information retrieval for the engineering undergraduates.
As a result there was a corresponding concentration on the evaluation of this course.
The following evaluations were carried out in connection with this programme.
Evaluation of tape/slide material for user instruction
A number of audio-visual tape/slide presentations dealing with various aspects of library user instruction had been produce d under the SCONUL tape/slide programme, at a number of British university libraries.
These presentations are often subject-orientated and the text commentary is always in English.
If it were possible to use this audio-visual material for Swedish students, direct with the English commentaries, it would save considerable time and expense.
For this reason, it was planned to carry out evaluation of this type of material by comparing the performance of an experimental group using a Swedish audio commentary with that of a control group using an English commentary.
In all other respects the two groups were identical.
Pre- and post-tests were administered to both groups and test performance was examined.
Attitude questionnaires were also filled in by both experimental and control groups.
This evaluation is an example of the use of psychometric methods, directed towards a given medium, or process.
The evaluation was carried out in order to provide information for a decision as to whether or not this type of material could be used for the user instruction programme at Chalmers University Library.
It was concluded that it was fully justifiable to use English language tape/slide guides directly, without translation, for Swedish users.
Users also stated that they lied this type of audio-visual material for library instruction.
Evaluation of the undergraduate course in information retrieval
The aim of the various evaluation procedures carried out was primarily to provide direct feedback on the innovatory user instruction course.
Information collected and analysed could then be used to modify the course.
Emphasis was on formative evaluation in connection with the educational process in a specific undergraduate course.
Various methods of evaluation were used and these will be briefly described.
A
Attitude measurement Studies of student attitudes with regard to course content, instructional material, teaching methods, and the organization of the course were carried out.
Students were asked to complete, anonymously, after each course, a three-page questionnaire dealing with the above-mentioned aspects.
In this way students were enabled to compare their observations with their expectations.
This evaluation was directed towards the educational process and made use of the psychometric approach.
The evaluation was of the formative type.
B
Evaluation by achievement Performance measurement was carried out after each series of courses, by means of examination of each student's list of references, in order to see whether the students were able to carry out a practical literature search.
Evaluation was directed towards the product of the course.
Summation of the individual student assessments, according to groups with different motivation as, for example, work on an undergraduate research project, enabled the effect of motivation on performance to be studied.
These student assessments were used as part of the formative evaluation of the course in that they provided information on the functioning of the course as, for example, in the presentation of the references.
C
Evaluation by pre-structured interviews Pre-structured telephone interviews were given to a random sample of students who had taken part in the undergraduate course in information retrieval.
These interviews were intended to provide information as to how well specific objectives, such as the awareness of the tools for information retrieval, had been achieved.
In this evaluation study, psychometric methods were used to examine the product of the course in information retrieval.
The interviews were carried out some ten months after the initiation of the courses, and included students who had taken part in some twenty courses.
Some modifications were made to subsequent courses  as a result of information collected — formative evaluation.
The evaluation could also be regarded as being of the summative type, in that information was given of the functioning of a nearly finalized course.
D
Illuminative evaluation An attempt to carry out an illuminative evaluation of the undergraduate information retrieval course was also made.
Detailed observations were carried out on the behaviour of the students during the actual course, and both students and teachers were interviewed as to their feelings in participating in this form of instruction.
It was hoped that these detailed observations and interviews would give information as to how the course was functioning as a whole and how the different parts were functioning.
This was non-preordinate evaluation, in which it was possible to find out unexpected information.
This form of evaluation was regarded as being a useful complement to the other types.
The information obtained could be used for the modification of the course under development — formative evaluation directed towards the educational process.
Evaluation of the programme of user instruction by the study of changing patterns of library use
In addition to the methods mentioned above, which were used specifically to evaluate the undergraduate information retrieval course, an attempt was made to carry out a long-term study on the use of the library with regard to reasons for use, materials used, success in carrying out literature searches etc.
It was intended to see if the total programme of instruction-orientation, introduction and advanced courses in information retrieval affected the pattern of use of the library over a period of five years.
As priority was given to the undergraduate course in information retrieval during the first year and other conditions remained nearly constant, any changes in the pattern of the use of Chalmers Library during that time could be attributed to the effects of the course of instruction.
Measurement was carried out by means of questionnaires.
Patterns of use obtained after the introduction of the programme of user instruction were compared with the pattern of use obtained for a control group before the start of the innovation.
In this way changing patterns of behaviour of the users of Chalmers University Library, in response to an educational programme, could be studied.
This is an example of the sociological method of evaluation being used for summative evaluation of the products of an educational programme.
Evaluation of the self-instructional orientation programme
Attempts were also made to evaluate the effects of the self-instructional orientation material, by means of observations of how students performed a series of tasks.
Observations on the way in which the tasks were performed, the time taken, and discussions with the students about their problems in orientation were carried out in order to provide information for eventual modification of the programme of orientation.
A combination of psychometric methods and direct observation and discussion was used.
The purpose of the evaluation was formative — for the modification of the process associated with the orientational material.
Preliminary observational studies of the self-instructional material provided for library orientation showed that the material provided was of help to new users, but that it did not, alone, supply adequate orientation information.
This formative evaluation led to the use of a self-paced orientation tour combined with practical exercises.
This orientation method was evaluated by psychometric methods directed towards both process and product.
The evaluation studies showed that self-paced orientation with exercises was a very useful method for introducing students to the use of the library.
Evaluation of the postgraduate course in information retrieval
The advanced course in information retrieval covers some 70 hours of study which includes a considerable part devoted to online information retrieval.
Early evaluation studies were directed towards the use of specific media — introductory MEDIATRON-multimedia programmes for online information retrieval.
Formative evaluation was carried out by psychometric methods directed towards both process and product.
Evaluation of the course with regard to course content, instructional material, teaching methods and organization of the course have been carried out, by means of a questionnaire — formative evaluation, directed towards the process, based on psychometric methods.
At the present time studies directed towards the educational product are being carried out, and long-term evaluation of both the introductory and advanced courses in information retrieval is in progress.
Summary
This chapter started with a discussion on evaluation and its purpose, together with a description of evaluation according to the four  parameters of targets, scope, methods and timing.
The advantage of using several methods of evaluation for a given educational programme was pointed out.
A brief review of existing work in library user instruction evaluation was then given and related to the parameters previously described.
The need for evaluation was realized by librarians, and obviously some evaluation was taking place, but few systematic attempts to evaluate programmes of user instruction by different methods had been made.
Against this background, the evaluation carried out in connection with the development of the programme of user instruction at Chalmers University of Technology Library has been described and related to the parameters previously given.
Evaluation has been carried out in several different ways, in an attempt to study the value of the innovatory programme, and long-term measurement of the effects of the educational programme has been started.
USER EDUCATION IN PUBLIC LIBRARIES
Introduction
One does not readily associate public libraries with user education, possibly because the educational role of the public library service is generally seen as secondary to its role as the provider of leisure-time reading and other services.
Yet public libraries offer a wide range of services to a diverse number of customers some of which have sophisticated information needs and problems.
For example, they have had and still have close links with well-defined groups like schoolchildren whose educational needs in terms of libraries and information cannot always be met within the environment of the school.
The business and industrial community too has always relied on public libraries to provide a service to meet their specialist needs.
But if we regard user education in its broadest sense and include library promotion and publicity within this umbrella term, we find that public libraries are very much involved.
In fact in the area of library promotion, ie bringing an awareness of library and information services to non-users, public libraries are far ahead of other library sectors.
The loose association of the public library and its public (compared with, for example, the university library and the university) has traditionally required it to be as visible as possible; and this is now further stimulated by the need to publicize an extended range of new services and by the need to justify its existence in an increasingly harsh economic climate (particularly in the USA and the UK) where there are competing claims for public money from the various public services.
Bluntly, if the services and stock of the public library are under-used, they are vulnerable to financial cuts.
Public library user education for schoolchildren
It is hardly surprising that public libraries have been traditionally active in user education for schoolchildren.
In many countries public libraries  and school education have often been administratively closely linked in that they draw financial support from the same source.
In the UK, for example, local authorities are financially responsible for both the public libraries and the schools in their area.
At one time the local authority would have provided only one library service — the public library — and if a school did have its own library it would probably have been administered by the public library.
In the USA the literature of user education indicates that schools were heavily dependent on public libraries for library services in general and for user education in particular, right up to the 1930s.
Until the school library service emerged in the USA about this time, their public libraries also, incidentally, took the responsibility of training teachers in the use of libraries as well, partly to give teachers the ability to run school libraries and to offer library instruction to their pupils.
Since the Second World War and as school libraries have become more common, public library user education for schoolchildren has become less overt, but nonetheless is still widely practised because user education is itself a growing concern in schools.
Yet in spite of the increasing number of school libraries (and the growing number of professional librarians running them, albeit still an unsatisfactorily small number) the public library can and still does offer a useful user education service to schoolchildren.
The reason is that most school libraries do not have and possibly never will have an adequate range of stock to satisfy the information needs of children in schools.
Modern teaching, with its use of projects and assignments, relies heavily on the use of reference books and newspapers and other periodicals which will largely be found only in the public library.
Thus, although a school library may be able to give instruction in the technique of using the library, eg use of catalogues, classification schemes etc, the experience of the exploitation of a wide range of stock is limited, and the public library has a role in extending this experience.
Many public libraries recognize this need and their programmes for schoolchildren reflect it.
But while the public library is fulfilling this immediate need, they are conscious of the long-term information needs of schoolchildren who will eventually require public library services as adults, and are conscious of the necessity of promoting the public library as a resource in its own right.
Their user education work therefore has a double focus — short-term and long-term library and information needs.
There are many examples of public library involvement in user education for schoolchildren but perhaps one of the most organized (and  the most enduring) is the work done by the School Instruction Service at Sheffield City Libraries.
It has maintained a full-time programme continuously for over forty years.
In some respects the public library has a unique position amongst libraries in user education and the potential for greater success in teaching the use of libraries and information.
Firstly, it has the opportunity to combine successfully, in its dual focus, the short-term and long-term library and information needs of the school users it is instructing: schoolchildren using the public library will one day use it as adults.
A similar dual focus rests uneasily in higher education libraries and invariably has met with failure.
Secondly, since the public library is not strictly tied to the educational requirements of a user education programme in, say, a polytechnic or indeed a school, it can introduce some novelty into its programme which will arouse the excitement o f children.
Therefore, motivation, a key to user education success, can be inspired by novelty, and not be solely dependent on relevance to immediate information needs and curriculum requirements.
From the point of view of what is taught by public libraries in schoolchildren programmes, however, there is now a problem.
It comes as a result of a change in the current school user education thinking — at least in the UK.
Recent research projects have emphasized that, not only should library skills not be taught in isolation from the curriculum, but they should also be taught in close partnership with study skills and communication skills.
This research advocacy has not yet been generally mirrored by practice, but the trend is there.
User education for schoolchildren in public libraries may therefore become increasingly out of step if this policy is pursued more widely.
And (because of their non-educational environment) it is difficult to see how public libraries can meet this requirement, even if they wanted to.
User education programmes for adults
With few exceptions formal or even semi-formal user education programmes for adults are uncommon in the public library sector.
The adult user, although accounting for the largest proportion of public library users, is an amorphous group not clearly definable unless the adults belong to the business community or to some temporarily associative grouping like adult education classes (where indeed there may be some potential for formal user education).
Reference might be made to East European countries where the structure of society and the public library's function in that society is  somewhat different to the Western world.
User education there may be a somewhat broader concept than would be permissible in the West, but their attitude even in our recognized parameters of user education would find acclaim here in their insistence that user education should be a continuous process for everyone from infants through to senior citizens,
But in the UK and USA, for instance, examples of public library user education for adults are few.
Leaving aside for the moment the special interest groups which might be more amenable to user education programmes, let us look at work with adults with no allegiance to the public library other than that they are committed users of the service.
These words, ‘allegiance’ and ‘committed users’are used deliberately because they are appropriate to many of the programmes for adults.
The public library needs both in an uncertain financial climate, and although it would be unfair to question the motivation of public librarians mounting courses for adults, the end product often produces an ultimately useful adult library user.
Whereas the library promotion schemes are designed to publicize the library service, the courses go a stage further by giving an insight of how the library operates as well as orienting the course participant to the services and stock.
Whatever the adult gains personally from these courses, it seems that the library itself also gains valuable support.
Quite a few courses have resulted in the formation (not always by the library admittedly) of groups which might generically be termed as ‘Friends of the library’ which may become formalized and then act as ‘lobbyists’for the public library in that area.
They may become in turn promoters of the public library service and even serve to bring in financial support for the service — a valuable support group particularly in the USA where public library services are frequently vulnerable to local authority cuts.
Library promotion
By far the greatest effort in public library user education is in library promotion or, more specifically, bringing the non-user to the library.
The threat to public library services in recent years from declining budgets in the broad area of public services has spurred them to increase their clientele, and convert more non-users to users.
By definition most of this activity takes place outside the library, and in common with other promotional work beyond the libraries field a full range of media (radio, television and newspapers) and material (posters, leaflets, badges, T-shirts, plastic carrier bags etc) is used.
If we consider the material first we find that they have several  features in common.
Firstly, although the material may be produced by one library or by a group of libraries within one authority, the message is an exhortation to use library services or the stock of libraries in general.
Secondly, the message is often in a humorous form.
Thirdly, the materials themselves are a source of income for the library.
This non-specific approach means that public libraries in general benefit from the promotion, and flexibility and wide appeal of the material permits mass-marketing, and wide distribution and sales of materials.
The practice of preparing materials for mass appeal would suggest that a degree of co-operation and co-ordination is appropriate, and instead of one or two libraries putting effort and resources into local campaigns a national approach to the problem of public library promotion should be taken.
Public libraries form by far the largest sector of the library world and they have no association with any one group of user other than the general public, so they would all receive the benefit of any national or even international promotional campaign.
This is in fact what happens in some countries, eg the USA, Scandinavia, the Netherlands, Germany etc, though not in other countries, eg the UK.
These centralized schemes are as much a reflection of adequate financial support as co-ordination.
Wherever this national approach is taken it is the national library associations that are usually involved; for example, in the USA the American Library Association through its Public Information Office generates a large quantity of various types of materials, produced in massive numbers and of a high professional (artistic etc) calibre.
The value of economy of scale and wide distribution is obvious in a national campaign.
When it comes to the use of media in library promotion the benefits of a national approach become even more apparent, particularly in the medium of television and radio.
Whereas a single library might successfully mount a campaign using posters, leaflets etc, few if any will have the resources to use television or even commercial radio.
Although the cost of acquiring television advertising might be obviated by the facility of free air time through public service announcements in some countries, considerable resources are still required to produce the content.
Again the American Library Association's Public Information Office is preeminent.
Using professional public relations agencies it buys their expertise and contacts to produce high quality slots featuring nationally famous personalities to promote the library nationally.
Radio spots, too, have been bought and made available to libraries within the Association.
The library can of course gain access to the media of television, radio   and particularly newspapers indirectly without formalizing a promotional campaign, provided it has something newsworthy to offer (and it may be that a library promotional effort may itself be newsworthy).
Local television, local radio stations and local newspapers especially are most easily accessible, but it is a relationship that needs to be worked at.
It is at this point that library promotion and publicity broadens into public relations, which, in its fullest treatment, is beyond the scope of this book.
Marketing too, in its strictest sense, is outside our remit.
Suffice to say that library promotion would be none the worse for closer involvement with the application of marketing and public relations principles, strategies and practice.
The place of marketing in libraries is often misjudged, however, particularly because the popular concept of marketing is that which applies to commercial and profit-making organizations.
But libraries are non-profitmaking services, and the criteria of non-profitmaking organizations apply to them.
This has yet to be fully explored but one publication at least gives useful guidance in this.
Information is increasingly a very marketable product and the advance of information technology gives the library, as a major source of information as well as an important user of information technology, the opportunity to take advantage of the strong current interest, and promote itself as aggressively as the purveyors of the hardware and software.
The relationship should be symbiotic.
Interestingly, there are some examples of joint efforts between individual libraries and commercial enterprises, whereby the library promotes its service and the company promotes itself.
Naturally the library should be careful in its choice of business association (from the point of view of image) but the advantage of such joint efforts is not only that promotional costs may be saved but they may generate income for the library.
How successful is library promotional work is unclear, because few libraries attempt any evaluation.
A survey by Woodhouse and Neill revealed that few public libraries in the UK have a precise policy for the promotion of services and even fewer attempted to assess the effectiveness of the resulting activities.
Unfortunately, the only easily quantifiable measure is new membership of the library but this is inadequate and inappropriate when the present wider range of services go beyond lending services and into the provision of various information services which do not necessarily require membership of the public library.
Other, perhaps non-quantitative, measure of use must be sought  to determine real use of the service.
But in terms of new membership at least, studies of some promotional efforts like publicity leaflets show that the results may have been negligible.
Woodhouse and Neill's experiment with promotional leaflets was inconclusive and a later, similar promotion by Cronin indicated that the result was a less than l% membership increase.
Nevertheless, individual libraries continue to attempt to publicize the library, and show remarkable imagination and enterprise in trying to make the library an appealing service.
Perhaps the absolute effect of small campaigns may be negligible, but ultimately the sum total of these may be to make the public library service as a whole more visible.
A recent development in the USA and the UK has been the attempt to make libraries more visible and give them a national identity, by creating national library symbols or logos.
It is a technique much used by national and multinational companies — a shorthand which the general public quickly comes to identify with a particular organization.
Whether or not the present library symbol and logo campaigns achieve the same success and identity, is rather early to say, but if the choice of symbol is a good and appealing one then it could bring the public library to wide attention on a host of everyday products, street-signs etc.
The American symbol is already being strongly marketed, while the British symbol has as yet not been widely promoted.
It is interesting to note, however, that both symbols emphasize the library as a place for books and readers.
It is disappointing that, although there is an internationally recognized symbol for information (the small letter ‘i’), this could not in some way find itself incorporated in either of these logos.
The range of public library services, as was noted at the beginning of this chapter, is now much broader than merely books and readers, and perhaps these logos should have made more attempt to reflect this greater concern for information services in the widest sense.
USER EDUCATION IN SCHOOLS
Introduction
There is common agreement amongst librarians, even outside the school library sector, that the earlier a person acquires library and information skills the better.
And from the beginning of interest in user education the literature has offered many examples of programmes of library user education for schoolchildren, even when school libraries were far less common than they are today.
The chief emphasis has been on instructing children in the use of the library and to a lesser extent on the promotion of reading amongst schoolchildren.
Most of the former work has been done by librarians and not unnaturally the instruction has been primarily biased towards library skills per se.
Although it may be unfair to criticize the laudable and worthwhile efforts in this direction over many years, the focus has probably been rather narrow.
Too often children have been brought to the library for library tours and library lessons, where the main content has been learning to use the catalogue, the classification etc — in short the organization of the library.
Of course, if schoolchildren are to use the library effectively they must know how it operates, how it is administered and how it is organized, but these arc only the preliminaries.
Beyond this they need to be able to exploit the stock — the reference collection and other material in book and non-book formats.
This, too, has been a frequent component of the instruction, though the emphasis has generally been on the retrieval of information from the stock, with the organization and communication of this information for effective learning left in the background.
But the most important flaw in the instruction has been that it has been too often divorced from the classroom itself and from the active involvement of the teacher.
It is therefore in the context in which the skills have been taught, isolated from the curriculum and from other class work, that the greatest failing in school library instruction has been observed.
In practice this approach to user education still predominates, but in the UK in particular the scope of user education for schoolchildren has been expanded so significantly, bringing with it substantial implications for user education in other sectors, that the emphasis here must be on the description and discussion of this recent work.
Those involved in this development (not all of the work is new) describe the work as ‘information skills’(again not new).
And although adding new terminology (or reinterpreting old terminology) to a subject already burdened with varying and often confusing descriptors must be viewed circumspectly, the use of the term information skills does usefully illuminate the nature of the new emphasis.
It is an ‘umbrella’ term incorporating study skills, learning skills and communication skills, as well as library skills.
Firstly, it involves the acquisition, organization and communication as well as the retrieval of information.
Hitherto the work in schools, as in other sectors, has concentrated on the retrieval of information.
Secondly, library skills are seen as part of a group of several related skills, suggesting that library skills should not be taught in isolation from study skills, learning skills and communication skills.
And thirdly, it suggests that the library is only one source of information among many.
Of course there is nothing entirely new in all this — various librarians have argued along some of these lines before.
What is new is that the personnel involved in this work have emerged from the different backgrounds of teaching, educational research and libraries, bringing with them expertise and specialist knowledge from these different areas.
What is also new is that they are building on and developing research in the various components of information skills.
The new developments in information skills are still primarily research-led and because of the slowness of dissemination and take-up of work based on research it is not clear what the impact will be of this work on library practice.
All too often the momentum of new developments built on research is lost when the research projects are completed and research workers are dispersed.
The British Library Research and Development Department, which, along with the National Foundation for Educational Research in England and Wales and the Schools Council, has funded most of this research, is aware of that problem, and using a standing committee called the Discussion Group on User Education in Schools, it is endeavouring to bring the research into general practice, and even to extend the influence of the work into other levels of education, eg primary schools (the concentration has been on secondary education so far).
Project and assignment work
The key or ‘entrée’ to the new development has been that problematic aspect of school work — projects and assignments.
In recent years teaching in schools has become more project and assignment oriented with less emphasis on teaching and more emphasis on independent learning in the curriculum.
A prescribed syllabus bound by the fulfilment of examination requirements still dominates the system, of course, but projects and assignments can be open-ended as well as closed, and the pupils in these situations are encouraged to use other information sources and develop other information acquisition techniques.
The skills required to do this work are varied and often complicated and, more importantly, there is uncertainty on the part of teachers as to how they should be taught.
Teacher-training, all too often still embedded in traditional teaching techniques, does not offer teachers sufficient guidance for them to be able to adapt to the new requirements in the curriculum; and the result is that pupils are inadequately guided, and projects and assignments are poorly executed.
This is where information skills instruction has been given its opportunity.
In passing, it is interesting to note that the great stimulus to user education in universities and polytechnics in the UK was also the project method of teaching, and that most of the best programmes in these sectors are still linked to this part of the student's course.
A whole-school policy
But if this new development were to be simply an aid to better assignments and projects then it would not be remarkable, because library instruction which is project-related and project-inspired, is not unusual, though it is less common than the separate library lesson.
Ultimately, the objective is to reform and reshape the school curriculum around information skills.
And if this seems an exaggeration then we might refer to the aims of a document entitled ‘Information skills in the secondary curriculum’ which was the result of the recommendations of a working group sponsored by the British Library and the Schools Council, and which embodies most of the current thinking on user education in schools.
‘Its purpose is to help middle and secondary schools plan their overall curriculum to include an adequate coverage of pupils’ study needs: the ability to formulate and focus a question, find possible sources, judge their appropriateness, extract the relevant information, reorganize it and prepare it for future use, or reorganize it and prepare  it for future presentation to others.
These are what we call information skills ; this phrase is meant to include what is known in some contexts as ‘library-user education’, ‘reading development’, ‘experimental and research training’, ‘study skills’ and ‘media literacy’.
Each of these labels indicates an aspect of study that has something in common, and our use of ‘information skills’ includes some parts of all of them ‘(p 11).
The various pupils’ study needs just listed include many skills that most school teachers would expect their pupils to have been taught or to have acquired in the process of their secondary education.
But the working party goes further: ‘By examining some examples of typical assignments set in the classroom, approached through the eyes of the pupils, we discover a series of stages that have to be worked through…
We propose that this daunting list of stages, each of which calls for different information skills, can only be satisfactorily incorporated in the school's programme by a curriculum policy built around these skills.
The central component of such a policy, we contend, is simply an expanded version of the stages listed’(p 11).
Thus the working party is arguing that information skills are not merely incidental to the curriculum but central to it.
This is ambitious, and if we look back at the scope of the information skills, it is subversive to present-day teaching.
But not only this — it could be seen, if taken to its logical conclusion, as subverting the role of the teacher; the stages are:(p 24–25).
1
‘What do I need to do?…
2
Where could I go?…
3
How do I get to the information?…
4
Which resources shall 1 use?…
5
How shall I use the resources?…
6
What should I make a record of?…
7
Have I got the information I need?…
8
How should I present it?…
9
What have I achieved?…’
If the teacher is regarded as an information resource just like the other information resources in the library, then stages 2–7 do jeopardize the teacher's place in education.
Viewed in these terms this new development is revolutionary and the logical extension of making information skills a central component of the curriculum casts doubt upon the success of the new development.
But even if the development stops short of this, any success for a whole.school policy for information skills will depend to a large extent on the attitude of the teachers.
Research into information skills (etc)
If teachers are the key to success of the information skills development than they will require convincing that the new approach can work in practice or at least that there is a body of sound research which proves the efficacy of information skills in the curriculum.
Neither approach on its own is probably adequate.
perhaps fortunately, then, the recent UK research has been in the nature of ‘action research’ involving pupils and teachers in the environment of the classroom.
Foremost amongst these has been the Information Skills in the Curriculum Research Unit (InSCRU), whose main aim can be summarized as follows: to create planned opportunities in the various school subjects for the introduction, exercise and development of a wide range of information skills.
‘The central principle which guides our work is that the skills needed to find and use information must be introduced and reinforced across the curriculum, within the normal day-to-day practice of subject teaching, ie teaching information handling should become integral to the act of teaching itself, and not an isolated entity demanding separate curriculum space.
The changes which we hope to introduce relate not to subject content, or pedagogic style but to learned outcomes ; ie we wish to see pupils leaving school who have not simply assimilated and regurgitated (with varying degrees of success) packages of information, but have developed those skills and attitudes necessary for independent ‘finding out’.
However, it would be naive of us to expect repercussions for both subject content and pedagogic style’.
InSCRU has encouraged, guided and assisted a sample of London secondary school teachers, to use and evaluate subject-based information skills teaching materials, created by the Unit.
The materials have not been used within traditional library lessons, but have been integrated into day-to-day practice of teaching.
Much of the InSCRU work has been in the context of assignment work, and is designed to change study habits.
But what of pupils' existing approach to assignment work?
Valuable insight into this question has been gained in another project entitled ‘Styles and strategies of information handling in the sixth form’.
The purpose of this study has been to look at the different ways sixth-form pupils find and use information when undertaking a school assignment.
In order to get teachers' views on pupils' information use, over one hundred sixth-form teachers and teacher librarians were talked to and a series of nineteen ‘vignettes’ developed.
A further one  hundred questionnaires were sent out to develop and validate these vignettes, and an analysis of the questionnaires resulted in the development of eight distinct styles of information use, pupils matched to these eight styles by their teachers have been interviewed and differences in the way these pupils talked about tackling two assignments in different subjects are currently being analysed.
This project continues, so it is too early to draw conclusions on the styles and strategies.
Another project, ‘Developing pupils’ thinking through topic work’, has considered the other dimension of projects and attempted to discover and document teachers' practice during topic work lessons in primary schools.
Head teachers and other teachers were surveyed and asked to describe their preparation for, execution of, and follow-up after topic work.
Information was sought also about the relationship of topic work to the rest of the curriculum, about the selection of topics or themes, about teachers' criteria for judging whether topics were successful, and about the advice they would give to student teachers about to tackle project work.
The teaching of study skills should of course obviate the problems that arise in assignments and projects, but generally this provision has been made at a later stage of the pupils' school career, at the sixth-form level, when a recognized amount of their time is allocated to private study.
But for some time teachers have been aware that many pupils do not appear to benefit from private-study time nor do they acquire the associated study skills, and there is uncertainty as to what kind of study skills training should be given.
In a two-year period from 1979 the ‘Teaching of study skills project’ investigated the teaching of study skills amongst 16–19 year olds.
Head teachers and other school teachers (as well as lecturers in colleges) were questioned and interviewed on their perceptions of the objectives and outcomes of the study skills courses being offered.
Students were also interviewed with the aim of ascertaining their feelings about, and approaches to, their studies; and later interviews were held with some students and teaching staff to provide further information about the study habits and attitudes of this age group and to investigate the study demands that are made.
Then groups co-operated in a trial of certain approaches to study skills teaching, and groups collaborated in a closer examination of the problems students find and possible solutions which might be offered.
The authors reported that as this project progressed interest in the teaching of study skills increased and this interest was filtering through  into the primary schools sector.
In 1982 a further project entitled ‘Study and information skills in schools’, was set up at the NFER to extend the above work, with the following aims:
1
To identify schools undertaking innovation in the field of study or information skills teaching.
2
To describe curriculum development in these schools and investigate factors which help or hinder progress.
3
To set up teacher groups to help teachers and librarians both (a) to review the ways their pupils study and use information in schools, and (b) feed their findings back to their staff.
4
To monitor the extent to which the teacher group activities help participants to engender study or information skills initiatives in their schools.7
Research into practice
The various projects just described have investigated, and some are still investigating, the opportunities, the possibilities and the problems of information use and information skills, largely through assignments and projects in schools.
The most important feature is the active involvement of teachers in these researches and developments, and thus they provide the support for interested librarians and teachers to make the transition from teaching simply library skill s to introducing study and information handling skills into the curriculum.
As such it is possible that the boundary between research and practice may be blurred and solve the age-old problem of dissemination of research and development work.
But another feature in the projects noted is that they have elements both of research and development in them, and the work has been pursued not just with one school but usually with several concurrently.
This does not necessarily ensure wide application of the research but it does provide various ‘models’ of development in different environments which increase the likelihood that, by identifying with one or another model, other schools adopt and adapt the work to suit their particular needs.
The total number of schools associated with the various projects is small, and, while even these may not continue to incorporate the new ideas in their user education, they have been sufficiently exposed to new approaches to schools user education to suggest that for them at least and probably for many other schools traditional school library instruction will not be quite the same again.
Computers and information
In a society which is becoming increasingly influenced by computer and other information technology it is recognized that schoolchildren need the facility of interacting with the new technology as soon as possible.
Not only will a significant proportion of information be accessible commercially via the computer but the next generation will also be inputing and retrieving a substantial proportion of its own information via the computer.
Computer-assisted learning, although it has made only some fitful progress in the past twenty years, will also feature prominently in education.
These various strands of information work with the computer are combined in some of the newest developments in user education in schools.
It would have been unlikely were it not for the introduction of the microcomputer, and in the UK the installation of microcomputers in large numbers of secondary schools has stimulated perhaps more of this work than anywhere else.
Two projects in particular are worthy of attention — the Schools Information Retrieval (SIR) Projects and the Microelectronics Education Programme (MEP) Project.
These projects are still current and the main results of their work are unpublished but it is useful to present the aims of the projects.
The SIR Project aims:
1
to develop a microcomputer-based information retrieval system for use in secondary schools that will demonstrate realistically the basic principles of information storage and retrieval and at the same time serve as a practical system which can be used in the classroom to locate teaching and research materials;
2
to assess the effectiveness of the system.
The MEP Project aims:
1
to help schools to prepare children for life in a society in which devices and systems based on microelectronics are commonplace and pervasive;
2
to help teachers to use the technology to encourage learning in the children they teach.
The MEP Project is largely concerned with information technology, but the fact that information skills are an important section of this £9 million project indicates how importantly such skills are regarded.
Accordingly, it is envisaged that in the emerging society information technology will be all-pervasive and the technology will bring a world of information ‘at your fingertips’.
Undoubtedly, the retrieval of information will be easier, organization of information will probably be  better managed and there will be so much more information available at the press of a button.
Some of the present generation's problems with information will therefore recede, but they will be replaced by others: and chief amongst these are selection, interpretation and evaluation of information.
But neither in the current phase of information skills research or in practice in schools are these particular skills especially prominent.
Computer-assisted learning packages
Besides the computer-assisted learning initiatives just described, there is currently a spate of commercial and library development of computer-assisted learning (CAL) packages.
While this teaching method was mainly confined to higher education institutions in the 1960s and 1970s the present phase has seen the production of a larger number of CAL packages for schools.
By far the majority of the packages have been developed for the microcomputer, and with this sort of equipment increasingly available in schools, especially in the UK and the USA, it is not surprising that that medium is becoming popular.
However, there is a tendency for the content of the packages to be simply a transfer of printed teaching matter to the computer medium, without capitalizing on the extra advantages of the medium, for example, making full use of its interactive teaching possibilities.
Information skills through the spectrum of schools education
Finally, some brief discussion is appropriate on the problem of the transference of information skills through the different levels of school education — pre-school education, primary or elementary school education, and secondary or high school education — and beyond into higher education.
The literature of user education in higher education frequently laments the lack of preparation of incoming secondary education pupils in their ability to use libraries and information.
Similarly, secondary education librarians point to the lack of continuity between primary and secondary education, The lack of continuity between the various sectors and the poor transference of skills from one to the other is partly a consequence of lack of co-operation between the different sectors, but also the dilemma of librarians at different levels as to whether they should focus on short-term or long-term information needs.
With respect to the lack of co-operation, there is of course a tendency (not uncommon elsewhere) for librarians in different sectors to  develop groups and associations to consider the problems and work within their individual sectors, without looking backward and forward to other levels of education.
They seldom seem aware of the support that might come from other levels, and emphasize instead the difference of their problems and environment.
Fortunately, there is some evidence now of assistance with user education between individual institutions, eg between some university and college libraries and secondary schools.
But this is localized and too often the motivation for assistance is one-sided and temporary.
Encouragingly, some of the research projects described in this chapter have worked on case studies from primary, secondary and tertiary education.
They at least are aware of the potential of relationships between the different levels and may be forging some co-operative links between them.
With respect to the dilemma over short-term and long-term information needs, the problem is one that underlies every aspect of user education.
If the skills are not immediately applicable then neither students or pupils nor faculty staff or teachers will respond, even though the skills might have pertinence at all levels.
So far the concentration solely on library skills has isolated and compartmentalized the skills in specific library environments, but the new, broader concept of information skills encompassing learning, study and communication skills strongly linked to the education process, does offer some scope for the take-up of the skills across the curriculum and through the curriculum to other levels.
But very dependent on this is the willingness of the educational system itself to form continuing links between all educational levels.
In other words, the success of user education as a continuous process between each of the educational sectors depends on the success of education itself being regarded and pursued as a continuous process.
NATIONAL CLEARINGHOUSES FOR USER EDUCATION
Introduction
In most libraries user education activity fluctuates from year to year; a bewildering range of teaching methods and teaching materials has been tried and applied; and a discernible pattern of development in the programmes has been almost impossible to trace.
In fact, some argue that there has been little growth or development over the years in the service.
This varied activity and fitful growth has, in part, stimulated the establishment of a number of amorphous organizations — the user education or library instruction clearinghouses.
Essentially their contribution has been to provide co-operative networks for the exchange of teaching material, experience and ideas.
They collect information and materials, frequently re-package it, and then disseminate it.
But above all their value to user education is that they act as focal points, so that if practitioners have a problem there is an information centre or clearinghouse to take it to as a first resort.
Function and development of the national clearinghouses
At the present time there are nineteen clearinghouses and most of these are state clearinghouses in the USA.
There are currently only three national clearinghouses operational — the USER clearinghouse in Australia, the LOEX clearinghouse in the USA, and the clearinghouse operated by the British Library Information Officer for User Education in the UK but others are at the planning stage.
This chapter concentrates on these three national clearinghouses already established, and is based on a longer paper on the subject.
The first of these was LOEX.
It emerged from the First Annual Conference on Library Orientation for Academic Libraries in the USA in 1971, and became a working reality as Project LOEX in 1972.
The function of LOEX (which stands for Library Orientation and Instruction Exchange) is as follows:
‘We are a national — even international — clearinghouse.
Our primary objective is to collect, organize and disseminate information and materials relating to academic library orientation and instruction.
We also aid libraries in their research endeavors in the field, encourage the sharing of both materials and information among other kinds of agencies and committees involved with instruction, and promote and publicize the development of library instruction whenever and wherever we can’.
The above statement was made at the Sixth Annual Conference on Library Orientation for Academic Libraries at Eastern Michigan University in 1976.
In the same year in the UK the Review Committee on Education for Information Use, which was set up by the British Library Research and Development Department (BLR&DD) in 1974, was recommending that:
‘The British Library Research and Development Department should, as soon as possible, appoint an Information Officer for User Education, to be responsible for the collection and dissemination of information on activities in, and relevant to, user education’.
The post, and thus the clearinghouse, was established early in the following year 1977.
A comment on the state of user education in the UK at that time made it clear why there was a need for a UK clearinghouse:
‘The establishment of an information officer for user education is a clear need in order to rationalize and exploit ongoing programmes.
There seems to be a very uneven development of user education programmes across the country at the moment, hence a need not only to prevent libraries from ‘reinventing the wheel’ in this area, but more important for them to be able to obtain advice on the ‘best’available tried and tested programmes and methodologies.
Most user education programmes have so far been very much of a local nature with little attempt to communicate experience to others.
In addition to this and partially as a result of it, there is little in the way of national planning’.
In 1979 the Australian clearinghouse USER appeared on the scene, and its philosophy is on lines similar to that of the USA and UK clearinghouses.
Indeed there is a unanimity of purpose shared by the national clearinghouses, which is in part a result of their commitment to cooperate, co-ordinate and communicate between themselves.
One point should be noted here concerning scope.
Both the USA and UK clearinghouses were set up to serve primarily the academic library sector, while USER from the outset made its target all library sectors.
However, in the last year or two activity in school libraries  and public libraries in particular has required ail the clearinghouses to widen their scope to include information and material from these other sectors in response to enquiries from these sectors.
Funding
Not surprisingly financial support is one of the more important administrative problems of the clearinghouses.
The three national clearinghouses illustrate different approaches to the problem.
In the UK, after the BLR&DD had decided to establish and fund the post of Information Officer for User Education, six academic libraries tendered for the right to accommodate the post.
Loughborough University of Technology Library was eventually awarded a grant of £23,600 for three years to provide facilities for the British Library Information Officer for User Education to operate a clearinghouse for user education in the UK.
Since 1977 the BLR&DD has continued to fund the project — the current grant of £62,000 for three years extends to February 1985.
Thus the UK clearinghouse has been entirely funded from a national body, and in this respect it has been fortunate and unique.
In the USA, LOEX became operational in 1972 at Eastern Michigan University.
It was maintained with local support for the next three years, then in 1975 it acquired a three-year grant from the Council on Learning Resources (CLR).
This expired in 1978, but by this time it was such an established force in user education in the USA that it was able to switch to being a self-financing, subscription-funded clearinghouse in that year.
LOEX therefore has made the transition from an in-house operation to grant-supported project and then to a self-financing clearinghouse.
It has built up a solid reputation amongst user education practitioners in the USA and is now the undisputed national clearinghouse for that country.
This is in spite of the emergence of many state and subject-oriented clearinghouses, which, incidentally, have been encouraged by LOEX and have become supportive rather than competitive agencies.
In Australia, with no research body equivalent to the BLR&DD or the CLR, the onus for the establishment of the national clearinghouse was taken by a single library, Caulfield  Institute of Technology (now Chisholm Institute of Technology).
Initially backed by money generated by other projects, the Australian clearinghouse, with no national funding, has been forced from the start to make itself entirely self-financing.
Like LOEX it operates on a subscription-fee basis, but unlike LOEX it  has a relatively small catchment number of libraries which might subscribe, and because of this its ability to maintain itself as a self-financing clearinghouse is in question.
The future funding of the clearinghouses is problematical.
The state library association backed clearinghouses and subject-oriented clearinghouses of the USA, because no staff salaries are required, will require only a limited amount of financial assistance.
Income from sales of their publications, conference profits etc, combined with assistance from state library associations, should be adequate to cover their administrative expenses.
But the national clearinghouses, if they are to remain national services, need much more substantial funding.
Only the UK clearinghouse has the resources to function on a full-time basis with salaried staff, and although the American and Australian clearinghouses operate only part-time, they are vulnerable because of their self-financing nature.
The question is, will libraries, which spend very small amounts of money on the user education service, continue to subscribe to the services of the national clearinghouses when the financial situation becomes even tighter?
Accessibility
Associated with the question of funding is the question of access to the resources of the national clearinghouses.
In this area the UK clearinghouse operates in a different manner to LOEX and USER.
Both of these make an annual subscription charge for a complete package of services — newsletters, enquiry service, access to databases etc.
The UK clearinghouse on the other hand makes no charge for its enquiry service nor for distribution of user education materials, but sells all its publications, including the index to its database, as separate items.
The reason for this difference is very much because of its funding: set up as a developmental project it needed to test the market for its services without putting too many financial obstacles in the way of the users of the services.
Besides, the climate of opinion on charging for information services in the UK in 1977 was even less hospitable than it is now.
But recently the policy of the BLR&DD has demanded more cost-recovery in its grants and the free aspects of the clearinghouse's services might be subject to review.
As far as physical accessibility of the clearinghouses is concerned, then the UK is fortunate in that the country is small and Loughborough is geographically central (within England admittedly).
This makes visits to the UK clearinghouse to inspect material relatively easy, in  contrast to the USA and Australia.
This has determined a no-loan policy for the UK clearinghouse (although duplicate material is available for users to keep).
On the other hand LOEX has always made material available on loan but nothing for retention.
If the frustration of subsequent queues for material did not bring about the state clearinghouses, then easier local access for librarians to material in their own state certainly encouraged their establishment.
In Australia the need to make the material more accessible to a widely scattered clientele has been met in part by the adoption of a centre for every state and territory, each of which holds a replicate collection of teaching materials.
Acquisition of material
There is little in the way of printed and audio-visual material that the clearinghouses do not attempt to acquire.
The bulk of this comprises teaching materials and library-produced guides; but books, research reports, journal articles etc on all aspects of user education are also collected.
All this is generally freely given, which is fortunate since none of the clearinghouses has a budget with which to buy published material.
In the early days of the clearinghouses it was anticipated that they would have difficulty in persuading librarians to contribute their material.
The concern was that librarians, not unnaturally, might be sensitive about making their teaching material generally available, and thus subject to the scrutiny of their peers, and furthermore subject to plagiarism.
The concern of the clearinghouses turned out to be unfounded.
Any reservations held by librarians have been dispelled, not just because of their confidence in the way the clearinghouses handled the material, but rather because of the realization that free exchange of material can improve their work on the subject.
Of course certain inducements are sometimes operable.
For example, the UK clearinghouse usually requires libraries to contribute up to ten copies of each item before they can automatically receive other material from LIMB (the Library Instructional Materials Bank — see pp 139–40).
Persuading librarians to contribute, then, may not be a problem, but ensuring that they do so regularly can be.
This is where the all-round acquisition and dissemination strength of the clearinghouse is important.
It has to take the initiative in building up the collection, and not rely on librarians remembering to send new material.
A clearinghouse must be highly visible, and the librarian actively reminded to continue to contribute.
The UK clearinghouse achieves this by sending computer  printouts of each library's deposits to the library so that currency and accuracy of input can be checked, and new material added.
Acquisition of information
Because of the large amount of activity in the field of user education there is no lack of information on the subject.
A certain amount of the work is reported in the general library press, and all the clearinghouses try to scan the literature for relevant articles, books, news items etc.
Yet the bulk of activity is never reported in the general literature — chiefly because it is not considered newsworthy or important, either by by the editors or the librarians.
Small, discrete pieces of information may have little significance in isolation, but when collected together, they can be much greater than the sum of their parts.
It is part of the function of the clearinghouses to gather this unreported information — systematically if possible.
The approach of the national clearinghouses to the collection of information varies.
The American and Australian national clearinghouses are dependent on librarians to feed them with information on a regular basis, and as each clearinghouse develops as a focal point for information exchange this is quite successful.
The UK clearinghouse, however, is not solely dependent on this method.
With sufficient funds to travel to many active libraries, it enables the British Library Information Officer for User Education to make more personal contact, and thus frequently acquire information that would otherwise not be volunteered or made public.
However, as more libraries in more educational sectors become involved in user education, this becomes less manageable.
It is time-consuming, and more importantly it is not sufficiently systematic.
The alternative approach, which is a feature of the American state clearinghouses, is the more ordered method of sending out standard questionnaires, and from this to compile directories of library activity.
Without the advantage of mobile clearinghouse personnel, the majority of clearinghouses have no option but to adopt this method.
A large amount of information can be gathered systematically in this way — data on techniques, personnel involved, subjects covered etc.
Although requiring periodic updating of the information, the questionnaire would appear to be an efficient method of collecting information on current activity.
It has its problems, not least that librarians are not always enthusiastic about completing questionnaires, but also that questionnaires, unless very carefully constructed, may not gather all the information available.
In spite of these drawbacks the questionnaire method is efficient and quite economical, and the national clearinghouses, particularly the UK one, are moving towards this method of gathering information.
Moreover, the questionnaire permits the almost automatic dissemination of information in directory format, and it is then a saleable product.
Certainly for the American clearinghouses it is one of their few sources of finance, and again it also serves to maintain them as focal points for information.
The key to success in collecting information, however, is not so much the organizational ability of the clearinghouses, but the confidence of the librarians that their information and experience will be disseminated carefully, effectively, and, sometimes, with discretion.
It is a question of trust, and if the quantity of information now shared through the clearinghouses is any measure, then the clearinghouses have generally succeeded in this respect.
Dissemination of information
(a) Enquiry Services
The enquiry service is the most important of the clearinghouses' information dissemination methods and all the national clearinghouses operate one.
Each attempts to provide as much information as possible from within the clearinghouse's own resources, but there is also a strong element of referral in the service.
There are two main reasons for this.
Firstly, although a clearinghouse might have considerable files to draw upon in answering an enquiry, the communication of all the relevant information may be clerically impossible and the information may on occasion have to be brief summaries; obviously those clearinghouses with a computerized database are at an advantage here.
Secondly, since the clearinghouses are essentially agencies for co-operation and most enquirers want the names of contacts who are currently working on the same problem, it is advisable to refer the enquirer to the contacts for first-hand information.
(b) Databases
The three national clearinghouses each have substantial databases.
LOEX's database currently exceeds 20,000 items, while the Library Instruction Materials Bank (LIMB), the database of the UK clearinghouse, now exceeds 12,000 items, and USER has 1500–2000 items.
Searching these databases manually is very time-consuming, and both LIMB and  USER, at the earliest stage of their development, became computerized.
Both of their databases are available on computer-output microfiche, which makes it possible to send their complete databases anywhere, both cheaply and quickly.
Moreover, with the microfiche databases available on subscription and therefore immediately accessible to subscribers, the effect is that certain types of straightforward database searches are less necessary on individual demand.
Consequently, more time can be spent by the clearinghouse personnel on the sophisticated and time-consuming enquiries which require information and material that has not been or cannot be conveniently added to the database, an those which are of an advisory nature.
The range of material in the databases is wide — all sorts of teaching materials, including library-produced guides, course outlines, exercises, commercially produced material etc, plus research proposals, reports, journal articles, books etc.
(c) Newsletters
All the national clearinghouses, as well as many of the other clearinghouses, produce newsletters.
For the most part they are unambitious publications, serving primarily the clientele of their own clearinghouses and reporting local activity.
LOEX news, USER news and INFUSE , from the three national clearinghouses, are in a different category in that they are not simply national but international in their coverage of news.
INFUSE is much the largest, averaging twenty-four, commercially printed pages in each of its six issues per annum.
It covers UK and overseas news, research reports and a research directory, a calendar of conferences and reports of their proceedings, book and audio-visual reviews, new products for sale, and a continuing bibliography.
One of the reasons for its greater size is similar to the justification of the computerization of the databases: the more information published in INFUSE , the less will be the need for subscribers to send in certain types of enquiries — they can be answered from the pages of INFUSE .
(d) Other publications
Only the UK clearinghouse, of the national clearinghouses, has a publishing programme beyond its newsletter.
These are chiefly conference proceedings, bibliographies and survey reports.
They are again important as supplements to the enquiry service.
But as substantial generators of vital extra income, they are also important.
(e) Conferences
The organization of conferences, seminars and other such meetings can be most time-consuming and labour-intensive, and probably for this reason the clearinghouses are not quite as active in this area as one might expect, although each of the national clearinghouses regularly organize or sponsor at least one.
Nevertheless, the clearinghouse personnel are heavily involved in running conferences under the sponsorship or organization of other bodies.
They attend many conferences on user education in the capacity of chairmen or speakers or frequently as exhibitors of user education teaching material.
Few delegates have such an overview of national or even international activity in the subject.
Dissemination of material
The policy of the three national clearinghouses varies.
For example, because LOEX only acquires one or two copies of each item of user education material from depositors, and because it is a nationwide service, it has opted for a loan system, with no material for retention.
On the other hand, the LIMB database generally receives up to ten copies of each item, so it is possible to send out copies for retention to requesting librarians, and a loan system is regarded as administratively cumbersome.
With a large number of visitors to the database, it is also essential to maintain a complete reference collection for non-duplicated deposits.
USER collects eight copies of each item, but each of these is distributed to the state or territory outlying centres, so loan copies are not available, and these centres act as reference collections.
Although it is desirable for the clearinghouses to be able to distribute or lend material, it is not essential.
The important point is that librarians may at least be aware of its existence.
Advisory role of the clearinghouses
The primary function of the clearinghouses is the collection and dissemination of information and teaching materials, literature and other documents relevant to user education.
However, there is another and potentially more important role which some of the clearinghouses are competent to assume, and this is to assess and evaluate the information and material that passes through their hands.
In the process of acquiring, indexing, organizing and exchanging this sometimes considerable amount of information and material, clearinghouse personnel see much  that is good and bad, and with difficulty can they avoid making assessments and judgements.
They are therefore in the ideal position to use their knowledge of these resources to provide evaluation, advice and consultancy over and above the straightforward transaction of information and material.
To overlook this valuable role is to fail to take full advantage of unrivalled access to useful resources.
Not ail of the clearinghouses are ideally placed to fulfil this role, and even for the national clearinghouses there are difficulties to be faced when it is attempted.
To set oneself up as an adviser, consultant or expert is a presumption that many practitioners of user education might find hard to accept.
Another problem attached to this role is the possible remoteness (not necessarily in geographical terms) of the personnel in the clearinghouses from day-to-day work in user education.
There are two points here: the first is that no matter how substantial is one's background in user education, advice can become steadily less relevant with the passage of time unless a determined effort is made to keep contact with the users to be instructed; ie to continue to instruct the user personally.
The second is that it is unwise to give detailed advice unless one has full knowledge of local factors, problems, users etc.
The key to both points is the mobility of clearinghouse personnel.
The ability to visit libraries and information services, to sit in on programmes etc permits a sound basis for a valid advisory and consultancy role.
A further problem about this role is the criteria by which we evaluate the information and material.
When librarians struggle to find appropriate means of evaluating user education programmes and when there is scant evidence that programmes have much effect on students attend.
ing them, it is a bold step to try and determine what is good and bad in the material of user education.
Those who assess, therefore, have little to back their judgement other than an instinctive feeling, aided by experience, that this or that is good, useful, or will be successful.
International co-operation between clearinghouses
Clearinghouses were set up primarily to overcome the isolation of individual practitioners within their own national boundaries.
An obvious extension of this is that they should attempt to break down the isolation between practitioners in different countries.
Just as there is mutual benefit in increased co-operation within one country, so there is even more value in international co-operation.
There are no formal ties between the national clearinghouses but  they maintain regular contact, and exchange information, newsletters  and materials.
There is room for further co-operation between them, as well as with new, fledgling national clearinghouses.
The co-operation between the UK and Australian clearinghouses in the area of their databases is a good example, and current support by the UK clearinghouse for several continental European clearinghouses, shows the potential.
This international co-operation between clearinghouses does not preclude international co-operation on an individual library basis, nor does it mean that the Australian, UK and USA clearinghouses will not provide a service to individual libraries in another country which has or has not a clearinghouse of its own.
The UK clearinghouse, for example, deals with a substantial number of enquiries from libraries in a large number of countries.
There are many reasons for co-operation, but the main concern should be that whatever is to be done by clearinghouses, it should have one prime effect — that the quality of user education should be significantly improved.
By helping practitioners in user education to share experience and expertise, the clearinghouses will surely raise this base level of quality even further.
COOPERATION AND CO-ORDINATION
Introduction
The activities of the various major clearinghouses in user education have already been discussed in detail.
This chapter continues on the theme of co-operation but now includes co-ordination, and concentrates on the organizations, committees and other groups outside the clearinghouses.
In terms of co-operation and coordination these organizations and the clearinghouses have similar aims and objectives, and to some extent they overlap in their functions.
However, to elucidate the differences between them and to indicate the potential for increased co-operation and co-ordination it is useful to define these terms which are often used imprecisely and interchangeably.
Possible definitions of co-ordinate are, to place or classify in the same order or rank; to combine or integrate harmoniously.
To cooperate may be defined as to work together or to operate jointly-These terms are therefore not dissimilar, yet co-ordination may be seen to be of a higher level and a more difficult operation than co-operation.
Co-ordination also implies a certain amount of standardization.
Since user education takes place in a variety of libraries, often at different educational levels, the potential for full co-operation across different environments is limited, and for effective co-ordination the potential is less promising.
Nevertheless because user education work has been so fragmentary and uneven at times, it has been felt worthwhile to attempt co-operation and co-ordination.
Moreover, if we accept, as it is often proclaimed, that user education is a continuous educational process, desirable for everyone at different stages of their lives, then this goal must surely be sought and certainly co-operation and co-ordination are the agencies by which it can be effected.
This goal is still far from fruition but some progress has been made, particularly by groups and organizations which have had limited but specific objectives (eg the production of teaching media) or which have  functioned within one educational level (eg academic libraries).
In the future, broader co-operation and co-ordination may follow from the firm basis of this work.
In the following pages a number of the more visible and possibly more successful and productive organizations are identified and described.
SCONUL Tape-Slide Group
One of the earliest associations arose from a meeting of British academic librarians in 1970.
There was an awareness that much effort was going into the production of teaching aids but also that there was some duplication of effort.
The major interest was in the preparation of audiovisual teaching aids and it was decided that this should be the focus of a co-operative scheme and a steering committee was formed to co-ordinate the work.
Shortly afterwards it came under the aegis and support of the Standing Conference of National and University Libraries (SCONUL) and the scheme assumed the title of the SCONUL Tape-Slide Group.
The Group operated quite effectively for several years and was responsible for the production of approximately two-dozen tape-slides concerned with bibliographic instruction.
It was not without its problems — co-operation between the individual producers was not always as effective as it might have been and it lacked a satisfactory system of ensuring that the quality of productions was kept uniformly high — but it was an influential scheme, and the bias towards the tape-slide medium amongst audio-visual teaching aids in the UK remains to this day.
By 1977 the SCONUL Tape-Slide Group barely functioned as a producing agency, and it was renamed the SCONUL Section on Cooperative Production of Packages for User Education.
This was eventually absorbed by the SCONUL Information Services Group (now the SCONUL Advisory Committee on Information Services) and no packages were ever produced.
The SCONUL Advisory Committee on Information Services still exists but apart from the occasional seminar on user education it is inactive in the sphere of user education.
The history and demise of the SCONUL Tape-Slide Group illustrates the problems of co-operative and co-ordinating groups.
They emerge and merge, co-operate and co-ordinate for a while, but they have a relatively short active lifetime.
They are mostly national associations affiliated to larger organizations, and they perform best when they have definite functions and aims, and are supported by an enthusiastic nucleus of personnel with similar motivation.
Co-operative Library media Group
In the USA a much later counterpart of the SCONUL Tape-Slide Group was the Co-operative Library Media Group, an informal organization of instruction librarians attempting ‘to serve as a stimulant to the production of audio-visual materials we all could share in teaching library use’.
Formed in 1980, it began by producing a newsletter (Co-operative library media group newsletter ) to review programmes, list purchase details of presentations, report on trends, and emphasize the constant need for a better exchange of ideas between librarians and commercial producers, and much closer co-operation in preparation of such programmes.
A significant element in its declared purpose was the better exchange of ideas between librarians and commercial producers, particularly because the commercial production of audio-visual teaching media accounts for a large proportion of programmes.
Librarians are not alone in the user education field and besides commercial producers there are the information generators who themselves have a vested interest in promoting user education.
Co-operation and co-ordination should not therefore be restricted to the library sector — it should reach out.
Library Instruction Round Table (LIRT) of the American Library Association
The Library Instruction Round Table (LIRT) is a unit of the American Library Association and is made up of academic librarians, school librarians, library school personnel, public librarians and special librarians.
Its purposes are:
1
to provide a forum for discussion of activities, programmes and problems of instruction in all types of libraries;
2
to contribute to the education and training of librarians for library instruction;
3
to promote instruction as an essential library service;
4
to serve as a channel of communication.
Among its specific activities LIRT sponsors programmes at the annual ALA conferences, a LIRT newsletter and establishes task forces to pursue relevant problems in library instruction.
Four of these task forces have been the Planning Task Force, the Instructional Theory Task Force, the National Programs Task Force and the National Programs Study Task Force.
LIRT has yet to make a substantial impact on library instruction in the USA.
Its aims and operations are still too loosely formulated to  allow it to be the cohesive force it could be.
But the fact that it includes librarians from all sectors makes it a potentially important co-ordinating body.
Bibliographic Instruction Section (BIS) of the ACRL
Of the various groups in the USA involved in co-operation and coordination probably the most visible and active is the ACRL Bibliographic Instruction Section (BIS).
Like the ALA LIRT it comprises many different committees, each concerned with a variety of aspects of library instruction.
They include the BIS Education for Bibliographic Instruction Committee, the BIS Co-operation Committee, the BIS Research Committee, the BIS Continuing Education Committee, the BIS Policy and Planning Committee, and the BIS Clearinghouse Committee.
Possibly because BIS confines itself to activity in the academic, college and research libraries (where most library instruction takes place), and the various committees have set themselves more specific tasks, BIS seems to be a more successful co-operative and co-ordinating agency than LIRT.
BIS had its beginnings as the ACRL Bibliographic Instruction Task Force and one of its products was the Bibliographic instruction handbook , a practical guide to the establishment and design of library instruction programmes for academic libraries.
Later that year the BIS Committee on Co-operation's Sub-Committee on Clearinghouses devised sample evaluation forms for exchange agencies to use: these included an ‘assessment of borrowed materials’ form and an ‘assessment of submitted materials’form.
Since then the BIS Clearinghouses Committee has produced an annual directory of library instruction clearinghouses.
This directory, although it includes clearinghouses established outside the USA, highlights the problem of the large number of state and specialist clearinghouses in the USA and the possible need for some co-ordination and co-operation between them.
So far, however, the BIS Clearinghouses Committee has simply reported their functions and activities, without formalizing any co-operation between them or attempting to co-ordinate them.
BIS does in fact concern itself with a certain amount of valuable fact-finding, eg the BIS Education for Bibliographic Instruction Committee's survey in 1979–80 of academic librarians involved in bibliographic instruction and the training they received at library school.
Apart from the value of the data itself, the exercise can be a useful preliminary to co-operation and co-ordination at grass-roots level.
At  this level BIS has encouraged co-operation through its conferences before and after main ALA conferences.
LIRT too has engaged in conference and workshop organization, as have most other organizations including the clearinghouses.
It is difficult to ascertain just how effective are conferences and seminars in promoting co-operation and coordination but at the very least they provide a forum for practitioners to take the opportunity for co-operative efforts.
One interesting development in the workshop sphere and again an example of BIS's initiative in co-ordination is the recent J Morris Jones-World Book Encyclopedia-AKA Goal Award of $5,000 for the BIS Continuing Education Committee's project ‘Bringing workshops to the members’.
This award is intended to provide funds to any state or regional library association to help underwrite the cost of workshops to be offered throughout the USA during 1983.
Through this grant workshop leaders from 1979 and 1981 BIS ALA pre-conferences will recreate their workshops on a range of continuing education topics.
This sort of project recognizes that, although co-operation and coordination are important at a national level, really effective co-operation comes most easily at regional and local level.
One hesitates to enter into the argument of whether co-operation and co-ordination should be processes which should be established at national level and work their way down to local level, or should be processes which should develop naturally at local level and work their way through regional to national or even international level.
In the USA, for example, there is co-operation and co-ordination at all levels up to national level, but the widespread library instruction activity probably determines or allows for this.
In those countries where activity is much more sparse a national approach is usually necessary in order to stimulate more work or provide models of good programmes etc.
In countries like the UK with large numbers of libraries involved in user education a nationally co-ordinated and co-operative approach was felt necessary to overcome duplication of effort at local level.
The establishment of the UK clearinghouse was one response to this but the British Library Research and Development Department itself, through its deliberations on its programme of research and development in user education, has to some extent been a co-ordinating influence, though with a low profile.
But in the UK there is also as much if not more local and regional co-ordination as there is at national level.
ACRL Bibliographic Instruction Liaison Project
In 1980 the Academic, College and Research Libraries (ACRL) Board of Directors in the USA approved funding for a two and a half year project to provide information concerning academic librarianship to organizations and individuals involved with higher education through the development of channels of communication with professional and higher education associations.
As a result of this action the ACRL Bibliographic Instruction Liaison Project was established.
‘Based upon the promotion of bibliographic instruction as a basic library service, the project is an answer to members’ perceptions of a critical need for faculty and administrators to understand bibliographic instruction and its relation to the mission of higher education.
In addition to promoting bibliographic instruction among these organizations and associations, the project helps members co-ordinate activities directly related to the furtherance of bibliographic instruction as a basic service’.
The project decided that the conferences already organized in a variety of subject disciplines would be the best medium in which to achieve its aims, and consequently its primary objective has been to assist in planning/executing bibliographic instruction-related programmes at these conferences.
The programmes feature librarians and academic faculty staff involved in already successful instruction programmes in academic institutions in the USA.
The project identified the following organizations and their conferences as ‘targets’ for programmes: American Association for the Advancement of Science, American Association for Higher Education, American Council on Education, American Federation of Arts, American Historical Association, American Political Science Association, American Psychological Association, American Society for Ethnohistory, Modern Language Association, American Sociological Association, and the American Assembly of Collegiate Schools of Business.
So far the Project has had some successes as well as failures, but it is a promising development and extends the scope of co-operation and coordination into the crucial library/faculty cooperation area.
The fact that it has well-defined aims and a specific medium of operation also augurs well for its successful continuation.
Liaison between co-operating and co-ordinating bodies
Once individual bodies of co-operation and co-ordination are set up and perhaps increase, there arises the further problem of co-operation and  co-ordination between them, and some liaison is strongly desirable.
And although some personnel may sit on several committees of the various bodies this is not enough to ensure adequate liaison, because there may be a conflict of loyalties.
Only infrequently is there a formal link.
One example, however, is the Liaison Officer of the ALA LIRT, who provides a relationship of liaison and co-operation between LIRT and the other ALA units concerned with library instruction.
It is this person's duty to foster and maintain communication with affiliated member groups and other interested groups.
This arrangement is vital if long-term co-operation and co-ordination in user education is to be successful.
International co-operation and co-ordination
At international level there is very limited co-operation and virtually no co-ordination.
The national clearinghouses co-operate to some extent but largely through exchanges of information and teaching material.
Co-ordination, if it is to take place at all, is also most likely to be instigated by the clearinghouses; but ideally it ought to take place between the library associations, if for no other reason than that they can provide financial support to arrange the necessary meetings of coordinating committees.
International conferences could provide the vehicle for international co-operation and co-ordination, but apart from the few international conferences organized by the British Library and by the International Association of Technological University Libraries (IATUL) there have not been many more than a dozen, and none of these has focused on the need for international co-ordination; although they have kindled a certain amount of international co.operation.
However, it is unclear what international co-ordination could achieve that could not be gained through more national co-ordination.
The educational systems and cultural climates in every country are so diverse that international planning would be unwise and ineffectual.
If there is a benefit to be achieved, and this is not inconsiderable, it would be to stimulate user education in countries where activity is low and which need outside support, particularly in the developing countries.
The UNESCO Report could be a first step towards this but it needs international organizations like UNESCO and IFLA to take the action they have not so far done.
Conclusion
The primary methods of co-operation and co-ordination are setting up committees concerned with various aspects of library instruction, organization of conferences, courses, seminars etc, and the publication of newsletters and similar channels of co-operation.
But beyond this, other methods are possible and perhaps valuable.
Individual librarians are frequently looking for ideal models of programmes of instruction or some sort of guidance and direction (perhaps only in the broadest terms).
Individual librarians themselves have not been slow to recommend model programmes and the literature of user education abounds with such statements and desiderata.
In recent years, particularly in the USA, there have been a number of statements and recommendations put out by committees and similar bodies with some more authority than individual practitioners.
It is unclear how influential these documents have been.
The drafting of recommendations is one thing, the taking up of their recommendations is quite another.
Like the gap between theory and practice, ideal situations must be modified in the light of local practice, and there is no body with the authority to ensure that the ideal becomes reality.
Nevertheless, some of these recommendations offer the possibility of co-ordinated purpose to user education and also perhaps stimulate the co-operation that is required for further development.
USER EDUCATION IN THE UNITED KINGDOM
Introduction
Although user education takes place in most library sectors in the UK this chapter will focus primarily on activity in higher education and, latterly and briefly, in special libraries.
Elsewhere in this book school libraries and public libraries in the UK are considered in some detail.
There is some justification for treating user education in universities, polytechnics and the colleges of further and higher education separately.
Activity is greatest in these particular sectors it is true, but it is also the case that the pattern of user education is broadly similar in each.
It would have been desirable to cover all the library sectors in one comprehensive review.
This might have implied some degree of interconnection and co-ordination between the various sectors, but unfortunately this is not the situation.
Some effort has been made by some libraries to assist libraries and institutions with user education programmes, for example, universities and polytechnics for schools, and public libraries also for schools, 2 but this expresses local efforts of co-operation, rather than the submission that user education is a continuous process which takes place throughout the various educational sectors and beyond.
This lack of continuity and, in reality, lack of co-ordination and co-operation, is a state of affairs which is generally mirrored in other countries, although in Eastern Europe national programmes of user education may be making some headway in obviating this problem.
User education in individual higher education libraries can change enormously from year to year so no attempt is made to describe current activity comprehensively.
Apart from this, the very large number of higher education libraries now active in user education in the UK makes it impossible in a brief survey to take a library-by-library approach.
Instead an eclectic approach has been taken, highlighting some of the more significant work that has been done in the five years  since the first edition of this book was published.
This will convey some impression of the philosophy and practice of user education in UK higher education libraries, while illuminating some of the problems that have exercised (and continue to exercise) the minds of the librarians and research workers in this field.
Reference should also be made to several useful surveys of user education published in recent years.
Taken in conjunction with what follows they show the development of UK practice, although they also illustrate that progress has been slow and uncertain, and that user education is still generally a peripheral service in most libraries.
Library guiding
Before dealing with the more formal approaches to library orientation some mention must be made of library guiding.
In spite of innovative work with colour coding (now entirely dismantled) by Carey at Hatfield Polytechnic Library in the 1970s where he emphasized that an effective library guiding system was an important prerequisite to any library instruction programme, the subject received little serious attention by libraries until the end of the decade.
Until then the general quality was very low indeed.
Qualitatively it lacked the professional touch, and within individual libraries it lacked planning and co-ordination.
Sometimes it was quantitatively inadequate, but more often it suffered from an excess of conflicting signs and signposts.
In 1976 the British Library Research and Development Department (BLR&DD) awarded the Royal College of Art a grant to study signing and labelling in libraries, museums and other information centres.
They examined current practice, investigated research work in the whole field of signposting, and considered the various factors which had to be determined when planning guiding systems.
The report in 1977 was valuable but rather theoretical, and shortly afterwards the BLR&DD commissioned the Royal College of Art to produce a library guiding manual which would aim to give librarians practical advice on designing and implementing library signing systems which would be effective, attractive, quick and economical to produce and easy to maintain and update.
The research programme seemed to provide the stimulus for improvement around the country, particularly in academic libraries where many working parties were set up to deal with the problem.
New academic library buildings and the reorganization of multi-site libraries too, appeared to have spurred academic librarians to the realization that  good library guiding is a vital complement to effective library orientation.
Library orientation
Almost all UK academic libraries attempt to orientate the new user to the services and stock of the library, and there are very few orientation methods which have not been used in recent years — lectures, seminars, tours (guided and self-guided), video-tapes, slide-lectures, tape-slides, programmed instruction, posters, audio-tapes, games, computer-assisted instruction, and of course library guides.
This range expresses the resourcefulness and imagination of user education librarians, but at the same time it may express some uncertainty with orientation techniques and, indeed, library orientation itself.
Apart from the wide range of orientation techniques used, the fact that orientation techniques are switched from year to year within individual libraries, and the fact that maybe several different techniques might be employed in any single library in any one year, is further illustration of uncertainty in this important area of user education.
If we divide orientation techniques into those which are media-assisted and those which are not (eg guided tours) we find that the former are infrequently used in the college libraries, while university and polytechnic libraries generally employ both the former and the latter.
In the college libraries this is a reflection partly of their low budgets, partly of their lack of personnel to develop and innovate with media-assisted techniques, and partly of the formality of their user education programmes as a whole.
Some evidence of this division between college libraries on the one hand and university and polytechnic libraries on the other, emerged from a 1981 survey of audio-visual presentations produced for user education in UK academic libraries.
61% of the responding university libraries and 66.6% of the responding polytechnic libraries used audio-visual introductions to their libraries, while only 25.3% of the responding colleges used these media.
Most of the university and polytechnic libraries replied to the survey but only a small number of colleges did so.
A 1982 survey, covering colleges alone (and a much larger sample of them) indicated that a much lower percentage used media in their orientation.
This survey also indicated that in those libraries with audio-visual presentations, more than half also supplemented them with other forms of orientation or instruction notably tours, printed guides, supplementary printed handouts and exercises or other practical work.
These were mainly for the purpose of reinforcement or ‘aides-memoires’, but they sometimes represent an effort to extend the orientation into some more substantial instruction.
The greatest problem at the orientation stage is getting the balance between orientation and more advanced instruction.
The librarians in the academic sector are particularly aware that students have few library and information needs and problems it the outset of their academic careers, but are mindful nevertheless that they may not have easy access to the students (especially in the polytechnics and the universities) until a much later stage of their courses, if at all.
This problem of balance can be alleviated if students are left to make their own choice of what to take from orientation, by giving them access to self-instructional media like self-guided tours, self-instructional tape-slides and audio-tapes etc.
Because they are self-paced, the students can help themselves to what they need and when they need it.
More advanced instruction can be offered on this basis, and they know that it will be (or should be) available to them when they need it.
It is this principle that guided the development of the ‘unmanned information points’, best developed at the University of Bradford.
It is J permanent feature of the library and accessible by students when and where they require it.
The self-instructional media give the students an element of choice, and this is also implicit where there is a variety of orientational techniques or media in operation.
It has been observed in education in general that students respond to and learn from some techniques more than others.
This was recognized by the City of London polytechnic Learning Resources Centre about five years ago, when virtually the same orientation content was presented in five different self-instructional modes (video.tape, programmed instruction, tape-slide, audio-tape and chart).
This was an ambitious programme, and it is regrettable that the Centre failed to make a full-scale comparative evaluation of the various forms of orientation used.
But of course complete evaluation of self-instructional media is almost impossible.
Recently there has been a determined effort to evaluate different orientation methods in several UK universities, particularly at University College Cardiff, the University of Aston and the University of Bradford.
The first two have attempted comparative evaluations of the two or more orientation techniques they used concurrently.
These evaluations will be discussed later in this chapter.
The universities and polytechnics have not been slow to innovate  with new techniques.
The University of Leeds briefly experimented with computer-assisted instruction, is although the emphasis was on more advanced subject instruction.
Recently the University of Aston has experimented with games and the University of Strathclyde has experimented with games through the medium of microcomputer-assisted instruction.
Teletext is the latest medium, and there is some discreet experimentation with this technique, but the medium of the online, in-house information system seems to be the most promising new technique.
The University of Bradford is developing its system to disseminate information of an orientational nature to the new library user.
Bibliographic instruction
Beyond the library orientation stage the pattern of user education in higher education shows marked differences between the university and polytechnic libraries on the one hand and the colleges of higher and further education on the other.
There are a number of factors which explain these differences, some of which simply relate to preferred approaches but most are determined by different styles of library management and, more importantly, their different educational context and the influence of outside education bodies.
Firstly the more formal programmes of user education in the colleges generally tend to follow directly the library orientation.
Sometimes this is because the length of students' courses is shorter, sometimes (because the programmes are included as part of course studies) there is the opportunity for college librarians to introduce the programmes at an early stage.
Either way it allows rather better continuity of instruction — frequently advocated by user education librarians.
In university and polytechnic libraries the advanced instruction has to wait until the second and third years of undergraduate courses, because it is at these stages that the students work on sometimes quite specialized projects.
These projects which, it is argued, require more independent study and a wide use of library resources, frequently provide the best opportunity for offering bibliographic instruction and information skills tuition.
Although such projects are not uncommon for students in the colleges (and they are also the ‘entrée’ for library instruction here) the projects tend to come earlier in their courses.
The second difference is that in the colleges advanced instruction is usually timetabled, if not a formal part of the course, whereas in universities and polytechnics it is generally neither of these.
In a recent  colleges survey (admittedly with a return response of less than 40%) 80% of the advanced instruction programmes which existed were timetabled and 60% of them were a formal part of the students' courses.
It is perhaps unwise to put too much store by these statistics, but the existence of many Technical Education Council (TEC) and Business Education Council (BEC) courses in colleges which have information skills requirements built into them does provide the stimulus to course-integrated instruction.
Many polytechnics also have TEC and BEC courses but there is little evidence of the information skills requirements in their courses in this sector.
In fact 30–40% of all polytechnic courses are Council for National Academic Awards (CNAA) validated, and in spite of the insistence by CNAA validating panels that library instruction should be written into CNAA degree courses, it is accepted more in spirit than in practice.
Only a very small number of CNAA courses include elements of information skills instruction in them.
One polytechnic (North East London Polytechnic) does, however, have a complete module on information skills in science and another polytechnic (Leicester Polytechnic) has a wide range of information skills components in its CNAA courses.
But for most of the polytechnics the formality of instruction is limited to a small percentage of course marks awarded as part of the assessment of projects.
Many polytechnics of course do have user education written into the overall aims of the library service (eg Hatfield Polytechnic Library).
In universities the situation is similar to the polytechnics but there are no nationally validated degree courses — every university validates its own.
Thus course-integrated instruction is a local arrangement and therefore unusual, but there are exceptions (eg University of Sheffield).
The third difference between the colleges, the universities and the polytechnics probably arises from the existence of formal programmes in the colleges and the lack of them in universities and polytechnics.
While course outlines, statements of course objectives etc are commonly prepared by college libraries, they are rarely documented in university and polytechnic libraries.
This omission in these sectors is not necessarily or intrinsically a bad thing, but it makes forward planning and therefore continuity of programmes more difficult.
The fourth difference lies in the nature of personnel involved in user education and their status and role within higher education management.
Actually the difference among the various sectors is primarily between the universities and the colleges, with the polytechnics  somewhere midway.
Libraries in the university sector usually have large professional staff complements which permit library management on a subject specialization basis.
They are mainly on academic-related grades but their job specifications are entirely library administration.
Libraries in the college sector usually have very small professional staff complements (often just one or two, and only exceptionally more than half a dozen), which do not allow library management on a subject specialization basis.
Perhaps only one librarian will be on an academic-related grade, but more importantly this librarian (often designated as a tutor-librarian) will have a job specification which includes a teaching function as well as a library administration function; and the teaching function will imply teaching academic course subjects as well as library instruction.
Library Guides
The library guide may be described as the more passive approach to library orientation, and in spite of the fact that there is much uncertainty about their value most university and polytechnic libraries produce one or more.
In college libraries they are less widespread, possibly partly because they are more limited in financial resources and possibly partly because they prefer more active orientation methods.
Certainly in this sector, where they do exist, they are generally very modest productions, reflecting a lack of money for this sort of thing.
In the university and polytechnic sectors the traditional library guide has undergone some changes in recent years.
The single, large, all-embracing, annually printed guide, covering all aspects of the library service, has largely disappeared, and has been replaced by a variety of new formats.
We have seen guides produced as newspaper tabloids (eg Sheffield City Polytechnic); guides reorganized as A-Z directories of library services and stock (eg University of Kent); loose-leaf guides prepared for ring binders (eg Heriot-Watt University); but most commonly collections of single leaflets, each describing different library services and operations, sometimes filling a glossy wallet, sometimes not.
There are various reasons for this change — financial economy, production convenience, the emergence of some imaginative designers, and not least the response to user needs.
Firstly, there is financial economy.
It may be unwise, however, to suggest the move away from the large, printer-prepared guide was determined by financial factors, because if this was the reason the saving was not achieved.
The university and polytechnic libraries now spend probably more in real terms on library guides than they ever did.
Secondly, production convenience is probably a more convincing reason.
Co-ordinating the effort of site librarians and section heads to produce one large guide for the printer at the beginning of each session is administratively difficult.
New services or changes in information cannot be made until a complete revision of the guide the following year.
On the other hand the production of separate leaflets can be staggered and additions and alterations can be made at any time quickly and less expensively; and some leaflets, which require no alteration from year to year, need not be reprinted for one or two years.
Thirdly, the new style guides have clearly been influenced by some interesting graphic design work.
The polytechnics led the way when for a period they had the advantage of the professionalism of graphic designers within their institutions, sometimes even within their libraries.
A suite of library guides produced by Sheffield City polytechnic set standards which no academic library has since surpassed, but other polytechnic libraries, without being so lavish, have also produced well-designed, novel and sometimes amusing guides (eg Preston Polytechnic).
Fourthly, there are the needs of the user.
The first point is that the user, if he or she uses the guide at all, probably finds the task of wading through a long, unindexed guide to find some specific piece of information somewhat tedious.
Single, short leaflets are more digestible.
The second point is that the separate leaflet on, say, the inter-library loan service, the catalogues, or the reserved book collection, can be made available at the point of use or point of need.
The third point is that leaflets can be produced which are specifically tailored to one category of users (including postgraduates and academic staff) or geared to a particular subject.
The University of Durham, for example, has produced leaflets entitled ‘Notes for academic staff’, ‘Notes for research students’, ‘Notes for external users’, and ‘Notes for students’.
These guides can reflect not only the differing facilities and services available to the different groups of users but their differing information needs.
This is especially true of the short library guides aimed at users in different subject fields (eg those produced at Manchester Polytechnic).
This trend for library guides to be more flexible, to be better designed or to be tailored more to the needs of the user is encouraging, but it all goes for nought if the user does not use them.
If they do not, then some research is required to find out why.
In a study by Taylor of library guides in London polytechnic libraries she found that the users often did not read them because they did not know they were there.
In a  study by Mayes into various measures of testing the readability of guides, he found that guides were jargon-filled, unappealing etc and suggested many ways in which they could be made more readable.
Guides to the literature and techniques of information handling
A major part of the effort in user education in university and polytechnic libraries is the preparation of guides to the subject literature, guides to individual reference works, guides to particular forms of literature, guides to techniques of information handling etc, and there are few libraries in these sectors who do not have at least a dozen in current production.
In the tertiary colleges on the other hand they are few and far between, and where they exist they are integrated into the user education programmes as teaching handouts.
The relationship of these guides to programmes in university and polytechnic libraries is unclear, although a minority are produced as teaching handouts.
But the value of the guides to the student is less certain.
In spite of a recent tendency to produce guides which are a mixture of service orientation and stock orientation, the usual formula of the subject guide is a lengthy list of references, infrequently annotated (even descriptively), and rarely indexed.
They may provide a comprehensive guide to the reference literature, but they generally do not attempt to guide the user through the literature either selectively or critically.
It is disappointing that the subject specialists in these libraries (who are usually responsible for their preparation) do not take this critical approach, because one would have thought they were well capable of it.
It is one thing to make students aware of the literature in their subject through a structured but indigestible literature guide, but quite another to assist them in selecting the literature they would be best advised to consult.
Very little research has been done on the literature guides and only one on their use by students, so all we have is speculation.
Roger Smith, a research chemist, made an evaluation of the literature guides in chemistry, and this probably represents the wider attitude of academic staff:
‘The overall view is that much improvement can be made in these guides, which at present would only be of marginal use to a student.
It is important that the reasons for producing the guide should be carefully considered.
It is not to produce publications but to inform and instruct the reader.
More involvement of active users of the chemical literature would undoubtedly help.’
He also commented: ‘It must be wondered why so many different guides have been produced, with so much duplication of effort, particularly when the overall impression is that they were prepared within libraries without reference to the needs of readers and without consultation or collaboration with the subject teachers.’
This involvement of academic staff in their production, although occasionally found, is generally rare.
A notable exception has been the guides produced by Open University teams (involving academic staff and librarians) and published as separate units for particular courses.
The Open University publications, intended for students without regular access to any one library (the Open University library is geographically far from most of its students) offer a variety of different guides to the literature, including literature case studies, guides to literature searching, techniques of information handling etc, and represent some of the best and ideal practice in this area.
Some of the other academic libraries (eg the Polytechnic of North London) have also taken the case study model, picking out a narrow topic within a large subject area and guiding the user through the maze of literature, as well as illustrating the pages of the different forms of literature which should be consulted.
To some extent they are an elaboration of the ‘pathfinder’ approach developed in the USA, and would seem to be a more inspiring approach than the typical literature guide.
The university and polytechnic librarians seem to be on surer ground when they are producing guides on literature search strategies, or guides to the preparation of bibliographical references or guides to the preparation of projects and theses: that is, when they are writing guides to library and information techniques.
There are as many of these sorts of guides as literature guides, and one may pose the question more acutely, why are so many of the publications virtually the same (even in one library there might be virtually the same guide on bibliographical references)?
The question of duplication of effort in guide production vexed Smith in his study and was also part of the focus of Taylor's attention in his study of information guides.
It was in fact anticipated that the establishment of the Library Instruction Materials Bank (LIMB) in 1977 would remove some of the duplication in production, but there has been only a small measure of success here.
Perhaps LIMB has simply given librarians the opportunity to replicate what is available and to produce improved guides more quickly, but widespread duplication is still common.
An alternative to more co-ordination of production is centralized production of guides of such a high quality that local production would be deemed redundant.
This was a possibility with the Travelling Workshops Experiment which published a number of learning packages in various subject disciplines that included a variety of guides to the literature and guides to individual reference tools.
Their insistence on selling only complete packages made the cost of buying the guides too expensive, but at the same time individual purchasing libraries have often gone on to modify the guides for local use; and this is the greatest block to co-ordinated and centralized production — librarians prefer to prepare their own guides, tailor-made for their particular local needs.
Evaluation
In the last five years evaluation has received much attention in UK academic libraries and particularly in parts of the research projects sponsored by the BLR&DD.
When there has been little substantial work done on course aims and objectives, and just as few examples of documented course aims and objectives at institutional level, it may seem anomalous that evaluation could be attempted or studied in any significant way.
But there is a body of opinion that programme evaluation can be executed without the laying down of programme aims and objectives.
And of course there is the sort of evaluation that judges the effectiveness of this or that teaching method over another.
The fact that evaluation has been and continues to be a matter of concern probably reflects the uncertainty amongst librarians of user education methodologies.
But also, as the various services of academic libraries demand more careful inspection with the onset of financial stringency, the need is felt to justify work like user education, which remains on the fringe of academic library services.
In the context of course evaluation the research work of the Travelling Workshops Experiment and the James project attempted to make practising librarians familiar with such terms as formative evaluation, summative evaluation and illuminative evaluation.
Illuminative evaluation, in particular, emerged from these projects as a strategy which could include a number of different evaluation methods (tests, questionnaires, interviews etc).
It uses all sorts of quantitative and qualitative data, and allows all types of subjective and objective assessments.
In contrast to the type of evaluation that assessed by purely quantitative techniques and data, this strategy or range of techniques could investigate and respond to the complex nature of user education.
But while the theory of illuminative evaluation has been carefully expounded, the successful practice has been only barely demonstrated.
The Travelling Workshops Experiment itself, foremost proponent and exponent of the strategy, made valiant efforts to operate the strategy during its experimental lifetime:
‘This involved the collection of (mainly qualitative) data within a sufficiently loosely structured framework to enable unforeseen, as well as predicted, events to be described and accounted for.
Generally this approach seemed to achieve its aim, and was welcomed by many librarians as an alternative to a more rigid system based on pre-stated objectives.’
But the Travelling Workshops Experiment report went on to say that: ‘…although the new approach was welcomed, few librarians actually took advantage of the opportunity to evaluate their user-education programmes by using the evaluation materials provided by the TWE as part of each package’.
Illuminative evaluation is a long process involving the collection of a large amount of data and opinions, much of which will be conflicting and difficult to synthesize.
No academic libraries since the time of the Travelling Workshops Experiment have successfully applied the strategy and it is most unlikely that illuminative evaluation ‘in toto’ will ever get the opportunity to prove itself in academic user education, largely because of the lack of time to pursue it in full .
But elements of the strategy, which were practised before illuminative evaluation as a structured approach to evaluation was contemplated, are more manageable and are being attempted.
One such is the study by Taylor.
As far as evaluation efforts by academic librarians in general are concerned, the primary problem has been the lack of student response to the process and the consequent impossibility of reaching sufficiently valid conclusions on the basis of small evaluation returns.
One suspects that more evaluation has been attempted than reported, partly because of this failure to complete the evaluation and partly because the techniques might be considered as too ‘soft’(simply qualitative or subjective) or too ‘hard’(simply quantitative or objective).
One cause of the lack of co-operation of students (besides their possible indifference) is maybe the suspicion of the motives behind the evaluation.
The solution perceived by some libraries has been to bring in educational technologists to perform or assist with evaluation.
This independence (as judged by the students) or expertise has produced relatively high response returns and useful reports of their studies.
Examples of this approach have been been the evaluation studies at the University of Bradford, University College Cardiff, and the University of Aston.
Study skills and user education
In the higher education sector user education still largely implies library orientation and bibliographic instruction, ie library user education.
While the new paradigm in the schools sector is information skills (incorporating library skills, communication skills, study skills, and a whole range of learning skills), the new concept has yet to be translated into higher education in any significant way.
Some libraries have become involved in programmes of study skills for their students, particularly in some polytechnics (eg the Polytechnic of the South Bank, Plymouth Polytechnic, and the City of London Polytechnic) and in some technological universities (eg Loughborough University of Technology and the University of Aston).
But these are exceptional, and traditional user education is largely the second concern.
It is surprising that higher education libraries have not become more fully committed to aspects of the teaching of study skills, for various reasons.
Firstly, there is wide recognition that the study techniques of higher education students are weak, and, if the small amount of institutional time and lecturing staff devoted to this part of higher education is any measure, there would seem to be some indifference to the students' shortcomings.
Secondly, the opportunity for most worthwhile user education activity in higher education is by way of student projects and dissertations.
This, supposedly, is when students are most committed to independent study and this is when students' weaknesses in study skills techniques are most readily exposed.
The opportunity for some relevant and timely study skills instruction (especially in the organization, evaluation and communication of information) is therefore there for the librarian, because his association with project work and his provision of bibliographic instruction, is already there.
If the librarian can broaden his focus of user education and let it become information user education and not simply library user education, then there is the possibility for significant change.
The prognosis is good also if higher education librarians pay heed to the present trends in user education in schools.
In that sector project and assignment work is a flowing librarians the chance to broaden their work (importantly in co-operation with teachers) to incorporate study skills training as an essential aspect of information skills instruction.
Special libraries
In the libraries of schools and higher education, user education may be justified by the fact that the library is just one department within an educational institution and thus user education is just one part of the educational process.
In special libraries, which are not generally attached to educational institutions, this situation does not obtain, and therefore the concept of user education may seem inappropriate.
Nevertheless library and information promotion and orientation is relevant, and in fact this activity seems to be as common in this sector as it is in the educational sector; something illustrated in a detailed survey by Sullivan of 1,437 UK special libraries.
698 special libraries responded to Sullivan's postal questionnaire and selective interviews, and 78.4% indicated that instruction was given, with library orientation predominating.
Some of the main conclusions were as follows:
Government departments were more likely to give instruction than private industrial/commercial organizations.
Where instruction was given selectively, government departments tended to take into account the general status or work activities of users, in contrast to private industry/commerce where regular, personal usage and time available were more important factors.
Learned professional societies, on the whole, only gave instruction at the request of the users.
Government departments were also more likely to utilize lectures as a format of instruction than other employer groups.
Units with a science as a major discipline were more likely than those with social sciences or humanities as a major discipline to instruct users.
The type of instruction in the science units, excluding engineering, tended to be more extensive and covered more in-depth areas of literature use compared with social sciences and humanities units.
Although time available to librarians/information officers influenced the amount of instruction given, especially to managerial/ administrative users, it was not an overriding inhibitive factor.
Instruction was more likely to be given in units where there was also a high level of ‘publicity’ generating activity.
Many interviewees referred to the importance of the promotional value of user instruction for the unit.
On the whole, interviewees felt that some user instruction was necessary in special libraries, favouring the continuance of some impromptu instruction alongside the more organized instructional activities.
Finally, the general nature of relations and activities in units, a tendency to interrelate with users on a very personal level, influenced the general style and approach to instruction the librarians/information officers viewed as desirable.
With a few exceptions particular examples of instruction programmes in individual libraries are rarely documented, and part of the reason for this is that special libraries themselves are not always entirely responsible for the education of their users.
For example, in training in the use of computerized information services, personnel may be sent on courses organized by database producers like INSPEC or the Chemical Abstracts Service.
On the other hand, especially in the industrial sector, library and information services may be non-existent and in cases like these polytechnic libraries or university libraries (eg technological universities like the University of Bradford and Loughborough University of Technology) have stepped in to fill the gap of information training.
A notable example of outside training and assistance from the educational sectors is to be found in a project which was run from the Department of Architecture and Building Science at the University of Strathclyde entitled ‘User Education in the construction industry; the development and promotion of a comprehensive teaching framework for information management as an integral part of construction course curricula.
There were many interesting features about this project, not least that it was funded not by the British Library but the Government's Department of Environment — an indicator of the recognition that information use is not simply a library problem.
Another point is that the information management unit was intended not only as part of a construction industry course for students at universities and polytechnics, but was also aimed as a course to assist construction industry personnel already in industry.
Three levels were in fact aimed at the professional level, the technician level, and the support (ie accountants, lawyers, secretaries etc).
But the most important point was that the emphasis in the syllabus was on the skills relating to the communication of information rather than retrieval from information sources.
In an industry where communication of information between different levels is vital to effective management (a factor reported as by no means negligible in Government inquiries into construction industry disasters), this project was not only fulfilling a real educational need, but also illustrating the justification for us to include communication skills within the scope of information skills.
Research and development
A major feature in UK user education (particularly in the last five years) has been the many hundreds of thousands of pounds spent on research and development.
Although several different bodies have awarded grants, the principal funder has been the British Library Research and Development Department (BLR&DD).
The BLR&DD's involvement with user education goes back to the early 1970s when it was called the Office for Scientific and Technical Information (OSTI) but it was the BLR&DD's establishment of the Review Committee of Education for Information Use in 1974 that marked its presence in the field.
The Committee's terms of reference were as follows:
1
To review research and related work on education in the presentation, handling and use of all types of information, for students, researchers, practitioners, teachers and administrators, and on the education of those providing user education.
2
Where necessary, to request the commissioning of short reviews in particular areas.
3
To identify gaps in past and present research in this field.
4
To consider what steps might be taken to ensure practical action, including the implementation of the results of research.
5
To report to the British Library Research and Development Department, recommending objectives and a programme of further research in their field.o
The Committee's final report was published in 1977 but even before then a number of its conclusions and recommendations had already been acted upon.
Even now it is probably true to say that the recommendations in the report guide and influence BLR&DD thinking and action on user education funding policy.
Since 1977 the BLR&DD has funded many large and ambitious projects as well as a variety of smaller projects.
Most of these are described in more detail elsewhere in this book.
Initially the grants were concentrated mainly in the higher education sector but in recent years attention has been switched to the schools sector.
Undoubtedly the BLR&DD, by its injection of substantial funding into the UK scene, has stimulated considerable activity and interest in particular areas of user education, at least during the term of funding of the projects.
Whether this input has made a significant impact on the pattern of activity is a moot point.
In the context of user education in academic libraries, where there are now hardly any BLR&DD projects  (if we exclude the British Library Information Officer for User Education project) the influence is barely discernible, because the pattern is not notably different from five years ago.
Five and even ten years ago academic librarians were generally aware of the demands and problems of user education in their sector, and the research and development projects gave them little reason to change the fundamentals of their approach.
In the context of user education in schools, however, where there is still some substantial funding and many of the projects have yet to be finally and fully reported, the impact will probably be somewhat different; although because of the slowness of the dissemination process it is too early to say how much and in what way.
Certainly the style and type of projects in the schools are different and they offer a markedly different approach to user education in schools than was prevalent before the present period of research funding.
Further discussion of this is made in the chapter on school library user education.
But in returning to the question of research projects in academic libraries, it is useful to consider generally and very briefly the nature of the various projects.
The first point is that they were largely developmental rather than research in the accepted sense.
Secondly, there was a preoccupation with teaching materials and teaching methods (specially innovatory ones).
Thirdly, many of the projects were ‘demonstrations’, in that they developed and demonstrated teaching materials and methods.
Fourthly, they were ‘big’ scale rather than‘small’scale projects in the sense of ‘big’and ‘little’scientific research.
Finally, and related to the fourth point, they were expensive (as measured by normal library expenditure on user education).
If we may further generalize on these projects, we may describe them as setting up models of teaching methods and materials, thus tending to extend and develop user education methods, rather than analysing and criticizing existing methodologies and materials.
Innovation has been the keynote.
This in itself is no bad thing, because academic librarians have not been shy in adopting and adapting new techniques, yet it has to be  questioned whether user education, with little institutional finance available, needed such stimulation.
It is all very well to pour money into innovation, only to find, after the affluent projects have left the scene, the poor practitioner cannot sustain or apply the innovations without continued support coming from within or outside the library.
Many of the funded research projects have thus been tantalizing and frustrating for practising user education librarians in higher education, and there has even been criticism that they were not sufficiently relevant to their day-to-day work.
perhaps some of the real and practical problems of user education may not have been tackled, but some might argue that these might be better researched at single-institutional level, without the necessity of substantial, outside funding.
In the USA, for example, where most of the research is done, without central funding, at individual libraries and even by MSc and PhD degree students, many valuable projects have been carried out (eg in the comparative testing of different teaching techniques).
In the UK, as the large research and development funding has been transferred to the schools sector, there is now a pattern of in-house research on user education emerging.
Our discussion of evaluation shows how such small-scale, in-house research can be equally valuable as the ‘big’ research in recent years.