

Introduction: The Animal-Watcher
AS A BOY one of my greatest pleasures was watching animals.
I divided my time between my hundreds of pet animals at home and the wild animals in the Wiltshire countryside.
I spent so much time with them that I began to think like them, to see the world from their point of view.
I identified with them so strongly that I began to see humans who hunted animals as the enemy.
At the time this was an unfashionable attitude.
Hunting-shooting-and-fishing was the norm.
In the British countryside where I wandered, everyone did it.
It was a way of life.
But from an early age, for some reason, I rebelled.
I preferred foxes to foxhounds.
I found wildfowl more fascinating than wildfowlers.
And I hated the anglers with their sharp hooks and their lack of understanding of what they were doing to the fish they plucked so gleefully from their wet world into our dry one.
Above all, I wanted to understand the world of animals.
There were so many mysteries and it was hard to know how or where to begin.
I tried to get closer to them.
I discovered that sitting very still for as long as possible was the first great secret.
Most people, I noticed, even experienced naturalists, were forever striding through the undergrowth, striking out across the fields, and searching, searching for something new.
Far better, it seemed to me, was the simple strategy of waiting for nature to come to you, rather than going clumsily to look for it.
When Picasso was asked how he painted, he replied, ‘I do not seek, I find.’
Already, in my childhood, this had become my way of studying animals.
When you walk into a wood or a field, you alarm everything that lives there.
The moving human body is large, obtrusive and highly visible.
But sit down quietly and, after a while, you become invisible.
Nature resumes its activities, the patterns of behaviour you disrupted by your arrival.
This is true whether you are in a desert or a forest or swimming on a coral reef.
When I was still very young I built myself a raft from old planks and oil-drums.
I launched it on to a small lake and, lying flat on its wooden platform, pressed my face close to the water.
The raft drifted very slowly, making no disturbance, and there through the mirror-smooth surface I saw a giant pike, lying in wait for its prey like a lurking U-boat.
A shoal of young roach approached it unawares, sensed its presence and immediately closed ranks — safety in numbers — before darting off.
I was so close to the water that I was already beginning mentally to enter their world and to feel their dramas as my dramas.
This was all happening half a century ago, before the invention of the aqualung.
But I was already close enough to the aquatic world for it to become a lifelong obsession.
It did not replace my fascination for mammals, birds and reptiles.
It simply gave my study another dimension.
My appetite for learning about all animals, simple or complex, was insatiable.
Inevitably I was destined to become a zoologist in later life.
The great problem I faced, when I eventually obtained my degree in zoology, was that to convert my childhood fascination into an adult career I would have to carry out experiments on animals.
Zoology was in an intensely experimental, laboratory-oriented phase, and this did not appeal to me.
I was simply not prepared to treat animals in that way.
In my mind I was one of them and there was no way that I was going to make a living from carrying out painful experiments on friends.
It looked very much as though I would have to find some other career.
Just as I was about to give up zoology, I was lucky enough to attend a lecture by the great ethologist Niko Tinbergen.
I had no idea what ethology was, but I soon found out.
It was the naturalistic study of animal behaviour.
Tinbergen demonstrated that it was possible, simply by watching animals, to make a scientific study of them.
By making the watching systematic and analytical, it was possible to carry out field  experiments that reduced interference with the animals to a minimum.
He demonstrated that it was possible to convert amateur natural history into professional zoology by the straightforward device of quantified observation.
For me this was a revelation.
It meant that, by carefully counting and scoring different animal actions in given time periods, I could make complicated analyses that helped to unravel the intricate behaviour patterns that existed in so many species.
It meant that instead of guessing that the presence of a red spot or the flicking of a tail was acting as a threat signal or a courtship display, I could set about proving it.
There was no looking back.
A whole new world of animal study lay open to me and has continued to excite me ever since.
After writing about fifty scientific papers on the subject I decided to reach a wider audience and moved into television, where week after week I tried to get across my fascination for the animal world.
My earlier studies of fish and birds were now extended to mammals and I ended up as the curator of the largest collection of mammalian species in the world — at the London Zoo.
There, with a team of young research workers, I was able to extend my animal behaviour studies into areas not normally available to zoologists.
I could work with everything from marmosets to elephants.
I became especially interested in apes and made a long study of chimpanzees.
It was at this point that I came face to face with the realisation that human beings could be studied like other animals, and I went on, past chimpanzees, to investigate the behaviour of this strange creature that I christened The Naked Ape .
I applied the same methods here, watching people rather than talking to  them, and I learnt many new things about the way humans interact.
I published the results in a book called Manwatching and for twenty years continued my investigations into that bizarre species Homo sapiens .
Although my Manwatching study was based on my lifetime of animal-watching, I had never written the book of which it was, in effect, the sequel.
At first I was too busy writing research reports and later on I had become completely engrossed in purely human studies.
I eventually assumed that, by now, someone else must have written the animal version of Manwatching and recently I went to look for it.
To my surprise it was not there.
There were a number of excellent textbooks on the subject but nobody had taken the trouble to present scientific animal-watching to a general audience.
And that is how the present volume came to be written.
Instead of providing discussions of theories and academic abstractions I have concentrated on animal behaviour patterns that can be seen and studied by any interested person.
It helps a great deal to have a large number of clear, separate concepts, ideas that can quickly and easily be applied to the sometimes confusing variety of animal actions we observe when we sit down to watch other species.
I have therefore made each chapter short, no more than a few pages, and have picked the most vivid examples in each case.
The serious student of animal behaviour starts out with a basic premise, namely that every spot of colour, every strange posture, every tiny movement that an animal makes, has some special meaning.
Furthermore, all these colours and actions can be understood if they are studied closely enough.
Nothing an animal ever does cannot be explained, given sufficient patience and ingenuity on the part of the animal-watcher.
Everything has a reason, every piece of behaviour functions in some way to improve the chances of survival of the animal concerned.
In the end, all animal mysteries can be unravelled.
To some romantics this may seem a pity.
They would prefer to keep the mysteries of nature as mysterious as possible.
They feel that to explain everything will be to destroy the beauty of nature, but they are wrong.
To know that a particular animal dance, or brightly coloured display, operates as a territorial device or as a sexual arousal mechanism does not make it any less beautiful.
To understand the function of bird-song does not make it any less enchanting.
The romantic refusal to analyse is based on a fallacy.
It also introduces a dangerous bias.
For, to the romantic, the bird of paradise is much more exciting than the humble house sparrow.
Any animal species that happens to be superficially dull will be ignored, perhaps even maltreated.
But to the ethologist, every species is fascinating — the end-point of millions of years of complex evolutionary pressures.
Every species has its own intricate behaviour repertoire of survival mechanisms and even the seemingly boring species soon become exciting when one starts to probe into their particular way of life.
The social behaviour of the despised house sparrow is every bit as intriguing as that of the bird of paradise to the serious animal-watcher.
A final comment on my use of the word ‘animal’.
Many people confuse the terms –animal’ and ‘mammal’.
They speak of fish and insects, for example, as though they are not animals.
What they mean, of course, is that they are not mammals.
All living things are either plants or animals.
The amoeba is just as much an animal as the elephant.
So animal-watching covers everything from microscopic creatures to mammalian giants.
But, having said this, I must admit that I have favoured familiar species or, at least, species that are relatives of familiar species.
There is no point in explaining behaviour patterns in animals that are extremely difficult to observe.
I have largely omitted the microscopic world, for example, as few people own microscopes.
I have concentrated on the higher forms of life, not only because they are easy to observe but also to some extent because they have greater meaning for our own species.
We can learn more about ourselves from monkeys than from microbes, and looking around our modern human world it is clear that we need to discover as much as we can about ourselves.
As I have said before, when writing about human behaviour, we are no more than swollen-headed animals and the sooner we accept this fact the safer we will be.
As risen apes we have come to dominate this small planet so effectively that we are in danger of smothering it.
There are many lessons we can learn from other animals, to our great and continuing advantage, and it is high time we took a little while to sit and stare at the other creatures with which we share the earth.
They have much to teach us, as I hope the following pages will demonstrate….
Why does the Zebra have Stripes?
IT COMES AS A SHOCK to some people to learn that we still do not have definite answers to many of the most obvious questions about animals.
Despite the enormous amount of information we have already accumulated there remains a great deal to be learned and this is one of the special pleasures of animal-watching.
There is always the feeling that, at any moment, something may happen that will lead to a new discovery.
And no matter how minor that discovery is, there is a peculiar excitement about understanding some natural phenomenon for the first time.
Frequently it is not the case that we have no answer to a question — rather, we have too many.
Each answer seems to have some merit, but we cannot be certain which is the definitive one.
What is needed is some new observation or insight to clarify the problem.
An example will illustrate this.
Everyone knows that the zebra has bold black and white stripes, but why does it have them?
What function do they serve and how do they help the zebra to survive?
And what can we learn by a little careful zebra-watching?
The traditional explanation is that the stripes act as camouflage and help to break up the shape of the animal, concealing its body from the eyes of hungry predators.
Despite their vivid appearance when seen in bright sunlight on open grassland, the zebras are said to be well camouflaged in broken cover at dawn and dusk, when predators are active and the light is dim.
One experienced game tracker claimed that it was possible to get to within 40 or 50 yards before spotting a zebra under these conditions, and even then it only gave itself away by a small movement such as the swish of its tail or the sudden turn of its head.
Under identical circumstances antelopes were visible up to 200 yards away.
This interpretation was accepted for many years but has recently been challenged.
It has been pointed out that the behaviour of zebras simply does not match with this picture of them standing very still in broken cover.
Compared with many hoofed animals on the plains of Africa, they are remarkably mobile and noisy and never attempt to hide in cover.
On the contrary, they prefer to rest in groups out in the open, where they can use their acute senses to scan the landscape for tell-tale sounds, scents and movements.
Their response to danger is to flee as fast as possible, rather than freeze or hide.
In other words, their natural history does not fit with the explanation that has been repeated in textbooks for decade after decade.
So some other answer must be sought.
Certainly a visit to the plains of Africa gives one an immediate impression of how conspicuous the stripes are and how easy it is to spot a herd of zebra in almost any terrain.
Perhaps, after all, they are meant to be seen.
If so, why?
One explanation is that they are meant to confuse a predator such as a lion — the zebra's chief enemy — by creating an optical illusion.
If you compare a striped object with one that has a different kind of black and white pattern, they do not appear to be the same size even if, in reality, they are identical.
If the striped pattern breaks against the outline of the object so that its contours are discontinuous, its shape is disrupted.
For some strange optical reason this makes it look bigger than it really is and it has been argued that this illusion would have the effect of making an attacking lion misjudge its leap, striking short of the true position of the prey.
A close scrutiny of films showing lions killing zebras does not bear this out.
When a lion gets close enough to strike, it usually does so with great skill and confidence and does not appear to be miscalculating its position to the slightest degree.
If zebras escape, it is because of their initial alertness, then their speed and finally their stamina.
It is the slow ones — the young, the old and the sick — that are caught, simply because they are not  quick enough over a long enough distance.
The traditional view of zebra stripes is that they act as camouflage, but even in woodland cover this is not convincing and, in any case, zebra herds spend most of their time on open grassland where the stripes cannot hide them.
Some other function must be sought.
A third suggestion is that the black and white stripes dazzle the lion when it gets very close to its prey and make it difficult for the killer to concentrate on its fast-moving victim.
This is the Op Art Principle and anyone who has stood close to a painting by Bridget Riley will understand why dazzle can be a problem to sensitive eyes.
The lines seem to shift and shimmer as you look at them and before long you have a powerful desire to look away, anywhere but at the painfully dazzling pattern in front of you.
In theory the dazzle explanation makes sense, because the zebra patterning is just about as vivid as it can be, when seen at close quarters, but once again the facts do not support this idea in practice.
As with size-confusion, there is no evidence that dazzle-confusion puts off a hungry lion which is close enough to experience it.
It has been claimed that the vivid pattern of black and white stripes creates a dazzle effect, rather like the Op Art paintings of Bridget Riley and that this disconcerts the attacking predator at close quarters.
This is a possibility, but in practice there is no evidence for it.
Another suggestion is that the stripes confuse the lion by making it difficult to tell where one zebra ends and another begins.
The herd tends to flee together and the stripes are thought to jumble up the individual shapes and make the fleeing herd look like one great mass of black and white patterning.
Since lions always like to isolate one individual from the herd before attacking, this theory also makes sense on paper, but reality does not bear it out because lions can all too easily single out animals for the kill.
This is what happens during a successful chase, as one individual falls behind or gets separated in some way from the rest.
Perhaps, then, the stripes have nothing to do with defence against predators.
Perhaps a herd of all-grey zebras would fare no better or worse where killers are concerned.
The answer instead may lie within the world of zebras.
Could it be that the stripes are intended not for the eyes of lions but for the eyes of other zebras?
One idea that supports this view sees the stripes as a means for the zebra to identify which species it belongs to.
There are three main species surviving today.
Up in the north of the range there is the big Grevy's zebra, with its very fine, narrow stripes.
Over the whole of the middle of the range there is the common zebra, with many local races, all with big bold stripes.
And down in the highlands of the south there is the extremely rare mountain zebra, with bold but more vertically arranged flank stripes.
To human experts it is possible to identify each species at a glance, but to more casual observers a zebra is just a zebra, and this reflects the weakness of this argument.
For if species identification was the function of the stripes they would have diverged much more in the three cases.
If it was important for an individual animal to be able to distinguish between other zebras, evolution would have led the three patterns away from one another to a greater degree.
In fact the opposite seems to have occurred because Grevy's zebra is in other ways a very different animal from the common zebra and it appears that in their stripes the two species have converged rather than diverged, over a long period of time.
It must be admitted, however, that there is an exception to this in the rump region of the zebras' markings.
There, each of the three species does have a very different and highly distinctive pattern of markings.
In the Grevy's zebra there is a bold black central stripe surrounded by a bleached-out white area.
In the common zebra the bold striping continues towards the central line.
And in the mountain zebra there is an unusual, fine grid-iron pattern along the central line.
In these rump displays the general zebra patterning diverges far more than on any other part of the body and it seems that in this restricted region, at least, species identification is operating.
But this cannot, of course, explain the greater similarity in the striping of the rest of the body.
The rump region, as is clear by looking at other hoofed animals, is the favoured place for species ‘flags’ of identity and there is a good reason for this.
When animals are fleeing in panic they have the greatest need to ‘follow the flag’ of their own species, keeping the herd together.
And when they are fleeing it is, of course, the rump regions of the other animals that they see most clearly.
One theory suggests that the stripes act as a species recognition device.
The striped patterns of the three species of zebras shown opposite — common (top), Grevy's (middle) and mountain (bottom)— are not as varied as might be expected if they were important as species-isolating mechanisms.
Seen from the side, they are at first glance very similar indeed.
Only in the rump region do the stripes markedly differ from species to species This means that, when fleeing at speed, each zebra can follow its own species flag.
Another possibility is that the stripes operate at much closer quarters as a personal identification system.
It is certainly true that no two zebras are exactly alike in the details of their black and white lines.
It is as if each animal wears on its skin a giant fingerprint, with as much individuality as would be needed for personal recognition.
It is entirely possible that this mechanism does operate, and that the members of a herd do use these clues when looking at one another.
The weakness in the argument is that a herd of wild horses, totally lacking in the striped pattern, also has accurate individual identification and every member of every equine herd, including all domestic horses, is known individually to every other member.
Without such abilities group organisation would be impossible, so stripes, although useful, are by no means essential for this.
It is therefore hard to see personal identification as the main evolutionary pressure leading to the famous black and white pattern.
Another theory sees the stripes as a mechanism for personal, individual identification, rather like fingerprints.
This could easily be used by other members of a herd as a way of naming an individual zebra.
A comparison of the markings on the faces of these four drinking zebras confirms how different each pattern is in fine detail.
A more ingenious theory claims that the stripes operate as a form of visual bonding between members of each herd.
They are thought to make each zebra feel it belongs more strongly to its group than it would do if its colours were nondescript or dull.
The clear, vivid patterns excite the zebra's eyes and give it a sensation of strong identity, as if it were the member of a football team or a sports club with conspicuous striped shirts.
Perhaps so, but if this is the case, why should vertical stripes be selected as the particular zebra pattern?
This is where the theory becomes ingenious.
It is argued that zebras, unlike antelopes, spend a great deal of time grooming one another 's bodies, especially in the neck region.
It is a friendly act of mutual benefit to the two animals involved, since they cannot groom themselves in this region.
When they are engaged in this  ‘bonding’ act, that helps to cement their friendships, their necks twist towards one another and this causes vertical folds or furrows to be formed in their flesh.
Because of the way that the two animals stand in relation to one another while grooming is going on, it is these vertical lines that are placed slap in front of their ‘nearside’ eyes.
All the while, as they groom, they see a vertical pattern of skin-folds.
This striping becomes synonymous with social attachment and is therefore the ideal pattern for evolution to exaggerate with contrasting colours.
Once established, the pattern could spread all over the body, until it reached the condition we know today.
This theory could explain the difference between zebras and the plain-coloured antelopes that live alongside them, but it fails to give an answer to the obvious question of why wild asses and horses lack stripes.
The arguments that the desert-living wild asses in northern Africa live in such small groups that this type of bonding enhancement would not be needed, and that the northern horses have winter coats that are too shaggy for vivid striping, are somehow unconvincing.
There were undoubtedly much larger herds of wild asses in the past and as for black and white markings being impossible on shaggy, cold-country coats it is only necessary to look at the shaggy-coated skunks and pandas to see that this is really not a problem.
A recent explanation is that the stripes are a mechanism for visual bonding.
The stimulating pattern is thought to create a feeling of herd membership.
In other words, the stripes function in much the same way as the patterns on football shirts in human sports groups.
Another, equally ingenious, theory sees the black and white coats as a display, not for predators or for fellow zebras but instead for insect pests.
It is argued that disease-carrying insects and other small pests are reluctant to land on such a strange surface, with its intensely white and intensely black patches.
The optical effect disturbs them and they flit off to land on some less vivid pattern elsewhere.
In support of this theory is the fact that zebras are much less likely to suffer from certain insect-carried diseases than other equines.
Ordinary domestic horses always suffered greatly in  tropical Africa, and it could simply be that they attract more insects than zebras.
But against this theory it has been argued that over large parts of the zebra's range, insects are not a major problem, so without further analysis the idea is once again inconclusive.
Finally, there is the even more unexpected theory that the black and white striping is essentially a cooling device.
Everyone knows that white clothing is better in the hot sun than black, because the black allows more heat to be absorbed.
It is claimed that by having sharply separated black and white regions of the skin, rotary breezes will be created between the black and white zones and that these will have a cooling effect.
It is pointed out that the extinct quagga, a zebra with much less striping, came from the far south of Africa where the climate is cooler and that the northern, stripeless horses also enjoy cooler weather.
In other words, the hotter the climate the more striped the equines become.
Unfortunately this theory does not stand up too well either– because the mountain zebra comes from the cooler south and yet has vivid stripes.
Also, the wild asses from northern Africa survive in some of the hottest places on earth and their bodies are stubbornly stripeless.
A reason why a pattern of vertical stripes might have been selected as a social bonding device is that attachment takes place most strongly during periods of grooming (right) and this involves a zebra bending its neck creating vertical folds in the skin (below); the bold stripes could have evolved to augment and elaborate these dark lines.
Once established the pattern would then simply have spread to cover the whole animal.
Briefly, these are nine theories to explain why zebras have stripes.
Each has something to commend it and yet each in turn is not totally convincing.
Nothing could demonstrate more elegantly the fascination there is in studying animals today.
The animal world is full of puzzles and half-solved mysteries of this kind.
Every so often a new observation is made, a new fact discovered and another theory is formulated.
Sometimes it is completely convincing and all the old ideas can be thrown away.
More often it turns out to have weaknesses of its own and many a general theory ends up as tomorrow's ‘special case’, explaining something but not everything.
In the case of the zebra, it is entirely possible that several of the nine mechanisms are working together, each supporting the other.
Or it may be that one of them alone is, after all, the true explanation of the vivid coat of stripes.
Alternatively and more excitingly, perhaps around the corner there lurks a tenth explanation — the true one at last.
We shall see.
On the pages that follow I have tried to present the most convincing and widely accepted explanations of all the various animal phenomena that are described there, but while reading them it is always healthy to keep an open mind.
Few cases are quite as confusing as the zebra's stripes, but there is always the chance that in a year or so's time new information will have been gathered that changes our views about some aspect of animal life.
If this were not the case it would be a dead subject, beautiful perhaps but boring.
And the truth that I insist I have discovered about the animal world is that it is never, ever boring.
Grouping Behaviour
AMONG THE HIGHER forms of life, each species has a typical group size at which it functions most efficiently.
Some animals are solitary, living on personally defended territories where no other member of their species is permitted to enter.
They only relinquish this extreme form of isolation for a brief coming together of the sexes during the breeding season and then return to their separate lives once more.
Other animals pair for life, but never congregate into larger groupings.
A pair of golden eagles may defend a territory of up to 16 square miles, living there in splendid detachment from the remainder of their species.
In stark contrast, the red-billed quelea — a small African weaver-bird — lives in dense roosts of up to ten million individuals.
They scatter during the day to feed, but reassemble every night in a vast, noisy crowd, blanketing whole sections of woodland and making the trees almost invisible under their cloak of bodies.
All higher forms of life live in groups of a particular size.
Some are solitary, while others appear in huge flocks like these flamingos.
Even these ‘feathered locusts’ are outshone by the real thing.
A typical locust swarm can easily contain 40 thousand million individuals and the record swarm — one that was said to stretch for 2,000 miles — was estimated at about 250 thousand million insects.
An average-sized locust swarm devours in the region of 20,000 tons of vegetation every day.
But these are not organised, structured animal societies — they are abnormal explosions of the locust population and they carry with them the seeds of their own downfall, as do modern human populations that are heading in the same direction.
For we, like all animal species, have an optimum group size and it is one that we have exceeded so dramatically that our species is already well on its way to massive self-destruction.
Like locust swarms we will experience a vast population crash at some point, one that will drag us back to a more natural level.
But that is another story.
In the meantime, what are the natural levels of social grouping for other animal species?
The red-billed weaver bird, or quelea, lives in colonies numbered in the millions (right).
Each million birds destroys 60 tons of grain every day making this species a major pest of African agriculture rivalled only by the locust (above).
(Opposite) Impressive aggregations can be observed when caterpillars struggle for space in their breeding swarms, snakes congregate underground in hibernating masses sharing their slight body heat, fish gather in vast protective shoals and butterflies gather in large numbers on their wintering grounds.
According to Noah, all animals go in twos, like the golden eagles, but in reality there are several basic social units, of which the isolated pair is only one example.
To classify these units into different types is inevitably an over-simplification, but it is nevertheless a helpful exercise.
Solitary
The adult males and females live alone and meet only in the breeding season.
After courtship and copulation they split up again and have no further relations until the next season.
The female deals with the young without the help of the male, or in certain cases the male rears the young without the help of the female.
The solitary adults may wander over vaguely defined home ranges, or they may restrict themselves to clearly defined and defended territories.
Animals that fall into this general category include many territorial fish, such as the river bullhead, many reptiles, especially snakes, a few birds, such as the ruff, and many mammals, such as bears, pandas and raccoons.
With birds and mammals it is nearly always the female that looks after the young, without the help of the male, but many fish reverse this procedure, with all parental duties being carried out by the males, as in the case of nest-building sticklebacks and pouch-carrying seahorses.
Pair
Wherever the parental duties are too much for one parent, the male and female form a strong attachment for one another and live together as a bonded pair.
Nesting fish, like many cichlids, form pairs that share the parental duties equally, and the same is true of over go per cent of all bird species, where incubation and feeding duties are particularly demanding.
Pair-bonds are comparatively rare in reptiles, and although they are  typical of certain mammals, such as beavers, jackals, foxes and gibbons, this is not the typical mammalian grouping.
Female mammals are better at caring for their young without male assistance and, where it is necessary, there tends to be a larger group than just a single pair.
Many animals, such as the puma, are solitary for most of the year, only coming together with other members of their species at mating time.
For the rest of the year they wander their home ranges or defend their territories against all-comers.
Family
This is merely an extension of the pair.
When the young arrive they often remain with the parents until they are fully, or nearly fully, grown.
During the later stages of their development to adulthood they frequently move about with their parents and, at this stage, create a larger grouping.
Occasionally there may be overlapping litters, with older offspring remaining while new babies are being cared for.
In such cases the extended family begins to look quite complex, but it is still essentially based upon the original pair, and when young do become fully adult they are driven away or wander off on their own to form separate pairs.
Whenever parental duties require the attentions of both mother and father, pair-formation takes place (opposite, top).
When a young female black-backed jackal first comes into heat she is followed by several young males, one of which she selects as her long-term partner.
Later when she is denbound with cubs, he will bring food to her and the pair will then rear their cubs together.
Once the young are born they may be cared for by both their parents for many days.
During this period the family unit becomes the natural social grouping, as it is for these highly protective swans (opposite, bottom).
A prolonged period of family life permits the growing offspring to add individual learning experiences to their inborn behaviour programming.
Harem
A typical mammalian grouping consists of one dominant male and a harem of females.
The size of the harem varies from species to species.
In polygamous monkeys each male has only a few females, but with species such as fur seals, the harems can be huge — up to one hundred females.
Male deer and some antelopes are also capable of collecting and controlling sizable numbers of females in the breeding season, but whenever the harem becomes too massive the harem-masters lose control and small splinter-groups of females are stolen by less dominant males in the vicinity.
The harem system requires, of course, that a large number of males are unlucky in the breeding season and must remain on the fringe of the reproductive groups.
There they may become solitary or may form into bachelor groups.
When the harem-masters become too old or too sick, new overlords will emerge from the strongest in the bachelor groups and will take over the females.
Inherent in this type of social system is a marked sexual dimorphism, with males usually much bigger than females, a consequence of the fierce inter-male competition for dominance.
In many species the basic unit is the harem, with one dominant male surrounding himself with a number of breeding females.
This is true of Hamadryas baboons (above), fur seals (left) and red deer (opposite, top).
The number of females varies from species to species.
The fur seal may have up to a hundred, but the Hamadryas makes do with only a handful.
Harem-masters are always conspicuously different in appearance from their females — frequently they are larger and in many cases they have special male weapons on their heads.
As an outcome of the harem system there are many surplus males.
In most harem-forming species these outcasts cluster together in all-male groups.
as here in the case of young male red deer (opposite, bottom).
From their number a new harem-master will one day emerge.
Apart from loss of control over females, there is also another danger in overinflating the size of the harem.
In some polygamous species, such as the patas monkey, the males become henpecked.
In this species, harems of up to twelve females are usual and although the male remains the leader, watchdog and defender of the group, in clashes with his females he is often the loser.
There are enough of them to gang up on him and dominate him, even though he remains the group ‘administrator’.
Some harems are permanent, while others dissolve at the end of the breeding season.
When this happens, the individuals may disperse or they may stay together in new groupings.
Red deer, for instance, end the season by splitting up into male herds and female herds, each with dominant members.
Then, when the next breeding time comes around, the males start moving in on the female groups again and fight one another for possession of that year's harems.
Matriarchy
By a small shift in the balance of power between the genders, the harem system can be converted into a matriarchy.
In this type of grouping, the females stay together at the centre of society, with the males on the periphery.
Instead of the dominant males moving in and taking over the females during the breeding period, they are simply allowed in for mating only and then driven out again.
This system is found in species as different as elephants and coatis.
When Victorian naturalists first studied the African elephant in the field they were convinced that the dominant member of the herd must be the  oldest bull.
This fitted their human concept of the dominant father-figure.
But we now know that the dominant leader of the herd is the old matriarch and that the big bulls are forced to live out their lives in solitary splendour on the fringes of elephant society.
Occasionally several males may form loose groups together, but whether they do this or not the essential point here is that it is the combined efforts of the females that control the herd, and rear and defend the young.
Some species have a female-dominated society.
This probably evolved from a harem system where the females combined forces to overpower and drive out the dominant male.
This matriarchal system operates in the African elephant where it is the dominant cow that leads the herd.
The herd is made up purely of females and young.
Oligarchy
Moving up the scale towards more complex social groupings we come to the oligarchy, where power is invested in an elite gang of dominant males.
The common baboon belongs to this type of social gathering.
Each troop, as it moves about its home range, consists of several powerful males, their shared females and their combined offspring.
Young adult males are driven out of this group and form separate bachelor parties that must bide their time until they can steal young females and set up an oligarchy of their own.
The advantage of this arrangement is that it provides an efficient means of defence against predators.
When attacked by a leopard, for instance, all the dominant males rush towards the attacker and together are able to intimidate it.
Singly, the leopard would defeat them, but together they can drive it away.
They can also help one another to defeat an attack by rival male baboons that are attempting to take over their shared females.
Furthermore, if one of the females becomes too dominant they can pool their male resources to put her in her place.
This arrangement requires a certain amount of restraint and co-operation on the part of the dominant males, but it clearly has compensatory advantages.
It is employed by a wide range of species, with slight variations.
In some cases there is a strong peck-order operating within the group of males, and sometimes also within the group of females.
With certain carnivores, only the dominant male copulates with the females.
He never gives the other males a chance.
In other groups, the dominant male gets most of the matings, and the other males are allowed an occasional copulation.
Sometimes the dominant female is so powerful that only she becomes pregnant and her subordinates must await her demise before being able to breed themselves.
In wolves there is occasionally a drawback to being the ‘top-dog’.
If the pack has become too big and unmanageable, the dominant male must spend all his time trying to control it.
He is often so busy that the less powerful males are able to disappear into a corner and copulate with his favourite females while his back is turned.
This ‘tycoon-failing’ pattern is one of the factors that makes a more moderate pack-size a better prospect for power-hungry males.
In the common baboon, unlike the Hamadryas, the troop exists as an oligarchy, with several dominant males sharing power.
This system is efficient because the males can gang up on attacking predators and their joint efforts are enough to drive them off.
There is some degree of division of labour, with certain males acting as sentinels.
Arena
Some species have developed an all-male grouping of a special kind.
In various birds species, such as ruffs and black grouse, the males all cluster together in the breeding season on a special patch of ground called a lek or arena.
There each displays as vividly as he can.
The females visit the arena and select the male of their choice, mate with him and then depart to rear the young on their own.
This is dealt with in more detail in the chapter on arena displays.
Hierarchy
A social hierarchy, peck-order, or social dominance grouping consists of individuals that are ranked according to their status.
Whereas territorial individuals are dominant in their own area but subordinates in other areas, hierarchically grouped individuals have the same status wherever they go.
Their rank is determined not by place but by person.
Some individuals manage to intimidate all their companions and rise to the top of the peck-order.
Others sink to the bottom.
This arrangement can become part of a reproductive grouping, but it is also frequently observed in non-breeding groups, where a hierarchy develops in relation to food sources.
The top animals can displace the bottom ones at feeding sites and gain other environmental advantages by virtue of being tougher than their group companions.
Aggregation
In non-breeding groups the size of the gathering can swell and swell, especially during migrations of the type seen in wildebeest and salmon.
There, when animals are on the move, there is little social structure, merely a mass of advancing animals.
The huge conglomerates that assemble on such occasions provide us with some of the greatest spectacles in the animal world.
Vast swarms of insects, endless shoals of fish, huge herds of antelopes and sky-filling migrations of birds, all reach dramatic proportions and defy accurate counting.
Caste system
Among social insects there exist extremely complex social organisations in which there are different classes of individuals, providing an efficient division of labour.
Termites, ants, bees and wasps display various forms of this caste system, all of which show a level of social differentiation that  cannot be found among any vertebrate species other than man himself.
There are queens, kings, workers, soldiers, and drones, each with a separate task to perform.
Together they create a large nest, operate it smoothly and defend it against all enemies.
Among the social insects dense aggregations occur but without the loss of complex social organisation.
Bees, wasps, ants and termites exhibit extraordinary degrees of division of labour, with separate castes comprising such categories as kings, queens, workers, slaves, drones and soldiers.
These are the ten basic types of social grouping.
For the animal-watcher the fascination is in finding new variants of these themes.
So often, a species appears at first glance to be a standard version of one of these ten categories.
Then, on closer inspection, it emerges that there are oddities in this particular instance (as there are in so many cases) and the quest is on to identify the survival value of these particular idiosyncrasies.
Usually it has something to do with the needs created by sharing: sharing the task of killing a large prey, sharing the task of defending the group against predators, sharing body heat to keep warm at night; sharing out different duties that can be performed at the same time; sharing the food that has been obtained by special members of the group; and so on.
Each environment and each species throws up its own unique combination of social demands which, in turn, create the spectrum of variations on the theme of social grouping.
And although we now know the facts for many species of animals, it is important to point out that for many more we still have only the crudest knowledge of their grouping behaviour.
Much remains to be discovered.
Escape Behaviour
MOST ANIMALS must live out their lives with an ever-present threat of attack from predators.
When active, they must always be on the alert, ready to take avoiding action.
They have three basic strategies: to freeze, to flee and to fight, often in that order.
Freezing is a widespread response to a predator alarm among many of the better camouflaged species.
The eyes of predators are finely tuned to the slightest movement, but are less well equipped to distinguish static shapes, especially if their outlines are blurred by broken patterning or by foliage cover.
Some species, such as hares and young antelope, will stay stock-still in a crouching posture until the predator is almost upon them, before bolting.
Anyone who has been walking across grassland and has nearly trodden on a hare, will know what a shock it is when the animal suddenly leaps up and darts off.
It is gone even before the predator can gather its wits and make chase.
When under attack from a predator the three basic responses of animals are to freeze, flee or fight.
In the bittern (above) and the hare (left), freezing is the most common form of defence.
At the first sign of danger the bittern adopts a rigid, stiffly erect posture, making itself almost invisible in the vegetation around its nest.
The hare crouches low on the ground and remains absolutely still until the predator is nearly upon it.
Only then does it flee.
Even without elaborate camouflage markings, this immobility is of great value to prey species because the eyes of prowling killers are more sensitive to movements than to static shapes.
Some prey species, such as tree squirrels, add a refinement to their freezing behaviour.
As soon as they sight a predator approaching, they swiftly dart round to the far side of a tree-trunk before performing the rigid ‘statue’ response.
Freezing on the trunk, they are now completely hidden from view and make no tell-tale sound.
If the killer comes prowling around to their side of the tree, they simply dart to the blind side again.
In this way, squirrels in a wood can remain hidden from view while a predator explores the whole region.
Woodpeckers use a similar hiding technique.
For the animal-watcher this strategy only becomes obvious when, from a hidden viewpoint, it is possible to see the predator approaching from the far side of the prey.
Then the trick is revealed all too clearly.
If freezing fails to work, then the next step is to flee.
Many prey species have developed amazingly fast escape actions.
The speed of some of these have been carefully measured.
Some deer have managed bursts of 40 miles an hour and antelopes have reliably reached over 50 miles an hour.
The fastest predator is the cheetah, which can touch nearly 60 miles an hour at its best, but it cannot sustain this for very long.
In fact, the average distance covered during pursuits by cheetahs is only 183 yards.
In exceptional cases they may be able to continue for 300 yards, but beyond this they quickly become exhausted and give up.
This is where the prey can score, because they can keep going for much longer.
Some antelopes have  been recorded fleeing at 42 miles an hour for a mile, or 35 miles an hour for 4 miles, and deer have been able to sustain 30 miles an hour for an astonishing 20 miles.
This may seem excessive in relation to the cheetah's performance, but there are other predators with much greater stamina.
Wolves and hunting dogs may not be able to reach dramatically high speeds over short distances, but they can run and run.
The speed of one wolf was recorded at between 1 5 and 30 miles an hour for a distance of 12 miles, after which the animal had to slow down to a trot.
Tundra wolves have been observed chasing deer for 5 or 6 miles before accelerating to attack.
Clearly prey need to be both sprinters over short distances and marathon runners over longer ones, to be able to defend themselves against both types of pursuers.
The secret against sprinting predators, such as the big cats, is to get a good start on them.
As they are marginally faster, the ability to begin fleeing before they have had a chance to accelerate to full speed is crucial.
Hence the ever-alert nature of so many antelopes.
They must always be on the lookout for the stalking feline hunter, whose aim is to get as close as possible before beginning the chase.
Once the pursuit is on, it is simply a matter of whether the killer will start to tire before it manages to reach its victim.
With wild dogs in pursuit it is a different matter.
Then it is a battle of relative staminas — who will last the longest.
If attacks come from above, running fast is less effective.
Birds of prey have been registered nose-diving at speeds of up to 1 l 0 miles an hour.
The best defence here is to go underground as quickly as possible.
The main prey of predatory birds are the hundreds of different rodent species and the vast majority of these have evolved a protection system based on a quick scamper down a tunnel.
The burrow has become their main survival device, saving them not only from swooping birds but also from earthbound predators too large to follow them.
Some prey species such as the oryx (opposite, top), rely on simple, powerful galloping to escape their pursuers, but others, such as the impala (below), employ a more confusing, zigzag escape route, with sudden directional changes making it difficult for the pursuing attacker to strike.
(Opposite, bottom) Many prey species have developed unusually long legs and strange forms of locomotion as refinements of their fleeing behaviour.
Bipedal leaping in kangaroos and bipedal sprinting in frilled lizards help to make their flight more startling and unpredictable.
Many other prey species flee upwards to safety rather than downwards.
Arboreal rodents, primates, and many other mammals take to the trees as an escape route and the majority of them rarely risk a descent to the  ground unless it is vitally necessary.
Birds, bats and gliding mammals simply take to the air.
Many of the most impressive forms of animal locomotion have evolved as extensions of fleeing actions.
There are several refinements of fleeing behaviour.
Instead of trying to escape by moving as fast as possible away from the predator, some animals take an erratic zigzag course.
The hare flees across a field in this way, and a number of different birds and fish have also been seen to use this technique.
It works on the principle that the pursuer will not be able to change direction as efficiently as the prey.
To be successful the direction-shifts of the fleeing animal must be irregular so that the predator cannot anticipate either when or in which direction the next change of course will be.
Unpredictable escape patterns of this kind have been called ‘protean’ defence systems because like the figure of Proteus in ancient Greek mythology they repeatedly change their shape.
The hare, pursued here by a goshawk, is a master of unexpected movements when fleeing.
Another technique is the dash-and-hide, dash-and-hide retreat.
This is employed by animals such as frogs and grasshoppers that cannot sustain a prolonged bout of fleeing.
They make a sudden darting movement at the highest possible speed and then quickly freeze, staying quite still in the undergrowth.
If the predator takes a wrong direction they remain in hiding until the danger is passed, but if it comes close again they wait until the last moment and then repeat the dash-and-hide movement.
They may keep this up time and time again until, with luck, the predator finally gives up the chase.
Chasing prey through the tree-tops is much more hazardous than pursuing them along the ground, as this raccoon-hunting puma is discovering (below).
Many species have taken to arboreal living as a protective device, and some, such as this sugar-glider (opposite), have become specialised jumpers that can leave most predators behind with ease.
A third device is the flash retreat.
In this the prey flashes a bright patch  of colour as it flees, and then it suddenly freezes, concealing the bright patch as it does so.
Some grasshoppers have vividly coloured patches on their wings and these are clearly visible when they are flying away from their enemies.
But as soon as they come to rest the wings close and the animals become completely cryptic again.
This confuses the predator because it has ‘tuned in’, so to speak, to the bright colour and is following that.
Once the colour disappears it is as if the prey animal has suddenly ceased to exist.
If fleeing and hiding have failed and the prey finds itself cornered by its would-be killer, it may make one last desperate attempt to save itself, by throwing caution to the wind and attacking the predator physically.
In most cases this will not be of much use, but at this stage there is nothing to lose.
And predators are surprisingly nervous about sustaining even minor injuries.
This is because, should they be wounded, or should a small cut become infected, they may temporarily lose peak condition.
If they are not athletically fit they may not be able to hunt for a while and this could be critical, as most of them must kill regularly to survive.
So a snarling, spitting, clawing prey is given rather more respect than it may appear to deserve.
Many a hungry cat has thought twice about attacking a large, cornered rat.
Many small birds have escaped with the loss of only a few feathers because of a smartly delivered peck with a sharp beak.
And animals with horns have sometimes managed to toss their tormentors high in the air when making a last-ditch stand.
For some prey, it becomes a matter of safety in numbers, with musk oxen forming up in a defensive circle to face a pack of marauding wolves, like a wagon train defending itself against attacking Indians.
With these three techniques of freezing, fleeing and fighting many prey manage to survive for another day, but there are also more specialised ways of dealing effectively with attackers and these are discussed in more detail in the following chapters.
(Opposite, top) Self-defence for a rhinoceros may be little more than casting a sleepily arrogant eye on the hungry lions surrounding it; for an agitated elephant, on the other hand, it may be a vigorous charge.
Horned prey, such as these musk oxen (opposite, bottom), are only armoured at their front end, so that their rear needs special protection.
The herd solves this problem by forming a defensive circle when marauding wolves attack.
If fleeing fails and the prey is cornered, it may make a last-ditch stand and turn on its tormentor.
Self-defence of this kind may be no more than a threat, as in the case of the inflated toad, standing high on its legs when confronted by a grass snake (above), or the frilled lizard (right) which erects a huge umbrella of skin around its gaping jaws.
Protective Armour
THE ANIMAL WORLD is so full of savage teeth, sharp claws and pointed horns that many species have sought protection behind a powerful wall of body armour.
Once they possess this their whole lifestyle is transformed.
Gone is the need for speedy, athletic fleeing, gone the need for eternal alertness and high-strung sensitivity to every tiny hint of danger.
They become comfortably heavy-bodied, even cumbersome, and bumble their way through life at a more relaxed pace.
They are the tanks of the animal kingdom, and they come in many forms.
Among the mammals they are comparatively rare.
Only 169 mammalian species (which is roughly 4 per cent of the 4,237 living species) can boast any form of armoured protection.
It is true that there are many species with horns or antlers, but those are primarily concerned with offence and are only secondarily employed as defensive armour against predators.
They are weapons rather than protective coverings.
The most primitive of the armoured mammals are the five species of echidnas, or spiny anteaters, from Australasia.
Their underside is soft and hairy but the whole of their upper surface is covered in strong, thick spines.
When disturbed, they make for a crevice or hole where they can jam themselves in so tight with their powerful claws that it is almost impossible to dislodge them.
All the attacker is offered is a sea of spines, with nothing to grip on to.
If caught out in the open, the echidna simply digs rapidly downwards until, again, nothing is visible but its spiky upper surface.
The echidna, Australia's spiny anteater, protects itself by digging rapidly downwards until its soft underside is completely hidden and its enemy is offered only a sea of powerful, sharp spikes.
Among the insectivores there are eight species of spiny tenrecs from Madagascar and fifteen species of hedgehogs from Europe, Africa and Asia.
The tenrecs look very much like the hedgehogs and have a similar defensive armour, with fine spines that can be erected as the animal rolls into a tight ball.
Some of the hedgehogs embellish their self-protection with an upward jerking movement.
If a predator is nosing close to them and they have not yet rolled tightly into a ball, they may bend and then suddenly straighten their legs, thrusting their spiny backs up into the  killer's sensitive nose.
This upward jerk can be very painful and is sometimes enough to dishearten the attacker and allow the hedgehog to scuttle away to safety without having to resort to the passive rolling-up defence.
In addition to these spiny insectivores there are two other armoured species, the extraordinary hero shrews.
Outwardly these look like large, furry shrews, but internally they carry a secret defence — their amazing, reinforced backbone.
Unlike the spinal column of any other mammal, it has a network of interlocking protrusions from its vertebrae that gives it enormous strength and resistance to crushing.
Confined to West Africa, these species of shrews have been persecuted locally because of their strange internal armour.
Local natives believe that, eaten or worn as decoration, they will act as protection from injury.
To demonstrate the power of the animals, a fully grown man stands on the back of the 6-inch-long shrew, balancing himself on one leg.
Any other small mammal of this size would quickly be squashed to death, but when he steps off it after several minutes, the hero shrew reveals that it is still very much alive by trying to escape.
The mystery about this particular form of protective armour is precisely what the shrew is defending itself against.
Humans were clearly not the primeval enemy that led to the evolution of this unique backbone, so which deadly crusher was involved?
This is a puzzle that has yet to be answered.
The hero shrew has an armoured backbone that can withstand enormous pressure.
The hedgehog cannot dig itself in when threatened but it can protect its soft parts by rolling up into a tight ball.
Its seven thousand spines then defend it in all directions.
The spines also act as shock-absorbers if the animal suffers a fall.
Another mystery surrounds the only example of body armour to be found among the primates.
The more advanced monkeys or apes do not have any kind of protective armour and use brain rather than brawn to solve their problems, but the slow-moving little relative of the bushbabies known as Bosman's potto does have a secret defence rather like the hero shrew's.
Here, too, the backbone is modified and made more impressive, but the details are different.
In the potto's case, the neck vertebrae have  short, blunt vertical protrusions that project slightly through the skin.
The result is a kind of knuckle-duster, a row of hard bumps hidden deceptively in the soft, dense fur.
The puzzle here is how the animal employs these obviously defensive spikes when in trouble.
When the slow-moving potto is approached by an enemy, it curls up into a tight ball, clings on to its branch and lowers its head between its legs so that the back of its spiky neck is thrust towards the predator.
But this hardly seems sufficient, as an armoured defence, to deter any but the most casual of killers.
Perhaps, as the attacker's jaws open wide to grab the small, furry shape, the potto acts like a jerking hedgehog and thrusts the back of its neck at the biting mouth.
Possibly the shock of feeling hard spikes in what appeared to be a soft, yielding morsel of food would be enough to make some predators think twice, but this is not particularly convincing.
If the spikes were sharp, like the dorsal fins of many fish, the strategy would be easy to understand, but their shortness and bluntness mean that, for the moment, the potto remains another puzzle.
Sharper spines, including the most fiendish known.
are to be found among the rodents.
In this huge group (1,729 species) there are many armoured examples: 18 kinds of spiny mice, 22 spiny pocket mice, 37 spiny rats and 24 porcupines.
The mice and rats have simple, slender spines mixed in with their ordinary fur.
Although they are not completely spiny, they are nevertheless prickly enough to repel all but the most desperate of predators.
It is with the porcupines, however, that the spiny defensive system reaches its zenith.
Here the spikes can become enormous quills — those of the great crested porcupine are as long as 20 inches.
They can be rattled to produce a menacing warning sound, they can be thrust violently into the flesh of the attacker by backward lunges of the porcupine's body, and they can easily be detached to be left embedded in the unfortunate predator's anatomy.
Once driven home, these savage spines are extremely difficult to dislodge and may continue to torment the would-be killer for days to come, sometimes leading to festering wounds that can kill.
This spiny mouse is one of 101 species of prickly rodents, but it is the least spectacular.
At first glimpse it may not even appear to be armoured, but if the animal is taken into a predator's mouth its fur is sufficiently spiky to cause acute discomfort and it is quickly dropped.
The most dramatic of the spiny rodents are the heavily armoured porcupines.
The South American porcupines (below, left) may not look as impressive as the great crested species from Africa (below, right) but their quills are sharply barbed so that once they have entered a predator's flesh they cannot easily be removed.
Less spectacular but even more deadly are the spines of the American  porcupines.
These spines are covered in small backward-directed barbs, so that once in the flesh they are almost impossible to dislodge.
Furthermore, the pain caused by the presence of an embedded spine makes the muscles it has penetrated contract in such a way that it is driven even deeper into the flesh.
Some barbed quills have reputedly travelled so deep into the bodies of their victims that they have caused the deaths of the predators from the extensive damage caused to vital internal organs.
It has been calculated that the 1½-inch quills penetrate tissue in this way at a rate of an inch a day.
The North American porcupine's method of defending itself is to lash wildly at the enemy with its spiny tail, sometimes turning the predator's nose into a pin-cushion.
The only killer that seems to have much success in dealing with this troublesome prey is the North American marten known as the fisher.
This species circles the porcupine like a mongoose dealing with a cobra, and confuses it enough to be able to strike at its only vulnerable zone — its head.
After a few blows there, the porcupine succumbs and is then turned carefully over and eaten from underneath, its soft underbelly causing no problems.
Eventually all that is left is the spiny coat.
The spines of the African porcupines regularly encountered by lions may not be barbed.
like those of the South American porcupines, but they are nevertheless difficult to remove and this particular lion faces a painful future.
Mammals with non-spiny armour include the twenty-one species of armadillos and the seven species of pangolins, or scaly anteaters.
The upper skin of the armadillo's body has evolved into a hard horny covering that is hinged in such a way as to give the animals at least some degree of flexibility.
The hinges are arranged in bands across the middle of the back and vary in number according to the species.
When alarmed, these animals usually try to make for cover, seeking out their burrows or some other hiding place where they can wedge themselves in as tightly as possible.
The smallest of the species, the pink fairy armadillo, possesses one of the most extraordinary rumps in the animal kingdom.
Its rear end has become a completely flat, circular disc of armour.
When the little animal is disturbed it burrows furiously down into the ground until it has completely disappeared except for its horny rump.
This acts like a cork in a bottle, stopping the borrow and preventing any attack on the soft flesh beneath it.
The most impressive of all the armadillo species, when responding to attack, is the three-banded.
This animal rolls up into an almost perfect ball, with the top of the head and the top of the tail fitting close together like the last pieces of a jigsaw puzzle, leaving no gap anywhere for a predator to probe.
As an added deterrent, this species usually waits until the last moment for the final clamping-down movement.
It rolls up so that the gaps between its different parts are nearly closed, but a small opening is left.
Then when it is touched it immediately snaps the shells together like a steel trap.
If, at this point, a tender nose-tip, or small paw is being probed into the cracks, the result is both painful and startling, encouraging a more cautious approach to this difficult object of interest.
The armadillos are all confined to the Americas.
In the Old World they have a counterpart in the form of the strange, scaly anteaters, the pangolins.
Looking like huge, animated pine-cones, these unusual animals are covered in large, overlapping scales that extend right down to the tip of the long, prehensile tail.
When disturbed they roll up so tightly that it is virtually impossible to unroll them.
Although well protected against most predators they are no match for human ingenuity.
Their flesh is popular with many local peoples and their scales are valuable as ornaments and decorations, with the result that their numbers have been dwindling.
Equally vulnerable to human weapons are the armoured giants of the animal world, the rhinos and the elephants.
The most impressive of the rhinos is the great Indian rhinoceros, with its tough skin thrown into heavy folds that look like curved, welded sections of sheet-metal.
Even the tail is carefully protected, fitting snugly into a deep groove on the animal's rump, where two sheets of armour meet in a vertical cleft.
Elephants lack these conspicuous folds, but they too are well defended against attack by their powerful, leathery skin which is sometimes as much as an inch thick.
The great Indian rhinoceros carries a heavy burden in armoured skin.
This is a handicap when racing a pursuing predator, but at the same time makes the rhinoceros an almost impossible meal.
Even its tail is protected from attack, fitting neatly into a slot in its rump armour.
Among the birds, body-armour is absent for the obvious reason that it would make them too heavy to fly.
Only the large, ground-living cassowaries from the Australasian rain forests possess anything that could be called avian armour, and even there it is confined solely to the head region.
The top of the skull is extended into a bony helmet, called a ‘casque’, that helps to cut a swathe through the dense undergrowth when the big bird is moving fast.
It shields the head from damage and can therefore be described as protective armour of a limited kind.
Rolling into a hard, scaly ball is a device employed by a variety of armoured animals, including the pangolin from Africa and Asia (top), the three-banded armadillo from South America, and the giant pill millipede from Madagascar (right).
The penalty for possessing this effective armour-plating is a disproportionately heavy body and a loss of physical flexibility.
Only the legs of birds show the tough scaly skin that reflects their reptilian ancestry.
It is to the reptiles themselves one must turn to find the greatest display of armoured scales that are all-enveloping, protecting their wearers over the whole surface of the body.
Each scale is a hard, dry shield of keratin growing out from the animal's epidermis and overlapping with its neighbours to make a body-covering that is as snugly fitting as it is strong.
The keratin is dead material that is replaced by growth from below.
The old armour is either worn away gradually, as in crocodiles, or it is shed at special times in a complete ‘coat’, as in lizards and snakes.
The strongest forms of reptilian armour are reinforced by small plates of bone lying under the horny scales.
These are at their most impressive on the backs of the giant crocodiles, where they are lozenge-shaped and give these  formidable reptiles the appearance of being covered in spiked metal armour-plating.
Body-armour is rare among birds but the ground-living cassowary (opposite) carries a powerful helmet on its head that acts as a protective shield when the bird pushes through rough undergrowth.
The scaly skin of reptiles is ideally suited for development into sharply spiked armour.
The armoured scales become extended into thorny backs, horny heads and spiny frills.
Some species, such as the armadillo lizard (above, left), make predatory attacks even more difficult by biting their tails and holding tight, creating an awkward circle of spikes.
The thorny devil (above) relies simply on its immensely sharp and powerful spikes for protection, while the bearded lizard (left) defends itself by erecting its spiny throat skin.
Certain lizards take the spiky defence trend a major step further, with long, sharp spines growing out of their scaly skins.
As painful to bite as cacti, spiny lizards such as the mountain devil or the horned toad are almost impossible to swallow without serious damage to the health of the predator.
Among the tortoises and turtles, the overlapping scales have been replaced by a large, thick armoured box of horn.
In certain species this can be shut tight as a further protection, with the head and legs being drawn behind the barrier.
Some have a hinge to close the head-end aperture others have a hinge to protect the hind legs; still others have both.
The  bigheaded turtle is unique in having a heavily armoured head and tail which it never attempts to draw into its shell when attacked.
In addition to their hard shell, tortoises and turtles sometimes possess special protective refinements.
The Asiatic spiny turtle (left) boasts a rim of sharp spikes around the edge of its shell, and the pancake tortoise (bottom) has an unusually flattened shell and body enabling it to slither to safety under low crevices.
The porcupine fish (opposite, top) inflates itself by gulping in water (or air if it has been removed from the sea) until its body is so puffed up that its spiny scales stand out rigidly from its body and defy any killer to devour it.
Amazingly, though, porcupine fish have often been found among the stomach contents of large tuna.
How the tuna manage to swallow these painful morsels is not known.
Amphibians, like birds and most mammals, have soft bodies that are easily squeezed in predatory jaws.
They rely on many forms of protective behaviour, but the wearing of armour is not one of them.
There is only one notable exception to this amphibian rule and that is the extraordinary sharp-ribbed newt.
This small and seemingly harmless creature carries a hidden weapon.
When it is grabbed, its elongated, sharp-pointed ribs are pressed out through the sides of its body and into the lining of the mouth of the hapless hunter.
The tips of the spiny ribs pass through special pores as they impale the predator and they carry with them the secretions of nearby glands — glands that cause intensely painful poisoning of the inside of the attacker's mouth.
Such newts are long remembered and long avoided.
(Opposite, middle) Anyone who has dined on crab or lobster will know how well the hard carapace of these animals protects their soft flesh.
But like all armoured animals they have sacrificed flexibility for security and must now be content with a stiffly jointed existence.
The greatest armour in the world of molluscs is found on the giant clam (opposite), a bivalve whose shell weighs ¼ ton and is over 4 feet in length.
Although this amazing armour protects the soft body of the clam extremely well, the animal is not the killer it is so often made out to be.
Countless stories exist of swimmers whose feet become trapped inside giant clams that snap shut suddenly and then refuse to release their victims.
This myth is believed all over the world despite the fact that the weight of the armour makes it impossible for the clam to close rapidly.
There is no recorded example of a giant clam causing a human death.
Many species of fish employ similar defence tactics, with fin-rays hardened into sharp spines which are often greatly elongated and frequently have poison added, making a lasting impression.
Some fish  boast armour so deadly that the predator dies within minutes of biting the spines.
Observations of predatory fish attacking spiny prey reveal that after one experience of even a non-poisonous species the predators are so shocked by the pain inside their mouths that they go off their food for days.
Eventually, when they begin cautiously to feed again, they avoid anything remotely like the spiny prey they attacked previously.
And the bigger and sharper the spines, the longer this effect lasts.
The supreme example of spiny defence is shown by the porcupine fish, a small inflatable creature that can puff itself up into a prickly sphere, either with an intake of water when under the surface, or with air when it has been caught and removed from the sea.
As its body becomes fully inflated all its spines protrude menacingly, defying any predator to attack.
At other times these spines lie flat against the body and are inconspicuous.
Spines are common among the lower forms of life and are clearly the most successful of all armoured devices.
There are treacherous spiny sea urchins, spiny molluscs and spiny lobsters, all well protected by their sharp-pointed defence barriers.
Even without spines, nearly all arthropods (prawns, crabs and lobsters) and molluscs (snails and bi-valves) are snugly enclosed in hard outer coverings.
Their shells provide them with valuable protection but like all armoured species they are at certain disadvantages — they are nearly always less mobile, less flexible, and suffer the consequences.
They are also less cunning and exploratory, having less danger to face than the soft-bodied species.
In general.
armoured animals are like rich people — insulated from the real hazards of life and therefore less  streetwise' and opportunist.
It is no accident that all the higher forms of life, all the most intelligent species, are without armour.
The bumbling nature of armoured animals is neatly summed up by an anecdote concerning a family of three-banded armadillos.
They were trotting along a path on the side of a hill when they detected a man walking below them.
When they immediately reacted with their automatic alarm response of rolling up into a tight ball, the entire family promptly rolled down the slope of the hill and came to rest at the man's feet, where he picked them up and popped them into his collecting bag.
Sometimes it pays to be a little more flexible.
The long spines of the sea urchins protect them from most predators.
However, this sea star, like many starfish, is capable of devouring these armoured animals.
It can protrude from its body a soft, slimy stomach which then glides between the spines and invades the centre of the sea urchin The victim's body is slowly digested before the stomach is withdrawn again to the interior of the sea star.
Camouflage
IF AN ANIMAL is to survive it must either confront predators or avoid them.
If it possesses some sort of strength — physical, chemical or armoured — it can face up boldly to its enemies and defy them.
If it is harmless, tasty, or soft-bodied, it must find some way of concealing itself.
Under duress it may flee and hide, but it can only do this occasionally.
For the rest of the time — the quieter moments in its life — it must render itself inconspicuous.
It must conceal its form with some sort of camouflage.
The most obvious clue to its presence is its movement, so in order for its camouflage to work it must be prepared to remain very still for long periods of time, or at least to alter its position very slowly and gently.
Its next problem is how to conceal its characteristic outline.
Most animals are bi-laterally symmetrical and their shape is too balanced to match with the irregularities of backgrounds made up of plants, rocks and earth.
To hide their clear outlines they need some kind of disruptive markings .
There are several types of disruption.
One of them employs a psychological trick.
If an animal is covered with irregular patches that break up its outline, the concealment can be improved by the presence of bright colours within these patches.
These intense areas automatically draw the eyes of the predator and as he stares at them he fails to notice the larger shape which carries them.
This is the Harlequin Principle and is vividly expressed on the body of the harlequin sweetlips, a fish that appears to the eye as a collection of coral reef growths.
Another type of disruption employs a series of intense bands or stripes that pass right across the animal.
These are nearly always pale and dark in alternation and again help to chop up the animal's basic shape.
If the animal is seen against a pale background, the pale patches blend in with the environment, leaving only the dark patches visible.
On their own, these do not add up to an animal shape, and disruption is achieved.
If the background changes to dark, the same system operates.
This is the Particoloured Principle and is found in a wide variety of fish and insects.
A third type of disruption helps to conceal particular parts of the body.
Certain anatomical shapes such as legs, arms, necks, feet or wings tend to give the game away.
They help to define the prey's body as a body.
A valuable way of concealing them is to have bars, stripes or blobs of colour that appear to overflow from one section to the next, as though someone has splashed ink across the animal.
This Splash Principle is finely developed in many frogs.
When they are moving about and their legs are held apart from the body the splash-pattern is not obvious, but once they crouch motionless, with their legs drawn up to their sides, their trunk and leg patches meet and obscure the divisions between them.
Most disruption works by making continuous outlines appear to be discontinuous, but the Splash Principle operates in the opposite way, making what is in reality a discontinuous surface appear to be a continuous one.
In both cases the camouflage is interfering with the natural elements, but in one case it is attacking the whole shape, while in the other it is blotting out the appendages.
Spots, stripes and dappled markings help to disguise the presence of many animals.
This small glass frog guarding its eggs on a large green leaf combines a semi-transparent body with a spotted skin that renders it almost invisible to its enemies.
The Splash Principle — the dark markings on this grey tree frog spread across its legs in such a way that they break up its shape.
They look as though they have been splashed across the skin.
More generalised disruptive markings which simply break up the broad shape of the body are found in the many spotted or striped species.
Big cats such as the tiger employ stripes that work well in the grassy undergrowth.
Serval cats, ocelots and leopards favour spotted coats that work well in dappled light.
To human eyes many of the body markings appear to be beautiful and highly conspicuous, but this is because we so often see them in artificial environments where their camouflage quality fails to show itself.
Seen against a plain, bleak background, most disruptive patterns fail miserably, but there are few such backdrops in nature.
One highly specialised form of disruptive pattern is the eye-mask.
This takes the form of a stripe, band or patch of dark colour that runs right  through the eye and effectively makes it invisible.
The eye is the most tell-tale detail of any animal shape and it is a great advantage to be able to obscure it from view.
If the eye's owner employs the more obvious technique of closing the eye, it is no longer able to monitor the predator's movements.
But if the eye can remain open without being seen, then the prey has the best of both worlds.
This eye-mask device is extremely common among fish, with literally hundreds of species employing it, and it is also widely seen in snakes and frogs.
A special variant of the eye-mask is the spot-the-eye pattern of certain fish.
In this, the markings consist of a pattern of dark spots all of which look like the dark pupil of the fish's eye.
In this crowd of spots, the real eye is lost.
A distinct form of concealment involves camouflage by countershading .
This works on a completely different principle from disruptive colouring.
Instead of trying to break up the real shape of the animal, it attempts to make it appear flatter than it is.
All animals have three-dimensional bodies and their solidity can give them away.
If they appear to be two-dimensional they suddenly seem less ‘animal-like’ and may avoid the unwelcome attentions of a hungry predator.
Countershading operates on a simple premise, namely that in the animal's usual position one part of its body is more brightly lit than the rest.
A completely plain, fawn-coloured antelope standing in a fawn-coloured landscape would appear to be solid-bodied because the sun, beating down on its back, would illuminate this area more than its sides and much more than its belly.
In many species the natural coat colouring compensates for this top-lighting, the back being darker than the sides and the sides darker than the belly.
In this way, the combination of light-plus-colour gives the animal a flat, undifferentiated appearance and renders it much less conspicuous to predatory eyes.
The same principle is at work in some caterpillars, except that, since they are usually crawling along twigs and branches upside-down, their counter-shading is reversed.
If they are deliberately turned up the ‘right’ way, they appear doubly solid, as the brighter light strikes the paler area.
The spots of the leopard (opposite) lurking in the long grass help to destroy the solidity of its form, and the dappled patches on the coat of the clouded leopard (above, left) conceal it well in the broken light of the forest.
Even the huge bulk of the tiger (above) is inconspicuous as the animal lies quietly on the forest floor.
The simplest method of all, where body concealment is concerned, is to  match perfectly the colour of the background.
Whether this is a plain green, or yellow, or an overall mottled grey and brown, the result is a body-covering of precisely the same hue and tone.
Tiny, pure green frogs live out their lives on large, pure green leaves.
Nothing more elaborate is called for.
Arctic mammals and birds have evolved pure white fur or feathers that help to camouflage them against the white expanses of the frozen north.
Gravel-bottom-dwelling fish have gravel-pattern colours.
But the problem often becomes more complex than this.
As the animal moves about, its background changes.
Dealing with this problem, many species have evolved various forms of colour change.
Some, like flatfish and chameleons, are capable of changing colour rapidly by expanding and contracting special pigment cells in their skin.
The octopus can even modify the texture of its skin at high speed, a smooth, plain surface suddenly furrowing up into complex folds and ridges and gaining a complex blotched patterning at the same time.
Other species are only capable of undergoing such changes at a much slower rate — as when birds moult in and out of their breeding plumage.
In the mating season finding a partner is more important than camouflage and bright colours are moulted in, but during the rest of the year self-protection dominates and camouflage returns.
Disruptive markings help to break up the shape of an animal's body in any environment that is full of irregular detail, as in the case of this well concealed crab.
The trumpet fish is a lurking predator that often hides in shoals of smaller fish.
When natural light falls on an animal's body from above, it illuminates the upper surface more than the lower.
As a result, many species, such as this predatory trumpet fish, are counter-shaded — their undersides are lighter than their backs.
This compensates for the top-lighting. making the animals look flatter and less conspicuous.
When artificially illuminated from below, the effect of the countershading is reversed — the trumpet fish looks strikingly solid and highly conspicuous.
The colours of certain other species can be modified only when there is a genetic shift in their population.
This has happened recently with the peppered moth, a speckled species that is camouflaged on the lichen-covered tree-trunks where it normally lives.
Following the Industrial Revolution, many trees became blackened by smoke and on these the speckled moths were suddenly highly conspicuous.
They were an obvious target for hungry birds and were easily picked off.
Only moths that were unusually dark managed to escape, and these then bred to produce a generally greyer strain of peppered moths.
Again, it was the darkest ones that survived best, with the result that in a few generations the peppered  moths living near the big industrial cities were nearly all black.
By 1900 a survey near the city of Manchester revealed that, there, 99 per cent of all the peppered moths were already black, while those continuing to live in cleaner, country districts retain the usual, speckled appearance of the species.
In a very short space of time — just a few decades — the industrial moths had gone through a small but distinct evolutionary step.
Today the melanistic moths are still thriving in the grimier habitats and, if our cities go on spreading at their present rate, these black ones may well become the common form of the species.
In tropical seas a few fish, such as this leafy sea dragon, have evolved bizarre extensions of their bodies, transforming them to look like small floating pieces of seaweed.
The tell-tale clue for many a predator is the circular eye of its prey.
Because of this, certain species, such as this banded butterfly fish, possess an eye-stripe, a dark line that passes through the eye and hides its presence.
Perhaps the most extraordinary examples of animal camouflage are those in which the animals concerned have evolved into mimics of specific details in their backgrounds.
There are insects that look exactly like green leaves.
Others are virtually indistinguishable from the flowers with which they associate — so much so that smaller insects keep settling on them.
There are stick insects that look like twigs, butterflies that resemble bird droppings, seahorses that appear to be pieces of floating seaweed, moths that look like bark and frogs that seem to be nothing more than leaf litter on the forest floor.
The tiny perfections of detail in these deceptions have puzzled some animal-watchers, who argue that no predator could be that clever — so why should there be these amazing refinements which may include such things as small patches of fake leaf-mould, or tiny pieces of leaf damage'?
The answer is that these deceptions have to fool all possible predators and while some may be able to tune in to one detail others may have a searching-image for something quite different.
In the end, the only system that works well, across the board, is the one that involves perfect imitation.
One last camouflage technique that deserves a brief mention is what  might be called ‘half-hiding’.
Instead of fleeing to a safe place and hiding away there with complete body concealment, the animal takes up a semi-hidden position from which it can remain watchful.
Certain snakes and lizards are highly efficient at wriggling themselves down into the sand or gravel in such a way that only the tops of their heads and their eyes remain exposed to view.
With the rest of their bodies submerged, their eyes go unnoticed.
Lying completely still they can see without being seen.
Among fish this is a favoured technique with many bottom-dwelling species.
As they land on the seabed, flatfish flap up the sand in a sudden flurry of rapid movements, and then quickly lie perfectly still.
The sand cloud settles on their bodies and obliterates their tell-tale outlines.
With a few deft eye-blinks they can clear their field of vision and watch the world about them for clues of special danger.
The most elementary form of camouflage is to match the background perfectly.
When the background is a single colour, this is a simple matter, as it is for this yellow crab spider crouching in wait for a prey to arrive on the marigold flower.
In the polar regions many species, such as this ptarmigan, have developed a pure white covering.
The Mimicry Principle — a tawny frogmouth as a tree-stump and a green shrimp as a plant stem.
By copying some detail of their environment many animals become almost impossible for predators to detect.
Some marine species, such as the trumpet fish, hide in a different way.
They are lurkers that escape detection by joining the passing throng.
As a shoal of some other kind of fish swims past, the predatory trumpet fish moves into their midst and progresses with them as they make their way around the coral gardens.
By this simple device, it is able to conceal its highly characteristic body shape and is able to approach more easily its intended prey.
For predators make just as much use of camouflage as do their prey.
Whether hunting or hunted, the act of concealment is a major survival technique for literally thousands of species.
Half-hiding is a technique adopted by many desert-dwelling species, such as this Peringuey's desert adder.
The animal wriggles its body beneath the surface until only the top of the head is exposed.
Then, with a watchful eye, it can keep a lookout for potential prey without revealing its presence.
When the pale trees on which the peppered moth rested became dirty from the grime of the Industrial Revolution, only the black variants survived well.
These quickly became the norm.
This small evolutionary step of ‘industrial melanism’ was taken in a mere century.
Warning Signals
THE MAJORITY OF ANIMALS are not brightly coloured.
Their dull coats make them inconspicuous and they survive by avoiding trouble.
Those that break this rule and display bright colours and vivid patterns are taking a risk.
By making themselves obvious to predators they can easily attract unwanted attention.
So for the animal-watcher it becomes a challenge, with every brightly coloured species encountered, to find out what particular advantage there is in giving up the quiet life and facing daily exposure.
There appear to be three main answers.
First, the animal may need bright colours for social reasons — to attract a mate, repel a rival, maintain high status, or carry out parental duties.
Second, it may need to make itself distinct from other species with which it shares its living space.
If that space is a particularly rich environment, such as a coral reef, and food of many kinds is plentiful, many different species will be able to live there together providing they can tell one another apart instantly.
Bright colours and complex patterns help to make this possible.
Third, an animal may be brightly coloured as a warning to its enemies that it is not to be trifled with.
Any species with a ‘secret weapon’— an obnoxious smell, foul-tasting flesh, poison glands, a painful sting or a venomous bite — can advertise the fact by wearing conspicuous warning coloration.
Patterns of colours used in this way are called ‘aposematic’(the root words apo sema meaning, literally, ‘away-signal’).
The vivid markings and bright colours of these caterpillars (above) act as warning signals telling predators that the potential victims are unpalatable, to be avoided at all costs.
The more striking the colours, the easier they are to remember — no predator is likely to forget these particular insects.
The markings of this sea slug (below) operate in the same way.
We know that these ‘go away’ signals work because time and again predators have been observed to avoid attacking brightly coloured species.
When monkeys were offered hundreds of different kinds of insects, many brightly coloured and many others with dull patterns and colours, only one in five of the bright ones were eaten, while three out of four of the dull ones were eagerly gobbled up.
The monkeys were cautious when confronted with conspicuous markings.
They may have acquired this caution by observational learning — watching other monkeys trying to eat these insects and seeing the way they reacted to the prey's ‘chemical warfare’— or they may have evolved an inborn reaction towards bright patterns, enabling them to avoid such species from birth without any learning process, or they may have learned caution the hard way, by personal experience.
Personal experience, if it happened, would have left them with a deeply embedded memory of an acutely unpleasant incident.
If, as naïve young hunters, they attacked a brightly coloured prey, bit it and started to chew it, only to discover that it had a foul taste or a poisonous secretion, they would probably remember it for the rest of their lives.
Frequently ‘one-trial learning’, as it is called, is all that is necessary.
Any human being who has eaten a bad oyster, spent a night in agony, and vowed never to touch oysters again, will understand this.
The poisonous skin of these salamanders (opposite) protects them from predation; their bright warning colours help by alerting would-be killers before any damaging bite has been inflicted.
For all its speed, the hunter's learning process is not particularly pleasant for the prey animal providing the education.
At best it will be severely prodded and nipped.
More likely, it will be mauled and mangled.
And in all possibility it will never recover.
This is one of the weaknesses of the system.
Warning colours work well with educated predators but do involve repeated sacrifices as young hunters learn their trade.
Nevertheless, taken on balance, if you possess unpleasant chemical properties, it pays to advertise.
Once the learning has taken place, the predators leave you alone and you can go about your business in a quietly relaxed manner, without too much fleeing, hiding, panic, or scuttling for cover.
In fact, the pace of your life will be slower and your lifespan may even be extended.
Animals with warning colours on average live longer than those without, and there is a simple reason for this.
Once they have completed their reproductive life they can live on past it as ‘trainers’ for novice predators.
If they are fatally damaged when attacked, their deaths do not affect the  population as a whole because they have already bred and are no longer doing so.
They therefore take some of the strain off the younger breeding stock within their species.
If dull, cryptic animals live on after their reproductive phase is over they, by contrast, only serve to increase the population density of their kind and thereby increase the chances of a predator finding them, despite their camouflage.
Once the killer has stumbled upon one cryptic individual, it quickly develops a ‘searching image’ and then finds others more easily.
So it pays for cryptic species to die soon after their breeding period is over.
One disadvantage of warning colours is that they may attract killers who might have missed the prey animals altogether if they had not been so gaudy.
A refinement that overcomes this is a coloration that appears inconspicuous at a distance but extremely bright and vivid near by — an improvement found in certain caterpillars and moths, for example.
An alternative is a special posture that the prey adopts when approached by the predator, suddenly showing off its warning colours.
The normal posture hides these bright colours; the display reveals them at close quarters.
Many amphibians employ this device.
The Oriental fire-bellied toad (right) keeps its bright colours on its underside.
They remain hidden until it is threatened, when it displays them by turning itself upside-down.
This katydid (opposite), a kind of grasshopper, stands on its head to display its own version of a warning display.
Other weaknesses of the system are that stupid killers do not learn quickly enough, if at all.
Predators from the lower ranks of the animal kingdom sometimes seem to be incapable of inhibiting their automatic responses to the brightly coloured individuals they encounter.
With each attack, it is as if they are meeting the distasteful animal tor the first time.
This means that for certain prey being conspicuous is a constant risk and not one worth taking.
Only wise predators can be broken in.
Also, any killers, wise or stupid, can be driven to eat anything when hungry enough.
Starvation overcomes all, and the brightly coloured succumb along with the cryptic.
Finally, there are a few killers that have been able to develop a special tolerance for certain poisons, enabling them to eat the noxious prey without ill-effects.
Clearly, though, despite these few shortcomings, the warning display is a useful one.
It is found over a wide range of species, from butterflies and wasps to sea snakes and skunks.
The yellow and black banding of bees and wasps is easily remembered and avoided.
The black and white stripes of  the skunks act as a powerful deterrent, even from a great distance.
Warning colours are found among caterpillars and butterflies, ladybirds and ground beetles, frogs and salamanders, and many other animal groups.
From close scrutiny, it soon emerges that they all have several features in common.
To start with, nearly all the warning patterns consist of pale bands or light patches against black backgrounds.
The pale colour is usually white or yellow or orange and shows up vividly against the dark areas.
This is not arbitrary — it is designed so that it operates just as well with colour-blind predators as with those that have good colour vision.
Another strange quality of warning coloration is that it varies remarkably little from one species to the next.
Even quite distinct groups share the same sorts of patterns.
Again, this is no accident and it has a special advantage.
For example, if there are several quite unrelated species of unpalatable butterflies living in one particular region and one of them has evolved a warning pattern of black, yellow and red markings, it will pay the others to follow suit because they will then all share the ‘training risks’ associated with novice predators.
Once a young killer has attacked one individual with this wing pattern, it will not only avoid other members of that species but also members of other species that look superficially like it.
These ‘warning clubs’ were discovered by a German field-worker called Fritz Müller.
It was as if each species of inedible butterfly was mimicked by the others, and this convergence of colour pattern became known as Müllerian Mimicry .
If harmful insects can protect themselves from attack by displaying special markings that warn away predators, then it follows that harmless insects can benefit by mimicking them.
Here a stinging wasp (above, left) is imitated by a harmless hoverfly (above, right) a distasteful butterfly (opposite, left, top) has a harmless copy (opposite, left, bottom)— both are from Nigeria — and a venomous coral snake (opposite, right, top) has a harmless mimic (opposite, right, bottom) with almost identical markings.
This is called Batesian Mimicry after its discoverer, Henry Bates.
Another form of mimicry was discovered by the English naturalist Henry Bates.
Also a field observer of insects, he noticed that many edible butterflies had the same bright markings as inedible ones.
He saw that these tasty species were treated with respect by predators as if they too were distasteful to eat.
In other words, they were sheep in wolf's clothing.
They were the harmless copying the harmful and benefiting from the deception.
This type of warning signal is today known as Batesian Mimicry .
It only works well, of course, if there are sufficient numbers of the genuinely distasteful individuals around to keep the predators well trained.
If the mimics swamp out their models, the trick no longer succeeds.
Studies with starlings as predators showed that the mimic insects  could not rise above the 60 per cent level without rapidly losing protection.
But as long as 40 per cent or more of the brightly coloured insects were genuinely distasteful, the mimicry was highly efficient.
Where the prey are merely distasteful or unpalatable, the predators can learn their lesson safely.
They may suffer sickness, vomiting or acute pain, but they do not die.
They live on, now fully educated, and fill the environment with cautious killers.
But what if the prey is itself a killer?
What if its poison is lethal?
In such cases each novice predator that makes a mistake becomes a corpse and learns nothing.
Both the prey and the predators keep on suffering.
In such cases it is essential for the predators to evolve inborn reactions to the warning signals of the lethal prey, so that they can be avoided without any learning process taking place.
One example of this concerns the deadly sea snake and a variety of predatory fish.
The brightly marked sea snakes are among the most venomous snakes to be found anywhere in the world.
They are confined to the warm waters of the Indo-Pacific region but are absent altogether from the Atlantic Ocean.
In a series of tests it was discovered that large predatory fish from the Pacific avoided sea snakes when they were offered as food, but that fish from the Atlantic lacked this caution and attacked them.
Ten species of Pacific fish were used and nine from the Atlantic.
It is highly unlikely that any of the Pacific fish used in these tests had ever encountered a sea snake previously and in two instances they certainly could not have done so.
It appears that in this case, at least, the avoidance of the deadly prey is inborn.
Doubtless other such cases also exist.
Chemical Defence
THE HORRORS OF chemical warfare are not confined to the laboratories of military scientists.
The natural world is full of them.
We all know of the dramatic effects of the venoms of snakes and spiders, the savage stings of wasps and jellyfish and the virulent poisons of scorpions and stingrays, but there are many other examples in the animal kingdom and some of them are even more lethal.
The champion poisoners — the Borgias of the forest — are the tiny kokoi frogs that patter boldly about in the tropical undergrowth of South America.
These beautifully coloured amphibians, usually less than 2 inches long, carry in their skin-glands a poison so powerful that it is hard to describe its strength.
If you collected as little as I gram of this toxin it would be enough to kill a hundred thousand average-sized men.
If you gathered I ounce of it, you could wipe out more than two and a half million people.
It is the most potent poison known to us from the entire animal world.
These lethal little amphibians belong to a family that has been given the name of poison-arrow frogs.
This is because, long before white men arrived on the scene, the local Indians living deep in the Amazonian rain forests caught and killed these animals to provide themselves with the poison tips for their arrows.
Impaled on a stick and held over a fire, the dying frogs exuded a milky secretion.
The arrows were held in this liquid and then allowed to dry.
One frog was used to coat fifty arrowheads.
When the Indians went hunting, whether for animals or for rival Indians, their firepower was deadly.
Anything struck by a poisoned arrow was paralysed almost immediately and in a few moments was dead.
The most virulent poison known from the animal world comes from the skin of the small, brightly coloured poison-arrow frogs from South American forests (opposite and below).
Because of their lethal defence system, these small frogs are able to live bold, untroubled lives on the forest floor, hopping about conspicuously with bright colours advertising their presence.
Many other animals that harbour secret chemical defences also show themselves fearlessly to the world and some of them also perform special displays that indicate their readiness to engage in a chemical encounter.
Anyone who has encountered a skunk will know that before it fires its stinking spray it issues clear warnings of its intentions.
It starts by stamping its feet on the ground and arching its back.
If this, combined with its vivid display of black and white fur, does not deter the enemy, it may then start swaying its body back and forth as if cranking itself up for action.
At this point it may — especially if it is a spotted skunk — perform a handstand, rearing on to its front legs with its hind legs held high in the air.
This amazing posture displays its markings even more conspicuously and in this position it may advance several feet towards the attacker.
In origin, this inverted posture seems to be related to the scent-marking action of certain small carnivores that deposit their odours upwards on high objects.
Some mongooses, for example, employ a similar handstand when marking overhanging branches with their personal scent, and South American bush dogs regularly stand on their front feet when leaving their personal odours on tree-trunks.
Presumably it is because of the link between standing up in this way and the act of squeezing scent from the anal region that the posture has become associated with the firing of the anal glands by the defensive skunk.
The message of the stance is clear enough — come any closer and I will squeeze my glands tight.
However, before actually firing its spray, the skunk must revert to a position in which all four feet are on the ground, the tail is raised and the back fully arched.
Then, looking back over its shoulder at the enemy behind it, it aims and shoots.
As it does so, it swings its body slightly from side to side, like a machine-gunner raking the enemy ranks.
This gives its nauseating, pungent spray a wider range — an arc of about 45 degrees — and greatly increases the defender's chances of covering its target.
Any animal that has been sprayed just once will respond immediately  and back away fast from a displaying skunk.
And with good reason.
The spray is not merely unpleasant, but is also extremely painful if it reaches its target directly.
The noxious substance contained in the two anal glands, one on either side of the animal's rectum, is called butyl mercaptan and it plays havoc with a predator's face.
In addition to the foul stench it produces, it is also damaging to sensitive mucous membranes.
If it gets into the predator's nose it can injure the tissues there and if it enters the mouth it causes violent vomiting.
If the spray hits the eyes there is almost unbearable pain and temporary blindness.
It is pitiful to see the agony of a naïve dog that has nosed up too close to a skunk and been sprayed in the face.
Retching, vomiting and desperately trying to rub its face clean, the animal learns a lesson it never forgets.
The stench of the skunk seems to last for ever.
The amber-coloured fluid is ejected with great force a distance of between 8 and 10 feet.
And the odour can be carried as much as a mile away if the wind is blowing in that direction.
Gloves used to handle a defensive skunk still stink of the animal's scent more than a year after contact.
If the skunk has not squirted its glands for some time, then it is primed for about six powerful shots at the enemy, but it is unlikely to use all its ammunition at once because it will take about a week for replenishment and the animal cannot afford to risk being cornered empty-glanded by a second predator.
So it uses its chemical defence sparingly.
Even so, it is powerful enough to keep almost any enemy at bay.
There are nine species of skunks with a combined range that covers nearly all of North, Central and South America.
Their equivalent in Africa is the zorilla, but its chemical impact is not quite so impressive.
Several other small carnivores also emit unpleasant stenches when caught by predators and sometimes these odours may deter their attackers.
Some foxes, mongooses and weasels are capable of this type of defence and doubtless give the hungry predators the sensation that perhaps, after all, the food object they are pursuing is not so tasty.
In all these cases, the unpleasant chemicals employed are modifications of personal scent secretions, but another major source of chemical defence substances is the saliva.
The only mammals with a venomous bite are certain moles and shrews.
They employ their poisonous saliva primarily as a weapon against their prey.
When a venomous mole or shrew bites its prey, its saliva acts as a paralytic agent.
In this way it is able, if it wishes, to make large stores of food.
One mole-nest was found with an adjoining store of no fewer than 1, 280 worms.
The poisonous saliva can be used in a secondary way to deter attackers.
In some species the venom is remarkably strong.
One American short-tailed shrew stores enough venom to kill two hundred mice.
The only other type of mammal to employ chemical warfare is the duck-billed platypus.
On the backs of the ankles of the male platypus there are horny spurs.
These are hollow and are connected to poison glands further up the legs.
Normally covered by a fold of skin, these spurs can be erected if the animal is caught and, with a sudden jab of the hind legs, the sharp points of spurs are stabbed into the attacker's flesh.
The poison injected is enough to kill any dog-sized animal, and even fully-grown humans are at risk, suffering intense pain.
The mystery with the platypus venom is why it evolved.
The species does not seem to have any appropriate indigenous enemies against which to use it.
As it occurs only in the males it has been suggested that it is somehow employed in male-to-male rivalry.
Alternatively it could have developed as another example of a prey-killing poison that has been secondarily used against attackers.
Certainly when the  dingoes and their human companions first arrived in Australia the poison-spurs of the platypus found a valuable use as defensive weapons against the new invaders.
The skunk is capable of ejecting a spray of foul-smelling liquid from its anal glands, but it always gives fair warning before attacking in this way.
The male of the duck-billed platypus has sharp poison-spurs on its hind legs.
The most notorious poisoners of the animal world are certainly the snakes.
Their fame in this regard has been their undoing and has caused the needless persecution and destruction of countless millions of harmless reptiles.
Because some snakes are genuinely dangerous to man, all snakes are feared, and yet only 15 per cent of the living species are in fact venomous.
There are 2,300 harmless species of snakes and only 400 poisonous ones, but few people take the trouble to find out which is which.
If a snake is encountered no one takes any chances.
One simple way of spotting a poisonous species is to look at the shape of the head.
If it is unusually wide, it is almost certainly a highly venomous form.
This is because the poison is stored in greatly enlarged and modified salivary glands.
These glands are connected to long, pointed, hollow teeth that act as hypodermic needles, injecting the lethal liquid into the victim's flesh.
In the most advanced types these fangs are hinged.
When the snake's mouth is shut they lie flat, but when the jaws are opened wide to strike, the two upper teeth that supply the venom are pivoted down through about go degrees, so that they are at right angles to the top of the head.
This means that when the jaws gape fully open, the sharp fangs are aimed directly forward.
At this moment the snake strikes, flinging its neck towards its victim at the astonishing speed of 8 feet per second.
The actual distance covered will probably be no more than 2 feet, so it is necessary to respond in less than a quarter of a second in order to avoid being struck.
Some moles and shrews carry chemical weapons.
This short-tailed shrew can inflict an unpleasant bite with the help of spittle from its venomous salivary glands.
As the teeth sink into the flesh, the pressure of this action squeezes venom out of the glands and down the hollow tubes of the paired fangs.
It spreads quickly once inside the victim and is soon being circulated in the bloodstream.
For human victims, the classic he-man response to this injury is the ‘cut-and-suck’ treatment, in which the unfortunate sufferer undergoes further trauma by having the site of the venom injection sliced open with a sharp knife and the blood sucked from the now gaping wound.
All this achieves in reality is increased shock and the greater chance of a stress death.
It does nothing to reduce the damage because by the time the sucking has taken place the poison is already busily circulating through the victim's body.
The best hope is to keep the patient quiet and inject the appropriate anti-venin.
Unfortunately it is crucial to know which species of snake is involved because snake poisons are so complex that it has proved impossible to develop a ‘multi-venin' that will treat all forms of snakebite.
The bite of each species must be treated with the anti-venin specific to that kind of snake.
A mistake with the treatment will simply mean a double threat to the life of the patient.
So the typical snakebite victim is stabbed rather than bitten.
There is no grabbing, but merely hitting with an open mouth.
The reason for this is that the snake must do its best to protect its precious fangs.
If it bit its victim and then hung on tight, the ensuing struggle while the injected individual died would probably damage the long, delicate teeth, ripping them from their sockets.
So the snake makes its deft, rapid lunge and then immediately withdraws to await results.
The poison works so quickly that the victim rapidly succumbs and the snake is then safe to make its move.
The primary function of snake venom is, of course, to quieten prey before swallowing them.
Its use in self-defence is entirely secondary and only employed as a last resort.
All snakes prefer to retreat from predators as quickly as possible, but if cornered will then use their lightning strike as a form of protection.
If the victim is not edible the reptile quickly slithers away into hiding, but if it is a suitable prey it simply sits back and waits for the animal's agonies to cease.
Then, as it lies dying, the snake moves in and starts to swallow the now helpless creature.
In this way the fangs receive the minimum of damage.
Even so, they do sometimes become dislodged by the ferocity of the strike.
When this happens a new fang quickly grows to replace the lost one.
At any moment there are about six fangs in reserve on each side of the mouth, at various stages of development.
When an active fang is ripped out, the next most mature one takes its place and quickly develops so that it is ready to fire.
The most impressive of all fangs are those of the gaboon viper from Africa.
Many of the big vipers possess fangs that are about an inch long, but the gaboon's huge teeth are nearly 2 inches in length, penetrating well into the deeper tissues where there is a rich supply of blood vessels to carry the poison away.
The poison itself is a yellowish, cloudy liquid.
It contains neurotoxins (nerve-poisons) and haemotoxins (blood-poisons).
In the venom of cobras, mambas and sea-snakes, the nerve-poisons are dominant; in vipers and rattlesnakes the blood-poisons are more active.
With a cobra bite there is a creeping paralysis accompanied by nausea and vomiting, leading to convulsions and the cessation of breathing.
With a rattlesnake bite there is massive swelling around the bitten part with the flesh turning blue, green, purple or black, with livid blotches and blisters, and this gradually spreads throughout most of the body, affecting the heart and eventually stopping its action.
The body of the adult human, however, can often withstand this chemical onslaught and ultimately recover fully.
It is large enough to absorb the damage in a way that the smaller, prey species cannot manage.
It has been estimated that, of the thousand people bitten by rattlesnakes annually in the United States only about thirty die.
This puts the chances of survival at about 33 to 1, and some authorities think this should be even higher — as much as 50 to 1.
(Opposite) Venomous snakes do not bite their victims — they stab them with open mouths, injecting their venom through hollow teeth in the upper jaw.
The fangs of this pygmy rattlesnake are clearly visible but are not yet in the full striking position.
which would entail a much wider gaping of the jaws to point the tips of the fangs directly forward.
It is difficult to obtain accurate figures from the wilder, more snake-ridden parts of the world, such as Africa, Asia and South America, but an attempt at a global survey carried out in the 1950s gave a total world figure of thirty thousand deaths annually from all forms of snakebite.
The spitting cobras of Africa are capable of shooting their venom at an enemy from a distance of 6 feet, causing eye damage and severe pain.
Perhaps the most remarkable of all serpentine chemical defences is that employed by the spitting cobras of Africa.
These snakes have evolved  the ability to rear up and squeeze their poison glands so forcibly that the venom inside them is propelled towards their enemy as a jet or spray of droplets.
They are capable of aiming accurately enough to splash a man's face from a distance of 6 feet.
If the venom strikes his eyes it can temporarily blind him and possibly even permanently damage his sight.
The pain is severe and no predator would risk a second close encounter with these snakes.
The toad possesses a dangerous poison in its large warts.
When the toad is attacked, this chemical weapon oozes out as a thick, creamy liquid.
Any mammal biting the slow-moving toad is soon retching and vomiting.
Dogs are particularly vulnerable to this poison, but some snakes appear to be immune.
Unlike snakes, lizards have not specialised in chemical warfare.
Of the three thousand living species only two possess venom.
They are the gila monster and the beaded lizard, from Mexico and the southern states of the USA.
Their poison has the same origin as that of the snakes — modified saliva — but the animals are much more primitive in their wounding mechanism.
There is no hypodermic injection.
A lizard simply holds tight with its teeth.
The venom trickles into the enemy's damaged flesh as the lizard slobbers and struggles to keep its grip.
Like a bulldog it refuses to let go, even when savagely attacked by the desperate victim.
But it would be wrong to give the impression that these are aggressive animals.
They avoid trouble at all times and only if they are cornered or pestered will they bite at their attackers.
Their neurotoxin produces effects similar to those seen in snakebite victims, although the number of deaths from lizard-bites is extremely small.
Indeed, only eight cases have been fully authenticated.
There are only two kinds of poisonous lizards, the gila monster, seen here, and the similar but larger beaded lizard.
Both bite their attackers and hang on like bulldogs, letting the venom trickle into the wound as they do so.
Among the amphibians there are many with poisonous skins, but none that has a poisonous bite.
If you are to suffer from amphibian poisoning, it is you who must do the biting.
The deadly little poison-arrow frogs have already been mentioned, but there are many other frogs and toads whose  skin glands and mucous secretions can cause vomiting and nausea in predators that grab hold of them in their jaws.
Almost all these poisons are derived from the various substances that have evolved as lubricants for the soft, vulnerable skins of these small animals.
Where the mucous has become distasteful, the animals bearing it have prospered, and in this way increasingly distasteful and eventually highly poisonous secretions have been favoured by natural selection.
The most common circumstance in which human swimmers are poisoned by fish is when a well camouflaged stingray is trodden on.
It reacts automatically by lashing upwards with its long thin tail and stabbing the victim's leg or foot with the sharp spine near its tip.
This spine has a serrated edge and can inflict painful wounds.
The world of fish is full of needle-sharp spines that can inject agonising poisons into unwary flesh.
The greatest threat to humans comes from the stingrays, large flatfish that lie inconspicuously on the seabed in shallow waters.
If a human foot accidentally treads on one of these shy, unaggressive animals, it responds instantly with an upward flick of its long, thin tail.
Towards the tip of this tail there is a sharp spine with a serrated edge and this is slashed painfully against the offending foot or leg.
All along the underside of this spine there are little grooves lined with a spongy venomous tissue.
The tissue contains soluble proteins that cause intense pain and swelling, but which are rarely lethal to man.
Out of a thousand cases reported in United States waters over a five-year period, only two resulted in death.
At first sight the cone shell does not appear to be particularly dangerous but it carries a secret weapon that can cause an unusually painful death.
When attacking, it protrudes its long snout, and as it pushes it against the flesh of its enemy it fires a small, venom-carrying harpoon — a hollow dart formed from a tooth — that can kill a human being within a few hours.
More deadly and much more painful is the chemical weaponry of the heavily camouflaged and lethargic stonefish.
For a human swimmer, to step on one of these almost invisible bottom-dwellers is to experience perhaps the worst possible pain.
Even the most fiendish human torturer has fallen far short of the agony provided by this small, shallow-water fish.
Its only response to being disturbed is to erect its dorsal spines.
It makes no attempt to move away, even if the water near by is being violently disturbed.
The venom is held in small sacs near the tips of the spines, so that when the human foot descends on the fish the poison is squeezed into the wound by the downward pressure.
The fish does nothing — the victim impales himself.
And the ensuing pain is so intense that victims seem, for a while, to go out of their minds.
They rush from the water, fling themselves down on the beach and proceed to roll around in agony, screaming and frothing at the mouth.
Helpers approaching have sometimes been bitten or attacked wildly in the delirium that follows and which may last as long as  twelve tormented hours.
Morphine has no effect.
Raving and thrashing about, the victim becomes gradually weaker and, if lucky, may eventually become unconscious.
The injured limb swells up until it looks like the leg of an elephant.
The toes or fingers nearest the wound turn black and later drop off.
Death is not uncommon, but an anti-venin has now been produced and is effective if it can be used in time.
The stonefish is the most deadly of all fishes, but many others possess poisonous spines developed from fin-rays, and any prickly-looking fish should be treated with great respect.
Other examples include the scorpion fish, lion fish, rabbitfish, toad fish, waspfish, frogfish and many of the catfish.
Some, like the stonefish, are inconspicuous, while others flaunt their chemical power by sailing around in bright colours that dare you to touch them.
The beautiful lion fish belongs to this gaudy category and is therefore much easier to avoid.
All these spikes evolved originally as a way of preventing predation by larger fish.
Today, with powerful venoms added, they have become a formidable defence system against anything that enters the domain of the spiny fish.
Also infesting this domain are the dramatically spiny sea urchins.
Some species possess poison bags near the tips of the long, brittle spines.
When trodden on, these spines puncture flesh and usually break off inside the resulting wounds, ensuring the prolonged insertion of the painful poisons.
Many fish are poisonous, including the turkey fish (above), but the most dangerous of all is the heavily camouflaged stonefish (above, right).
Its thirteen powerful dorsal spines contain enough poison to kill any human swimmer who accidentally treads on it with a bare foot.
Surprisingly, certain sea snails are also quite deadly.
The seemingly harmless cone shells, attractively patterned and very slow-moving, can kill with their sting and human medicine has to date found no antidote.
A harpoon-shaped tooth is thrust into the flesh of the victim, carrying the venom with it.
Numbness, paralysis and eventually heart failure result.
But the only way one of these snails will attack is if its soft parts are manhandled.
Holding it by the hard shell is safe enough, although a steady grip is recommended.
Among poisonous jellyfish and their relatives the Portuguese man-o'-war (opposite) is notorious as a killer, but despite its reputation there is no authenticated record of it having caused a human death.
The less impressive-looking jellyfish called the sea wasp or box jelly (below), on the other hand, is one of the most venomous animals in the world, capable of causing human death in less than 10 minutes.
More difficult to avoid are the poisonous jellyfish.
As they float through the water their long, almost invisible tentacles hang down and spread out far from the visible central part of the body.
In some species these trailing threads, full of stinging-cells called nematocysts, can reach as far as 50 feet.
Swimming through a jellyfish-infested sea is like advancing through a minefield.
Each stinging-cell contains a coiled-up tube.
If a victim brushes up against a tentacle, literally thousands of these tiny cells automatically fire, shooting out the sharp-tipped tubes like minute harpoons.
These penetrate the skin and paralyse the intruder.
If the victim is a small fish, paralysis and death are rapid, and it can then be drawn in and eaten.
But if  the body struck by the stinging-cells is large — such as a human swimmer's — the poison is usually insufficient to kill.
Instead there is searing pain, blistering of the skin and a rapidly discovered aversion to swimming in the sea.
The most virulent of all jellyfish is not, as is usually claimed, the large Portuguese man-o'-war, but the sea wasp or box jelly commonly found off the shores of Australia.
The neurotoxins contained in its thousands of little venomous darts are strong enough to cause both extreme pain and sometimes even death.
Since it stings anything it bumps into, regardless of what that may be, the only solution is to stay clear of the water when the swarms of jellyfish appear.
Staying clear of water is no protection against the hundreds of poisonous insects, spiders and scorpions that abound on dry land.
Some sting, some bite, some throw poisonous hairs at you and others squirt you with blinding sprays.
Most are unpleasant but not lethal.
A few are deadly.
The most dangerous of all the spiders is the black widow, a small species that is common throughout America and which responds to vibrations of its web by rushing out and biting what it considers to be its next meal.
Its bite is rarely lethal, but is so painful that some victims have survived when they ‘hoped not to’.
A meticulous survey of black widow attacks on humans in the USA from 1726 to 1943 revealed 1,291 recorded bites — in other words, an average of no more than six bites a year.
Only 55 caused the death of the victim — or one every four years.
Despite its bad reputation.
it is clearly not a species to cause concern.
Even less of a threat is the huge tarantula or bird-eating spider.
This has the worst reputation of any ‘creepy-crawly’ in the public imagination, and yet its bite, which is extremely rare, is no worse than a bee sting.
Its usual reaction when abused by an attacker is to tear out its own hair rather than attempt to bite.
It flings its fine hairs in the face of the assailant, in a dense cloud.
When this cloud settles on the skin it causes a red rash, but it is no more than an irritation and certainly nothing to justify the terrible image of this animal that has been so relentlessly fostered by cheap novels and films.
As with so many poisonous animals, the tarantula prefers to keep its venom for feeding time and only employs it against enemies as a last resort.
It is, in fact, impossible to find any poisonous animal that actively goes in search of victims unless it is feeding.
Despite popular mythology concerning ‘evil’ and vicious species that track down their victims ruthlessly and mercilessly, the reality is that no venom, no poison, no bite, no sting, is ever administered except under extreme provocation or simply by accident, unless the victim is either a potential prey or a rival belonging to the same species.
As in human warfare, chemical defences are essentially deterrents rather than everyday weapons.
The black widow spider is the most dangerous of all spider species and its venomous bite has been known to cause human deaths on rare occasions.
But it has been calculated that there is only a 4 per cent chance of dying if bitten by one of them.
Deflection Displays
DEFLECTION DISPLAYS are deceptive.
They are examples of natural deceit.
Just as the magician fools his audience with his sleight of hand, so deflection displays confuse the pouncing predator by sending him false signals.
Their essential feature is that they misdirect the enemy's attack, so that it fails to damage any vital organs.
Most predators prefer to attack their prey at the head end.
When zooming in for the kill, or performing a lightning strike, they ignore the tail end of the body and aim straight for the eyes.
This targets them towards the most important part of the prey, where they can do most damage with their first contact.
Even if the prey is not killed outright, there is a greater chance that it will be incapacitated.
Many a prey species can afford to dispense with its tail but can never afford to lose its head.
Also, most prey can only flee fast in a forward direction, so attacking the head is the best way of hampering their escape.
And many predators like to grasp the prey by the head to facilitate swallowing.
In the case of fish prickly fins and sharp gill-covers all point backwards.
Gulping such a prey animal down head-first is a smooth operation.
Swallowing it backwards can be painful or even fatal.
For these reasons, some prey species possess display markings that confuse their heads and tails.
They make their heads less head-like and wear false eyes on their tails.
The predator no longer knows where to strike.
There are several degrees of deception.
The simplest involves displaying a large eye-spot marking somewhere at the rear end of the body.
This looks as eye-like to the predator as the real eye, and gives the prey a fifty-fifty chance of losing its head.
Usually the false eye is a little bigger than the real one, tipping the odds slightly in favour of the prey.
A predator dashing in for the kill has no time to assess the minute details of the eyes to detect whether they are real or false.
It simply sees ‘eye’ and reads ‘head’.
A more advanced technique involves camouflaging the real eye while at the same time making the false eye truly spectacular, with a huge black ‘pupil’ surrounded by a bright white eye-ring.
This tips the balance much more in favour of the prey and sends most attackers lurching towards the wrong end of the body.
Even if part of the tail is lost, the victim survives and swims away to safety.
A large eye-spot at the tail of a fish deflects the interest of a predator away from the more vulnerable head.
Having an ‘eye’ at each end of its body, this Oscar cichlid gives its predators only a fifty-fifty chance of striking its head.
An even greater refinement is possible.
Two species of butterfly fish have been observed to swim slowly backwards at the first hint of trouble, making their false eyes seem even more real.
Then, when the predator moves in for the kill, at the very last moment the butterfly fish switch direction and dash rapidly forward, leaving the frustrated would-be killers snapping at empty water.
On this butterfly fish the eye-spot at the rear of the body becomes the centre of attention, the real eye being obscured by a vertical stripe.
Deflection eye-spots are found in a wide variety of quite unrelated species.
They seem to have evolved not once but many times.
As a result they show subtle differences, some being positioned on the upper fin, some on the rear of the main trunk and some on the tail-stem.
The elimination of the real eye is also achieved in various ways.
Sometimes there is a single vertical bar running right through it to obscure it.
Sometimes the whole body of the fish is banded with vertical marks, one of which conveniently blots out the real eye.
In other cases, the eye-concealing lines are horizontal stripes, or a single diagonal line may run up through the eye and end on top of the head.
Occasionally, the real eye is hidden in a mass of spots, sometimes white, and sometimes black.
In one unique fish, the imperial angelfish, the juveniles are covered in white lines that curve round in a special pattern that  centres all one's attention on the tail end.
There is no actual eye-spot, but the effect is just as compelling, with the curved lines shrinking to smaller and smaller circles as they approach the tail.
The head, by contrast, is obliterated by formless, meandering lines.
Some fish go a step further and display not one but a pair of false eyes.
This is even more confusing because the predator receives the impression that it is approaching a fish that is swimming straight towards it.
These false eyes stare implacably, challenging the predator to bite, while the small, real eye of the prey is sufficiently concealed not to give the game away.
This sharp-nosed puffer fish (left) has a real eye, on the right, that is not inconspicuous.
Despite this, however, one's gaze is drawn to the huge black false eye at the other end of the body.
Fish are not alone in staging this deception.
Reptiles and insects employ similar tactics, but in their case eye-spots are not necessary to deflect the interest of their predators.
All they need is a patch of bright colour on their tails.
Among the lizards, this can be seen in young skinks of several species.
Their heads are inconspicuous and camouflaged with black and white stripes that conceal the eyes.
These stripes run right down the body, but peter out near the base of the tail.
The rest of the tail is bright, vivid blue — so intense that it is hard to see anything else in its vicinity, including the head and body of the small reptile.
When approached by a stalking killer, the lizard's tail is the focus of attention.
If the predator pounces and manages to catch hold of the tail, it quickly breaks away from the reptile's body and, even in its severed condition, continues to writhe and twist, either on the ground or in the mouth of the triumphant killer.
While the lizard scuttles away to safety, the predator is left to discover, little by little, that its apparently succulent meal is in reality no more than a scaly scrag-end.
The comet (opposite, top) is a fish that attempts to lose its real eye in a sea of white dots.
These dots do not, however, conceal the huge eye-spot at the rear end of the body.
The vivid markings of the emperor angelfish (opposite, bottom) create a strong circular motif just in front of the tail.
There is no such focus of interest at the head end.
Again, a predator's attention is deflected away from the vital head organs.
Most skinks lose this blue colouring as they become adult.
Their speed of escape reaction is by then greater and they have become much more experienced.
On balance they are better off being fully camouflaged at this stage, because although the blue tail may save the life of many a young lizard it also has the disadvantage of being so conspicuous that it can, to some extent, attract unwanted attention in the first place.
In some species that are heavily preyed upon, such as the Polynesian blue-tailed skink, the  tail colour is unusually retained right through into adulthood.
The balance there continues to favour a small tail-end sacrifice even with experienced individuals.
Some snakes go a little further.
When approached by a possible killer they hide their real heads and raise up the tips of their tails.
These they waggle boldly in the air.
In the Malayan pipe snake the tip of the tail is bright red and the sight of this little patch of colour moving about so invitingly is too much for most predators to resist.
They attack the tail and ignore the vital head end of the snake.
Unlike the blue-tailed lizards, these snakes only have the bright colour on the underside of the tail-tip.
This is an improved model, because when the snake is crawling along with its tail on the ground the red colour is concealed.
It only becomes conspicuous after an attack has started, and never provokes that attack.
Insects adopt two different devices.
Some butterflies have a rear end that looks more like a head than their real heads.
The trailing wing-tips have conspicuous head markings and even develop long, fake antennae, while the actual head is inconspicuous.
Even more convincing heads are found on some lantern flies, where the real head is well hidden and the false head has a huge eye-spot and bold ‘antennae’.
These insects complete their deception by jumping backwards when attacked.
The other method, used by certain butterflies, is similar to that found in the deflection-displaying fish.
Paired eye-spots on the rear wing-tips give the impression of faces watching.
Specimens of these butterflies are often found with bite-marks in the region of these false eyes, showing that bird predators really are attracted to this part of the body, allowing the insects to fly off to safety with no more damage than a few frayed edges.
This type of butterfly eye-spot should not be confused with the much larger eyes that occur on some species — eye-spots that are suddenly flashed at the enemy as it draws close.
These do not function as deflection devices but as startle displays.
Rather than misdirecting attacks, they repel them altogether, as we shall see in the next chapter..
Some lizards and snakes possess a dull-coloured body combined with a brightly coloured tail.
When approached by a predator, the tail attracts all the attention and is more likely to be attacked — the vulnerable head is thus spared damage.
In the western skink (below) the tail is bright blue; in the ring-necked snake (right) it is orange.
This owl butterfly (opposite) uses a different deflection device, having a pair of small eye-spots near the trailing edge of its wings.
If a bird pecks at these it will probably only make a small tear in the edge of the wing and the butterfly may then escape.
Some butterflies and moths have evolved false heads at the rear ends of their bodies, deflecting the attacks of birds away from their vital organs.
This hairstreak butterfly has achieved the effect by evolving not only a coloured false head but also a radiating black and white pattern on its wings that directs the observer's eye away from the real head.
Startle Displays
IF AN ANIMAL is approached by a killer it may try to defend itself by giving its attacker a fright.
If it can startle the predator in some way, there is a faint chance that the enemy may panic and flee.
At the very least, the assailant may be made to pause for a moment before attacking, and this may be just enough to allow the prey to escape.
Buying time, whether a lot or a little, during an attack is always worth doing.
Many animals attempt this and there are two popular devices: sudden sounds and suddenly displayed fright-patterns.
It is the suddenness that is vital.
Nothing gradual can startle anything.
As directors of horror movies know so well, there is no better way to scare their audience than to have some unidentified object flash suddenly on to the screen, very close to the hero's face.
As the strange shape darts in, the whole audience jumps and gasps.
It is a deep-seated defensive mechanism that we share with most higher forms of life.
Firing a gun behind an unsuspecting head has the same effect.
The body tenses, the neck hunches and the eyes close protectively.
It is during such a split second that a prey animal may be able to make its escape, if it is fast enough.
If it is a slow-moving species, then it must rely instead on provoking a panic response in the attacker, a response that sees it pull back in horror and retreat to a safe place.
The spit and hiss of a cornered cat may startle an attacker because of its suddenness and also because it is reminiscent of the threat display of a venomous snake.
Some mammals, especially those that hide in dark dens or crevices, respond to the approach of a predator with an explosive spit and hiss.
The suddenness of the spit makes the attacker jump smartly backwards and the hiss that follows alarms it even more; it retreats carefully, watching the dark corner from where the noise is originating.
It is not hard to guess why this sudden display is so effective.
Venomous snakes spit and hiss when they are cornered, and no predator likes to risk the possibility that a lurking shape may possess poisonous fangs.
The sudden, unexpected appearance of the bright blue tongue of this skink may startle an approaching predator sufficiently to make it think twice about attacking.
This snake-mimicry is employed by many species, from the familiar domestic cat to less familiar finches.
A cat cornered by, say, a dog will produce an explosive spit that always makes the approaching animal jump back in alarm.
As it hisses in its fake-snake manner, following the spit, it completes the illusion by thrashing its tail about in a serpentine way.
In the semi-darkness it is a brave predator that ignores this bluff display.
Some small cavity-nesting birds, rather surprisingly, employ similar tactics.
A little African finch, the cut-throat finch, when it is disturbed while sitting inside its ball-shape nest, gives a bizarre ‘snake-dance’ reaction.
Anyone who has peered too closely into a cut-throat finch's nest when the bird is sitting on eggs will have experienced the disturbing feeling that, very suddenly, their eye is far too close to a snake for comfort.
Instead of fleeing, like most small birds approached this closely, the cut-throat sits firm and hisses like a snake.
It then adds a remarkable visual display, writhing its body in a sinuous, undulating movement, exactly like a crawling snake.
Even human beings find this distressing to encounter at close quarters without any warning, and find themselves drawing back.
Our fear of snakes is as deep-seated as our fear of sudden movements.
And the same is true of many other predators.
In fact, it is difficult to understand why more nesting birds do not use this defence.
Visual displays that involve the sudden appearance of bright colour patches or conspicuous patterns, especially eye-spots, also intimidate approaching killers.
Because poisonous animals are often brightly coloured, as a warning to would-be predators, there is a startle value in a prey species suddenly flashing a bright patch of colour, even if it is not poisonous.
This is not simple mimicry, which would only entail being the same bright colour as a distasteful species.
It is a combination of mimicry and sudden exposure.
The lizard known as the blue-tongued skink is normally inconspicuous.
Only when threatened does it flash its huge, broad tongue at its assailant.
The bright exposure of a vivid blue patch  alarms the attacker and may save the lizard's life.
Several kinds of insects adopt a similar strategy.
Well camouflaged stick insects, whose concealment has for once failed to work and who are about to be snapped at by a hungry predator, will suddenly flick open their brightly coloured wings in a dramatically unexpected display that may shock the enemy into retreat.
Some moths add an extra deterrent.
One West African species not only flicks open its wings to reveal a bright red abdomen but also bubbles out a stinking yellow froth from its body.
Perhaps the most effective shock tactic is to create the impression that you are a lethal killer yourself, and not to be trifled with.
Many a harmless animal manages to transform itself, with a sudden display, into what appears to be a vicious killer — a scorpion, a snake, or a bird of prey.
The camouflage devices employed are truly remarkable.
Some caterpillars possess the markings of small venomous snakes and, when approached too closely, will rear up on the branch and wave their fake snake-heads at the attacker.
One kind of stick insect arches its abdomen and makes savage swipes through the air as if it is an attacking scorpion.
Only an exceptionally hungry or courageous predator will risk attacking such a creature, and most prefer to play safe and leave well alone.
When the camouflage of this praying mantis fails and a killer is closing in, the insect adopts the last-ditch defence strategy of flashing its wings open and rearing up with its front legs spread.
This sudden transformation may help to scare away a timid attacker.
By far the most common form of startle display involves the sudden exposure of a large pair of eyes.
It is not always possible to say precisely which kind of eyes these are pretending to be, but the chances are that in most cases they are mimicking the forward-facing eyes of birds of prey.
If a killer thinks, even if only for a split second, that it is face to face with an owl or an eagle, it is very likely to back away and this may give the harmless bluffer enough time to escape.
Predators are usually nervous of attacking venomous species and this stick insect attempts to startle its assailants by adopting a scorpion posture when approached closely.
By curving up its abdomen it gives the false impression that it is about to strike with its tail.
But these eye-spot displays are not confined to harmless species.
One of the most deadly animals in the world, the cobra, employs just such a device.
As it rears up in self defence, it spreads its wide hood to reveal a massive pair of eye-spots.
To at least some of its attackers this pattern must be intimidating and its value is that it may allow the cobra to repel its enemy without resorting to the use of its precious venom.
In popular  mythology poisonous snakes are always ready and waiting for the chance to strike out and kill their attackers.
In reality they will do everything in their power to avoid this, because the primary function of their venom is to incapacitate their prey and they cannot afford to waste it unless they are driven to extremes.
So even a lethal cobra prefers to bluff an attacker if given the opportunity.
Some caterpillars manage to startle their attackers by raising themselves up like small snakes.
Aiding them in their deception, their rear ends look remarkably like snake-heads, complete with impressive serpentine eyes.
In the case of the citrus swallowtail caterpillar (bottom) there are false eyes near the front end of the body and, just behind the animal's real head, an organ that looks like the forked tongue of a snake.
This is bright red and is extruded and flickered at the enemy when the caterpillar is disturbed.
Enhancing its startling effect this ‘forked tongue’ also gives off an unpleasant, pungent odour.
Less well known than the cobra eye-spot display is a similar action by certain kinds of toads.
Toads are poisonous, too, but like the cobra they prefer not to use their poison except as a last resort, although for a different reason — their poison glands only secrete their lethal dose when the toad is bitten hard by an attacker, and for the toad this is leaving matters far too late, with serious injury a strong possibility.
The alternative is to scare off the enemy and this is done by inflating the body and raising the rear end of it towards the approaching assailant.
There, on its otherwise camouflaged skin, appears a pair of huge staring eye-spots that make its rear view look remarkably like the face of a predatory bird.
A pair of false eyes is also found on various higher forms of life, including reptiles and birds.
Startle eye-spots appear on the hood of the rearing cobra (right), and even on the back of the head of the pearl-spotted owlet (above).
Many kinds of butterflies and moths perform similar startling transformations.
The peacock butterfly normally rests with its wings pressed tightly together.
Their visible undersides are camouflaged, but if the camouflage fails to work and the butterfly is attacked it then immediately  opens its wings flat, revealing two conspicuous pairs of eye-spots.
Many moths, like the eyed hawkmoth, have a dramatic pair of eye-spots on their hind wings.
They rest with their wings flat, but with the front wings covering their rear ones.
Their front wings give them the protection of camouflage but they can be pulled forward rapidly when the moths are attacked, to flash the startling false eyes.
An African praying mantis has even more spectacular eye-spots with an almost hypnotic spiral design that it employs in a similar way.
In its case, however, the eye-spots are on the front wings and are exposed by suddenly spreading the folded wings and directing them at the attacker.
Most of the enemies of these insects are small birds out searching for a tasty meal.
We know that the eye-spots do startle them because of a series of careful field-tests.
A special box was used, on to the lid of which could be flashed a variety of patterns whenever a bird approached it.
To attract the birds a mealworm was placed in the centre of the box and then, as the bird alighted to attack the mealworm, the box was illuminated to reveal a pair of eye-spots or some other pattern.
Using crosses, dots and circles, it was possible to find out which patterns were most effective in frightening away the birds.
It established beyond doubt that it was the eye-spots that worked best, and that the more realistic they were the more they startled the birds.
In particular, it was found that if the fake eyes were shaded to look three-dimensional they made their biggest impact.
This explains why so many of the eye-spots on the bodies of prey animals have evolved such a subtle and complex degree of mimicry.
Simple spots will not do, but natural selection has met the challenge and has produced some truly amazing replicas complete even to glinting highlights.
Insects with eye-spot startle displays include this remarkable bush cricket (above).
At rest the cricket looks like a dead leaf, but it transforms itself at the last moment.
Many butterflies and moths, such as this io moth, possess a pair of startling eye-spots on their wings.
These are usually concealed and then flashed at the last moment, giving the prospective predator the impression that it is approaching a much larger animal and one that is staring straight at it in a defiant manner.
Field experiments have proved that this startle display does indeed deter attacks from small birds.
Death-feigning
THE TRICK OF ‘PLAYING possum’ is not confined to opossums.
Acting as though dead has also been observed in a variety of insects, frogs, snakes, birds, squirrels and foxes.
In each case the animal, when attacked, suddenly collapses and remains immobile.
Limp and apparently lifeless, it permits itself to be mauled and prodded without twitching a muscle.
Then, if left alone, it quickly revives and makes a dash for freedom.
It is a risky form of self-defence, putting the animal completely at the mercy of its attacker's jaws, but it sometimes works and the bluffer escapes.
Among the insects, death-feigning (or thanatosis, to give it its technical name) occurs in some beetles, bugs, grasshoppers, stick insects and mantids.
Certain spiders also use it as a last resort.
Giant water bugs may go rigid when taken from the water and may hold this ‘frozen’ posture for as long as fifteen minutes.
Some species of small beetles behave in a similar fashion, pulling all their legs in close to their bodies and lying absolutely still.
The larger, longicorn beetles use a modified technique.
When approached they may stay absolutely motionless and allow themselves to be picked up.
They appear to be in a catatonic state, but this is deceptive because they may then suddenly bite the hand that holds them.
This behavioural pattern gives them the chance to avoid detection initially by staying very still.
If caught, they can avoid arousing the predator's urge to kill through not wriggling, and then panic the predator into dropping them by making a sudden unexpected attack.
Once on the ground they may be able to get to safety before the killer strikes again.
Frogs and toads occasionally employ this device, but it does not seem to be very widespread among these amphibians.
Some respond to an attack by drawing their legs tightly against their bodies, closing their eyes and staying completely still.
If a frog is climbing when it is attacked, it may drop to the ground and lie there motionless for several minutes before risking an escape.
Large bullfrogs have a special reaction.
If cornered, they may thrust out their limbs in a fully stretched posture, flatten their bodies and then hold this rigid, spread-eagled pose until danger has passed.
They will retain this tonic immobility even if they are placed on their backs, giving certain human tricksters the chance to claim that they are capable of ‘hypnotising frogs’.
Of all the animals that sham dead it is the snakes that are the star performers, some of them going to amazing lengths to convince their assailants that they are truly deceased.
The most extraordinary example of death-feigning in the entire animal world is undoubtedly that shown by the West Indian wood snakes.
These are small boas which, if molested, first coil themselves up tightly, then release a foul-smelling fluid from special glands, giving the impression that they are rotting and that advanced putrefaction has already set in.
Following this they release blood into their eyes which turns them a dull red colour.
But the climax of their act is the breaking open of small capillaries inside the mouth, so that blood is seen trickling from their apparently lifeless jaws.
This auto-haemorrhage, as it is called, is an astonishing refinement of the death-feigning strategy, implying that predators pay a great deal of attention to minute details of their prey's condition.
Chameleons have been known to death-feign, lying inert on their sides, with their feet held out stiffly and their eyes half-closed.
Most snakes do not go this far.
Small tree snakes that sham dead do so simply by dropping to the ground when disturbed and lying there.
The common European grass snake and the American hog-nosed snake both employ a death-feigning act which, although elaborate, suffers from what might be aptly described as a fatal weakness.
They begin well enough, rolling on to their backs, gaping the mouth awkwardly wide and allowing the long tongue to loll lifelessly from their sagging jaws.
The impressive realism of this performance is totally ruined, however, if you bend down and turn the snake up the right way again.
It responds to this helpful  adjustment by promptly inverting itself into the mock-dead posture.
Even if the snake is turned over again and again, it always flips itself back into the inverted posture, an over-eager dying act that completely gives the game away.
Only when it is totally convinced that the danger is past will the snake finally and with great caution start to move away.
It does so by first pulling in its tongue and closing its jaws.
Then it rotates just the head end of its body into the normal position.
With the rest of its length still inverted, it looks around and tests the air.
Then, slowly, very slowly, it starts to slither away.
If, as it retreats, it is approached closely once more, it hurriedly flings itself upside-down again and resumes its forlorn death-pose.
Some snakes play dead by inverting themselves and lying limply on the ground, but if they are turned over they spoil the effect by quickly inverting themselves again.
The death-feigning snake often lies with its jaws gaping open and its tongue hanging out.
Then, when the danger has passed, it starts to turn itself slowly back to its normal posture, beginning at the head end.
This device is found in a variety of species including the grass snake (right) and the hognose snake (below).
Birds rarely employ death-feigning but sometimes a small bird held in the human hand has been seen to collapse motionless and lie very still.
If it is closely examined at this point it appears to have died from shock, but then a few moments later it may revive miraculously and fly off.
It is a trick that might just save the life of the bird if a cat has caught it and then placed it on the ground for a moment before starting to pluck it.
Cats do often pause after catching their prey and momentarily release what they imagine is a corpse before settling down to the business of eating it.
So it is possible that avian death-feigning is tuned in to this one crucial moment of possible escape.
If the bird keeps struggling, it will be clawed and bitten repeatedly by its captor, but if it lies still the cat may then make the mistake of putting it down on the ground and releasing it from its jaws.
Among the mammals, some South American foxes have been seen to play dead when caught, as have certain squirrels.
A little African ground squirrel gave a most convincing performance when examined by a zoologist.
The young squirrel had been caught and placed in a box.
When the box arrived, the zoologist took the animal out to examine it, only to see it keel over and lie motionless on her hand.
No respiration was visible, the eyes were closed, the mouth gaped and the paws were rigid.
The zoologist was upset because she felt that the small animal had suffered from the journey in the box and she was responsible for its death.
She tried to feed it with a little warm milk, but there was no swallowing response.
Putting the ‘corpse’ down, she gave up and was gazing sadly at the small body when, about two minutes after its ‘death’, it suddenly took a few very deep breaths and started to move about.
It became such a tame pet afterwards  that she could never persuade it to play dead again, even if she grabbed it as though she were a predator.
It was now too much at home with her for the response to be triggered.
The animal most famous for shamming dead is, of course, the American opossum.
It is the species in which this curious behaviour has been studied most thoroughly, with some surprising results.
When attacked, the opossum's first reaction is to fight back.
It possesses a large number of small but very sharp teeth and can inflict a painful bite if given half a chance.
It hisses like a snake, growls like a carnivore and snaps out at its tormenter.
If this fails to deter the enemy, the possum promptly drops dead.
It collapses dramatically on to its side, its body limp and lifeless, its back slightly bent and its head turned down, so that it has a half-curled-up appearance.
Like the best fakers from the snake world, it displays a slackly open mouth with its tongue lolling out, and its eyes are half-closed.
The American opossum has given its name to death-feigning.
When ‘playing possum’ it lies limply on the ground and can even be bitten hard by an attacker without showing any response.
In this pathetic condition it is completely immune to any pain that may be inflicted upon it.
Even if bitten or pecked it continues to lie limply on the ground.
What is the mechanism in the animal's nervous system that makes this possible?
It used to be a popular theory that death-feigning animals were somehow self-hypnotised, or that they were thrown into such an acute state of shock by their tormentors that they went into an unconscious, cataleptic state, as though from a fit or seizure.
Others likened it to fainting — a dead faint that switched off all the animal's faculties.
But careful studies in the 1960S revealed that none of these explanations will do.
Employing an electroencephalogram to measure the brain waves of opossums when awake, when asleep and when playing dead, investigators were surprised to find that the condition of the brain when death-feigning is taking place is the same as that in the wide-awake animal.
There was no sign of any special or unusual wave pattern during the minutes when the animal was apparently lifeless.
This study showed that the opossum does not experience some kind of fit or paralytic unconsciousness.
Indeed, it must be fully aware of what is happening to it when it is playing dead.
In some strange way, however, it is incapable of putting its usual pain reactions into operation.
The mystery that remains concerns the almost insoluble problem of whether the possum feels the pain when it is being bitten, but is incapable of responding to it, or whether it feels nothing, even though it ‘knows’ it is being bitten.
In other words, is  it a sensitive but totally incapacitated animal, or one that is effectively self-anaesthetised?
Whatever the answer may be, it is certain that we are dealing with an extremely strange reaction here, and one that might repay much greater attention.
It has been argued that death-feigning in natural circumstances is of comparatively little use and far too risky to become a major defence strategy.
If a killer is faced with a quiet prey rather than one that is resisting violently, it will simply be able to enjoy an easier meal.
If the prey obligingly offers itself as an immobilised piece of meat, what advantage does it gain?
Clearly this view is mistaken or the death-feigning reaction would never have evolved.
Despite the superficial stupidity of the action, it must have some special advantage in at least enough cases for it to have been the subject of natural selection.
The answer seems to lie in certain predators' need for prey-movement during the hunting process.
Predators that never scavenge and always insist on eating freshly-killed prey will have their appetite switched off by a limp, static object.
Many animal killers like their prey to writhe and scream, not because they are sadistic but simply because that is the way they can ensure that they are about to eat fresh, healthy food.
For them the seemingly dead animal is far less enticing.
If this makes them pause, even briefly, it may be just enough for the prey to escape.
There is another function of playing dead that has been depicted for centuries but which, until recently, was thought to be no more than a fictitious folk-tale.
As long ago as the twelfth century there appeared in the early bestiaries an illustration of a cunning fox feigning death, surrounded by birds.
He lies upside-down with his eyes closed, his mouth open and his tongue hanging out.
The birds are hungry and gather round the corpse to eat it.
Then, at the last moment, the fox leaps up and catches them, devouring them instead.
Nobody took this fable seriously until in 1961 a Russian film-maker managed to record it actually happening.
There in the film is a fox lying limply on the ground.
A carrion crow approaches it and prepares to start feasting on its body.
All at once the fox leaps round, catches and kills the crow and makes a meal of it.
Sometimes nature is just as strange as ancient legends.
The legend of the fox that traps birds by pretending to be dead has been depicted for centuries.
It was shown in the fourteenth-century Queen Mary Psalter and many times in the centuries that followed, but it was later rejected as an imaginative fiction.
Then in 1961 a Russian film-maker managed to record the event and prove, for once, that an old legend is also a scientific fact.
Self-mutilation
ANYONE WHO HAS LOST a finger in an accident will be painfully aware that the human species is incapable of regrowing lost appendages.
This is one of the ways in which we are inferior to the so-called ‘lower’ forms of animal life.
The best we can do is to grow a covering of skin over the stump where the amputation occurred.
In this respect other mammals, and birds, share our short-coming.
To find the most advanced animals that show regular regeneration of lost organs, we must turn to the reptiles and, in particular, to the lizards.For them, losing their tails as a way of saving their heads is a common event, and is a specialised process known as autotomy, which literally means ‘self-cutting’.
Autotomy takes place when a lizard is not quick enough to elude the attentions of a hungry predator.
As the killer strikes at the retreating reptile it is the victim's tail that is most likely to be caught in claws or jaws.
At the moment of impact, the tail of the lizard breaks away from its body.
The lizard is then able to rush away to safety while the predator, momentarily confused by the suddenness of what has happened, concentrates all its efforts on the disembodied tail.
The tail wriggles and writhes in its mouth, or in its claws, and its liveliness preoccupies the would-be killer to such an extent that it hardly notices the rapidly escaping form of the rest of the lizard.
The neuromuscular system of the discarded tail is capable of continuing to produce vigorous twisting movements for several minutes after the attack has occurred.
This engrossing spectacle fascinates the predator who may eventually devour the tail, although it has little nutritional value.
We know that the trick works, because lizards' tails have been found in the stomachs of a wide variety of predators, including carnivorous birds and snakes.
When autotomy was first observed it was thought that the killer simply ripped off the tail by brute force, but closer study revealed that many lizards, especially geckos, have evolved special break-points in their tails — weak spots that fracture with great ease and make the sacrifice a simple matter.
For such animals, the lightest touch on the tail is enough to produce automatic contractions that split the tail away from its base.
Some species are even capable of  sheding their tails without any contact at all.
If such a lizard is caught by the body, it is still the tail that snaps off, separating from its base independently of any external pressure.
It might seem obvious that if weak points are going to evolve in the tails of lizards they would do so between the vertebrae.
But this is not the case.
Strangely, the fracture planes pass through the middle of the vertebrae and not in the spaces between them.
In a typical lizard, every tail vertebra from the sixth one onwards has a special ‘plane of weakness’ where a thin layer of cartilage replaces the stronger, bony tissue.
At these points there are also constrictions in the blood vessels and nerves, and weaknesses in the connective tissues.
So, when the circular muscles of the tail perform their sudden, massive contraction, the whole of the tail section disconnects with ease.
Because of the constrictions in the blood vessels — rather like the necks of hour-glasses — there is practically no loss of blood and the blunt end of the tail-stump quickly dries off and hardens.
Many lizards, such as the green lizard (above) and the blue-tailed skink (below), are capable of breaking off their tails when they are molested.
A dropped tail continues to wriggle, keeping the attention of the predator focused on it while the prey makes its escape.
The mutilated lizard will then slowly regrow a new tail, although it is usually rather imperfect.
A lizard without its tail is at a considerable disadvantage.
The tail is used in running, swimming, balancing and climbing, not to mention courtship and display.
Lizards that have lost their tails by autotomy do not live as long as those that manage to retain them, nor do they breed as efficiently.
But they do at least survive, and after a period of time will be able to regrow their tails.
This is a slow and imperfect process, but it does give them back most of their original caudal functions.
The only attribute their regrown tail lacks totally is the capacity to be discarded again.
This is because it does not develop ordinary vertebrae, but contains instead a  central rod of cartilage.
This provides a rudder that is capable of assisting in balancing and locomotion, but has no break-points for further ‘tail-dropping’.
The age of the lizard is important in determining the quality of its second tail.
A young lizard can regrow one that is almost as long as the original.
An older lizard tends to produce a somewhat abbreviated, stumpy appendage, and sometimes the regeneration goes horribly wrong and the unfortunate animal finds itself growing not one but two or even three new tails at once.
In this condition its mobility is severely hampered, but it still has a chance of survival if its environment is benign.
Of the sixteen families of lizards alive today, eleven of them have species that demonstrate tail-sacrifice.
Crocodiles are also capable of some slight degree of regeneration after losing a tail-tip, but the process is far less efficient than with lizards.
Some snakes lose their tail-tips with comparative ease, under duress, but unlike their four-legged relatives they are incapable of any regrowth.
Invertebrates are more efficient at regrowing lost parts.
A starfish can regrow all its arms if necessary even if the mutilation is severe.
Certain lizards — some of the skinks and the geckos — sacrifice another part of their body when they are grabbed by a predator.
Their trick is to have a very loosely connected skin, so free from the underlying tissue that a sudden gripping pressure can break it away, leaving the killer with only a mouthful of the instantly shed skin.
The now almost naked lizard scampers away to safety and quickly regrows a new outer covering.
This is highly efficient, but is no more than a slight modification of the normal skin-shedding process — quite an easy evolutionary step for any reptilian species to make, especially in comparison with the ‘natural ligature’ device in the lizard's tail.
The only other vertebrate animals to show an efficient form of self-mutilation  are certain amphibians, especially salamanders.
Some of them aid the deception by raising their tails and wagging them at the approaching attacker, while keeping the rest of the body still.
This attracts the predator towards the tail and protects the rest of the body.
The tail, when bitten, may then be broken off at a weak spot near the base, where there is a slight constriction.
But the ‘natural ligature’ is of a different kind from that of the lizards.
Here the plane of weakness is between two vertebrae, instead of through the middle of one.
After it has been sacrificed, the salamander's tail wriggles about just like the lizard's tail, but it has the additional advantage that it often contains poison glands which the killer finds pungently distasteful.
As a result, the predator is far less likely to attack a second individual of this type of prey.
The tactical loss of part of the body and its subsequent regrowth is far more common among the animals without backbones — the invertebrates.
Here it can be observed in worms, starfish, crabs and molluscs.
Their less advanced bodies appear to be easier to reconstitute than those of the higher animals.
Starfish and brittlefish will readily jettison an arm or two when attacked, and are capable of quickly growing new arms to replace them.
Crabs throw off a leg if it is grabbed by a predator, and scuttle away to the safety of a nearby crevice.
If they are dragged out again, they will release a second leg, then a third.
But they become less and less likely to make further sacrifices, until, when they are literally on their last legs, they cannot be persuaded to give up any more limbs, no matter how hard the killer grabs hold of them.
This increasing reluctance makes sense.
A crab missing a few legs may have enough running power left to survive, but a crab that is completely legless might as well be dead.
Some crabs employ an aggressive form of autotomy.
Instead of waiting for the predator to attack them, they use their powerful claws to turn the tables.
They grab hold of the killer's flesh, clamp tight and then cast off the claw.
This has been observed when otters have been hunting crabs.
The hapless mammal is left with a pair of savage chelae pinching it tight, while the crab makes its escape.
The otter has no alternative but to retreat in agony and attempt to prize the claws free.
By the time it has done this, the crab is safe.
With the next moult it will have regrown its missing claw, although the new one is by no means as impressive as the original.
Bees and wasps will leave their stings in the flesh of their enemies, employing a similarly aggressive form of self-mutilation.
Unfortunately for them this act is final.
Not only are they incapable of regrowing the stings, but they also cannot live without them.
The survival value of this act lies not with the individual but with its hive community.
Perhaps the most remarkable example of self-mutilation that inflicts pain on the attacker is the breaking off of poisonous papillae by various kinds of sea slugs.
The colourful animals — naked, marine snails — often display clusters of finger-shaped bladders along their upper surfaces.
When approached by a predatory fish, these little creatures contract their bodies and expand their papillae which they then wave about in the water.
The fish snaps at these enticingly offered morsels and finds that it is comparatively easy to bite one off.
It discovers its mistake a fraction of a second later, for these strange organs contain poison glands and sometimes also additional stinging-cells acquired from the anemones on which the sea slugs themselves feed.
Fish quickly learn to give these conspicuous little molluscs a wide berth, so that the loss of papillae is not too frequent.
But even when it does occur it does not provide too much of a problem, for the sea slugs are capable of quickly regenerating them ready for the next naïve fish to attack.
Some crabs are capable of throwing off their arms if they are grabbed by a predator This common shore crab is in the process of regenerating a sacrificed right claw.
Some sea slugs have conspicuous, brightly coloured growths on the tops of their bodies.
These coloured papillae can be enlarged when a predator approaches and are then waved about invitingly.
If the attacker bites one off it can soon be regrown.
The papillae are highly distasteful and deter fish from making a second assault.
Distraction Displays
THE AMAZING LENGTHS to which parent animals will go to protect their young has fascinated animal-watchers for centuries.
As far back as the fourth century, one of the founding fathers of the Greek Orthodox Church, Saint Basil, reported with admiration and astonishment that a parent bird may risk its life for its nestlings by attempting to lure a predator away from the nest.
It achieved this, he noted, by pretending to be injured, dragging itself along the ground as if it had a broken wing.
In this way it gave the predator hope of an easy catch, something it could not resist.
Instead of going closer to the nest and finding the genuinely helpless nestlings, the killer followed the apparently helpless adult bird.
At the last minute the parent would abandon its charade and fly off to safety.
Saint Basil was so enchanted by this selfless action that he concluded his comments with the words ‘If things seen are so lovely, what must things unseen be?’
Certainly, this is not the sort of behaviour that modern judges have in mind when they refer to young thugs as behaving ‘like animals’.
Seen by romantic eyes it is the epitome of the nobility of nature, but what is the truth of the situation?
Are the parent birds really putting themselves at risk for their offspring, laying down their own lives so that their young may live?
Even a brief moment of objective analysis reveals that this cannot be so.
For if the parent bird were to be attacked and killed by the predator, all its young would inevitably perish for subsequent lack of parental care.
So for the trick to work the parent must always be perfectly safe.
The risk is only apparent.
Nevertheless, distraction displays are, by any standards, remarkable patterns of animal behaviour, and require some explanation.
Displays of this kind are found in a wide variety of birds, but they are most common in the ground-nesting species.
There is a special reason for this.
Tree-nesting species, if they are being approached by a predator, have little hope of concealing their nests.
Having spotted them, the predator will know where they are, even if it is momentarily distracted by the parent bird.
The best hope for tree-nests is that they should be inaccessible.
Failing that, the parent bird's most useful strategy is to attack the climbing killer as it approaches the nest-site.
Diving at it and pecking it may just be enough to unsettle it as it makes the difficult final climb.
Alternatively, the parent bird can flee and live to rear another clutch of eggs elsewhere.
The only other course of action for a tree-nester is to hop about in the tree, squawking and screeching noisily in an attempt to break the attacker's concentration.
This is a crude form of distraction display, but it cannot be developed much further because of the context in which it occurs.
The climbing predator is in no position to start chasing after the cackling parent bird, no matter how tempting it may be.
Up in the branches this does not make sense.
Down on the ground matters are very different.
For a start, the nest, its eggs, its nestlings and its owners are all highly camouflaged.
Ground-nests are so well concealed that predators can easily overlook them even when they are only a few feet away.
So it pays the nest-owners to sit tight and hope that the killers will pass them by.
If this fails, then clearly the eggs or young are at a serious risk.
When the parent bird, with the predator only inches away, finally takes flight, the nest is horribly vulnerable, its position revealed and all too easily accessible.
This is the moment at which a major diversion is necessary.
To attack the predator while it is in a stable position on the ground is far riskier than to do so when it is clinging to high branches.
The diving and pecking routine would have little impact and might expose the nest-owners to serious injury or death.
Only powerful birds would stand a chance.
For the rest something else is needed, and that is where the distraction display comes into operation.
At ground level the nest-owner can make exaggerated movements away from the nest and draw the killer towards itself.
The combination of inconspicuous nest, conspicuous display and easy terrain, makes this the ideal context for this type of reaction.
The display must be more than just conspicuous.
It must also be tantalisingly attractive to a hungry predator.
And nothing appeals to an experienced hunter more than a wounded or somehow disabled prey.
If the parent bird can appear to be at some grave physical disadvantage, the killer will find the tempting proximity of the vulnerable adult irresistible and its concentration on the location of the nest-site can be broken.
Once it has been led farther and farther away from the nest by the parent bird, it will have difficulty in rediscovering the position of the nest and will, in all probability, set off to search elsewhere if it fails to make a killing.
A successful distraction display therefore requires five stages.
First, the bird must sit tight on the nest until the last moment.
Second, it must fly swiftly away from the nest and alight some distance from it.
Third, it must perform its conspicuous, super-prey routine until it attracts the attention of the predator.
Fourth, it must continue this display while moving away from the nest.
And fifth, it must be alert enough to judge perfectly the moment for a sudden ‘recovery’ and flight to safety.
The most remarkable phase of this sequence is the ‘super-prey’ display.
It takes two distinct forms in different species.
These have been christened the ‘broken-wing’ display and the ‘rodent-run’.
In the broken-wing performance, the realism is so remarkable that even human observers can be fooled when they first encounter it.
Having flown away from the nest, the bird flutters to the ground and then pathetically tries to run away, limping and dragging one outstretched wing along the ground.
Sometimes it flops to the ground as if exhausted.
Its feathers are ruffled, as those of a genuinely sick bird would be, and this ruffling often exposes bright patches of plumage that add to the conspicuousness of the display.
If the parent bird is aquatic and is making its display on water, it may turn on its side, flap one wing awkwardly in the air and paddle itself in a circle as if it is hopelessly crippled.
Even while they are staggering about, fluttering and floundering, these mock-disabled birds are fully aware of everything around them.
They are not suffering some kind of seizure brought on by the fear of the nearby predator.
All their actions are counterfeit.
An early observer was amused to notice that certain shore-nesting birds took great care about the way they performed their imitation death throes: ‘The end comes slowly, surely, a miserable flurry and scraping, the dying stilt, however, even in articulo mortis , contriving to avoid inconvenient stones, upon which decently to expire.’
In other words, these are ritualised displays triggered off by the stimulus of ‘predator-near-nest’.
Whatever their origin, they are now highly controlled and automatic responses to this situation.
They represent an elaborate piece of behavioural mimicry and appear to be inborn.
Indeed a Galapagos dove was seen to perform a distraction display on an island where there had been no predators for countless years.
When humans arrived, the dove demonstrated a behaviour pattern that it must have inherited from its ancient ancestors and kept in storage ever since.
Many ground-nesting birds employ a distraction display that draws an approaching predator away from the nest-site where vulnerable eggs or chicks are situated.
The display, seen here performed by a thick-knee (top), a kildeer (above) and a semi-palmated plover (opposite, top and bottom), usually consists of a simulated injury —the body is rolled on one side and an apparently broken wing trailed along the ground.
The ‘damaged’ bird struggles away from the nest, followed closely by the would-be killer.
When the predator comes too close, the parent bird suddenly leaps up and flies to safety.
The ‘rodent-run’ display takes an entirely different form and is employed especially where the local predatory species are always on the alert for small rats, mice, or lemmings.
The bird jumps from its nest at the last minute and runs off making a special squeaking call.
Its body is hunched up in a strange way, with its wings drooped, its feathers ruffled and its head lowered.
In its humped posture it runs along in a zigzag path, quivering its wings and stopping every so often to make sure that it is being followed.
If the predator ignores this tempting performance, the little bird quickly flies back and runs close to it, moving with great agitation.
It then starts off on another ‘rodent-run’, watching to see if it is followed.
It  continues to do this until the predator is safely in pursuit and is moving farther and farther away from the nest.
The bravery of a parent bird when defending its nest is remarkable, as is proved by this blacksmith plover's display towards an intruding elephant.
Although the elephant is not a predator, it could easily damage the nest, and it must somehow be persuaded to take another route.
The little bird is dwarfed by the giant pachyderm, but does not hesitate to perform its distraction display at close quarters.
There are many minor variations, from species to species, but these two types of distraction display are the basic forms.
Their strangeness is a testimony to the sensitivity of the predators.
No crude display will suffice to decoy them.
The performance has to be convincing, or they will not be lured away from the vulnerable nest or young.
And they have to be safe for the performers, so that the nest-owners can survive to continue their parental duties.
Their inner mood must remain one of complete alertness to be ready to make the final dash to safety.
They may appear to be fainting, collapsing and suffering from shock, but in reality they can be none of these things.
Everything must be a sham.
In which case, how did they develop these extraordinary actions during the course of evolution?
What is their origin?
Even the mighty ostrich has been known to resort to this form of deception.
Instead of risking an attack on the predator that is approaching the nest, the parent bird sometimes runs awkwardly away, flapping its wings as if in difficulties.
At any moment it can switch to full-speed running.
The predator, by the time it has given up the chase, will probably have forgotten the exact location of the nest and will not be able to retrace its steps.
The ostrich, on the other hand, will eventually be able to return to the spot it knows so well, where it can resume its parental duties.
As with all displays, the unusual movements and postures are the result of a state of conflict.
In this case the conflict is between the urge to flee from the predator and the urge to attack it.
At the same time there is a conflict between wanting to be on the nest and away from the nest.
Originally this state must have led to a great deal of contradictory and ambivalent  behaviour, with the bird being tugged in opposite directions by its opposing moods.
Clashing intention movements of coming and going, autonomic disturbances leading to harsh vocalisations and feather erections, and agitated changes of direction could all be expected to occur.
If this were a simple conflict between attack and escape, it would have led to threat displays.
These would have evolved in such a way that the displayer would have appeared bigger and more frightening.
But intimidation is not the function of distraction displays.
Here selection has favoured display developments that make the birds look not fearsome but disabled.
The elements selected from the confusion of conflicting movements have this different and very distinctive bias.
In particular, a combination in which one part of the animal flees and the other part stays still, is favoured.
This has produced the ‘broken-wing’ display.
The flapping wing says ‘I am frightened,’ and the stationary wing says, ‘I will not retreat.’
Together, this gives the awkward, asymmetrical display that mimics injury.
In the case of the curious ‘rodent-run’ display, it is as if the bird is running away and hiding at the same time.
The strangely crouching posture, with the head down and the body hunched, seems to have been taken from the ‘hiding-by-staying-put-on-the-nest’ repertoire, while the running away and squealing has been taken from the escape repertoire.
Put together, along with a ‘run/don't-run’ locomotion compromise, they create the rodent mimicry that appeals so much to certain killers.
But whatever their origins, these distraction displays are now reactions in their own right.
They have become emancipated from their roots and exist as trigger reactions to the approach of predators.
They are, however, finely tuned to the parental condition of the birds.
They are most readily shown at the times when the young are hatching and again when they are fledging.
These are the most intense parental periods for the birds and the increase in parental arousal affects the frequency of the distraction displays.
Distraction displays are almost entirely confined to birds, but there are a few examples from elsewhere, notably in a fish called the bowfin.
This is a nest-building species in which the male guards the young fry after they hatch.
They cluster around him in a dense shoal and follow him as he moves about.
They are the favourite prey of certain predatory fish and the male parent is reputed to perform a distraction display at certain times.
He does this by moving away from the shoal of fry and then thrashing about in the water as if injured.
In this way he may succeed in attracting the attention of the predator away from the vulnerable fry.
Other distraction displays, of a completely different nature, are those in which the displayer attempts to distract the attacker from itself.
No young are involved.
For example, the cuttlefish, when attacked, releases a large blob of ink into the water.
Originally it was believed that this was a simple ‘smokescreen’, a kind of instant fog in which the cuttlefish became hidden and could escape.
But careful observation suggests that this is not the case.
The blob of ink initially hangs together and does not disperse immediately.
Floating in the water it is suddenly more noticeable than the cuttlefish itself.
The blob is black in colour while the cuttlefish instantly becomes cryptically pale, and the mollusc sneaks away, almost invisibly, while the attacker assaults the vividly conspicuous blob of ink.
Another self-protection form of distraction is practised by certain orb-web spiders.
These animals are frequently attacked by predatory wasps and they divert the killers by wrapping up the remains of insects or egg cocoons and positioning them in their webs.
Being roughly the same size and shape as the spiders, they act as decoys, attracting the attention of the wasps and sparing the spiders.
This spotted sea hare (above) is a mollusc that can squirt a cloud of purple ink into the water in response to the approach of a predator.
This display distracts the attention of the would-be killer from the retreating form of the prey.
The octopus (below) and the cuttlefish both use a similar strategy when under attack, but their ink blob is dark brown or black.
Mobbing
SMALL BIRDS suffer from a lifelong fear of birds of prey, especially owls.
It is an inborn fear that develops when they are only a few months old, regardless of whether they have ever met an owl.
In general it results in their avoiding owls at all costs, but occasionally they turn the tables on the killer bird — the tormented become the tormentors.
Instead of fleeing they stand their ground and confront the owl.
Screeching an alarm call, they attract more and more small birds to the scene until the bird of prey is surrounded by a noisy, angry mob.
They now start to harass the bigger bird, calling incessantly and loudly, twisting and jerking their bodies and even making mock attacks.
Sometimes a particularly bold individual will risk a real attack, swooping in from behind the owl and striking at its plumage.
This mobbing behaviour never occurs when the predator is actively hunting.
It is most likely to occur when the bird of prey is behaving in an odd way.
If it is injured or sick it may sit quietly in an unusually visible position during daylight hours.
A conspicuous, stationary owl is a major target for mobbing.
The small birds gather round and approach it remarkably closely, often as near as lo feet, and then start to display.
The exact movements vary from species to species but in a typical finch such as the chaffinch the body is turned towards the owl, the crown-feathers are raised, the legs are bent, the wings are slightly raised, and the body is jerked quickly from side to side in a crouched, bent-leg posture, while the tail flicks up and down.
Many species have been observed to indulge in this strange mobbing display, including finches, tits, buntings, warblers, blackbirds, thrushes and even little hummingbirds.
The hummingbirds become particularly hostile, buzzing around the big bird's head, as close as 2 inches from its face, calling out and jabbing at its eyes.
Some of the larger birds, like the blackbirds and thrushes, often risk a little dive-bombing, in which they swoop down on the owl from a distance of about 30 feet, heading straight for it, and then swerve aside only at the very last moment, when they are no more than a foot away.
Sometimes they leap at it from behind and claw at its head feathers.
The excitement is contagious, with many new birds arriving and performing the mobbing display without even seeing the bird of prey that is causing the commotion.
They witness the behaviour of the other small mobbers and simply follow suit.
They become so excited during this gang warfare that humans can approach them much more closely than at other times.
And their arousal is so intense that if the owl finally departs they will still go on mobbing for a long while afterwards, as though they cannot calm down to a normal level of activity until some considerable time has passed.
If a large predatory bird sits in a conspicuous position it may find itself being mobbed by smaller birds, which call, display, and even attempt to dive-bomb it with pecking attacks.
When it flies away it may be Pursued until it has left the vicinity — as is happening with this beleaguered golden eagle being chased by a group of aggressive ravens.
The beleaguered owl finds the whole encounter highly distasteful and confusing.
Its bearing suggests that it is irritated and jarred by what is taking place around it.
It becomes increasingly ill at ease until eventually the din and the intrusions become too much for it and it flaps off to find a quieter spot somewhere else.
And this, of course, is the function of the combined display onslaught.
The owl will not forget the ordeal and may in future avoid that particular neck of the woods.
For the local small birds this is a huge advantage.
Sometimes a solitary individual is brave enough to act as a one-bird mob and attack a predator on its own, as this roller is doing, worrying a martial eagle.
The actions employed by the displaying birds are clearly those of animals in conflict.
Fear of the owl makes the birds want to flee and anger at its obtrusive presence makes them want to attack.
In addition there is a considerable element of curiosity on the part of the little birds — they want to learn all they can about this dreaded enemy while it is, for once, sitting quietly.
Although serious research on the subject of mobbing did not begin until around the time of the Second World War, it has been known as a natural  phenomenon for over 2,500 years.
There is an exceptionally beautiful Greek vase depicting mobbing, dating from the sixth century BC.
It is a black-figure amphora showing a tree with ten branches and an owl tethered near by.
On either side of this scene there crouches a human watcher and the air is filled with small birds — thirty-one of them altogether.
Some appear to be stuck to the branches and one or two are distinctly fluttering their wings, as if in some kind of trouble.
What this early artist has illustrated is mobbing behaviour being exploited to trap small birds, which would have been destined to be served up at table.
The tethered owl, deliberately employed as a decoy, attracted the flock of small birds to the spot, where many of them alighted on the branches of the nearby tree.
And this was their undoing because the surfaces of the branches had earlier been covered with lime to make it impossible for them to take flight again — ever again.
The owl was being used as bait.
The most common victim of mobbing is the owl, and this phenomenon has been known for centuries.
The earliest depiction of it is on a sixth century B. C. black-figure amphora (above) from Greece.
This shows that human bird-catchers had already learnt to exploit the mobbing reaction.
By placing a tethered owl under a tree, the branches of which had been covered with sticky lime, it was possible to trap small birds as they gathered to mob the bird of prey.
Their feet became stuck and they could then easily be caught and killed for the pot.
This reveals a close understanding of the phenomenon and shows that it was well known even at this early date.
A little later, in Ancient Roman times, the mobbing display again appears in the art of the day.
This time it is on an elaborate mosaic, where an owl is shown sitting in the middle of a ring of attacking animals.
Symbolically the owl sits on an Evil Eye that has been pierced by a spear, suggesting that the owl's own ‘Evil Eye’ has been incapacitated by the mobbing display.
Later still, in a Medieval bestiary, three courageous birds are shown in the act of attacking an owl's head.
One of these birds is depicted as a magpie.
Much later, in the eighteenth century, the Spanish artist Goya shows a caged owl being swooped upon by two free-flying birds, while a small caged bird sits nervously in front of it.
The indication here is that the caged finch has been placed close to the owl in order to provoke it into prolonged alarm calling that will attract others of its kind.
The netting thrown over the tree in the background is obviously intended to trap these newcomers as they arrive to mob the owl.
This seventeenth-century mosaic (above, right) illustrates the way in which different species of small birds may uniquely work together to deal with the shared problem of seeing off a feared predator.
(Below) A mockingbird is here seen boldly attacking a great horned owl.
In modern times interest has centred around what it is about the owl that makes it the target for this hostile treatment.
Field tests using stuffed owls and wooden dummies quickly established which features are important.
To be an effective ‘owl’, a model should possess the following qualities: a big head, a short neck, a short tail, solid contours, brown or  grey colouring, a patterned surface with spots or streaks, a beak and frontally directed eyes.
The more of these properties a dummy possessed the more strongly it was mobbed, but it seemed to make little difference whether the object was a stuffed owl with real plumage or an owl-shaped piece of painted wood.
If the key elements of ‘owlness’ were absent, or only a few were present, the birds showed some curiosity about the dummy but were not stimulated to perform the full mobbing response.
One particular owl quality that is. sufficient by itself to attract mobbing birds is the characteristic hooting sound it makes.
In the days when hummingbird feathers were fashionable costume accessories, the plumage hunters of Trinidad used to imitate the hooting of owls to draw the unfortunate hummingbirds towards them and to their deaths.
Although they produce the strongest reactions, owls are not the only animals to provoke mobbing reactions.
Other birds of prey may also arouse strong responses if they sit in a conspicuous position during the daylight hours.
Also, field experiments with a stuffed cuckoo quickly revealed that this, too, was attacked by small birds.
At first the mobbers showed the typical agitated response but then, when the stuffed bird failed to retaliate, they dashed in for violent physical assaults on its body.
They savagely plucked feathers from it and were so carried away by their onslaught that they even continued attacking when the stuffed bird was held in the experimenter's hand, close to his face.
At one point, to suppress attacks, a large handkerchief was thrown over the stuffed cuckoo, but the enraged birds (in this case, nightingales) would not give up and assaulted the handkerchief instead.
Such is the passion of the mob.
Field experiments with stuffed birds also demonstrate that different species of small birds all close in for the attack on a hated enemy — in this case not a predator but a cuckoo.
The stuffed cuckoo is bombarded by a frenzied reed warbler and a belligerent pair of nightingales.
The willow warbler is even prepared to assault a stuffed cuckoo head.
Snakes have been mobbed from time to time by groups of ground squirrels.
The little rodents make brave, taunting rushes at the deadly reptiles and sometimes even risk delivering a lightning bite to their bodies.
Another technique they employ is throwing sand or dust into the snake's face.
Put under this pressure and without an isolated adversary on which to concentrate its lethal strike, the snake usually does its best to beat a rapid retreat.
Again, safety in numbers saves the day for the prey species.
Like small birds, small mammals may occasionally indulge in mobbing to rid themselves of a feared killer.
Here, in the Kalahari, a group of meerkats is angrily seeing off a deadly yellow cobra.
Some predatory mammals also provoke mobbing reactions.
Foxes  often avoid the colony sites of breeding seabirds because if they attempt a swift invasion to capture nestlings they are liable to find themselves the object of severe and painful dive-bombing by the parent gulls and their companions.
The gulls swoop down, striking at the fox's head, and the predator quickly retreats to safety.
Baboons will gang up on a leopard in a similar way, although this is a risky venture.
But here, too, the presence of a group of agitated, hostile prey animals, all assembled together as an opposing force, is usually too much for the predator.
Every killer has its own special modus operandi — or MO, to use a police term — and it does not take kindly to being forced to attack in circumstances that do not favour its special hunting style.
An angry mob creates confusion and prevents the smooth running of its hunting sequence.
Its decision is therefore almost always to show restraint and to leave the scene as quietly as possible.
The hunt will occur later, on its own terms and in its own time.
When mobbing occurs, the situation is far too unpredictable from second to second to suit even the most lethal predator.
Chimpanzees have been observed to indulge in mobbing in certain unusual cases.
One intrepid field-worker took an electrically animated, stuffed leopard into the forests of West Africa, placed it in a clearing near a group of chimpanzees, and hid in the bushes near by.
When the chimpanzees came close to the leopard, he activated its mechanism, so that it started to move its head.
The apes' reaction was astonishing.
Film of the event shows that they immediately ganged up on the leopard, rushing at it, screaming, stamping their feet and throwing objects at it.
Eventually, one of them attacked it with a large branch, striking it a damaging blow.
This is so reminiscent of the way human mobs have all too often treated wild animals they have encountered, that it is just one more reminder of how closely related humans and chimpanzees are.
Food-finding
THERE ARE ABOUT one and a half million different kinds of life forms on the planet today.
Of these, 1,124,000 are animals and 359,000 are plants.
The animal species are divided as follows (to the nearest thousand):
4,000 Mammals
9,000 Birds
6,000 Reptiles
3,000 Amphibians
20,000 Fish
80,000 Molluscs (shellfish, octopuses and squids)
4,000 Echinoderms (starfish and sea-urchins)
923,000 Arthropods (insects, spiders, scorpions and crustaceans)
9,000 Coelenterates (jellyfish, sea-anemones and corals)
66,000 Lower Forms (worms and microbes)
Every one of these species has evolved its own special way of finding food, but they fall into eleven basic categories.
At the top of the scale come the predators , animals that live largely by killing other animals.
Some are highly specialised and limit themselves to one particular type of prey, refusing all other kinds of meat even though it may be highly nutritious.
Others are opportunists, killing anything they can catch and devouring it with relish.
The specialists tend to live rather quiet, often secretive lives, while the opportunists scamper hither and thither, always on the lookout for a new kind of meal.
Eagles, snakes and cats are typical lazy specialists, and crows, mongooses and dogs are typical busy opportunists.
The use of the word ‘lazy’ here does not imply that those animals are indolent or inefficient but rather that their specialisation is so finely tuned and successful that they are able to spend a great deal of their daily lives sitting, gazing and sleeping.
The opportunists, by contrast, must be forever searching and sniffing, exploring and checking.
The supreme predator is the cheetah (opposite, top) the fastest animal on four legs, capable of reaching speeds of over 50 miles an hour.
But its chase is brief, averaging less than 200 yards, and if it fails to catch its prey within this short dash it gives up.
If it does catch it, it knocks it to the ground and then grabs its throat in its strong jaws, killing it by suffocation.
These are two totally different ways of life, each with its own rewards.
The difference becomes crucially important when animals are brought into captivity, as in zoos or menageries.
The specialists are then much easier to satisfy — providing they are given the right kind of food, they are content to sit and stare out from their cages, much as they would sit and stare out at their wild landscapes.
But the opportunists suffer terribly under these conditions.
Even if well fed, they cannot stop searching and exploring, as this has become an end in itself in their behaviour repertoire.
Their problem is often that there is nothing to explore except a bare concrete cell, and this frustrates them intensely.
To watch such animals biting their own bodies as a way of providing novel stimulation is to see just how inadequate even the most modern zoos are for this type of species.
Opportunist feeders must have a rich and complex environment if they are to thrive.
Zoos really cannot provide this without giving them enormous, pseudo-natural enclosures.
African hunting dogs (opposite, bottom) attack their prey in a pack, pursuing them for several miles if necessary.
Their secret is stamina rather than speed and when they have worn down their prey the kill is clumsy but efficient.
They simply tear at the flesh of the victim until the animal is weak from loss of blood, when they pull it over and start to devour it.
Smaller prey are disembowelled and then eaten while still alive.
In the wild, the specialist predators may spend only a very small percentage of their time in the pursuit of food.
A kill every few days is often enough for the predators of large prey.
After each kill they can feast and rest, then slowly digest the flesh on which they have gorged themselves.
This is food of the highest quality and their feeding technique, although always involving the risk of physical injury, is the most efficient of all.
The lion is an ambush killer.
With its heavy body it is only capable of reaching speeds of about 35 miles an hour, some 15 miles an hour slower than many of its prey, and so it requires stealth and surprise rather than speed to catch them.
Encirclement of prey is a common strategy, as in wolf hunting, and the frantic victim finds it difficult to escape the group attack.
It is knocked to the ground by a heavy blow, seized by the throat or mouth and quickly suffocated.
The pride then move in to share the feast.
The smaller the prey becomes, the more labour is needed to obtain adequate nutrition.
Each victim has to be tracked and killed and yet it provides only a small meal.
But its food value is still very high if it is a vertebrate prey, such as a rodent, a bird or a fish.
The feeding of insect-eaters is less efficient.
They must scoop up or snap up huge numbers of insects each day to fill their stomachs, and each insect contains a large percentage of rather non-nutritious outer-covering.
The advantage, however, is that there are plenty of insects about.
The second major category of feeders is the scavenger group.
These are  the meat-eaters who leave the killing to someone else.
The benefit of this feeding lifestyle is that it avoids the dangers of active killing of prey.
A carcass cannot injure you.
But the food is always of second-best quality — the left-overs from the hunters.
And there is always a risk of disease to replace the risk of injury.
It must be admitted, however, that vultures always appear remarkably healthy.
The raccoon has a strong preference for aquatic feeding.
The development of its taste for small water creatures as a main ingredient in its omnivorous diet may be similar to the trend that occurred in our own ancient ancestors during the intermediate stage on the way to becoming the first hunting primates.
At the other end of the scale there are the particle feeders , static animals such as burrowing marine worms and other bottom-dwelling aquatic creatures that simply sit and sift the plentiful detritus that sinks to the bed of seas and lakes.
They rarely go hungry, but they are easy prey for aquatic hunters, having little or no mobility with which to defend themselves.
The diet of this Alaskan brown bear (right) is predominantly succulent vegetation, including roots, fruits and berries, but when the opportunity arises animal foods are consumed with relish.
Once a year the up-river migration of the salmon heading for their spawning grounds provides a great feast.
Each fish is caught in the water, then carried to a nearby bank and delicately devoured.
As a restaurant diner would, the bear separates the flesh from the skeleton, which is left behind after the meal.
(Opposite, top left) River-feeding birds have evolved a highly specialised hunting technique based on great restraint.
They have developed the ability to stand stock-still, like statues, until the fish are relaxed and unwary.
Then a lightning stab is made, in which the bird has to allow for the refraction of the water surface .
Herons are masters of this technique.
Similar to these are the filter-feeders , animals that pass a current of water through their bodies and take out of it all the food they need.
The largest of the filter-feeders is, however, far from static and is indeed the biggest animal that has ever lived — the blue whale.
This vast creature, weighing up to 30 tons, feeds by merely swimming along with its mouth open.
It collects its food on a curtain of baleen or whalebone in its mouth and after a single meal may well have transferred to its stomach no less than 2 tons of tiny shrimps, each no more than 3 inches long.
The largest of the sharks and rays are also filter-feeders.
(Opposite, top right) The first mammals were small, scurrying, nocturnal creatures that hunted for insects and other small animals.
Today's tarsiers retain this ancient feeding pattern.
Birds of prey, such as this tawny owl (opposite, bottom) swooping down on a mouse, are at serious risk in many parts of the world because of pesticides employed to eliminate the pests on which they rely for food.
Being highly specialised feeders, there are no alternatives for them and their numbers are dwindling fast.
Among the birds, flamingos have also evolved strainers inside their mouths and operate as filter-feeders in shallow lakes.
They feed with their heads upside-down, sweeping them from side to side.
The tongue acts as a pump, helping to suck in small forms of water-life and squeeze them down the throat.
Dabbling ducks operate a similar system when sifting through the muddy bottoms of the waters on which they live.
With lower forms of life that employ this type of feeding system, such as oysters and other bivalves, the animals are usually stationary and pass the current of water  through their bodies by beating with thousands of tiny filaments called cilia.
Many of these creatures — peacock worms for instance— look more like plants than animals.
The world's greatest scavengers are undoubtedly the vultures (above).
They detect the presence of carrion by sight.
Their excellent long-distance vision spots something suspicious and they fly to it at high speed.
Other vultures observe these rapid flying actions in the distance and then move in themselves.
In this way a carcass can draw vultures from far away in a short time.
Once there they gorge themselves until they are so bloated they can hardly take off.
On dry land the nearest equivalents of the filter-feeders are the grazers .
Like their aquatic counterparts they have to take in a great deal of substance to supply their energy needs.
But instead of filtering food from huge quantities of water they have to extract it from a mass of indigestible vegetable matter.
Grazers have the enormous advantage that there is plenty of their favourite food available, all around them, stretching for as far as the eye can see and regrowing time and again regardless of how much they crop it.
But they have the grave disadvantage that they must spend almost all their waking hours eating it if they are to obtain an adequate diet.
The endlessly repetitive cropping and grinding becomes a whole way of life, dominating the daily routine of such animals as rabbits and hares, some rodents, marsupials such as kangaroos and wallabies, many ungulates and, among invertebrates, the grasshoppers and locusts.
Starfish (above, right) are the vultures of the seabed.
Here a swarm of common starfish are rapidly devouring the carcass of a fish.
Seeking more succulent vegetation, many herbivores have turned their attention to higher sources of food in the shrubs and trees of woodlands and forests.
Antelopes such as the long-necked gerenuks, the even longer-necked giraffes and pachyderms like the elephants and the black rhinos have all stretched upwards for their sustenance.
Koalas, sloths and leaf-eating monkeys are already up there, with a never-ending supply of food at their disposal, but again with the problem of breaking it down and digesting it.
For these browsers , like grazers, the feeding is easy but tedious, putting a greater evolutionary pressure on patience rather than intelligence.
For some reason, however, the pachyderms do not fit this picture — both elephants and rhinos exhibit far more complex personalities with much higher intelligence than might be expected for animals with their style of feeding.
Hyenas have always been thought of as scavengers but it is now known that they are also vigorous nocturnal hunters.
By day, however, they are more likely to move in on someone else's kill and carry off parts that other jaws cannot crack (below).
There is another major category of feeders that concentrates more on the highly nutritious parts of plants — their fruits, nuts, seeds and flowers.
Those that are specialist fruit-eaters enjoy a much more luscious form of food, rich in water, carbohydrate, Vitamin C and sometimes oil, but poor in protein.
Most fruit-eaters require other kinds of food as supplements, and they tend to be generally more omnivorous in their habits.
Fruit is so tasty, however, so sweet and juicy, that it is a favourite source of food for a  huge variety of mammals, birds and reptiles.
Together these species assist the plant kingdom in its dispersal and reproduction, via the pips, stones and seeds that are rejected or excreted.