

£1.25 EVERY WEEK
1000s OF USED CARS TO BUY PINK PAGES
E-type's heir gets the go-ahead
Jaguar's new V8 sports car
AWARDS BEST CAR MAKERS REVEALED
TESTED RENAULT SAFRANE
DRIVEN BENTLEY BROOKLANDS
DM 8.50, Lire 4400
This week
Jaguar Reinvests the E-type Exciting V8 sports car gets green light
‘Low-cost’ Cellphones Warning: they could actually cost you more
Australian Grand Prix Mansell's swansong in Formula 1
PLUS Cropley, Robinson, Young, sports news and your views
Autocar & Motor Awards
We honour the top achievers of 1992 in the motor industry Oscars
Road Test
Renault Safrane V6 Another winner from the Regie?
Long Term Test
Caterham 7 HPC 12,000 miles in our home-grown supercar
Features
First Drive: Citroen ZX 3dr Seven new ZXs headed by 16-valver
Kit Cars' Lifeline Soon you will be able to buy kit cars fully built
From Calibra to Viper We interview new Chrysler boss Bob Eaton
100,000 Miles in a Sierra If it ain't broken, don't fix it
Brooklands Today The circuit's glory days live on
A Week in a Bentley Brooklands To France in style
Driver's Diary My kingdom for a convertible
Pink Pages
Road Test Results Our exclusive facts, figures and verdicts
Past Masters Test results and verdicts on greats from the past
New Car Prices Cost and essential specification of every car on sale
Cars For Sale 31 pages of the greatest new and used bargains
Sell Your Car Classified advertisement coupon
Bentley's new Brooklands on tour in France, p66
Renault's new Safrane is a big improvement over the R25 — but is it a class leader?
We test the range-topping RXE, p38
this week
exclusive
Green light for Jag's new E-type
The spiritual successor to the Jaguar E-type has finally been given the go-ahead.
Steve Cropley reports
THE F-TYPE LIVES!
At last, Ford and Jaguar bosses have given their backing to a spiritual successor to the E-type.
This stunning sports car, an XJS replacement codenamed X100 will give the hard-pressed company the same kind of inspiration and sales kick that its illustrious predecessor did through the '60s.
Superbly styled, the car will be powered by the new four-cam 32-valve four-litre AJ26 V8 engine, part of a modular family of power units to be built by Ford at Bridgend in Wales.
The X100 will use a modified version of the present XJS replacement, it is expected to be lighter, smaller and much more nimble.
It will offer similar performance to the present 5.3-litre V12 XJS.
Axe fell on overweight F-Type when Ford bought Jaguar
The official go-ahead from X100, won at a meeting of Ford and Jaguar company chief company chiefs in Coventry late in October, has sent an unprecedented wave of optimism and excitement through Jaguar's Browns Lane headquarters.
Jaguar insiders say the company bosses — all 14 of them — are so enthusiastic about the car that every one of them has claimed he'd spend his own money to buy one if it goes into production.
The meeting was a triumph for Jaguar's  in-house styling team.
Led by Geoff Lawson and Keith Helfet, it beat off two late challenges from Ford sources — the Ghia studio in Turin and Ford's US design centre in Dearborn.
Pininfarina showed XJS Spyder in late '70s
Company bigwigs unanimously backed Helfet's design.
Although hurriedly completed for the presentation, it was felt that it embodies the Jaguar spirit better than any of the others.
There was similar enthusiasm for the Coventry concept at styling clinics in the UK and the US.
The green light for the X100 brings to an end nine months of heart searching at Browns Lane while Ford invited its own design offices to submit plans for a new Jaguar sports car.
At one stage, chief designer Geoff Lawson felt his job was so much at risk that he began looking at houses in the Essex area and making arrangements to move his family.
It is understood Ford and Jaguar managers soundly backed the efforts of Lawson and Helfet to preserve the traditional Jaguar look in the original design.
Lawson, it seems, is now firmly back in the fold at Browns Lane.
The directors even labelled one of the rival designs from another part of the Ford empire as a great concept for an Alpha Romeo.
Geoff Lawson (above) headed the styling team that produced the stunning X100
For Helfet, the design's acceptance is a particular triumph, since he prides himself on understanding the Jaguar ethos.
He is one of the few engineers or designers still at Browns Lane to have worked with Sir William Lyons, the company's founder and whose principles still provide much of its inspiration.
The X100 will come in both fixed-head and convertible versions.
There is no question of making the car a full four-seater, but cabin room will be expanded in length and height over the comparatively small interior of the XJS.
At this stage, Browns Lane has not given up hope of getting rear seats into the convertible, but it is proving a hard task, and it is probably that only the coupe will be a two-plus-two.
Apart from the major suspension components and floor pressings — and therefore the 102ins wheelbase — the X100 will be a completely different animal from the XJS.
Firstly, it will be much more aggressive and sporty, with styling cues that owe much to the XJ220 and the failed F-type.
Codenamed Project 41, the F-type was cancelled soon after Ford acquired Jaguar.
It was deemed too heavy, but its styling had many admirers.
In turn, the F-type owed  something to Pininfarina's Spyder concept of the late '70s which, in essence, was a rebodied XJS.
X100's body will be rounded and sculpted, with soft, flowing lines and no hard edges or chrome highlights.
Insiders say the front air intake, rounded but not necessarily elliptical, will be below the impact-absorbing front bumper.
The headlights — so much a feature of the E-type — will be rounded and unusual in design again, though details are sketchy.
‘Not a predictable shape’ is the way one insider put it.
The X100 will be at least 20 per cent lighter than the XJS's corpulent 1770kg (3900lb) at the kerb.
The new car will bristle with safety hardware, including side intrusion bars and airbags as standard and possibly a roll-over bar for the convertible.
The X100 will be as much as 610mm shorter than the 4724mm (15ft 6ins) XJS, not least because the 1220mm rear overhang will be halved.
As ever at Jaguar, the emphasis will be on making the car smooth and quiet.
But the efforts of some of the UK's finest suspension engineers will make the X100 the sports car the XJS never was.
Expect no complaints about suspension float or over sensitive steering: this will be a car to be driven.
Helfet: X100 stylist
Current debate at Browns Lane has turned to the engine's power output.
Early reports were that the four-litre V8, to be produced at the same factory as Ford's Zeta range of 16-valve fours, could produce as much as 290bhp when fitted with Jaguar-designed cylinder heads.
X100 will be smaller and much lighter than XJS — more of a true sports car
But Jaguar is conscious that the car must have credible fuel economy, too.
It seems more likely, therefore, that the final output will be nearer to 250bhp.
Company official believe a 140mph top speed, coupled with a 0–60mph time of less than 7.0secs and achievable all-round fuel consumption in the 22–28mpg range, would be acceptable to the market of 1996.
Under Ford's influence, Jaguar is placing heavy emphasis on building the car efficiently, speedily and at low cost.
The X100 will benefit from Jaguar's recent decision to spend £7 million on upgrading its final assembly track next year to allow more efficient doors-off assembly.
The system allows doors to be assembled separately and fitted to the car at a late stage, to improve access to the car as it proceeds along the line.
The company has appointed Bob Dover as the project chief charged with bringing the car to efficient production.
A manufacturing expert, he comes from Land Rover, where he put  the Discovery into production.
Dover is believed to have begun involving Jaguar's suppliers in the X100 at an early stage, to smooth potential problems.
Jaguar's new wave of optimism will need to endure.
It still has to deal with sagging demand in its two vital markets — the UK and the US — while it develops the first of four new models for the late '90s.
The X300 saloon, which replaces the XJ6, is destined for a 1994 launch.
A taller order may be prolonging the life of the XJS until the X100 takes over.
Since these mid '90s cars are to use Ford Bridgend-built engines, or at least blocks, Jaguar must decide what to build at the Radford engine plant outside Coventry, which at present produces in-line AJ6 and V12 units.
Lingering problems or not, this is a great moment in Jaguar's history.
Concrete plans are now afoot for the beleaguered company to produce its most keenly awaited car, its most radical design for 30 years and a probable lifesaver.
For lovers of Jaguar sports cars, the next three and a half years are going to seem interminable.
Sculpted lines and rounded headlights are reminiscent of illustrious E-type
news
New Supra due in UK next autumn
THIS STUNNING new Toyota Supra will go on sale in Britain next autumn — a few months later than expected.
Right-hand drive production at the Tohara plant in Japan, where the current Supra is built, is expected to start during the summer, prior to a Tokyo motor show launch in September.
The test car, scooped here at Germany's famous Nurburgring circuit, shows the swooping body and aggressive low stance.
The new body is shorter, lower and wider than the current seven-year-old design.
Don't expect the high rear wing, fitted to the test car to measure airflow, to make it to the UK.
But the new car will retain the traditional front-engine, rear-drive layout of previous Supra models.
Two in-line six-cylinder engines will be offered.
Both are versions of the three-litre unit that powers the Aristo executive saloon, which is only available in Japan.
Expect the twin-turbo with 300bhp to be the UK's best seller and to cost around £35,000.
The non-turbo is expected to put out about 250bhp and to cost closer to £30,000.
New Supra marked by swooping lines
Longer, wider, lower than current Supra, the new car retains aggression of previous car — but don't expect that rear wing
Multi-valve future for Vauxhall
BRITAIN'S NEWEST engine plant, opened by Vauxhall at Ellesmere Port last week, brings the V6 Cavalier a step nearer reality and heralds a multi-valve future for all models in the range.
Production of the compact 2.5-litre V6 begins this month prior to UK sales starting in March.
The 170bhp Cavalier, initially available only in automatic form, should cost less than £19,250 — the current tax break.
But the significance of the new plant, a £190 million refit of a factory last used to build the Vauxhall Chevette in the early '80s, goes further than just the V6.
This ultra-modern ‘lean production’ plant has been geared up to produce the V6's twin-cam cylinder head in vast quantities.
This 16-valve unit fits the Family II block in all 1.6, 1.8 and two-litre forms.
Currently, the only 16-valve engine in Vauxhall's range is the 150bhp two litre, which leaves Ford, with its new Zeta multivalve fours, a step ahead.
Vauxhall's new four is said to offer better induction and combustion and be more compact and economical to build than the present unit.
The 16-valve programme, which will touch all models in the range including the new Nova replacement due next year, will be completed within four years.
The new engine plants represents GM's single biggest investment in the UK and is seen as a huge vote of confidence in Vauxhall, which continues to increase sales and avoid short-time working despite the recession.
170bhp V6
Hyundai's Lantra gets power boost
HYUNDAI'S 1993 LANTRA RANGE IS TOPPED BY A NEW Cdi model powered by an new 1.8-litre engine.
On sale now, the £11,998 car gets more power and side-impact door bars, which are now standard across the rest of the Lantra range.
Hyundai claims the new 124bhp engine is more than just an enlarged version of the existing Lantra's 1.6-litre unit.
The 16-valve dohc units sports twin balancer shafts to reduce engine vibration for smoother running.
Hyundai claims 0–60mph in 10secs for the Cdi and a top speed of nearly 118mph — improvements of 1.1secs and 6mph over the 1.6-litre Lantra.
Hyundai has given the Lantra flagship a more lavish specification — air conditioning, leather-wrapped steering wheel, electric glass sunroof and new alloy wheels are all standard.
The 112-bhp 1.6-litre engine lives on in the entry-level £10,298 Lantra GLSi.
New Lantra Cdi gets to 60mph in 10secs
AUTOCAR & Motor
Renault steals the limelight at our awards
Four years ago we started the Autocar & Motor awards, established to give credit where it was due to all aspects of the global motor industry.
It was to be no insular backslapping occasion where favourite cars were chosen by the magazine's staff, but a hard-headed look at the industry with independent judges outnumbering Autocar & Motor people by three to one.
The international flavour of that first prize-giving ceremony in 1989 was instantly established when the winners included General Motors, Toyota and Honda.
And the runners-up included BMW, Rover, Volvo, Ferrari and Citroen.
But one major European car maker was conspicuous by its absence.
In 1989, Renault failed not just to win an award but even to find a place among the shortlisted contenders.
Today we reveal that Renault has scooped four awards, the single largest haul for one manufacturer we have ever seen.
The French giant has won the large manufacturer category, its Twingo and Zoom cars have picked the two design awards, and it was the runaway victor in the motorsport class.
It's a stupendous achievement for a company that, just four short years ago, didn't even warrant a mention.
Shaun Campbell EDITOR
BMW V8-powered 8-series confirmed
IT'S OFFICIAL.
BMW has admitted it has a V8 powered 8-series in the pipeline.
The new model — to be known as the 840Ci — goes into production next summer and should be on sale in the UK in August.
Powered by the new 286hp V8 from the 740i and 540i, the automatic-only V8 coupe is expected to sell for 20 per cent less than the V12 850Ci — next year's renamed and upspecked 850i.
BMW says the performance difference is minimal, with a 0–62mph time of 7.7 secs, just 0.3 secs slower than the V12.
Apart from minor cosmetic differences, the 840Ci will match the equipment level of the 850Ci.
However, from January the V12 850s get the Active Rear Axle Kinematics four-wheel-steer system as standard.
Externally similar to 850i, new 8-series is only marginally slower
Insurance groupings updated but…
HUGE DISCREPANCIES IN insurance groups continue to dog the new insurance rating system, despite the publication of an updated list.
Both Escort XR3i models are rated in group 15, despite a 25bhp difference in engine outputs.
And the 105bhp XR3i is rated four groups higher than the 103bhp Citroen ZX Furio, while the 137 bhp Renault Clio 16v is rated in group 11 along with the more pedestrian 93bhp Renault 19 RT turbo diesel saloon.
Despite initial remonstrations, Ford is going along with the insurance industry's grouping of the XR3i.
The Association of British Insurers says both versions cost the same to repair and look the same to potential thieves: ‘With no difference in badging, you don't know what you've got until you open the bonnet.’
The ABI says the Clio 16v is in the same group as the 19 RT because its plastic front wings are cheaper to repair.
ABI groupings don't differentiate between 105bhp and 130 bhp XR3is
Road-going Ferrari 348s will be taking the circuits of Europe next year in one-make racing series organised in Italy and Germany.
To compete in Challenge 348, owners must uprate their cars — either tb and ts targa models — with a kit supplied by Ferrari dealers.
This comprises all necessary safety equipment — including a full roll cage — a new exhaust system to boost torque and slick racing tyres.
Contenders in the two championships will meet in an international event at Mugello, Italy, in September.
Entry to the Challenge cost £12,000, which includes the racing kit.
DESPATCHES
US
John McCormick reports
Chrysler's Concorde LH saloon (below) made its debut in the British Airways Concorde lounge at JFK airport, New York.
A fleet of Concordes, lined up next to the supersonic jet, were driven away by journalists.
After last week's resignation of GM boss Bob Stempel, there has been more blood letting within the car giant.
Executive vice-presidents Lloyd Reuss and F Alan Smith and vice-chairman Bob Schultz have resigned.
All were considered members of the ‘old guard’ at GM.
Stempel had been replaced by two men: John Smith is the new chief executive officer and John Smale takes over as chairman.
ITALY
Luca Ciferri reports
Giugiaro's Italdesign is to create an officially sanctioned concept car for Bugatti.
Expect the 550bhp 4wd concept to make its debut at Geneva in March and to be better received than Italdesign's unofficial ID90 styling mock-up that raised Bugatti's hackles at Turin two years ago.
Fiat is to keep prices static for the rest of the year.
‘To fight inflation is an absolute priority for everyone,’ says chairman Gianni Agnelli.
The move will help Fiat regain market share from French and German importers, which have hiked prices after recent currency crises.
The last Innocenti Small , the Daihatsu-powered Bertone-bodied Mini (below), will roll off the production line in Milan on 18 December when the recession-hit factory at Lambrate shuts.
The plant, jointly owned by Maserati and Fiat, has built Innocentis since 1974.
Price cutting is rife in Italy as well as Britain.
Seat is lopping £1400 off the £9400 sticker price of the entry-level Toledo 1.6 CL.
Seat's last sales effort concentrated on zero per cent finance.
MY MOTORING WEEK
Life and times of a man on the move Steve Cropley 
THURSDAY
Racking the brains because a friend had fallen on hard times — the engine of his old VW has dropped a valve.
He needs a £500 car, like, today.
People in my trade are supposed to be able to help, but I've only been able to come up with the old platitude: ‘Don't buy a £500 car from a dealer because you'll only get £100 worth of vehicle — the rest will be profit.’
Eruptions of demand for really cheap transport take me back to student days, when a lack of wheels was a disaster.
Whenever I come across it now, I think of the huge commercial gain awaiting the person who can provide it.
But who and how?
FRIDAY
Out and about today in our office Porsche 924, a red 1982 model bought six months ago for £2500.
Since then it has done about 4000 miles and generated a lot of interest among fellow hacks — especially now we have the handling and ride back to its exalted best with new shocks and a set of tyres.
Alarmed the other day, though, when the car started to run like a hairy goat — as one eloquent ‘Strine’ put it.
Fuel consumption rose and a misfire set in.
This was a particular disaster, since we're planning to flog it soon.
Turned out that some well-meaning wally had given it a tankful of unleaded two-star.
How many other fit old classics are being given an indigestible diet?
SATURDAY.
I used to enjoy heaping gratuitous criticism on the head of the Daihatsu Applause, a stiff-legged, slab-sided and crudely named Escort-sized five-door for the pensioner.
But further acquaintance with the latest model forces me to acknowledge that the 1993 Applause is a well-equipped and well-finished machine.
It is easy to drive, and quite fast if you rev its loudish 16-valve engine.
It has a three-year unlimited mileage warranty (the best available), and even the ride comfort beats the class average.
It's good news for Daihatsu and their buyers, but I see a downside.
Truly bad cars are worryingly rare in Britain these days: a large selection of graphic and entertaining road tester's invective is falling sadly into disuse.
Eaton speaks out on Elan failure
THE DEATH OF THE Lotus Elan was the result of poor sales which failed to recoup the massive investment made in the car, according to former GM Europe boss Bob Eaton.
In his first major interview since moving to Chrysler as chairman elect, he says: ‘The problem with the Elan was very simple: it came in dramatically over its cost target and its investment target, and the marketplace didn't put as much value on the vehicle as it cost to build it.’
He says the relationship between GM and Lotus had nothing to do with the Elan's failure.
‘The car missed its targets.
GM was very careful not to smother Lotus, not to destroy the Lotus mystique, the culture.
I would not have done it any differently as far as the involvement of GM and Lotus.’
Former GM boss Eaton
Satisfaction Index to hit Britain?
NEW CAR BUYERS may soon be voting on the reliability and quality of their new vehicles, as well as the standard of service they receive from their dealers.
American consultant JD Power wants to set up its infamous Customer Satisfaction Index in Britain.
In the US, car makers fear the Index because it exposes some models as unreliable and poorly built.
But the survey will only go ahead in Britain if JD Power can get access to car owners through the DVLA in Swansea.
JD Power is negotiating with the DVLA to use its lists of car owners and addresses.
Any deal between the two will have to safeguard the identity of car owners because of Britain's Data Protection Act.
If the DVLA co-operates, it could mail out surveys to car owners, which would then be returned to JD Power.
.
The DVLA claims it is working as normal after a one-day strike last week delayed the mailing of vehicle tax reminders.
JD Power surveys grab the headlines in US
SHORT TAKES
Car crime dropped 2.5 per cent in almost half of Britain's police authorities during April, May and June — the first three months of ‘Car Crime Prevention Year’.
The Birmingham motor show attracted 656,702 visitors.
That's 45 per cent more than in 1990, but virtually half as many as visited the Paris show.
At Paris, which drew 1.1 million visitors, Renault gave away no fewer than 120 tonnes of brochures.
The first Jaguar XJ220 driver to be booked for speeding in Britain is Christian Vilaseca, chairman of Jaguar France.
He was stopped on the M6 last week, at an alleged 105mph.
He denies his speed was so high.
Evante says motor show reaction to its '60s Lotus Elan-like roadster, which is now fitted with a Ford Zeta engine, was ‘overwhelming’.
The company plans to make around 100 Evantes next year and is already holding deposits for 18 cars.
Toyota 's top-of-the-range Landcruiser VX, now with antilock brakes and side impact bars as standard, costs £29,565, up £1300 on the old model.
The auto model costs £33,620 and gets air conditioning and a leather-trimmed cabin.
IAD , Britain's world leading electric car experts, won a special design award at the NEC motor show for its diesel/electric hybrid ‘Eurotaxi’ concept car.
IAD also won the same award in 1990 for the Venus sports car.
DISPATCHES
JAPAN
Bob Sliwa reporting
The Mitsubishi Mirage Cyborg R type (below) is the first car to be fitted with the lean-burn 178bhp 1.6-litre MIVEC engine.
The existing Mirage R — the equivalent of the UK's GTi — will be phased out in Japan in favour of the Cyborg.
Mitsubishi's GSR Evolution rally weapon met its three-month sales target in record time — 2500 cars were sold in just three days!
Toyota and Nissan are building electric versions of their luxury barges.
But Toyota's Crown Majesta has a higher top speed and a longer range that the Nissan Cedric (below) and Gloria models.
The Toyota will be launched in March 1993, the Nissans in December.
Each manufacturer will build about 50 vehicles which are due to be sold to government agencies.
Bereaved pet owners no longer have to go to a cemetery to give their cat or dog a loving send off.
Now a fleet of mobile pet crematoriums can incinerate a dead Gnasher or Felix at its owner's doorstep for about £150.
Japanese car makers have started to refurbish used luxury saloons.
Mitsubishi has refettled 200 Diamantes and Nissan is continuing its run of dressed up Cimas.
Despite costing £4250 more than an equivalent used model.
the first batch of ‘new-old’ Cimas sold out in a week.
Daihatsu is cashing in on the leisure boom in Japan with the latest addition to its minicar line up, the Mira RV-4 (below).
Featuring high-rise suspension, a roof rack and a spare wheel mounted on the rear hatch, the RV-4 is otherwise the same as the road-burning RZ-4.
Consumer cellphones cost more
Subscribers to the new ‘low-cost’ mobile phones could end up paying more than business users
CONSUMER CELLPHONE systems could cost motorists more than comparable business mobile phones.
That's the cellphone dealers' verdict on the new ‘low-cost’ phone systems.
Backed by high-profile advertising campaigns, Cellnet's Lifetime and Vodafone's LowCall have been launched to tempt nonbusiness users.
These systems are subject to lower connection and rental charges than normal business cellphones.
But the call charges are significantly higher — in London a peak rate call from a LowCall cellphone costs 54p per minute compared with 33p from a normal Vodafone business mobile.
‘We've done some sums and we reckon that if you use the phone for more than one and half minutes per day it will be more expensive,’ says a west London cellphone dealer.
Neither Cellnet nor Vodafone dispute this.
‘Lifetime is basically for people who won't use their cellphones,’ admits Cellnet, which is promoting the new system as more of an emergency breakdown tool.
While connection and rental fees for non-business users are lower, the actual cost of the phone itself could be significantly greater.
In anticipation of business users  running up large bills, the airtime suppliers give retailers bonuses from £200 to £350 per phone sold, but private buyers won't generate enough revenue for it to be economic.
Whereas business users can pick up a leading handset such as a Nokia Cityman 190 for £200, Lifetime and LowCall subscribers will typically have to pay £100 more for the same equipment, according to one phone dealer we spoke to.
The RAC is also in on the act, offering members its Emergency Telephone, a cellphone priced at £199, inclusive of connection, and with a 55p peak rate charge.
The AA also offers a cellphone, but it can only be used to call emergency services.
Airtime suppliers are to charge what they like, but competition should mean that call rates fall, especially as the recession has all but capped the once fast growth.
‘You could see some discounting,’ predicts Cellnet.
Some mobile phone retailers are now supplying the once popular car phone free, bar an installation charge, and rely on bill-related bonuses to make up the entire profit.
Car phones lost popularity when portable handsets plummeted from will into four figures to under £300 and became available with in-car adapters.
David Sutherland 
Future developments
BEFORE SIGNING UP FOR ANY OF THE PRESENT CELLNET OR VODAFONE networks, would-be subscribers should consider what's in the cellphone pipeline.
By spring next year, Vodafone will have its new Groupe Special Mobile cell network ready for use.
This digital, pan-European system is claimed to give a far superior line clarity to the present analogue system.
It will also be totally secure from crossed lines and tapping, the company says.
But call charges will be 20 per cent higher and present analogue handsets won't be compatible.
At the same time, Vodafone's Micro Cellular Network system will be launched, which will offer peak rate calls at 20p per minute.
It will operate only in urban areas — hence the lower cost — but once out of town the caller can transfer to the existing cell system and pay the higher charges.
Again, a new type of handset will be needed.
Would I be paying 54p per minute for this call if I wasn't fond of you?
Private individuals could pay a high price for calls
How the cellphone system works
THERE ARE TWO LICENCED ‘NETWORK PROVIDERS’ IN THE UK: CELLNET AND Vodafone.
These are the companies which made heavy investment in the electronic transmitter cells which now cover 90 per cent of the country.
Under their licences granted in 1984, the network providers are forbidden from selling airtime or cellphones direct to the public, a restriction imposed to prevent them wielding excessive power in the business.
They sell airtime to ‘service providers’, which then sell phones and supply subscribers through a retailer.
Service providers can bill users as they wish, but intense competition has seen connection, rental and call charges settle at near identical levels.
Early rip-offs such as one-minute (as opposed to 30-second) billing have all but disappeared, as have contracts for longer than one year.
WISH YOU WERE HERE
PARIS FRANCE
By our man from across the channel Peter Robinson
How many people noticed a small display on the Porsche stand at the recent Paris show?
I'm sure I would have missed it had I not been waiting for somebody nearby.
The display was a mock-up of an alloy, double wishbone suspension system for a Porsche model due next year — the 933 facelift of the 911 Carrera 2 and 4.
I'd no sooner pulled out my notebook than Thomas Krusenbaum, a young engineer from Porsche's R&D centre at Weissach, appeared at my side.
It's Thomas's job to sell Porsche engineering expertise to other companies.
Back in Australia, I have a bent wishbone from a Shadow F1 car — a priceless present from a mechanic friend who worked for the grand prix team during the '70s.
Porsche's new suspension appeals in the same way.
The craftsmanship and engineering prowess are obvious; the wishbones so beautiful you just want to touch them.
This suspension is so like sculpture is should be displayed in my living room.
Back to Paris.
A small chart itemised the increasing use of aluminium in various Porsches.
In 1970, 16 per cent of the 911 was the light metallic element.
This figure reached 23 per cent with the 928 in 1978 and nudged 24 per cent on the 944.
By 1988, 27 per cent of the Carrera 2 and 4 was aluminium and, in 1992, 29 per cent of the 968.
Helped by the new suspension, the 933 will be 38 per cent aluminium.
But Thomas denied the 933 would be built on an aluminium honeycomb platform, as rumoured.
That's for a future model, he told me.
What price a car brochure?
If it's the 72-page, five-gatefold glossy produced for the McLaren F1 road car you can apparently charge what you like.
When McLaren first showed its supercar, potential customers — and the press — were each given a copy.
Word spread.
To slow down the demand, McLaren began charging £30 a copy.
No let-up.
The price became £50, then £70, and still people demanded a copy.
Now it's £100.
Refundable when you order a £540,000 F1!
My copy, complete with signatures of Gordon Murray, Pete Stevens and Paul Rosche, is Not For Sale.
Nissan loss prompts cutbacks
NISSAN IS TO CUT the number of model variants on sale in the UK after posting its first worldwide financial loss for 41 years.
In an effort to cut costs, Nissan will reduce the breathtaking speed at which new models are rushed on to the market.
The same models will be on sale in the UK, but the number of trim variations and options will be reduced on some ranges.
‘For example, on the Sunny there's LX and SLX trim, 1.4 and 1.6-litre engines and manual and automatic gearboxes.
You could say there's some room for rationalisation,’ says Nissan's British importer.
Nissan's £75 million loss between March and September is blamed on the world recession.
In Japan, sales have plummeted 20 per cent during that period, while European sales have fallen 12 per cent.
The cutbacks, however, won't affect the Primera and Micra factory in Sunderland, which has cost Nissan £900 million since the company started building cars there in 1986.
Plans to increase output to 270,000 cars a year in 1993 — about 130,000 of them Micras — will go ahead.
Number of Sunny variants will be reduced
OPEN TO QUESTION
John Heffernan, automotive and industrial designer, penned the new Aston Vantage and loves V8s — from Chevy Impalas to the Cobra
How did you learn to drive and in what car?
With a driving instructor in a Vauxhall Viva HB.
Two weeks after passing my test, I was driving a seven-litre Chevrolet from the GM garage in Detroit.
When was the last time you drove a car just for the thrill of it?
Every time it's sunny I enjoy driving.
But driving a friend's Cobra replica around the club circuit at Silverstone was a real thrill.
What is your worst driving habit?
Sometimes forgetting to belt up for several miles.
What is your best excuse for a motorway policeman who has just caught you speeding?
I never exceed the limit by more than 10mph.
There is no excuse for being caught by a marked police vehicle — but there's not much you can do about unmarked cars or cameras.
What infuriates you most about drivers?
Red light cowboys, usually driving Astra vans or British Telecom trucks.
What is the best piece of driving you've ever seen?
Dan Gurney in a Chevrolet Impala versus Graham Hill in a Lotus Cortina in the 1964 British Saloon Car Championship.
What is the one car, cost no object, you would most like to own?
Giorgio Giugiaro's 1963 Aston Martin ‘Jet’ Geneva show car for Bertone, recently completely rebuilt at Aston.
Which car most deserves a trip to the crusher?
I'm tempted to suggest the Mercedes S-class for being visually boring, but I respect Bruno Sacco too much, so I'll plump for any current Maserati for not living up to the legend.
If you were transport minister, what would be your first action?
I would look again at the Gatso experiment to question its benefit in moving traffic efficiently around London.
Should Japan be restricted in the number of cars it sells in the UK?
Yes, because I believe European makers must be encouraged to provide competition and technological challenge to all Pacific Basin car companies.
Should random breath-testing be introduced?
It already exists — try driving with a defective headlight and you'll find out.
Which newspaper do you take regularly and which book are currently reading?
‘The Independent’ for its coverage of design and architecture, and I'm re-reading Neville Shute's ‘On the Beach’to remind myself that we no longer have the nuclear threat to worry about.
What would be the title of your autobiography?
‘Car Design — Pleasure or Purgatory?’
Whose job in the motor industry would you most like and, if you had it, what would be your first decision?
There's no job in the industry I covet above my own, but I dearly wish I could spend more time designing and less on paperwork.
Do you love cars?
I have loved cars since childhood but I'm concerned we're not addressing some of the problems they cause.
Mercedes S-class: ‘visually boring’
Maseratis ‘not living up to legend’
The inaugural meeting of the Trabant Owners' Club in the UK saw no fewer than 15 of the curious cardboard-bodied cars coverage on Lancaster.
The rally included a convoy run into the Lake District and driving and manoeuvrability tests.
Two and four-stroke Trabants were represented, but there was also an unusual estate and even a military Trabbie that was once used to patrol the Berlin Wall.
New Carina undercuts competition
TOYOTA HAS launched a bargain basement £10,695 Carina E. On sale now, it is priced to undercut rivals from Ford and Vauxhall.
The 106bhp 1.6-litre Carina Xi comes in four-door and £11,084 five-door guises.
Ford's cheapest Sierra, the 80bhp 1.6-litre CFi, costs £10,985 and Vauxhall's most basic 1.6-litre Cavalier weighs in at £10,270.
But to match the Carina's power, Sierra or Cavalier buyers would have to spend well over £11,000.
To bring the price down, Toyota has dropped the electric sunroof, radio-cassette player, anti-theft system and ‘some’ seat adjustment.
The Carina Xi retains central locking and power assisted steering.
.
As predicted, Toyota has increased the price of the Lexus LS400 by £3000 for 1993.
The revamped car will cost £40,268 when it goes on sale next January.
Jottings
THE SCRIBE
MOTORING JOURNALISTS DREAM OF FINDING Colin Chapman, discredited father of the Lotus legend, alive and well, eking out a living under an assumed name and with moustache shaved off.
So you can imagine my excitement when my attention was drawn to the small print in the back of Screen International , the film industry's weekly newspaper.
For there, hard at work dubbing the soundtrack on to a new series of Minder at Anvil Studios, was the Lotus Elan-hero-turned-De Lorean cohort I'd been longing to unmask.
When I accosted the scoundrel, he turned out to be completely different Colin Chapman, up to his neck in sound bites.
However, the Scribe has caught a whiff of success and further sightings of Colin Chapmans will be gratefully received.
In fact, there's a prize for the person who can find a Colin Chapman in the most Lotus-like position.
IT MADE A CHANGE TO SEE THE MOTOR industry doing something original at the NEC show — admitting it never does anything original.
Gathered for charity were four marketing chiefs from Volvo, Mitsubishi, Vauxhall and Mazda, clutching their ads which have all used the catchline ‘More extras than Ben Hur — Vauxhall first in 1978 and Volvo the latest this year.
THANK YOU, J R SMITH OF CANTERBURY, for sending me this cutting from the Canterbury Extra , offering the ultimate Austin for sale…
QUOTE FROM JAMES HUNT, from the Peterborough column in The Daily Telegraph : ‘I like them because they are decorative and make a cheerful sound.’
Is he talking about F1 pit lane groupies or maybe even the cars themselves?
No.
Hunt, often to be seen in mum's Austin A35 van around Wimbledon, was referring to budgies — a passion since boyhood.
Maybe that's where he got his bird-pulling reputation.
WOULD YOU BELIEVE IT?
DEPT
According to The Guardian (24 October), the Lancia Thema shares the same floorpan as ‘the Saab 2000, the Fiat 164 and Fiat Chroma’.
The president of the American maker of the massive Hummer military vehicle is called James Armour.
The cheapest American city in which to run a six-cylinder, four-door sedan is Sioux Falls, South Dakota, where insurance costs a fifth of what it does in LA.
TRUE STORIES
A motorist in Cooperville, Florida, has been acquitted on a drink-driving charge because he drove so well under the influence.
Speeding at 90mph, John Derry outstripped police cars for an hour.
The judge said: ‘The law needs evidence of inability to control a car.
The defendant proved a better man than the trained police drivers.’
Fleets boost October car sales
CAR SALES JUMPED AN ENCOURAGING EIGHT PER cent in October — the second largest single monthly increase this year.
High fleet sales are largely responsible for the temporary boom, according to Ford.
October is traditionally a big fleet sales month.
Canny fleet managers avoid buying in August, when consumer sales are at their highest, so that they can get the best bargains.
Vauxhall continues to close the gap on Ford, which now has the biggest market share by just 2.24 per cent.
Last year Ford was 8.6 per cent ahead of Vauxhall.
The Cavalier was the best seller in October, ahead of the Escort or Fiesta.
The Sierra slipped to sixth place, just ahead of the Renault Clio.
October Top 10
(Sales position between January and October in parentheses)
1
Cavalier
2
Escort
3
Fiesta
4
Astra
5
Rover 200
6
Sierra
7
Clio
8
Nova
9
Metro
10
Peugeot 405
market update
INSIDER DEALING
Keeping tabs on the motor trade
John Coates
‘But it is not all bad news in the car trade: one or two models are still making high prices’
‘THERE WILL NEVER BE a better time to buy a used car.’
These were my own words 12 months ago.
And, of course, I was wrong.
In 1992, used car values have fallen to even lower levels.
Certain models have dropped to prices that would have seemed inconceivable even in late 1991.
This means that they are available at ‘giveaway’ prices.
But what are these really cheap cars and where can they be found?
Nor surprisingly, those cars cursed with oversupply are the biggest depreciators at the moment and are available at the lowest prices.
And high-specification cars are particularly weak at the moment.
Cars such as the Vauxhall Cavalier SRi, Rover 416 GSi and Ford Sierra 2.0i Ghia are worth little more than the same model with a lower spec.
J-registered Cavalier SRi saloons and hatches are good value at auction and bidders can expect to secure 1992 cars with under 10,000 miles from company and fleet sources for around £8250.
Rover 416 GSi models of similar age can be bought under the hammer for around £7250 and a Sierra 2.0i Ghia for £7500.
Compare these prices with cost new and you will see that even the high discounts currently available on new cars become an irrelevance in the face of such horrendous depreciation.
The Sierra is listed at £16,995 but, with say 12 per cent discount, can be purchased for £2000 less.
This means that the car could lose 50 per cent of its value in one year.
But it is not all bad news in the used car trade: one or two models are still making high prices.
New-model Golfs are still scarce and dealers are paying high prices to secure them.
Retail demand is quite heavy and is likely to remain so even after the novelty value of the new car has worn off.
Private buyers have taken to the new Golf in a big way and this Volkswagen is likely to be a used car market leader for years to come.
At the moment, 1992/J Golfs are making prices that are close to their new cost.
I have seen some 1.8-litre CL models with under 10,000 miles on the clock sell for around £10,000 within the trade.
The current list price for this model is just £11,295.
I have also heard of a CL diesel — list price £12,196 — going for £10,850 recently.
Heaven knows how dealers can sell these cars at a profit.
Prices cannot remain at this level for long, but potential buyers can be assured that their money will be safer in one of these than in almost any other car.
Oversupply has forced Sierra prices down
Scarcity is keeping Golf residuals high
Firms target car abuse
Gavin Conway reporting
Our weekly look at what's rocking the new and used markets
COMPANY CAR drivers who thrash their vehicles are being targeted by lease companies using sophisticated computer systems.
One company reckons car abuse costs British industry about £50 million a year.
Cowie Interleasing runs a programme called CID which it believes cuts servicing costs by up to 30 per cent.
‘Problems range from simple driver error, like forgetting to check the oil, to bad driving habits and even fraud,’ says Cowie.
The system can pinpoint individuals if fuel bills and maintenance charges fall outside the average for their type of car.
Cowie claims the problem applies to about five per cent of drivers who neglect their company cars, occasionally for bizarre reasons.
‘We know of a case where the driver abused the car because of a superstition — there was a number 13 on the number plate.’
Other drivers, unhappy with their jobs, often vent frustration on their cars
Cowie says its programme will also expose ‘cowboy’ garages which overcharge for parts and labour and perform unnecessary work.
Lease firms aim to cut company car servicing costs
TRENDS
Nearly a quarter of UK motorists now do a significant proportion of their own servicing.
An RAC survey also found that over 60 per cent of motorists are thinking of buying a used car, instead of a new one, in order to save money.
One in 10 motorists would actually consider selling their car to save money.
And not surprisingly, the motorists hardest hit by recession are those living in London and the south-east.
Peugeot is promising overnight delivery of parts or the customer gets them free of charge.
The scheme applies to Peugeots up to five years old and there is no limit on cost, ‘as long as it is a part that keeps the vehicle off the road’.
Peugeot claims it has always provided quick turnaround on repair parts: ‘We feel that it is appropriate to put our money where our mouth is.’
Renault, Volvo and their future links
Lennart Svantesson, vice-president of Volvo product planning, on the joint Renault-Volvo models in the pipeline
Volvo and Renault cars are being developed together.
How will you ensure they're different?
We will concentrate on styling and giving them a different driving feel.
For example, at the moment, the 850 GLT is more sporty than Safrane models.
When will you have a common platform?
By the year 2000, there will be a Volvo and Renault model based on the same platform.
We will also share engines, gearboxes and other expensive components.
Will the car be front-wheel or rear-wheel drive?
I can't say exactly, but it is expensive and difficult to make a platform for both.
For example, the weight distribution for each type has to be different.
How about front-wheel drive for big Volvos?
If we go to front-wheel drive, it's because we think it's better.
Will we ever see Volvos and Renaults made in the same factory?
In the long term, I can imagine using the same factories if we use the same platform and fit many of the same parts.
We don't want to develop different production lines.
Will we ever see a very small Volvo?
Renault will make the small cars.
It's not important for each brand name to have every type of car in its range.
What about an MPV?
Research in both Europe and the US suggests that estates are really coming back and Volvo will develop estates.
Renault is the leader in minivans.
NEW CARS
The dealers may not always admit it, but these new cars are bound for the UK
Alfa Romeo Spider (new model) Late '93
Alfa Romeo 164 Super March '93
Aston Martin Vantage Early '93
Audi 80 estate January '93
Audi S2 Avant Spring '93
BMW M3 (new shape) September '93
BMW 325td, 525td (diesels) June '93
BMW 3-series cabrio (rhd) Early '94
BMW 530i/540i V8 February '93
Chrysler Viper (V10 roadster) June '93
Citroen BX (all new model) June '93
Daihatsu Freeclimber (off-roader) February '93
Daihatsu Mira (microcar) Early '93
Fiat Cinquecento June '93
Fiat Uno (all new model) Spring '94
Fiat coupe (all new model) Early '94
Fiat MPV Early '94
Ferrari 456 GT Spring '93
Ford Fiesta (two-stroke engine) Late '95
Ford off-roader Summer '93
Ford Probe (next Capri) Autumn '93
Ford Mondeo (all-new front drive) March '93
Honda Synchro May '93
Jeep Cherokee (5dr) January '93
Jeep Wrangler (2dr) January '93
Lamborghini Diablo roadster Autumn '93
Lotus Esprit (low-priced model) Late '93
McLaren supercar Late '93
Mercedes 190 (all-new) September '93
Mercedes W124 cabrio January '93
Mercedes 600, 500SEC coupe January '93
Mercedes 600SL January '93
MG RV8 (V8 retro roadster) March '93
Mitsubishi Galant replacement March '93
Mitsubishi Sigma estate February '93
Nissan Micra replacement January '93
Panther Kallista roadster Early '93
Peugeot 106 (5dr) January '93
Peugeot 306 (mid-range batch) April '93
Peugeot 405 (193bhp, 4wd) Mid '93
Peugeot MPV Early '94
Porsche Carrera 2 Speedster May '93
Renault Safrane (25 replacement) January '93
Rover 600 (new saloon) May '93
Rover Mini cabrio Spring '93
Saab 900 (all new replacement) September '93
Saab 900 cabrio (all-new) Spring '94
Seat Toledo VR6 November '93
Toyota Carina estate February '93
Toyota Supra (all-new) Late '93
Vauxhall Cavalier V6 Spring '93
Vauxhall Nova (all-new) April '93
VW Golf GTi 16v Early '93
VW Polo (all-new) Late '93
CAR OF THE WEEK
It's time to wrap up against the cold and go hunting for a convertible.
During the winter months, those trying to sell convertibles have little in their favour.
One of the best-specified soft-tops going is the old-shape 197bhp Mazda RX-7 Turbo cabriolet — Mazda doesn't sell a drop-top version of the current model.
Our Pink Pages recently carried four examples — a 1990/H was advertised for just £12,250.
Rag-top RX-7 a snip in the winter
BEST BUYS
NEW
Volkswagen is considering a price rise, likely to be in the region of three per cent.
That would push the on-the-road price of the Golf VR6, now £18,700, past the £19,000 mark.
Discounts are still the order of the day, though, and we garnered an easy £2000 discount.
That's £16,700 on the road for a three-door VR6, with antilock brakes, electric sunroof and windows and power steering as standard.
Buy a Golf VR6 before prices rise
USED
A measure of the Toyota Previa's desirability is its strong resale value.
That means paying a bit more for a used example, but you retain more of your investment.
An MPV class leader, the Previa comes with two sunroofs and allow wheels as standard.
A 1990/H example sells for around £12,500 privately and over £13,000 on the forecourt, but Previas are seldom found at auction.
Low depreciation on Toyota Previa
Higher residuals in Porsche buy-back
PORSCHE GB'S buyback scheme is more generous than originally reported (Pink Pages, 4 November).
The finance plan, applicable to 968 and 928 GTS models, will guarantee a residual value of 55 and 50 per cent respectively of the car's purchase price at the end of three years.
Porsche claims the scheme allows buyers to finance a new 968 for less than £500 a month.
The initial deposit required by Porsche is 15 per cent of the car's retail price, not 20 per cent as originally stated.
While some industry guides are pessimistic about Porsche's predicted residuals, the company is confident that the cars’ exclusivity and an improvement in the market will ensure good residuals.
The scheme specifies a maximum of 37,500 miles, beyond which an excess mileage charge is applied.
Australian Grand Prix 
Berger wins farewell bash
A collision between Mansell and Senna and retirement for Patrese left Berger and Schumacher to fight for the spoils.
By Maurice Hamilton.
GERHARD BERGER won the best race of the year.
It was the perfect way to round off the season, although Nigel Mansell and Ayrton Senna might not have agreed after crashing out while disputing the lead.
Top: Berger celebrates his last race for McLaren.
Above: Senna steps out to begin his sabbatical
Their removal left the way clear for Michael Schumacher to stage a dramatic charge as he chased Berger's McLaren-Honda to the line.
Martin Brundle finished third in the second Benetton, making doubly sure that the team kept up its remarkable record of having scored points in all 16 races.
Despite retiring while holding the lead, Riccardo Patrese kept his runner-up spot in the championship but Schumacher overtook Senna to claim third place on the points table, an impressive achievement at the end of his first full season.
It was clear from the start, however, that this race was going to be a final shoot-out between Mansell and Senna.
Mansell had taken pole — a record 14th in a season — but Senna's stunning lap, good enough for the front row, while perhaps having more to do with the driver than the car, revealed that McLaren was closer than usual this year to Williams.
Mansell's hopes of record 10th win dashed by collision.
But rumours persist he will stay in F1 next year
Senna desperately needed to beat Mansell at the start but the Williams made the better getaway.
Senna attacked immediately and at one stage actually slipped ahead of the Williams under braking, only to run wide and allow Mansell to take the lead again.
But their searing pace left the rest of the field as mere also-rans, Patrese falling 10secs behind Senna after just nine laps.
Mansell never got further than 1.6secs ahead of Senna, the gap rising and falling as they began to work their way through the back-markers on lap 15.
Four laps later, Senna took the opportunity to close right up.
As the leaders rushed towards the final hairpin, Senna appeared to be caught by surprise as Mansell began to slow, the McLaren slewing sideways under heavy braking before smashing into the back of the Williams.
Both cars spun on to the grass outfield, Senna's McLaren minus its left front wheel and Mansell's car damaged badly enough to ensure his retirement.
Patrese, having resisted a strong attack from Berger, was now in front with Schumacher third, a few seconds behind the McLaren but pulling slowly away from Brundle, who, despite suffering from increasing oversteer as the fuel load lightened, was comfortably ahead of Jean Alesi's Ferrari.
Honda bows out of F1 on a winning note
Alesi had proved troublesome for Berger in the early stages after the Austrian had made a poor start and then spent several laps working his way past the Ferrari and Schumacher.
With fuel consumption on the McLaren marginal, this was not what Berger had wanted and his tyres were paying the price for such hectic activity.
Deciding to take care of the fuel later, Berger pitted for tyres on lap 35 and rejoined in third place.
Schumacher: second in the race, third in the championship
He quickly passed Schumacher and closed the gap on Patrese, whose plan to run non-stop was foiled in the most unexpected way on lap 51 when the engine suddenly died.
That left Berger well ahead of Schumacher with Brundle a distant third, Alesi fourth, Thierry Boutsen's Ligier-Renault fifth and Stefano Modena's Jordan-Yamaha on course for the team's only point this season.
Patrese led his last race for Williams
Berger now had time to restore the fuel consumption figure to a more acceptable level but when Schumacher — also on new tyres — began to set a string of faster laps, he was forced to speed up.
Even so it was a close call.
Berger crossed the line, his fuel reading zero and Schumacher just 0.7 secs behind.
In fact, Berger completed the slowing down lap, which indicated a pessimistic computer and justified his theory that, had Schumacher got really close in the final laps, he would have gone flat out and to hell with the consequences.
It was that sort of race.
The beginning of the end: Australia provided the best race of 1992
The predictable end of an era
That Mansell and Senna should end, temporarily at least, their F1 careers in acrimony and controversy should surprise no one THIS WAS NOT THE FAREWELL appearance Nigel Mansell had wanted.
The 1992 world champion had been in a subdued mood all weekend and it was clear he was being worn down by the continuing rumours over his future.
Or, at least, his future as other people saw it.
Mansell insisted he intended to honour his contract with the Newman-Haas Indycar team.
‘But,’ he confessed, ‘I'm a little bit upset, a little confused.
I was wanted in Formula 1, then I wasn't, so I went about my own business, creating my own new future, then all of a sudden I'm wanted again.
I have this agreement in America which I am prepared to fulfil but there's all these things going on and I can't pass any comment.’
The suggestions were that Bernie Ecclestone, as vice-president of Promotional Affairs for FISA, was keen Mansell should stay in F1, particularly if Senna should take a year off.
Mansell and Senna were to provide photographic proof of what F1 is likely to miss next year as they engaged in a thrilling battle during the race.
With the championship having been decided, this was likely to be their last chance to settle old scores.
But if Mansell was unhappy with life in general before the race had started, he was furious after it had ended.
Senna had crashed into the back of Mansell's car as they approached a second-gear hairpin.
Senna said Mansell had braked much earlier than anticipated.
Mansell claimed Senna had simply driven into him.
Mansell stormed off to see the stewards.
After studying a video of the incident, the officials told Mansell it was a sporting accident.
When Mansell then returned to the Williams garage and asked the team to lodge a protest, his request was refused.
Point blank.
Mansell argues with Frank Williams
‘I'm disgusted,’ said Mansell afterwards.
‘I've just seen the stewards and they are totally gutless.
They said it was just a racing accident.
It seems to me that certain people in F1 can get away with anything they want and that has just been demonstrated here today.’
There had been suggestions that Senna's car may have lost downforce when running behind the Williams but the video clearly shows that he wasn't close enough.
Indeed, much of the evidence suggests that, even if Mansell had not actually braked early, he had perhaps lifted his foot from the throttle, which has much the same effect in an F1 car.
And in a place where Senna least expected it.
Either way, Senna was keen to discuss the matter in an amicable fashion as they walked back.
But Mansell ran ahead to avoid, as he put it ‘getting into any problems’.
It was a strange action by someone totally convinced he was in the right.
And it was a sad end to what will probably be the final F1 appearance for some time by two of the sport's greatest protagonists.
PIT STOPS
ADELAIDE
by Morris Hamilton
McLaren boss Ron Dennis was closeted in private discussions with Renault's Bernard Dudot only hours after Berger's victory.
Dennis's desire to retain McLaren's lucrative Shell contract in the face of Renault's close links with Elf still looks likely to scupper any deal.
McLaren well receive continued supplies of Honda engines for testing purposes through to the end of the year.
Jean Alesi is said to be trying to disentangle himself from his 1993 Ferrari contract in order to make himself available to Williams.
The Frenchman (right) is apparently unhappy with Gerhard Berger's absolute number one status for next season.
The first Jordan-Hart development car is expected to be tested at Silverstone next week.
Jordan has signed an exclusive two-year deal to run Brian Hart's 72-deg V10 unit.
A new F1 team from Spain was announced in Adelaide.
Bravo F1 will use chassis designed by Simtek Research.
The Banbury-based design house built cars for the ill-fated Andrea Moda team in 1992 and it is believed Bravo F1 will purchase equipment from the defunct Italian outfit.
Martin Donnelly drove a Reynard F3000 car during a secret test at Snetterton last week.
The Ulsterman (right), severely injured during practice for the 1990 Spanish Grand Prix, lapped within 1.6 secs of the fastest lap set by a F3000 car in a recent British F2 meeting, but continuing problems with his left knee prevent Donnelly from thinking seriously about an F1 return.
Ayrton Senna remained evasive over his plans for 1993.
Rumour in Adelaide suggested he will take a year off and return in 1994 to head a new team run by Honda, which will make its own chassis as well as engines.
Nigel Mansell was less than complimentary about Alain Prost during a 20-minute documentary broadcast nationwide in Australia.
Commenting on Prost's alleged statement that he would give Mansell half his salary if the Englishman would stay at Williams, Mansell said: ‘Prost is full of s***, The guy just tells so many porky pies.’
The ‘definitive’ John Barnard Ferrari will make its debut at the French Grand Prix at Magny-Cours in June 1993 rather than at the start of 1994 as originally scheduled.
An interim car will make its debut at the start of next season.
sport
DIARY
Exploits and reminiscences from pit, paddock and pub
by Eoin Young
ADELAIDE AUSTRALIA
Australian expat Peter Windsor, Williams team manager and former Autocar sports editor, is following the example of Prost in 1992 and taking a season off.
My bet is that he will spend next summer following the fortunes of his friend Nigel Mansell on the Indycar trail, while doing the groundwork for a team of his own in CART for 1994.
Windsor has already tried to set up a team of his own in F1 and knows the problems involved, not least of which is the mega money needed to gain a foothold, never mind putting together the technical talent needed to build his own car.
Indycar racing offers the advantage of off-the-peg cars and engine packages.
Drivers?
Windsor thinks that several F1 stars are eyeing the US scene.
Lee Gaug, Goodyear's feisty, pipe-smoking international racing manager, is retiring after 24 years — 13 in F1 — with the tyre company.
And he had some typically cryptic things to say about F1 as he bade it goodbye.
The drivers, he says, have become overpaid prima donnas who have little regard for their responsibilities to the public or sponsors.
‘They are spoilt, overpaid kids who are not responsible.
They are good, but as people they're not as good as they ought to be.
They don't appreciate where their pay cheques come from.
The F1 system changes people.
Success makes it hard for them to keep their heads straight.’
He was also critical of the way F1 was run at the top.
‘We all want F1 to be successful but it's going in the wrong direction.’
He said the decisions were being made by Bernie Ecclestone and a handful of other people, but the sponsors and suppliers like Goodyear were not being involved in this decision making.
‘Bernie has made F1 viable, but the more powerful a man becomes, the less he listens.
He may be right, but nobody else has a chance to provide any input into the decisions which affect everybody in F1.’
Gaug has been in a position to evaluate the drivers who have used his Goodyear tyres.
Foremost in his book is Ayrton Senna.
Alain Prost is not as quick as he used to be but was smarter, and Nigel Mansell is not the smoothest driver around but he has a lot of ‘mechanical talent’.
Windsor: aiming to go it alone in ‘94?
Ayrton Senna made comments of his own at a Marlboro press conference in Adelaide relating to driver fees.
‘It's all a question of market, of you negotiating your deals in an appropriate way.
I'm the highest paid driver today — it's not because of my skin colour, my eyes, my hair or anything, it's because it's worth paying me the money.
And nobody would pay anything to anyone unless they could get it back somehow.
I'm not concerned about that, in all honesty.’
Senna, Mansell, Prost: Gaug's top three, but do they act like champions?
Niki Lauda honours Enzo Ferrari
NIKI LAUDA HAS named the latest LaudaAir aircraft after the man whose cars he drove to two world championship titles in 1975 and 1977.
This week, the Austrian airline took delivery of a new Boeing 767 which has christened ‘Enzo Ferrari’, in memory of the Commendatore who died in 1988.
This marks a departure for LaudaAir.
Lauda, who also acts as a consultant to the Ferrari F1 team, has shown an inclination to name his aircraft after famous musicians.
‘Enzo Ferrari’ joins Boeing 737s named after John Lennon, Bob Marley and Elvis Presley.
Two further 767s will be assigned to the US run and named ‘James Dean’ and ‘Janis Joplin’to make US customers feel at home.
Lauda: remembering Enzo
Mitsubishi steals Ivory Coast win
GREGOIRE DE MEVIUS CAME WITHIN 250 MILES OF claiming a remarkable outright victory in a Group N production car on the Ivory Coast Rally.
The Belgian had a clear lead in his Nissan GTi-R on the final day, but engine failure allowed Kenjiro Shinozuka to take victory in his Group A Mitsubishi Galant VR-4.
Top teams traditionally stay away from the gruelling west African rally, making it an irresistible attraction for those teams which cannot win elsewhere.
Although uncompetitive on European events, the Galant is at home on the endless tracks of Africa.
With Lancia and Toyota absent, the result did not affect the head of the drivers' points table of the world series, which finishes with the Lombard RAC Rally next week.
Shinozuka claimed eleventh hour victory
letters
SETTING THE RECORD STRAIGHT
The article headed ‘IAD: Electric car plan ‘unworkable'’(Motor show report, 28 October) gives a completely false and misleading impression of the situation relating to the LA301 car for California.
Firstly, the heading gives the impression that the production plans for the car and its fitness for purpose are in some way in doubt and this is very far from the true situation.
Secondly, if the heading is read as referring to the California Plan, the term ‘unworkable’ is totally incorrect.
Most plans can benefit from carefully considered change and this plan is no different in this respect.
Some small changes could well assist the introduction of electric vehicles to the market.
While battery technology certainly needs to be improved, and this is ongoing by many developers, the batteries available commercially today together with careful design of the vehicle will provide a range that will meet the requirements of the majority of commuters in Los Angeles.
Operating from batteries alone, the vehicle is of course a zero emission car and it is expected that the majority of commuting will be in this mode.
To give the LA301 a much wider appeal and flexibility of operations, it is designed as a hybrid with a small low emission petrol engine to supplement the energy available from the battery.
In this mode of operation the car will be classified as an ultra low emission vehicle (ULEV).
The vehicles required to meet the 1998 California deadline can certainly be made available and are likely to be a mix of both battery and hybrid vehicles.
Developers of electric vehicles around the world would like to see some small concessions granted in the legislations so that ULEVs are not unduly penalised.
The market opportunities for a flexible hybrid car like the LA301 are likely to be much greater than a battery only vehicle, but in practice such a hybrid car will be driven in zero emission mode for the majority of the time.
It is this fact, that needs to be recognised by the California Regulators so that hybrids can be encouraged rather than penalised to give more zero emission miles of total use than would be the case with a battery-only car produced in lower volumes.
Brian Phillips Manager, EV Group IAD Worthing Sussex 
TITLE RIGHT
In your Japanese Grand Prix report (28 October), you say Honda had won five constructors' championships in the last 10 years.
For the record it is actually six — 1986 and ‘87 with Williams, and 1988/89/90/91 with McLaren.
Graeme Holt Honda UK London 
HAVING A CRUSH ON ZOOM
Renault's tiny Zoom, with its ability to park sideways, is liable to be shrunk a little more than intended.
What is Joe Bloggs going to do when he returns to his ancient, battle-scarred Range Rover, only to find a Zoom parked a few millimetres from his rear bumper?
John Impey Bromsgrove Worcestershire 
A COVER UP
The warranty cover mentioned in the Mercedes 600SL feature (‘Too clever by half, 30 September) was wrong.
The 600SL has exactly the same warranty cover as all other Mercedes cars: that is 12 months/unlimited mileage.
There is no anti-corrosion warranty.
With reference to breakdown cover, all new Mercedes are covered by our Touring Guarantee service.
This is probably the most comprehensive customer care service available, offering technical and personal assistance through over 2400 Mercedes dealerships across Europe.
Clever parking could get Zoom into trouble
The Touring Guarantee is valid for four years from the date of purchase of a new Mercedes and is passed on with the car if it is sold during that period.
There is no mileage limit.
Touring Guarantee is a progressive cover and offers everything from roadside assistance (including Homestart) to overnight hotel accommodation and even air flights to the customer's destination.
FIRST LOVE
My first car, an MG TC, was the best car I've ever owned — it left so much to the imagination!
Years later I could say the same of my old MGB.
So, unlike Eoin Young (Diary, 28 October), I'd drive Rover's RV8 before I passed judgement on it.
Of course, I've never worked for McLaren (even though , judging by its participation in F1 diplomacy, the team only deserves an RV8 engine to play with next season).
WRONG END OF THE STICK
The weekly motoring experience of Mr Dempsey (‘We're in it together’, 28 October) presumably consists of a trip to Tesco's in a car covered with ‘I've been to Blackpool’ stickers and furry dice dangling from the mirror.
There can be no other explanation for his asinine letter berating the formation of the Association of British Drivers (ABD).
The ABD does not object to Gatsos where they will contribute to safety on the roads.
In fact, we would encourage their use at traffic lights to catch red light jumpers, outside schools for excessive speed and for other such criminal acts of stupidity.
What we do object to is in their cynical use on stretches of open road and motorways as a means of penalising motorists for doing something that causes no danger to anybody.
The ABD is not only about speed limits, absurd through some of them are.
It is about all manner of motoring matters such as improvements in vehicle safety and construction, raising of driving standards and an attempt to get the authorities to look at the whole business of motoring in a different way for the good of all.
Contrary to his quip about the B standing for Bad, it does not — it stands for Better.
Anybody interested in the improvement of driving, roads or vehicles should get in tough with Brian Gregory.
SAFETY BLAST
You cannot be serious!
Norman Horobin's suggestion (‘Weather conditions’, 28 October) that motorists can safely drove in dry weather with tyres below the legal limit is highly irresponsible.
It is inevitable that tyres like that will blow out when travelling at a high speed.
And presumably, should it start to rain, Mr Horobin intends to leave his car in the middle of the road, don some wellies and walk home.
Let's keep our roads safe and tighten motoring law to rid our roads of these death traps once and for all.
LIKE GOLD DUST…
I would like to bring to your attention a situation that exists in east London/Essex.
Autocar & Motor is unobtainable at 99 per cent of newsagents; they won't sell it because they are not reimbursed for unsold copies.
I would like to see more people enjoying your magazine; I just think it's a shame that it is not more readily available.
Autocar & Motor is now supplied to all newsagents on a permanent sale-or-return basis.
This means they take no risk when they stock it, as they are reimbursed for any copies left unsold at the end of the week.
Please let us know about any newsagents where Autocar & Motor is not on sale so we can contact their local wholesaler — publisher.
OAKLAND MOTOR CAR COMPANY LTD
I am about to start research on the above.
I am aware of most of its history in America, its formation out of the Pontiac Buggy Company, its takeover by General Motors and its sibling Pontiac — that is all fairly well documented.
But nothing seems to exists about Oakland's history in the UK.
If any reader has anything connected with Oakland, no matter how tenuous or trivial, and if anyone owns or knows the whereabouts of Oaklands in the UK, I would be grateful to hear from them.
PASS
Geoffrey Whalen (Open To Question, 28 October) says he doesn't like to be passed on the inside on motorways.
But if the lane to his left is clear, why isn't he in it?
STAY ON THE RIGHT SIDE
If J Barrett (‘Income exposure’, 4 November) wishes to keep his financial position private then the solution is very simple — don't break the law.
If he isn't prepared to do that then he must accept the workings of a system which is much fairer than the system which was previously enforced.
Write to:Autocar & Motor Readers' Letters or fax .
Short letters stand a better chance of publication.
The editor is not bound to agree with readers' opinions and reserves the right to edit letters.
Like all new Mercs, the 600SL gets the Touring Guarantee cover
The MG TC: ‘Left so much to the imagination,’ says a reader
Next week
Coupe clash
The eight-valve version of the UK's best selling coupe, Vauxhall's Calibra, goes up against Rover's cheapest 200 coupe
Master of the art
We drive the new Mercedes SEC and find an awesome driver's car that manages to shade the mighty S-class
RAC Rally
Our preview contains everything you need to know about the drivers, the teams, the route and where you can get the best views.
Growing up
With a new 1.8-litre engine, side-impact bars and higher spec, Hyundai's Lantra appears to have answered the critics
PLUS
Driving Toyota's wacky concepts (above), a close look at BMW's 850CSi and Steve Cropley talks to car selling legend Peter Vardy 
The Autocar Road Test
Renault Safrane V6
The R19, Clio, Espace, A610 coupe — has Renault produced another winner with the R25 replacement?
IT ISN'T JUST THE brilliant new Twingo that says Renault is on a roll.
Next year's R21 replacement should build on the clear thinking and design flair established with the Clio and consolidate the middle markets won by the revamped R19.
And the company's specialist products — Espace MPV and junior supercar A610 — already occupy the critical high ground in their respective niches.
Making the engine that powered Williams to the Formula 1 constructors' championship can't be bad for business, either.
It's all coming right for Regie.
On paper, at least Renault is but a heartbeat away from having the most impressively modern and comprehensive range of cars in Europe.
The Safrane, Renault's direct replacement for the R25, aims to be the icing on the cake and, as such, has to raise the game of the competent but uninspired R25 on to a higher plane.
But at the same time, Renault — no doubt conditioned by the less than sparkling sales performance of the R25 P isn't setting its sights too high.
The Safrane isn't intended to engage BMW and Mercedes, but rather to outshine Ford, Rover, Vauxhall, Audi, Peugeot and Citroen.
Initially, Renault UK has decided to offer just two models to the British buyer.
The entry-level car will be the two-litre RT, but here the spotlight falls on the range-topping V6 RXE.
The Safrane goes on sale in January and prices have still to be announced, but expect the RT to cost about £18,500, the RXE £25,500.
Like its R25 V6 forebear, the Safrane V6 RXE is crammed full of Renault's latest technology.
The synthesised audible warning harks back to the 25, but the computer controlled, MacPherson strut-based self-levelling air suspension is much more ‘cutting edge’ for Renault.
Longer, higher and wider than the old R25, the more rounded Safrane is 148mm (5.8ins) shorter than the   Rover 800 fastback but, at 1818mm between doors, is nearly an inch wider than the Citroen XM.
Those two cars — or, more specifically, automatic versions of the £24,745 Rover 827 SLi and £26,390 Citroen XM 3.0 SEi — are competitors, but the best-selling Ford Granada EFi Ghia (£20,830) is the Renault's main rival.
Swedish opposition comes in the form of Saab's 9000 2.3i CSE at £24,945, another big luxury hatchback but with four cylinders only against rivals that all have six cylinders at this price level.
It hatchback versatility isn't so important, you could also look at the £22,244 Toyota Camry 3.0 GX, while the Alfa Romeo 164 V6 Lusso (£24,846) will be, for some, the choice of the heart.
The other saloon worthy of mention is Volvo's 850 2.5 GLT automatic priced at £22,695.
Performance
The Safrane RXE makes do with the ageing Douvrin V6, although it is now mounted transversely and has its cylinder heads shrouded in ‘V6 ie’ labelled silver plastic.
In essence, this is the engine that powered the old V6 R25, but it has been heavily revised and a bigger bore takes the capacity out to just under three litres.
In turbocharged form it is the engine that powers the A610 sports car.
No turbo version of the Safrane is currently available in the UK.
It may be an engine from the old school — a single overhead camshaft per bank operates ‘only’ two valves per cylinder — but the Renault V6 produces a respectable 170bhp at 5500rpm — about the same as the Volvo 850 2.5 GLT's 20-valve five and the Honda-derived Rover 2.7-litre V6.
Although attitudes are changing, the V6 engine configuration still seems to be the one ideally suited to the needs of a big executive car like the Safrane.
Low-speed driveability and engine tractability were priorities identified for the V6 Safrane early on in its development, and the low-tune Douvrin V6 seems ideally suited.
The peak torque figure of 173 lb ft, developed at 4500rpm, is slightly misleading since some 155 lb ft is available from as little as 1700rpm.
And it's torque that the Safrane needs, because it's a heavy car.
With half a tank of fuel on board, the Renault weighs 1580kg, making it comfortably heavier than any of its chosen rivals and ensuring that the Safrane's power-to-weight ratio of 108bhp per tonne is the meanest of its class, too.
The Ford Granada wields 112bhp/tonne and the Alfa 164 130/bhp/tonne; even the R25 V6 it replaces outdoes it, with 114bhp/tonne.
Sparkling performance figures would seem to be out of the question.
And they are.
With the lever of the four-speed auto gearbox shifted manually for the best results, the Safrane sprints from rest to 60mph in 9.9secs, cover the quarter mile in 17.6 secs and completed the 30–70mph increment in 9.3secs.
It's this last figure that best highlights the Safrane's lack of sprinting zest.
Even the Ford, with only 145bhp at its disposal, manages to cover the same increment in 9.1 secs, while the Alfa posts a laudable 8.2secs.
The Citroen XM — a car with identical power and torque figures — is a whole second quicker than the Renault between 30 and 70mph.
Kickdown is tardy, too.
With the gearbox in sport mode, the 30–50mph and 50–70mph increments are dispatched in 3.9 and 5.4secs respectively.
While both these figures are more in touch with the opposition's times, they are still far from special.
The transmission's widely spaced gear ratio don't help matters, but the gearbox's reluctance to kick down is plain poor.
Foot flat to the floor, you can count to three while you wait for the response.
Although upshifts are mostly smooth, downchanges can be lumpy on a trailing throttle.
A drag coefficient of just 0.30 helps the Safrane to a achieve a top speed of 129mph, which is good enough to see off the Granada (123mph), but this looks distinctly average when every other car on our rivals page can top 130mph.
Perhaps the most telling measure of performance comes from a straight comparison with the R25 V6.
That car, lighter by some 175kg but with less power and torque (160bhp, 170 lb ft), is 0.4secs quicker to 60mph (9.5secs) and just 1mph slower.
Economy
Our overall consumption figure of 22.6mpg P which included testing at Millbrook, about 500 motorway miles and lots of urban motoring — is a reasonable result but nothing more in the light of the identically powerful Volvo 850's 25.9mpg.
A restrained right foot should coax up to 26mpg and a range of about 450 miles on an 80-litre (17.6-gallon) tankful of unleaded.
A trip computer, capable of calculating instantaneous and average fuel consumptions, is fitted as standard.
At a constant 75mph on the motorway over a distance of 50 miles, it calculated consumption to be an optimistic 28.4mpg.
High-tech self-levelling suspension
How Safrane stays on the level The Safrane is the first Renault to feature computer-controlled self-levelling suspension with adaptive damping.
Basically, the system comprises twin-tube dampers that operate according to three different settings — comfort, medium and sport, which is manually selectable by the driver.
The dampers are controlled by small air springs, which work in parallel with the main coil springs.
Unlike the Citroen XM's hydropneumatic system, which uses hydrogen gas oil, the Renault achieves constant self-levelling of its body by adjusting air pressure between the air springs from front to rear.
A low position (15mm below normal height) is selected by the computer above 75mph to improve aerodynamic behaviour.
A return to normal ride height is signalled below 50mph.
A high position — 30mm above normal — can be manually selected to cope with flooding and snow.
Unlike the R25, the Safrane is fitted with MacPherson strut suspension all round.
At the rear, the struts are each connected to two transverse links and a radius arm.
The whole rear suspension geometry has been designed to deform (up to 1.5degs) under the effect of sideways cornering forces in order to overcome any tendency for the Safrane to oversteer.
Handling
For out tastes, the Safrane's power-assisted steering is much too light.
Although it weights up a little with speed, it still seems more concerned with the easy life than confidence-inspiring weight and feel.
That said, it's free from torque steer and is very accurate.
The suspension employs computer-controlled adaptive dampers that give the driver a choice of comfort, medium and sport settings.
Working in conjunction with the dampers and controlled by the same computer are four air springs, which constantly adjust the ride height according to a number of external factors.
These springs, mounted above the dampers, achieve a level ride height by varying air pressure from front to rear.
The computer automatically lowers the body by 15mm above 75mph for improved stability and returns to its usual setting below 50mph.
Like the XM, the driver can raise the body by 30mm to help cope with floods and snow.
Hustle the Safrane along some backroads and it's clear that the adaptive damping is a major asset.
Control of body roll is good, although we couldn't see the advantage of manually selecting the sport setting when the suspension firms things up automatically at higher speeds.
Grip from the Michelin MXV2 195/65 tyres is strong and understeer generally well contained.
When the nose does eventually run wide, it does so very progressively.
All this makes the Safrane's handling capable and efficient, although it fails to reward the driver with tactile responses in the way that, say, an Alfa 164 does.
Ride
There's little payoff in ride quality, despite the excellent damping and body control achieved by the computer-controlled suspension.
And selecting the sport damping mode makes progress markedly more bumpy.
On the motorway the Safrane rides excellently and is well able to flatten out long amplitude undulation while being equally successful at suppressing smaller bumps, such as expansion joints.
Adaptive damping controls body roll well.
Good grip but steering too light; handles competently but unrewardingly
Brakes
Large ventilated discs all round are supplemented by a Bosch four-channel anti-lock system.
Stopping power is simply excellent, and during our rigorous fade test there was virtually no tail-off in braking performance.
Pedal feel is firm and progressive.
At the wheel
The facia of the Safrane looks big-boned and impressive — and less quirky than the R25's.
The switchgear layout, however, is more sci-fi than ergonomic and very little about the operation of the driving environment seems intuitive.
Still, both the oil level and temperature gauges are clear and the two main control stalks that work the wipers and lights are easy and pleasant to use.
Given time to assimilate the surroundings, the driver should be able to achieve a very comfortable driving position.
A motorised telescopic steering column is fitted as standard, as is an electrically adjustable seat with a memory function.
Quantities of leg and headroom are generous, rearward seat travel in particular, and all-round vision is terrific.
Glassy rear hatch opens wide to leave low loading lip
Accommodation and comfort
The Safrane is hushed and comfortable over long distances.
Its plush interior (full leather trim is about a £1000 option) is roomy enough for five to sit in comfort.
Those in back can adjust the rake of the split backrests and height of the rear cushions electrically, but the degree of adjustment is insufficient to make it worthwhile.
An excellent air conditioning system, independently variable between the driver's and passenger's sides and fitted as standard, improves on an already good ventilation system, although its controls and high-tech graphic display are not easy to understand at a glance.
The Safrane's hatchback format comes into its own when large objects need to be transported.
The glassy rear hatch opens wide and the boot has low loading lip.
Secondary storage space comes from reasonably proportioned door bins, a good-sized glovebox and a large central cubby that doubles as an armrest.
Noise
Here, the new big Renault shows major improvements compared with the R25.
Reduction of noise, vibration and harshness was a fundamental goal during the Safrane's development.
Engine noise is very well subdued for most of the time, although the V6 does start to sound hoarse at high revs on the rate occasions that the automatic gearbox allows you access to them.
Suspension noise is well contained, too, and while there's a little more tyre and wind noise than we would have expected, the Safrane still shines in this category and makes a particularly quiet and refined motorway cruiser.
Build quality and safety
Another giant leap forward here for the Safrane, which feels as well put together as any Granada and puts the R25's build quality to shame.
Shut the doors and they don't thud with the solidity of a Rover 800, but neither is there a tinny clank.
Better still is the interior, which features pleasantly rounded soft plastic mouldings.
The Renault designers have included some neat detail touches, too, such as the chunky door handles.
But whether the use of imitation wood is a success is more a matter of personal taste.
Both Safrane models have side impact protection bars and although a driver's side airbag is not standard, one is available as an option, costing around £300.
An anti-lock braking system is standard.
A decision on whether to offer seatbelt pre-tensioners as an option on UK cars has yet to be taken.
Value and equipment
The V6 RXE comes very well equipped, though leather upholstery is a option and a sunroof is unavailable.
However, air conditioning is standard and there is electric adjustment for mirrors, windows and seats.
The car also has cruise control, heated front wind-screen and seats, a high-tech six-speaker stereo with fingertip controls and infrared remote central locking with anti-theft system.
Usefully, the door mirror tilts downwards to show the kerb when reverse is engaged.
Even headphone sockets are included for rear passengers.
Verdict
If you liked the R25 you will love the Safrane.
It's a car that builds on the 25's strong points and makes huge advances in refinement, build quality and styling in its own right.
The Safrane is also a car that meets its rivals head on, even though there are areas in which we, certainly, were hoping for more.
Essentially, it's the ageing drivetrain that lets the side down.
Performance is leisurely to the point of frustration and the gearbox should be improved immediately.
Yes, the Safrane V6 is a big step in the right direction, but judged by the standards of Renault's recent efforts, it could have been better.
Adaptive damping lowers ride height by 15mm above 75mph then raises it again when speed drops below 50 mph
Renault Safrane V6 RXE
Safrane's cabin is plush, solid in feel and looks very high tech.
The layout of controls and switchgear takes a while to assimilate, though.
Fine driving position aided by telescopic steering column.
Air conditioning is standard; rear passengers have their own controls, too
White-on-black main dials are not the easiest to read.
Trip computer is slightly optimistic
Safrane is big enough in the rear for three to travel in some comfort.
Rear squab and backrest adjust electrically
V6 engine , now mounted transversely, is very refined and tractable but fails to give the Safrane a decent turn of speed
Safrane's boot is big to start off and hatchback format adds to its versatility.
Rear seat splits asymmetrically
Six-speaker RDS radio/cassette can be operated from control unit mounted on the steering wheel
Large, heavily padded seats are heated as standard and adjust electrically   
Renault Safrane V6 RXE Rivals
Renault Safrane V6RXE
Although the top Safrane is a much more accomplished act than its predecessor, the R25, it's still too uneven to grab the initiative in the prestige sector.
Strong suits include smoothness, refinement, space, plushness and build quality.
But performance is poor, the steering light and lifeless, ergonomics messy and the gearbox jerky.
The Safrane is good but needs to be better.
Alfa 164 V6 Lusso
If only all Alfas could be as good as this one.
From the gorgeous Pininfarina bodywork (there's no hatchback version) to the rasp and flair of its hunky V6 engine, the 164 is the big-car driver's delight, especially in automatic guise, where the torque steer effects are lessened but the engine's verve hasn't been expunged.
A new 24v version is due soon — it should be great.
Citroen XM 3.0 SEi
The XM makes its presence felt with high technology, alternative styling and lots of equipment.
Its unique Hydractive suspension provides genuinely superb comfort on most roads while the cabin is as roomy as they come.
In V6 form it's quick, too.
The footbrake is crazy and the ultrasensitive steering requires acclimatisation, but it wouldn't be a Citroen without the quirks.
Ford Granada EFi Ghia
At least the evergreen Granada is good value in this company.
Ghia trim heralds a huge list of goodies, but perhaps only to turn the attention away from the lacklustre dynamics.
Certainly both the chassis and V6 engine have known more competitive days.
The interior, although fairly basic in its design, is roomy and much better screwed together than a few years ago.
Rover 827 SLi
Rover's elegant 800 is an appealing blend in 827 SLi form.
A well-conceived interior, spoilt only by some awkward minor switchgear, should please anyone looking to cover large mileages, while the V6 engine, although not the last word in smooth-spinning power, executes its task effectively and quietly.
Automatic gearbox is adequate, if a little snatchy, much like the ride and handling.
Saab 9000 2.3i CSE
The least glamorous car of this group is ironically the best.
It would be easy to point to the lack of a six-cylinder engine and mark it down, but the Saab rises above that with a blend of abilities that few can rival: space, pace, fine handling and ride, a well designed and supremely comfortable interior and heaps of equipment.
That's enough for us.
OUR CHOICE
First Drive
ZX 16v opens new doors
Have the three-door ZXs, topped by a 16v, inherited the strengths of the five-doors? by Michael Scarlett
Flagship of the new three-door range is the £14,500 16-valver: loads of torque and a great ride/handling balance
FEW WOULD DOUBT the all-round strength of Citroen's ZX.
Few cars ride and handle so well, even fewer offer such good value for money.
And the turbo diesel ZX is, in our view, the best small diesel in the world.
But until now, there have been no three-door ZXs.
And the sporting Volcane version, while hot, is not the scorcher one might expect at the top of so accomplished a line-up.
The arrival of a new two-litre 16-valve flagship wielding 155bhp and six other three-door ZXs put matters straight.
The 16-valver is joined by another new engine — an insurance-beating 1.8-litre in the Furio model.
Both powerplants are unlikely to find their way into the five-door shell.
The remaining three-doors have a familiar look to them — petrol 1.4 (in Reflex and Avantage guises) and 2.0 (Volcane) units and the 1.9 unblown diesel (Reflex and Advantage).
Furio boasts an insurance-beating 1.8 engine
As well as the loss of two doors, the new ZXs also drop  the sideglass behind the C-pillar, gain fillets in the waistline each side of a thickened B-pillar, have door handles turned through 90degs, and are fitted with new rear bumpers, fatter C-pillars and rounded rear wheelarches.
The cost of these changes are prices roughly £400 less than the five-door versions and highly competitive with the opposition.
The £8500 1.4i Reflex is nearly £1500 cheaper than the Ford Escort 1.4L; £10,750 buys you the 103bhp Furio but you'll have to fork out £13,100 for the 105bhp Escort XR3i; and the ZX 16-valve costs £14,500 against £16,540 for Renault's 19 16v.
The new 1.8 engine has been borne out of the five-door's 1.6 by lengthening the stroke.
The resulting 1761 cc all-aluminium engines gives 103bhp at 6000rpm and 1131 lb ft of torque at 3000rpm and Citroen claims it will power the Furio to a credible 117mph and run the 0–60mph in 9.5secs.
Healthy figures indeed.
Better still, look at its insurance ratings compared with close rivals': the Golf GTi and Rover 216 GTi fall into group 14, the Escort XR3i into group 15, the Furio nestles happily in group 11.
It will keep you happy on the road, too.
The new 1.8 is smooth and refined, all the way up to the 6200rpm limiter.
Things aren't so great at the wheel, however.
The standard manual steering is heavy, low geared and not too keen to turn in.
In town, this becomes tiresome and the £359 optional power assistance looks a good bet.
Rear passenger space in Furio — and, similarly, in all the three and five-door ZXs bar the Volcanes and the 16-valver, which benefit from an adjustable rear seat — is borderline for taller adults.
A six-footer behind some-one of the same size in the driver's seat would have to sit in a splayed knees/bent neck posture.
The upside is that getting in and out is made simple by the front seats sliding well forwards.
Also the seats return to their previous position when pulled back.
The two-litre engine in the Volcane develops 123bhp at 5750rpm and 130lb ft at 2750rpm, enough for claims of 125mph and 8.4secs to 60mph.
Those claims move up to 137mph and 8 secs for the exciting top-of-the-range 16-valver.
Mating the two-litre's iron block to the alloy head from the BX 16-valve, an impressive 155bhp at 6500rpm is possible, thanks also to special inlet manifold.
For the driver, this means at least 120 lb torque on call from 2550rpm, with a peak of 135 lb ft at 3500rpm.
And you can feel this on the road, enjoying a smooth and refined engine.
This can, however, mislead you as, at 1150kg, this is no lightweight and the car doesn't feel as quick as 155bhp or Citroen's claims might suggest.
The pay off is that there is little sign of the peakiness that can accompany sports engines.
It pulls hard, evenly and far less raucously than an Astra GSi, Escort RS2000 or Renault 19 16v.
It becomes harsh only if you rev beyond the 6500rpm red line, a result of the engine's willingness to accelerate all the way.
There's no excuse for not using the gears, though.
The change is light and precise although, if you're lazy, the 16-valver is flexible enough to pull from 1000rpm.
The steering, geared at 2.5 turns between locks and power assisted, is delightfully responsive and, even in the wet, didn't suffer badly from torque steer, thanks also to the 195/55 Michelin XGTVs wrapped round 15ins alloys.
Like all ZXs, the passive rear steer suspension gives superbly neutral handling, allowing you to exploit bends confidently and safely.
The five-door ZX has a reputation for its class-beating ride and the 16v also rides well, despite its stiffer springing and damping and a thicker rear anti-roll bar.
From the 16v down, the three-door ZX is every bit as excellent an all-rounder as its five-door parent.
With the two new models and strong pricing, Christmas might just come early for Citroen.
Main dials are clear
Versatile loading ability
New 155bhp two-litre (left) is smooth and refined
Supportive seats
Rear space not great
The Autocar Long Term Test
Caterham 7 HPC
Can a Seven possibly stand 12,000 hard miles in eight months?
Andrew Frankel finds out
For Wonderful to drive and own, cheap to insure Against Numerous niggling faults, hood design, vulnerable body
I AM NOT LOOKING FORWARD to tomorrow.
That's when the Caterham goes, eight months after five of us struggled for a weekend to built it in a cramped studio behind the office.
We have covered more than 12,000 miles together, during which it has won prizes, howled around Switzerland and Italy, been thrashed at Millbrook, and on race tracks and carried me home to Notting Hill through traffic and rain.
It is the car that took on the Rocket and won.
I have toured France with my girlfriend in it, it took me to my brother's wedding.
I am not looking forward to tomorrow.
During that time it has let us down just once, stranding the deputy editor Michael Harvey in Hammersmith with a broken clutch cable.
The retaining nipple at the pedal end fell off, but whether that was due to our amateur build standards or a faulty cable remains in the unsolved file.
Otherwise, it always reached its destination, albeit with a detour on two occasions.
The first of these was midway through its battle with the Rocket over the North Yorkshire moors.
A warning light on the dashboard heralded a thrown alternator belt, which took no more than a swift shop at the courteous and enthusiastic Vauxhall dealer Ryedale Garages of Kirkbymoorside to replace the offending item for just £4.
The second unscheduled diversion was to Southern Carburettors in Hersham, brought on by the Caterham's refusal to idle at less than 4000rpm.
A broken spring within one of the pair of twin-choke side-wrought Weber 45 DCOEs was discovered and replaced, this time for a fiver.
This problem is apparently not uncommon in such carburettors.
Since we covered as many miles in six months as many Caterham owners do in four years, that's not an unreasonable failure rate for a car built by amateurs and speaks volumes for the simplicity, strength and quality of the materials Caterham employs for its cars.
But that's not to say our life with the Caterham has been an uninterrupted joy.
Quite often the limitations of its '50s design brought with it annoying problems you wouldn't think of in a more modern-thinking car.
The total absence of bumpers means that any practitioner of the black art of touch-parking could easily cost you a nose cone (replacement price £74.26).
By the time we returned J7 HPC, its pretty yellow nose had been broken in two places.
And then there's the hood, which is, frankly, a damnable device, especially if, like me, you stretch well beyond the far side of 6ft.
There is only one way for me to get in with it in place.
That is to feed my body through the hole left by the sidescreen until my head collides with whoever is in the passenger's seat and then wriggle and squeeze my legs down either side of the steering wheel.
Elegant it ain't.
And that is only a small part of a litany of hood-related sorrows.
Not only do you have to fold it with fastidious care to avoid pinching and clouding the plastic rear window, but fitting it in a hurry is simply impossible.
If it rains when you are driving, you tend to be drenched by the time the hood has been erected and are the laughing stock of every MX-5 driver in the neighbourhood.
Our hood added insult to embarrassment by breaking the poppers on its leading edge one after the other until David Vivian found himself circumnavigating the M25 one evening with one hand on the wheel and another holding the hood to keep it from flying off.
Moreover, the car is hideously noisy with the hood up, and it has the effect of filtering out some of the nice engine sounds and replacing them with rattles from the differential, whines from the gearbox and banging from the suspension.
Its one saving grace is that it is water-tight, which is more than can be said for the tonneau cover.
Numerous other niggles arose from our months together.
The yellow gaiter around the gearstick ripped slightly with the constant to-ing and fro-ing of the lever and the leather-look dashboard material was marked and dented after 10,000 miles.
The instruments sometimes steamed up, the revcounter failed altogether and the carpet in both footwells had come adrift by the time the car had reached the end of its test.
The windscreen cracked, too (replacement price £126.34), which Caterham claims can be a result of undue pressure caused by over-enthusiastic hood-fitting.
The rear wings were pitted and scratched from flying stones and the handbrake never worked well enough for any of us to trust it, even with a rerouted cable.
The only problem which cured itself was a horn that tended to cut the engine during the early life of the car.
The Caterham has been an expensive car to run, although not prohibitively so.
Service intervals of 3000 miles, plus an initial 500-mile check, mean the car   has been back to the Dartford factory five times since April and have produced bills for a total of £826.05, although £96.50 of that was to replace one of the 205/45 ZR16 Goodyear Eagle GS-D tyres, which had collected a nail in its tread.
This might seem like a horrifying amount to spend in eight months (and it would have been a lot more were Caterham's labour rate not a reasonable £20 an hour), but you have to remind yourself that five services would last the average Caterham owner until 1996.
What is potentially more worrying is the secondhand value of the HPC.
The knocked-down kit with options costs £20,640 (as opposed to £19,252 for the almost-built version quoted in the back of this magazine), but because of its rare nature and the fact that Caterham itself is the sole official sales outlet, gaining an accurate reflection of the car's true worth is by no means an easy process.
Our trade expert, John Coates, hazards that the trade might only be willing to pay £12,500 in the hope of retailing it for £15,500.
Caterham, however, will try to sell it on for £17,500.
The situation seems to be that those who want a car like J7 HPC will pay, within reason, what it takes to get a good one from a source they can trust.
Much better news awaits those who may well have dismissed all ideas of Caterham ownership with one thought of the insurance bill.
Thanks to a special deal and insurers RCM Associates, even an HPC is cheap to insure considering its performance potential.
Even a 25-year-old male with a couple of speeding convictions leaving the car on the street in a high-risk area can expect to pay only £424 per year, so long as he has a five-year no-claims bonus.
Split developed in gear lever gaiter
So just how fast is the HPC and did it, as Caterham suggested it might, grow faster as the miles accrue?
It first went to Millbrook with just 3874 miles on the clock and finally at 12,106 miles.
On both occasions the car had just been serviced and was running perfectly.
I drove it  both times in similar test conditions, so any change would be down to the car.
In four years of road testing I have never seen two such similar sets of statistics.
All the way from 0–110mph there was never more than 0.2secs between the two.
In each gear you could tell the carburettors were better balanced after 12,000 miles as the slower increments always favoured the later set of figures.
But when the two-litre Vauxhall twincam was at screaming speed the earlier tests proved the swifter.
Which still means our HPC is as quick as a Ferrari 512TR to 60mph (5secs flat) or a 350bhp Porsche 928GTS to 100mph (14.3secs).
And down a tight, twisty road it would disappear from either in a short order.
This is thanks to handling and power which, to my mind, would have posed a greater threat to the Honda NSX's title of best-handling car than any Mazda RX-7.
And don't be fooled into thinking power can only play a secondary role in a car's handling; to an HPC it's everything.
When we built J7 HPC, we set the rear anti-roll bar to give mild oversteer — an attitude it adopts readily.
Where the tail goes from there is entirely up to the driver.
As with all the finest handling cars, you leave the general direction of travel to the steering and plot the precise course with the accelerator.
To do that you need power.
Sideways on a loose surface and the HPC still refuses to misbehave.
One of the greatest handling cars of all time
Yet the HPC is not corrupted by its power.
During all those thousands of hard miles, on wet and dry roads, mountain passes and leafy lanes, it never gave anyone who drove it a second's cause for concern.
In the end I had to take it to a skid pan to see how far it would go before it eventually lost its cool The answer was as far as its steering lock would allow.
When the front wheels were no longer capable of pointing in the desired direction of travel, it would launch into a gentle semi-spin if you did not act to salvage the situation.
If only the RX-7 was so faithful to the limit.
Oil and water temps on one gauge
In the end, J7 HPC did us proud.
Those who thought it would fall to pieces within 5000 miles were confounded, even if those who hoped it would sail the test with BMW-like dependability could hardly crow about its reliability record.
In truth there were too many small problems for us to recommend it as exclusive, everyday transport.
Caterham's one-year warranty made sure these proved merely  inconvenient , but for those covering such mileage over four years this will prove cold comfort.
Then again, stretch the list of failures over four years and it doesn't seem that long at all.
Optional leather looks appropriate
What it did prove, emphatically, is that you can buy a car which will out-handle any Ferrari, out-accelerate the most powerful Porsche to way past licence-losing speed and provide more safe fun than anyone who hasn't driven one could possibly imagine.
And you can do it for a fraction of the price and without finding yourself on first-name-terms with your local AA recovery team.
It will make you a better, more appreciative driver, too.
All of which makes it a bargain and one I shall miss for years to come.
Low-volume lifeline
There'll be an even wider spectrum of cars to choose from next year, thanks to a change in Type Approval rules.
By Giles Chapman
Jem Marsh is deadly serious, not a flicker of a smile darting across his weathered expression: ‘We're going to move out of the component car industry.
This is a golden opportunity to get away from it — we want to produce a proper car, sold through a proper dealer network.’
Along with Graham Nearn of Caterham and Chris Smith of Westfield, Marsh — Marcos founder and mainstay of the UK's cottage industry of component car makers — was exhibiting at the last motor show, where anyone could legitimately call him a ‘kit car’ maker.
But from 1 January 1993 the three will join the UK's fully fledged car company bosses; the Marcos Mantara, Caterham K-series and Westfield ZEi will be the first ever kit cars to be sold fully built up, thanks to a helpful new bit of bureaucracy: Low Volume Type Approval.
You will, in theory, be able to walk into a dealer's showroom and drive away a road-ready car without even having to take a spanner to it.
The Department of Transport's Vehicle Certification Agency (VCA) has appointed a team of engineering inspectors, based at MIRA in Warwickshire, to ensure that companies entering their cars for Low Volume Type Approval meet a whole raft of regulations which, and we quote, ‘demonstrate that the vehicle is constructed from parts which conform to international standards’.
Daunting as that may sound, it's nothing to what a maker the size of Rover must go through to get an average family car into fully type-approved production.
But then, under the new rules, Messrs Smith, Marsh, Nearn et al will be no threat to the major players: only 500 low-volume type-approved cars to any one design can be made each year — a number of Marcoses, Westfields and Caterhams combined that's less than a day's output from Longbridge.
It it's satisfied with this, a low-volume maker will enjoy a series of waivers that should ‘significantly’ reduce the cost of gaining national Type Approval.
For a start, this will mean cars won't have to be driven into concrete blocks at 30mph, or be written off in seatbelt anchorage tests, saving the cost of at least two expensive prototypes.
Vitally for small manufacturers, the more parts they use from large manufacturers that have already gained Type Approval in another application, the cheaper the tests will be; MIRA's inspectors will be able to cross-check data they already hold for, say, a wheel, a light or a mirror, using their discretion as to whether they think its new role is fit and proper.
As long as the component's use is not significantly different, these items should get a tick on the boffin's clipboard.
Additionally, although the cars must conform broadly to the standards required for full Type Approval, the need for physical tests of door hinges and  latches, protective steering and anti-theft devices will all be waived.
Such concessions will save a company like Marcos time and money.
Marsh says LVTA has cut the cost of making the Mantara customer-ready from £120,000 to between £30,000 and £40,000 and halved the car's development time.
‘It's a big help to us,’ he says.
‘Now, an engineer can look at the car, say it's okay and rubber-stamp the paperwork.’
However, Chris Smith, owner of Westfield Sports Cars, claims that his company has had to spend more than £250,000 on readying the ZEi for the showroom, as well as allocating two full-time staff to the project.
‘Slamming a car into a brick wall is actually one of the cheaper tests,’ he maintains.
‘The fees involved aren't very high but the actual money involved in modifying the car is.’
£250,000 spent on readying ZEi for showroom
Bob Atkinson of the VCA reckons the cost of LVTA could be as low as £15,000 but suggests that, as the precise requirements of the regulations have been kept deliberately flexible, the inspectors will have the final say.
‘There's not much there, and the way it will happen in practice is still to be found out,’ he says.
‘We're trying to come up with a ‘user's guide’ to explain the regulations.’
LVTA is the result of years of lobbying by the SMMT on behalf of its Specialist Car Manufacturers' Group, chaired by Caterham's Graham Nearn and consisting of seven companies which number Marcos, Westfield, JBA and Jago Automotive — all kit car makers — among them.
The SMMT estimates that they account for 40 per cent of all kits sold in the UK.
However, larger companies like Ford have also woken up to the fact that it could help them build small runs of specialist cars — the Ford RS200 for example— cheaply and quickly, which gave the movement momentum.
The VCA hopes its scheme, inspired by the German TUV safety tests, will be adopted by all EC countries.
‘As long as European governments don't argue about the rules, we can sell our cars throughout Europe.
We hope our politicians pull their fingers out and negotiate on our behalf,’ says March.
It is also likely to benefit makers of more expensive and complex cars, such as McLaren's F1 and the Jaguar XJ220, and could apply to any sector of car, not just the sporting machines that currently stand to gain in credibility.
Meanwhile, the three pioneers are readying themselves for a surge of interest: Marcos has appointed its Coventry engine supplier, JE Engineering, as its first distributor, Westfield is looking at a trio of dealers and Caterham plans to appoint half a dozen Rover distributors as service agents for the K-series engine that will power its first ‘turn-key’ car.
Marcos: Marsh wants to quit kits
K-series: first ‘turn-key’ Caterham
None of the companies we spoke to would forecast how many cars they aim to sell in 1993, nor how many customers who would previously have bought kits are expected to switch to type-approved cars.
But Chris Smith sums up the make-or-break situation of the market in turmoil: ‘The low end of the market is thinner than it used to be, and the other buyers don't want to mess around with scrapyards.’
From Calibra to Viper
Bob Eaton, the man who brought Lotus to GM and gave us the Calibra, is about to become chairman of Chrysler.
He talks to John McCormick
COME 1 JANUARY, THE MAN WHO turned GM Europe into a profitable operation and fathered winners such as the Calibra takes over the top spot at Chrysler.
Bob Eaton, 52, actually joined Chrysler in April this year as vice-chairman, after a prolonged search for a replacement for the retiring Lee Iacocca, arguably the car industry's most charismatic figure.
In contrast to Iacocca's blustery persona, Eaton is relatively reserved but, beneath his calm demeanour, it's clear that there lurks a tough and gritty leader.
ON LOTUS AND THE ELAN
Would you like to have brought Lotus with you to Chrysler?
I have a lot of fond memories of Lotus and the people there, but bringing them to Chrysler, I never considered it.
What about the Elan?
Why do you think it failed?
Do you think GM paid too much or too little attention to Lotus?
Nobody in the world would suggest GM paid too much attention to Lotus.
the problem with the Elan is very simple: it came in dramatically over its cost target and its investment target, and the marketplace didn't put as much value on the vehicle as it cost to build it.
GM was very careful not to smother Lotus, not to destroy the Lotus mystique, the culture.
Responsible for Calibra at GM
In retrospect, was leaving Lotus alone the wrong thing to do as far as the Elan was concerned?
No, the problem was the car missed its targets.
I don't think you can point to GM's relationships with Lotus having any effect on that at all.
There have been cars done by lots of people round the world that missed their targets.
From a standpoint of engineering the Elan was one hell of a car.
It brought a new level of handling to front-wheel drive that's never been equalled.
I would not have done it any differently as far as the involvement of GM and Lotus.
How do you think history will remember Lotus's former chairman Mike Kimberley?
There would not be a Lotus today without Mike Kimberley.
From the time Colin [Chapman]died until the time Mike left, he was Mr Lotus .
Numerous times before that period when GM got involved, he didn't know how he would make the payroll next week, much less next month.
What about Chrysler's relationship with Lamborghini?
It's much like the relationship between GM and Lotus in that we do co-operative engineering work with it, but we don't get actively involved in the day-to-day operation of that company.
ON CHRYSLER IN EUROPE
How does your time at GM Europe help you now at Chrysler?
I do have a fairly in-depth understanding of the European market, even though that market is changing.
I've never said this before but I'll be putting more emphasis [on Europe], because of my understanding of it.
What difficulties are there for a US company in Europe?
I don't believe that you have any idea of what's really going on in a country or culture until you live there.
I think you can read all you want and talk to people as often as you want but, in my case, my understanding of Europe just simply didn't exist before I went there.
Chrysler's Viper is coming to Europe
At Chrysler you have quite a number of executives with experience in Europe.
Is this an advantage?
It definitely brings a European flavour to our cars here [in the US]and it is an advantage over there as well.
the LH [saloon]is the closest thing to a European car made in America.
You'll see that reflected by the European press and the public as we introduce it on the continent next year.
Since you left Europe, the car market had deteriorated; does Europe have anything to learn from the way the US car industry is coping with the recession?
I believe the European market is simply going through an economic cycle.
While the recovery is a little bit slower that we had been anticipating when I left GM Europe, it's not very much different than what we had expected.
I don't believe that the method of selling cars with huge discounts that has been going on in the US for some time is good for the companies, and I also don't think long term it's good for the industrial base of the country and therefore ultimately for the customer.
Concerning the Japanese, I think Europeans are far more realistic and pragmatic.
I think they are allowing competition, which is healthy, but at the same time demanding reciprocity.
They are also restricting access to their markets, which will minimise the economic dislocation and the ultimate loss of industrial base.
Do you think the competition from the Japanese will force some European car companies out of business?
Yes, but they would have failed anyway.
Forgetting about the Japanese for a moment, I had bee forecasting that one or two of the big six would go out of business as independent companies.
You have six companies each with 10 per cent or more of the business.
If any one of those companies loses two per cent of market share their profitability is just about completely destroyed.
That's what you're seeing with Fiat right now.
In 1988, Karl Ludvigsen came out  with a study that two of the big six would go away — he predicted they would be GM and Renault.
Now if I'm not mistaken, GM is vying for second place, Fiat, which at that point was tied neck and neck with VW for first place, has fallen like a rock.
How has Chrysler performed in Europe since the company returned in 1987?
We've been growing at a fairly significant rate considering we've only been back about five years.
Including what we build in Austria, we're selling about 70,000 vehicles.
That's increasing at about 15 per cent a year, which is a much faster growth rate than our domestic operations.
Given our financial priorities, we will not be challenging the big six in Europe but we can expect to be an increasingly strong player.
With plans to sell just 2000 cars in 1993, is the UK market just a niche for Chrysler?
We plan to get bigger but we will continue to be a niche player, although I think we can be a very successful one.
At this point we're only bringing in the Cherokee and the Viper, but ultimately we'll bring in the Grand Cherokee and the minivan [MPV], although we won't do those until we have right-hand drive versions, which may come before the next generation models.
That applies to the LH as well.
We're not coming to the UK strictly to sell 200 cars; we're coming with that as our stating point.
In 10 years we'll be selling 20,000.
Eaton is eyeing the future: ‘We've got plenty of struggles left, but I feel very good about the people and the cars’
ON CHRYSLER'S MPV
How do you feel about the EC wanting to impose tariffs on Chrysler's MPVs made in Graz, Austria?
We're simply saying that if we're going to build the vehicle over there with in excess of 60 per cent local content, you shouldn't charge us the 10 per cent duty.
But if we fail with that argument, I'll be over in Europe trying to get tariffs on all European vehicles brought over here, because I believe in reciprocity just like the EC believes in it.
I'm not going to sit still and let them do that to me.
ON A FIAT TAKEOVER
What do you think of Karl Ludvigsen's prediction that Fiat will buy Chrysler in the next decade?
I think he's as far wrong on that as he was on his projections about GM Europe going out of business four years ago.
Is there a chance Chrysler might buy Fiat?
I would think there's essentially zero chance of that happening.
What about a co-operative deal with Fiat?
I'm sure that neither one of us has any thoughts along those lines at all.
The world does funny things but I can tell you that's the furthest thing from my mind at this point in time.
ON BEING A CHRYSLER MAN
Now you've been here several months, have your feelings about Chrysler changed?
Yes, I feel much, much more positive, for two reasons.
Number one, I have seen the vehicles in the pipeline, and I really like what I see.
When I came over here, I knew what the LH and the Grand Cherokee were, but they had not been introduced and I hadn't driven them.
Now I know they're absolutely outstanding vehicles, much better than Chrysler has ever done before.
We will have a brand new product launch every six months for the next three years.
Secondly, I see how well the organisation — the platform team system — is working.
We've got plenty of struggles left, given our balance sheet and financial situation, but I feel very good about the people and the cars.
Eagle Vision — successful LH saloon
SECONDHAND SPOTLIGHT
ME & MY FORD SIERRA
Darren Pearce's Sapphire 1.8 LX has racked up a remarkable 112,000 miles in four years without missing a beat — and without regular servicing
FORD SAYS
Mr Pearce's experience with his car is typical of the quality and reliability we would expect of our product.
It's a fitting testament to the Sierra, a major sales contender throughout Europe since 1982.
While we're delighted to hear of Mr Pearce's ‘hands-off’ philosophy to maintenance, we would strongly recommend that Ford owners have their vehicles serviced at a Ford dealer in accordance with the scheduled service intervals.
The criticisms concerning the performance of the gearbox and the suspension could have been corrected at a Ford dealer.
Regular servicing ensures vehicles operate at their maximum levels of efficiency and safety.
We would also suggest customers consult their local dealer if they're considering buying a used Ford.
Our dealers possess considerable knowledge of vehicles through their recorded service history, and this can help to overcome many of the potential pitfalls associated with the purchase of a used car.
DARREN PEARCE HAS A simple rule when it comes to car maintenance.
‘If it ain't broken, don't fix it,’ says the 23-year-old fashion sales manager.
And in his case it's hard to fault the hands-off philosophy.
Darren bought a 72,000-mile Sierra Sapphire 16 months ago and has now run the mileage up to an incredible 112,500 miles with no attention apart from a new exhaust, replacement rev-counter and three services.
That's the kind of faithful reliability that Mercedes owners talk about, but it's hardly expected from a car like the Sierra.
If next year's Mondeos all prove as durable as this, Ford will be laughing.
That Darren's car has been such a loyal servant is all the more surprising when you consider that it spent its first 50,000 miles in the hands of a company rep and was then driven for 22,000 miles by a builder — two occupations hardly renowned for lavishing care and attention on cars.
In 1991 Darren started a job that involved covering a huge business mileage but didn't provide a company car.
He therefore wanted a mile-eater that would be cheap to run and repair.
And as a 23-year-old living and working in London, he also needed something he could insure without difficulty.
‘I went to several used car dealers and found that the way most of them described their cars was a far cry from the actual condition they were in,’ he recalls.
‘One Sierra I looked at had done 112,000 miles but the dealer couldn't tell me whether it had been once or twice around the clock.’
Interior trim has stood up remarkably well to hard use
Unimpressed, he turned to the private classified.
An ad in the Sevenoaks Chronicle led him to the white 1988 Sierra Sapphire 1.8 LX, advertised at £3750.
‘The builder had either spent three weeks cleaning it or had been kept in pristine condition,’ says Darren.
The service history ended abruptly at 50,000 miles, and because Darren had no insurance the seller understandably wouldn't  let him drive it.
‘But the engine was quiet and seemed to run well, and everything about the owner seemed legit,’ he says.
Two days of haggling on the price followed, with the seller reluctantly dropping to £3500.
‘I paid cash and drove away with a funny feeling in stomach over my decision,’ Darren recalls.
But two weeks later a friend in the motor trade serviced it for him and proclaimed the car to be in sound condition and a good deal.
Sapphire is ultra-reliable and cheap to run, making it ideal for the high mileage user
Nevertheless Darren was prepared for trouble.
‘I knew I had to be tolerant of any mechanical faults which were bound to surface during the year,’ he says.
But he needn't have worried, because in more than 40,000 miles the Ford has been nearly trouble-free.
Total outlay in parts — revcounter and exhaust — has been £118.
112k and still going strong
top marks for boot space
Darren has called the AA twice: once when the battery went flat and again when the distributor cap became soaked after the car was driven through flood water.
Of the latter fault he says: ‘I've learned how to fix that, so I'll know the next time.’
The central locking doesn't work on the boot; it remained unlocked for two months before Darren realised.
He's conscious that safety-critical items such as tyres and brakes mustn't be skimped on, but he's not overly concerned about sticking to the recommended 6000-mile service schedule; so far the Sierra has on average been serviced every 13,500 miles and has never seen the inside of a Ford dealer's workshop.
It doesn't seem any the worse for the lack of attention.
‘I have it serviced when I can do without a car for the day,’ he says.
‘The last service was at 98,000 miles, but did change the spark plugs myself at 106,000 miles.’
The four-year-old car looks in remarkably good condition given its mileage.
The only obvious sign of wear and tear is a groaning gearbox, while the engine smokes a little on start-up.
The interior trim isn't worn or damaged and the driver's seat is still reasonably firm.
There's a big dent in the nearside sill, but that was the result of Darren hitting something solid while pulling on to the grass verge of a Lake District lane to let another car through.
Although Darren dreams of driving a Mercedes estate, he feels that pounding the road in his Sierra is an enjoyable enough experience.
‘The ride quality stretches your patience and the gearbox is sticky in first and reverse, but it has enough power, and boot space, accessibility and the driving position all score highly.’
Although he was mindful of the need to buy something insurable, Darren is angered by the £875 premium, despite a 40 per cent no-claims discount.
‘We all know that XR3s and Cossies seem to attract a lot of unwanted attention, but I feel I'm paying too much insurance on what is a Plain Jane family saloon,’ he says.
The Sierra is now worth about £1750 in a private sale.
That may be half of what Darren paid for it, but in absolute terms it's incredibly low depreciation over 40,000 and adds up to an excellent value motoring package.
JOHN COATES' VIEW
The Sierra is one of the great used cars.
It took over from the Cortina as the best DIY car around, and its high build quality ensures public loyalty.
Ordinary in ride, handling, looks and performance, Sierras are nevertheless reliable, durable and fairly refined.
The 1.8 LX is perhaps the best package available and severe oversupply ensures low residual values.
No one with cash and no part-exchange should consider buying used Sierras from franchised dealers, who invariably ask unrealistic prices.
The private columns are thick with them, but buyers should look out for complete service histories as many are clocked.
Darren's car was reasonably priced when bought in July 1991 and evidently in clean and original condition.
Although he has added 40,000 to its mileage, this will not deter potential buyers if the condition has remained good and £1750 should be easy to get.
Where the ghosts of racing roam
Cars no longer race at Brooklands, but memories of its glory days in the '20s and '30s live on, says Mike McCarthy
Restored Brooklands clubhouse today; before World War II, race days pulled big crowds (inset)
DURING THE INTER-WAR years, Brooklands was British motor racing.
Until late in the '30s when Donington and Crystal Palace appeared, there was simply no other circuit of any significance whatsoever.
So dominant was the Weybridge bowl that it was later accused of stifling the development of racing car design in the UK.
It was not just a circuit, though.
It was also the home of the Brooklands Automobile Racing Club whose motto, ‘The right crowd and no crowding’, neatly summed up its attitude — not for nothing has it been called the Ascot of the motor racing world.
It was also the cradle of the nation's aircraft industry, starting with A V Roe's historic flight in 1908.
Jack Barclay's Bentley (31) in 1929 ‘right crowd’
The war, of course, changed everything.
Vickers Aircraft was based there, and  Brooklands expanded dramatically.
The Club House became Sir Barnes Wallis's office, and part of the banking was removed to extend the runway, ending Brooklands' use as a circuit forever.
It must be said, too, that by 1945 Brooklands-type racing — flat out on bankings — was old hat.
Riley Imp, MG PA, period memorabilia on display
Then the aircraft industry declined and Vickers moved elsewhere.
Industrial estates sprang up, particularly along the west and south of the circuit — in recent years Panther and AC have found their homes there.
But there was a large section in the north-east corner that survived.
It was called ‘The 40-acre site’ and it included ‘The Club House, the Members’Hill, various ‘sheds’— workshops — like those of Malcolm Campbell and Dunlop, and part of the banking.
In 1967 the Brooklands Society was formed to preserve as much of the area as possible.
The track's existence came under threat — there was talk of it becoming a gravel pit and it was, after all, a prime industrial area — but in 1982 tobacco giant Gallagher purchased the site and handed the important sections over to the Brooklands Museum Trust, erecting its new headquarters building where it would create least damage.
500-mile racers pound Brooklands banking in ‘33
The trust, a registered charity, was formed to overlook the remaining 30 acres of the site and to restore or refurbish wherever possible.
More than 25 historic buildings and features are gradually being returned to their original condition to house the museum's collection of more than 30 aircraft, cars and motorcycles with Brooklands connections.
A promised gift from the Automobile Club de l'Ouest, organiser of the Le Mans 24-hour race, was a flying Tiger Moth aircraft (Brooklands and the Le Mans Museum were recently twinned).
One of the first buildings to receive attention was the Edwardian Club House.
Fully restored rooms include the office of the Clerk of the Course, a '30s billiard room and the all-pink Barbara Cartland Room, which has to be seen to be believed…
The Barbara Cartland room, resplendent in pink
A number of the cars are, at the moment, in storage awaiting the completion of the Malcolm Campbell Shed in which they will be fully displayed.
Interestingly, the original quarry tiles, in what was Campbell's showroom were discovered under wartime screeding and are in excellent condition.
This section should be finished, hopefully, by Easter next year and will include a special display on Bentley and the aristocratic ‘Bentley Boys’ racing team.
Among cars currently on display is the late Hugh Hunter's Siddeley, nicknamed Daisy (he left £20,000 to the museum which is being used to refurbish the Campbell Shed), and the Duesenberg which belongs to Denis Jenkinson (‘Jenks’ of Motor Sport fame).
At the moment, one of the most fascinating sections of the museum is the hanger, where a Wellington bomber is being restored, and it you think rebuilding an old car can be difficult, you ain't seen nothin' yet!
The Wellington was, of course, designed by Barnes Wallis using his geodetic construction principles and was one of the aircraft built at Brooklands during the war.
This example was fished out of Loch Ness.
The restoration is taking place in public, so you can actually see the volunteer restorers, some of them ex-Vickers employees, in action.
There is a successor to the BARC, too.
Called simply the Brooklands Club, it aims to follow the old motto about the ‘right crowd’, and offers a full programme of social events plus entry to the members' lounge and bar.
It's not cheap to join — £350 per member per year, and up to £500 plus VAT for corporate membership — but it is exclusive.
One of the newest members is a Mr Nigel Mansell.
Historic aircraft also on show at Weybridge centre
Duesenberg loaned by ‘Jenks’ of Motor Sport
In order to survive, the museum has been commercialised — in the best possible taste, of course.
There are conference rooms, restaurants, tea rooms and you can even hire the Sultan of Oman's VC10 for small, intimate receptions…
Recent customers include Rolls-Royce, Renault, Rover and Mitsubishi.
There's also a museum shop stocked with souvenirs and Brooklands memorabilia.
The museum is open from 10am to 4pm on Saturdays and Sundays, but with guided, prebooked tours from Tuesday to Thursday.
The entry fee is £3.50 for adults, £1.50 for children, and there's plenty of free parking.
Brooklands is also proving a popular venue for owners' club meetings of all descriptions.
More details of these and other special events.
A week in the life of Bentley Brooklands
Bob Murray finds out how well a big green luxury saloon stands up to the strain of chauffeuring a discerning family of four around France
FRIDAY
The Bentley arrives today!
No, it's not often we can say that.
And when we do, it pressages a lot of mixed emotions.
to hell with all of them.
Better to think of it as a big, V8-powered luxury automatic saloon of unique character and style that, at £91,500, costs about what a Mercedes dealer will take off you for a V12 Mercedes S-class with a few extra bits.
That's it: Britain's answer to the S-class.
No, on second thoughts, perhaps not.
I'll just drive it for week and see if I like it.
What could be simpler?
FRIDAY NIGHT
I like it!
It's fantastic .
After dropping off Rolls-Royce's chauffeur at the station I fill her up and cruise home down the M3, pile in the family and take for Sealink at Southampton.
The boot is big, the kids can see out of the windows and the heat/vent/demisting is brilliant, as are the sound system and cruise control.
And the detailing in the cabin — the mirrors, lights and little chrome bits — are exquisite.
The family says the seats are lovely and comfy, I say the driving position is good and commanding and the light, quick steering and instant V8 torque make for an effortless drive.
We are all happy.
The Brooklands is Rolls-Royce/Bentley's ‘entry model’, replacing both the Mulsanne and the Bentley 8 and aimed at enticing first-time owners into the Crewe fold.
On specification, think of it as a Turbo R without the turbo: a firmer, sportier saloon for people who do their own driving.
And on price, think of it as a car that costs only twice that of conventional luxury cars instead of three times the level of BMW/Jaguar/Lexus that RR charges for it more potent models.
So it's still in rarefied air, the Mercedes V12 S-class being the only saloon to come close.
Since 205 of those have been sold in the UK so far this year, the Brooklands is no shot in the dark.
Potential buyers are few but real enough.
Whether they like what RR is offering them is another matter.
They certainly won't be surprised by it, for the Brooklands is a logical mixture of all that's best in the cars from Crewe: you can take for granted the leather, walnut, chrome and Wilton carpeting, and also the mighty 6.75-litre V8, four-speed automatic transmission and familiar four-door body.
The gear selector is on the centre console (which you can't take for granted, even today), while the automatic ride control is also borrowed from other models.
The standard equipment list extends to electric everything, anti-lock brakes and a CD player, while the chrome bonnet strip is gone and in come new alloy wheels, a body-coloured radiator surround and a new front airdam with integral foglights.
Bentley remains aloof and elegant in Paris mayhem
SATURDAY
Cherbourg, 7am.
Despite Sealink's best efforts, I can't wait to escape our tiny cabin for the Bentley, whose interior I reckon has about the same amount of room but is more expensively trimmed.
You don't climb aboard a Rolls or Bentley today expecting state-of-the-art answers.
Nobody is claiming that the Brooklands offers the last word in performance, fuel economy, space efficiency, silence or ergonomic excellence.
What you do expect is a car removed from all others in so many ways that to judge by normal criteria is to tell only half the story.
As saloons go, this might not be the most accomplished around but it is the most different, especially on the inside.
And the great thing is that it is such a tangible difference: in the Bentley you are faced with so much quality and classical good taste that it is relatively easy to see where your money has gone.
You can smell it, touch it, see it and feel it.
Other cars that try hard to embrace traditional concepts of luxury use leather and wood as add-on decoration; the Bentley uses them as raw materials.
It is a powerful difference.
Long cruise to Versailles
Even without turbo, V8 is responsive and effortless
We were to drive to Paris the long way, via cups of steaming chocolat on the quayside in Honfleur and a saucisson and baguette picnic on the back seat outside the Palace of Versailles: some motorway, some back roads, some Routes Nationales and then the Peripherique and Paris.
Real owners might do the same thing but perhaps end up in a Relais & Chateaux hotel rather than the Place d'Italie.
No other cabin uses leather/wood to such good effect
A more modern Bentley for first-time owners
I drove slowly and unambitiously and the Brooklands responding with smoothness and quiet to rival the best, all the time asking so little of the driver that it was positively soporific.
In case it hasn't been said before, I shall say it now: a Bentley is one of the least demanding cars to drive.
It is especially easy to see out of and manoeuvre in tight spots, which is why, apart fro anything else, you see so many of them being driven so aggressively in heavy traffic.
We were not in aggressive mood: at 50–60mph we wafted through the countryside, while the technique on the Paris ring road was a firm but polite standing of one's ground.
Real little England stuff.
The Parisians, in that way of theirs, just turned the cheek and bore down on us anyway.
I had the air horns primed and ready just in case one got too near.
Gripes?
I guess a few more came to light.
The wiper switch on the dash is starting to annoy me, as is the headlight flasher which refuses to flash with dipped beam on.
And I wish with this high seating position that the rear view mirror wasn't so directly in my line of sight.
MONDAY
Yep, still enjoying it.
The family still likes it.
The kids have behaved.
We haven't taken one wrong turn or had one row since getting in.
Is it my imagination or does the tranquil state of mind the car encourages contribute to these things?
I wouldn't mind an adjustable steering column, though, and some more front legroom.
We got 91 litres of unleaded in the tank today, which at French prices doesn't encourage a tranquil response.
Our gentle driving had resulted in 15.6mpg — about what I was expecting — but also a maximum touring range of 300 miles, which I can imagine some owners quibbling with.
Detailing is first-class
It is, without doubt, a heavy-duty fuel consumption, but then ‘heavy duty’ sums up so much of the car.
The thickness of the carpet, the stitching in the Connolly, the solidity of the walnut, the feeling of deep-down integrity — and the foot-operated parking brake and the detent mechanism on the doors.
Both are built to last, for sure, but it's engineering that seems more appropriate to BR rolling stock than a luxury car.
I wonder: is there something  wrong with the electric seat motors or should they sound like they have sand in them?
Brooklands is an impossible car not to enjoy — a unique motoring experience
WEDNESDAY
Aargh!
Brained myself on the boot lid again.
It should open higher.
Never fear, it is a huge and easily accessible boot and has swallowed all a family of four needs.
Enough space even to make a stop at a Le Havre supermarché worthwhile.
But first we are faced with the prospect of a decently brisk run there, and in horribly wet and miserable conditions.
RR still keeps mum about its power outputs and on performance will only say the Brooklands will do ‘in excess of 125mph’ and 0–60mph in ‘less than 10secs’.
Most of the time with this car it simply isn't important: in town and at up to 50mph, performance is sufficient, not least because it is so responsive, so effortless.
Both are adjectives difficult to apply to brisk cross-country motoring.
The auto gearbox refuses to take the revcounter needle anywhere near the red line (and that's set only at 4500rpm), which means the chances of kicking down into a lower gear are limited, making A-road overtaking manoeuvres more ponderous than they should be and knocking a substantial hole in the cruising speed when you meet a hill.
At its most intrusive the V8 roars valiantly under full throttle, but there is no escaping the fact that for demanding driving this engine occasionally labours under the strain.
Whether or not the rough parch at 85mph (or 2500rpm on the revcounter) was peculiar to the test car or not I cannot say; if it is common to all, it is very disappointing, and the fact that you can drive through it is of little compensation since at higher speeds there is enough wind roar for two cars.
All this is rather a shame, given the progress made in other areas.
And these days the Bentley is a respectable cross-country performer; no sports car, certainly, but a car with well-judged standards of suspension control, braking, steering and roadholding.
FRIDAY
The quick run back gives 10.9mpg (for a range of just 220 miles) and the average for the 715-mile week is 13.7mpg.
And now the Rolls-Royce chauffeur is here to take the car back to Crewe.
A sad day.
I read the Bentley brochure last night and I reckon it is tempting fate to begin by mentioning one of W O Bentley's habits.
‘When asked why he chose to test his cars by driving them nonstop, the 600 miles to Scotland and back, W O explained that it was illuminating to drive a car when tired: all its faults would scream out at you.’
Picnic on the back seat
He wasn't wrong.
On a miles per scream basis, there are lots of competent cars at a fraction of the Bentley's price that could go that distance before getting too strident, and a Mercedes S-class would still only be whispering the odd complaint after 1200 miles.
But as a sales pitch for a new Bentley Brooklands?
Despite my criticisms, in our week together I drove the Brooklands long distances in awful conditions on lots of unknown roads when pretty knackered and I must say it didn't shout at me once.
Nor did I shout at it.
I, and the rest of the family, laid back, thought of England and enjoyed it, because it is an impossible car not to enjoy
Perhaps that's what W O meant: it's not that there are no faults, just that from behind the wheel of a Bentley you don't give a damn.
Like it?
I loved it.
THE 1992 AUTOCAR & Motor AWARDS
Man of the Year  Design  Design Concept  Technical Innovation Safety Achievement  Environmental Contribution  Marketing Initiative  Manufacturer in Motorsport  Specialist Manufacturer Mid-size Manufacturer  Large Manufacturer
Welcome to the 1992 Autocar and & Motor Awards, our unique annual prizegiving recognising the greatest industry achievements and achievers of the year.
Over the following pages we profile the winners, but first let us remember the past year with a whirlwind tour…
AUTUMN 1991 AND THE GREEN shoots of recovery were starting to show.
Or so we were told.
At the 1991 Autocar & Motor Awards the optimism was rather more guarded, as Lord King spelled out a message to the motor industry to take pride in engineering.
And there was no shortage of new engineering.
THE HOPEFULS came up with new supercars: famous names from the past — BRM, Iso Allard, Monteverdi — and new names for the future: Yamaha and,; most of all, McLaren, eligible for awards next year when production of the F1 starts.
McLaren F1 supercar unveiled
THE DESIGN STUDIOS came up with fantastic concept cars: Audi Avus, Daihatsu XO21, IAD Magia and a car with nostrils called the Focus.
AND THE INNOVATORS dreamed up ever more innovations: from an electric sports car from Bertone to Renault's incredible shrinking Zoom city car.
IT WAS THE YEAR that electric cars were big but two-strokes were bigger as Jaguar told us of a supercharged two-stroke future and Pininfarina let us drive the Ethos.
Ford went one better and put 60 two-stroke Fiestas on the roads.
BUT BEFORE ALL THAT, people had to buy the cars already in showrooms.
And they weren't.
The industry tried all sorts of things to get people interested: Rover put a traditional grille on its 800, Ford introduced a new way to buy a car called Options and Nissan even tried selling its cars itself for a change.
Fond memories of Denny Hulme
Traditional grille for Rover 800
IT WAS THE YEAR Lotus killed off the new Elan and the year the MGB and Morris Oxford made a comeback.
AND ALL THAT made it a busy year for Autocar & Motor .
We did 0–60mph in 5secs in the Rocket…drove a Volvo we loved…lived with a Ferrari for a month…built our own Caterham 7…took a Lamborghini Diablo down a German autobahn at 201.4mph — and test the new Ford Escort, and liked it.
WE SAID HAPPY 40th birthday to Lord Montagu's National Motor Museum.
And hello to some new boys: Nick Scheele at Jaguar, Kevin Gaskell at Porsche, Luca di Montezemolo at Ferrari and a new world champion by the name of Nigel Mansell.
And we said goodbye to GM's Bob Eaton, Arno Bohn at Porsche and a new world champion by the name of Nigel Mansell.
Hello, goodbye, world champ
THERE WERE GOODBYES TOO for Nelson Piquet, who retired hurt after a terrible Indy smash…and, to everyone's sorrow, to Denny Hulme, who died at the wheel of racing car in October.
IF THE INDUSTRY was under pressure, the poor old motorist wasn't getting off lightly.
When his or her car wasn't being illegally clamped, stolen, broken into, photographed by a Gatso camera or failing the MoT emissions test, it was costing an arm and a leg to insure.
A new Road Traffic Act was thrown in, too.
DIESEL SALES SOARED — our diesel challenge showed that some oil burners today are better all rounders than petrol equivalents — and hot hatch sales stalled.
UK learned what Gatso meant
CARS WERE GETTING SAFER, heavier, slower and, to quote Nissan with the Micra, friendlier.
And more of them were made in Britain: the Nissan Micra, Toyota Carina E and Honda Accord, soon to metamorphise into a new Rover.
CARS WERE GETTING SMALLER, and two of the best were the Fiat Cinquecento and the Renault Twingo.
NAMES WERE BIG IN 1992 and we had an exclusive on one of the most important when we spilled the beans on the Mondeo, new name for next year's Ford Sierra replacement.
Ford Mondeo broke cover
THE GREEN SHOOTS never did appear.
1992 will go down as one of the hardest, darkest years for car buyers and the car industry in decades.
But also a year in which the good new cars, exciting developments and true innovations kept flowing.
So who did best?
And now, the 1992 Autocar & Motor Awards…
Man of the Year
Presented by Autocar & Motor
Criteria
The industry figure whose achievements have been especially outstanding within his or her operational sphere
The judges said
‘Mr von Kuenheim is without a conventional ego and is happy to allow others to take much of the credit.
But over almost 23 years in charge of BMW he has provided strong direction and real leadership — and never lost sight of BMW's primary reason for being’
Previous recipients
Nobuhiko Kawamoto of Honda, George Simpson of Rover, Prof Dr-Ing Ulrich Seiffert of Volkswagen
Judges
Prof Dr-Ing Ulrich Seiffert, head of research and development, VW; Steve Cropley, director, Haymarket Motoring Publications; Peter Robinson, European editor, Autocar & Motor; Bob Murray, editor in chief, Autocar & Motor
The sponsor
Autocar & Motor
Whatever you know, think, understand or dream about BMW, one man above all others has been responsible for putting those three initials into your consciousness.
He is Eberhard von Kuenheim, undoubted architect of modern-day BMW and all it stands for.
Seeing BMW today you might think its success was preordained, so crystal clear is the company's model development, so single minded its pursuit of those qualities now synonymous with BMW.
It wasn't always so.
When von Kuenheim, engineer turned manager, took over as chairman on 1 January 1970, BMW was still battling to establish a clear model identity after earlier dabbling with everything from V8 limousines to sports cars to bubble cars.
The 1500, then the 2000 and, in 1968, the fantastic, sports car-beating 2002 provided von Kuenheim with the building blocks for the future.
He was not to waster them.
Six cylinder saloons and coupes followed, then the 5-series, the 3-series — how logical it all seems today — the 6-series, the sevens and now the eights.
‘The ultimate driving machine’ the ads said, a claim that was to stand the test of time like few others, establishing principles of BMW motoring as true today as ever.
In 1970 BMW built 161,000 cars and, despite always healthy rivalry, was not in Mercedes' league.
This year BMW will make about 580,000 cars and for the first time outstrip Mercedes.
Each of the 22 years of the von Kuenheim rule BMW has made a profit and, 1974 fuel crisis year aside, has increased production.
BMW's model range is used today as industry code for different market segments, a rile model that car companies everywhere have tried to emulate.
Von Kuenheim, as chief architect of that success, has achieved all this in manner uniquely BMW.
Aside from having the industry's longest serving chairman, BMW today is the one big car company in the world without any cross shareholdings or collaborative links with other companies, fiercely guarding its independence.
‘Who can help us without transferring their problems to us?’ von Kuenheim was quoted as saying in The Economist earlier this year.
Outside BMW this Prussian aristocrat, 64 next month, remains little known.
Inside, though, from his office on the 22nd floor of the famous four-towered BMW HQ, he wields formidable power and commands enormous respect.
He takes an active role in key planning and new model decisions — most recently to start manufacturing a new car in the US — while, say employees, being happy to let others take the credit.
A high profile, in work and certainly in his private life, is not the von Kuenheim way.
In an interview with Autocar & Motor in 1991, we reported: ‘No other major motor industry magnate has moulded a car company more completely.
Modern-day BMW — the company, its cars and its place in society — is his creation.
 Bob Murray 
winner  Eberhard von Kuenheim Chairman of the board of managing directors, BMW AG
Design
Presented by Patrick Motors Group
Criteria
The body design displaying the greatest visual flair while keeping abreast of current aerodynamic and construction standards
The judges said
‘The Renault Twingo is a great package with an innovative interior.
Its originality and pleasing character will make purchasers adopt it as a member of the family.
Above all, it reminds us what small cars should be: fun’
Highly commended
MAZDA RX-7
‘Lean and lithe with uniquely pure curves’
Finalists
CHRYSLER LH
‘A clean and handsome range of cars that challenge the accepted architecture and proportioning for their class’
DODGE VIPER
‘It's just plain exciting.
Although its spirit is retro, the effect is fresh’
FIAT CINQUECENTO
‘A very small car that doesn't feel it; the embodiment of neat, economical design’
FERRARI 456GT
‘Classic Italian elegance that harks back to one of the greatest ever Ferraris, the Daytona’
Previous winners
Vauxhall Calibra, Toyota Sera, BMW-3-series
Judges
Ken Greenley, course leader, Vehicle Design, Royal College of Art, London; Carl Olsen, transportation design chair, Center for Creative Studies, Detroit; Peter Robinson, European editor, Autocar & Motor, David Vivian, associate editor, Autocar & Motor
The sponsor
PATRICK MOTORS GROUP
Patrick Motors' interest in car design goes back to the '30s when the company designed and built its own ‘Patrick Specials’.
Today the group concentrates on retailing quality cars through its network of Midlands outlets
The worst sin you can commit when designing a small car, according to Renault's design director, Patrick Le Quement, is to make it boring.
It's an assertion that needs no lengthy qualification when you look at the Twingo, Renault's hugely characterful and versatile Clio alternative.
Renault's new front-drive, 1.2-litre, one-box baby looks confident in a way that small cars seldom do; it's cute without being jokey, radical without being controversial.
The nub of the Twingo, of course, is that it's small only on the outside — over a foot (300mm) shorter than Renault's ‘regular’ small car, the Clio.
But most of the length is taken up by the cabin and since the Twingo is taller than a Sierra its packaging prowess is, perhaps, easier to appreciate.
Outstanding space efficiency alone, though, isn't the reason the Twingo won this award.
It's the way it combines it with a ‘look’ as striking and individual as any on the road today, both inside and out: from the inverted half-moon headlights to the reprioritised facia with its straight-ahead warning light strip and digital speed, fuel and range display on the centre console; from the impossibly sporting rake of the bonnet and windscreen to the way the rear seat is set on runners to offer the maximum degree of flexibility between legroom and luggage space.
Le Quement claims that all this is only possible by having a single drivetrain and wheel size specification but the limitation works to the car's advantage.
But not our advantage, least not yet: right-hand-drive versions have yet to get the go-ahead.
But there can be no doubting that the Twingo is a statement and there are no compromises.
As one of the judges said, it's a true original.
 David Vivian 
winner  Full of character on the outside, full of space on the inside.
Le Quement's flair evident in the cabin, too  Renault Twingo
Design Concept
Presented by Philips Interactive Media Systems
Criteria
The concept, not necessarily for production, making the most relevant progress through its visual beauty, packaging of mechanicals or occupants, aerodynamics or body engineering
The judges said
‘The Zoom is ecologically correct, cute to behold, and promises to be highly practical both to run and keep.
Its merits as a city commuter/runabout are numerous but its ingenious parkability stands out, as does its excellent interior’
Highly commended
GENERAL MOTORS ULTRALIGHT
‘The technology in GM's Ultralight may be far-off, but it's still rational.
Its two-stroke engine, the materials and structures used in its 635kg construction and its safety systems set targets for engineers and designers alike.
It's especially welcome from North America’
Finalists
PININFARINA ETHOS
‘New thinking not only in design and manufacturing but in industrial co-operation too’
GHIA FOCUS
‘A knock-you-down statement of post-aero organic form’
BERTONE BLITZ
‘Uses its electric motor's low rev/high torque characteristics to make a rocket-sled on wheels’
Previous winners
Ghia Zig/Zag, Ford Contour
Judges
Shotaro Kobayashi, editor, Car Graphic, Japan; Royden Axe, managing director, Design Research Associates; David R Brown, president, Art Centre College of Design, California; Michael Harvey, deputy editor, Autocar & Motor
The sponsor
PHILIPS INTERACTIVE MEDIA SYSTEMS
Philips Innovative CD-1 and Photo CD systems represent a very cost effective method of introducing interactive communications into car dealerships
Choosing a winner in this category this year was more difficult than ever.
All the finalists represent exciting projects, and all employ the highest technology in finding solutions to the real problems that face the car.
That they all do so with big doses of customer appeal is an added bonus.
Renault's Zoom, although less exotic than the others, has in many ways the most to offer.
This tiny car — it's a foot shorter than a Mini — might be the breath of fresh air Europe's choked and choking cities have been looking for.
Strictly a two-seater it can, at the flick of a switch and the hiss of hydraulics, make itself a foot shorter to squeeze sideways into a parking bay.
AT that means three cars in the space of one.
And what's more it's clean.
Battery power, especially in France, means no emissions in urban areas.
Its direct-drive 33hp electric motor gives it a good top speed of 74mph and a range of 90 miles: more than enough, says Renault, for the average commuter's entire week's travel.
The stuff of dreams?
Not if you believe the development engineers at Renault and partners Matra, the same team responsible for the Espace.
It's their intention to have a car as close to Zoom as possible in production by 1995.
How much of the Zoom can be carried over remains to be seen.
The electric/hydraulically powered adjustable wheelbase will stay for certain, and the recycled aluminium structure with its plastic panels is here and now technology.
The bold mood Renault is in at the moment casts a further vote for its critics.
Renault says there is demand across the whole of Europe for 100,000 Zooms a year.
If that's accurate, we can start looking forward now to brighter, less congested and cleaner European cities.
 Michael Harvey 
winner  Renault Zoom Electric-powered two-seater will shorten wheelbase by 300mm at flick of switch to ease parking
Technical Innovation
Presented by Castrol UK Ltd
Criteria
The year's most significant engineering development
The judges said
‘The Orbital two-stroke is the engine of the future and Ford, with its fleet of 60 special Fiestas now running, is doing more to grasp that future than anyone’
Highly commended
BMW, DIESEL ENGINE
‘Economical, refined, clean but also powerful, BMW's diesel is what you would expect of BMW but no less remarkable for that’
Finalists
NISSAN MICRA CVT
‘Computerised control and an electromagnetic powder clutch make for the world's first CVT with anti-lock brakes’
VAUXHALL/OPEL V6 ENGINE
‘Unconventional vee angle makes an unusually compact V6 for front-drive cars’
RANGE ROVER AIR SUSPENSION
‘Electronically controlled gas springs bring benefits both on and off the road’
Previous winners
Honda VTEC, BMW 850i multiplexed electronics, Continental AquaContact tyre
Judges
Dipl-Ing Jorg Bensinger, product development director, GKN, Germany; Professor Jim Randle (former chief engineer Jaguar) Automotive Engineering Centre, University of Birmingham; Professor Ruediger Weber (former senior engineer) at BMW and Porsche), Automotive Institute, University of Hannover; Keith Howard MSc, technical editor, Autocar & Motor
Sponsor
CASTROL UK LTD
Castrol is the most technically innovative manufacturer in the lubricants business, and the leading lubricants specialist
So much has been written in recent years about Ralph Sarich's Orbital two-stroke engine that our award for technical innovation might appear somewhat tardy.
On the other hand, with the first Orbital-engined cars still three years from serial production, it might equally seem premature.
What makes it appropriate right now to recognise the great promise of the Orbital engine is Ford's bold decision to manufacture 60 prototype two-stroke Fiestas and lend some of them to high-mileage users.
Ford, though usually perceived as a cautious company in its approach to technical innovation, is resolutely leading the way with two-strokes.
In the process it is allowing outsiders an unprecedented opportunity to preview a major automotive development — and they like what they are experiencing.
The great benefit of the two-stroke is that, at any given engine speed, it fires twice as frequently as a four-stroke with the same number of cylinders.
In its simplest form, with piston-covered transfer and exhaust ports, it also does away with a four-stroke's valve gear.
Together these features offer considerable potential benefits to efficiency, flexibility, refinement and packaging, but in the past these attributes have been more than offset by traditional two-stroke failings of poor fuel consumption coupled with high emissions.
New-generation two-strokes, epitomised by the Sarich engine, are very different animals.
The Orbital's two-phase (air blast) direct injection fuelling system, which adds a finely atomised fuel charge to the cylinder only after the exhaust port has been covered, eliminates the economy and emissions problems of old while providing a high degree of control over charge stratification.
As well as being powerful and flexible, the Orbital engine is also impressively economical and clean.
The 1.2 litre, three-cylinder, 80bhp unit fitted to the Fiestas achieves 46.3mpg on the urban cycle and, with a two-way catalyst, easily meets the stringent 1993 Californian emissions requirements.
In addition, it saves weight and liberates space above the engine — otherwise occupied by valve gear at the top of the engine — much needed by the car designers.
All told, the ambitious predictions made for the Orbital have been substantially realised, and it is for this reason that the two-stroke Fiesta prototype won the approbation of our judges.
Well done Ralph, and full marks Henry.
 Keith Howard 
winner  Ford Fiesta two-stroke prototype
Safety Achievement
Presented by Continental Tyre and Rubber Group
Criteria
The component, system, whole car or initiative making the greatest contribution to furthering safety in cars
The judges said
‘Honda's fitment of airbags, ahead of its competitors, meets the greatest remaining problem with current seatbelts — that of the driver's face striking the steering wheel even when he or she is correctly restrained’
Highly commended
BENDIX ADDONIX 4.2 BRAKING SYSTEM
‘For bringing inexpensive but effective two-channel electronic anti-lock braking to small cars’
Finalists
FORD ESCORT/ORION
‘A new safety cage and door intrusion beams represent a superfast response in improving the Escort's safety credentials’
AUDI
‘For achieving the highest standards of active safety in its cars while pioneering new passive safety features’
VOLVO
‘For its work on three-point inertia reel seatbelts for all passengers, and extending the Side Impact Protection System to new models’
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORT
‘For the introduction of cameras triggered by cars running red lights at intersections’
Previous winners
Triplex Hotscreen, Volvo built-in child seat, VW Golf Mk III
Judges
John Wall BSc, manager, Vehicle Resource Centre, Transport Research Laboratory (formerly TRRL), Berkshire; Dr Murray Mackay, Professor of Transport Safety, University of Birmingham; Keith Howard MSc, technical editor, Autocar & Motor; James Thomas, road tester
The sponsor
Continental Tyre and Rubber Group
Germany's biggest tyre company and the second largest in Europe, Continental has for more than a century been world leaders in tyre design and technology
Marketing dogma of old had it that car buyers don't want to hear about car safety, preferring not to dwell on the possibility of being killed or injured on the road.
If that were true once, certainly it is true no longer.
Recent years have witnessed a sea change in the fortunes of car safety as a marketable quantity.
Safety technology — both active and passive — is now a significant selling point, and one that promises only to increase in importance.
As a result, we see the large European car manufacturers in particular now incorporating safety features well in advance of the those required by legislation.
Japanese car makers have mostly played an altogether less prominent part in bringing car safety to the forefront of public attention.
All the more remarkable, then, that Honda should this year have upstaged its European class competitors by introducing standard-fit driver's side airbags to no fewer than 13 models of its range, beginning with the £11,750 Civic VEi.
Concentration on seatbelt usage — the single most significant contributor to injury reduction in car accidents — delayed the arrival of the airbag in Europe.
But with the wearing of seatbelts now a legal requirement in many European countries and with adherence rates generally high (much higher than in the US), the airbag is poised to make a significant contribution to lessening the head and chest injuries that even restrained drivers can suffer through impact with the steering wheel.
Although not usually  life-threatening , such injuries can be debilitating or at least disfiguring.
It is no exaggeration to say that tomorrow there will be many drivers who owe their continued good health and looks to the fact that they bought an airbag-equipped Honda today.
 Keith Howard 
winner  Honda Airbag Initiative  Honda is showing the way with driver's side airbags fitted as standard on 13 models of its line-up
Environmental Contribution
sponsored by The Automobile Association
Criteria
The item, system, process or initiative making the greatest contribution to reducing the impact of cars on the environment
The judges said
‘The Volvo ECC hybrid marries new technology and good environmental practice in a family car prototype of immense practical appeal’
Highly commended
VAUXHALL/OPEL TWIN
‘The Twin's novel interchangeable electric/petrol engine modules avoid the hybrid's weight and space penalties and deserves further development’
Finalists
BERTONE BLITZ
‘An electric sports car whose exciting styling, 80mph top speed and 6secs 0–60mph time prove that battery power can be exciting as well as green’
BMW DIESEL
‘BMS's intercooled turbo diesel engine combines economy, performance and refinement in a way never before seen in a diesel’
SAAB
‘For its on-going commitment to environmental awareness, and its new work into turbo systems that balance performance with economy and low emissions’
Previous winners
VW Umwelt engine, Volkswagen Group, PSA group
Judges
Dr Cedric Ashley CBE, PhD, BSc, C Eng, FlMech E; Dr Paul Nieuwenhuis, MA, PhD, research fellow at Centre for Automotive Industry Research, Cardiff Business School; Dr Viktor Williams, manager waste management programmes, Du Pont, Geneva; Julian Rendell, news editor, Autocar & Motor
The sponsor
THE AUTOMOBILE ASSOCIATION
The AA has been helping motorists since 1905.
Now Europe's leading motoring organisation, it offers members an unrivalled range of breakdown services in the UK and throughout the Continent, from the world's largest patrol forces.
Capable of a 109mph top speed, acceleration from standstill to 62mph in 13 secs and seating four adults, Volvo's Environmental Concept Car stacks up like few others in claiming a place on the roads of tomorrow.
Volvo says that over a 125,000-mile life the ECC will have almost half the environmental impact of a conventional petrol-engined car.
The heart of the ECC's environmental friendliness is its unique powerplant.
Drive is by a 96bhp electric motor, which is powered either by nickel/cadmium batteries or by electricity generated on board by its own gas turbine engine.
The gas turbine also keeps the batteries topped up.
Around town, the ECC runs solely on its batteries, giving it a range of about 50 miles and zero emissions.
On longer journeys, the gas turbine cuts in to take the strain off the batteries and to ensure they are charged up ready for when the car next drives into a city.
The ECC, first displayed at the Paris show in early October, is the first truly convincing in-the-metal demonstration of how this ‘hybrid’ engine technology might shape the family car of the future.
Based on a Volvo 850 floorpan, the ECC is a fully drivable prototype.
One of its most significant features is the choice of a gas turbine rather than internal combustion engine.
Because the gas turbine operates at a constant speed of 90,000rpm, it is very efficient so that fuel consumption and emissions are low.
At a constant 56mph, Volvo claims fuel consumption of 54mpg and exhaust emissions up to 25 times better than California's 1993 laws, the world's toughest.
The ECC has also been designed to use environmentally sympathetic materials that can be recycled.
The aluminium body is 12 per cent lighter than if built of steel, which helps keep fuel consumption down.
Parts are designed to be made of single materials only, making separation during recycling much easier.
Recyclable plastics are used to save the world's landfill sites from plastic overload.
The ECC certainly convinced the judges.
‘The ECC looks like a practical, realistic design incorporating features that must be worth pursuing further,’ said one judge.
Another said: ‘Here is the year's most significant attempt to make a low energy consumption/low emissions car that is practical, good looking and feasible.’
Further evidence of Volvo's commitment to the environment is the CFC-free 850 and the use of life-cycle analysis to assess overall environmental impact.
As a result of this work, the paint shop at the Torslanda plant has cut solvent emissions by 85percent while at the Skovde engine plant new technology has allowed dust emissions to be cut in half.
 Julian Rendell 
Good environmental practice meets new technology in ECC
winner  Volvo ECC
Marketing Initiative
Presented by Trio-Kenwood
Criteria
A distinguished initiative in a new or existing market segment, or outstanding promotional activity
The judges said
‘Options shows how innovative and daring Ford can be, especially in difficult times.
The importance of schemes like Options is shown by the fact that so many other car makers have rushed to follow Ford's lead’
Highly commended
SHELL ADVANCED FUEL
Shell's powerful and imaginative promotions for its Advanced Fuel increased forecourt traffic so much that its sales now vie with Esso, previously Britain's biggest petrol retailer’
RENAULT
‘The pan-European campaigns for the R19 and Clio have given Renault a much-needed dose of personality and excitement, contributing strongly to the marque's dramatic sales and image resurgence’
Finalists
PROTON
‘When most other makers seem obsessed with slick, ever more upmarket images, Proton's brash directness is refreshing.
It worked too’
VOLVO
‘Instead of resting on its laurels when most other makers are talking increasingly about safety, Volvo has used the impressive 850 and its evocative launch campaign to broaden its appeal significantly’
Previous winners
Mazda for MX-5, Rover, Toyota for Lexus
Judges
Professor Peter Doyle, Professor of Marketing and Strategic Management, Warwick Business School; Victor Gauntlett, chairman, Proteus Petroleum; Robert Dwek, motor industry correspondent, Marketing; Mel Nichols, editorial director, Haymarket Magazines
Sponsor
TRIO-KENWOOD
The Trio-Kenwood Corporation, a world leader in the home audio, car audio, communications, test and measuring equipment, is driven by high quality, advanced design and sensitivity to market trends
Ford's Options scheme has given tens of thousands of motorists new cars they could not otherwise afford.
And not just Ford buyers: Options instantly touched such a sensitive nerve that other makers rushed to promote similar schemes.
Within a few months of its launch, everything from Mercedes to Metros were available for monthly payments buyers could only dream of before.
This is a marketing initiative that's affected the entire market place, changing forever the way private motorists buy cars.
More than 25 per cent of Fords are already being bought on Options.
In August, this added two per cent to Ford's market share.
Options works by letting buyers finance their use of a car rather than its whole cost.
You negotiate the price of the model you want and pay a deposit either by cash or as a trade-in.
The dealer works out the car's value in two years' time (the MGFV, or Minimum Guaranteed Future Value) and subtracts it from the price, minus your deposit.
The remainder — the depreciation value — is what you will pay for, plus interest on that amount and the MGFV.
The effect is dramatic: on Options, an Escort 1.4i LX five-door worth £10,609 costs 24 payments of £251.27 (at an APR of 13.5 per cent) against £437.97 a month on a typical 23.4 per cent APR bank loan.
After two years, you have three options.
One: choose a new car and sell the old one yourself or through the dealer's Resale Club.
The MGFV is paid back to Ford Credit, but if you've kept the car in good nick and it fetches more than the MGFV then you keep any profit.
Two: keep the car by paying the MGFV to Ford Credit.
Three: return the car knowing that if it's under the MGFV, the dealer takes the loss.
Ford tested Options in 15,000 deals for two years before launching it nationwide, so many of those cars are now coming up for sale.
Ford claims most are selling for enough over the MGFV to pay a deposit on a new Options car now for the same monthly payments.
It that keeps up, buyers are likely to remain very happy.
 Mel Nichols 
winner  Ford Options
Manufacturer in Motorsport
Presented by Xtrac Ltd
Criteria
The car maker or major manufacturer of road-car components making an outstanding and successful contribution to motorsport
The judges said
‘Renault in association with Williams, has demonstrated its ability to achieve the highest level of automotive technology with its crushing superiority in this year's Formula 1 world championship’
Highly commended
VAUXHALL
‘Vauxhall deserves credit for strengthening and sustaining the bedrock of motorsport with its imaginative grass roots programme in single-seaters’
Finalists
Lancia
‘The continued success of the Integrale, winning Lancia its sixth consecutive World Rally Championship constructor's title, is a testament to the team's preparation, organisation and will to win’
PEUGEOT
‘Peugeot set about its intended aims of winning Le Mans and the Sportscar World Championship with great resolve and professionalism’
Previous winners
Mercedes-Benz, Renault
Judges
Stirling Moss OBE; Murray Walker, BBC TV motorsport commentator; Peter Foubister, publisher Autosport; Alan Henry, grand prix editor, Autocar & Motor
The sponsor
XTRAC LTD
Xtrac is now the world leader in the design and manufacture of high performance transmission systems that time and again have helped motorsport teams to achieve the ultimate success.
There was a fear that, having come so close last year, Renault's effort would face away in 1992.
That was what happened in 1984 when Renault's Formula 1 programme fell into disarray the season after it had just been pipped at the final post by the Brabham-BMW team.
Not a bit of it.
When the grand prix season opened in South Africa in March, it was a one-horse race.
Nigel Mansell and Riccardo Patrese simply blitzed the opposition with a devastating one-two result.
The McLaren-Honda partnership, which had dominated F1 racing since 1988, was relegated to the role of also-rans.
The championship was never in doubt as Mansell reeled off victory after victory.
And whenever Honda or Ford threatened to close the gap, the Williams-Renault raised its game.
Without doubt, the technical excellence of the Williams chassis, with its active suspension, semi-automatic transmission and traction control, played a huge part in the partnership's success.
So did the driving skills of Nigel Mansell.
But easily the most impressive aspect of this year's dominance was the sheer consistency and reliability of the car and its engine.
This was Renault's fourth year with Williams and it was abundantly clear that the two companies had created a rarely achieved relationship between chassis builder and engine manufacturer, based on mutual respect and a firm resolve to win.
The fact that Renault managed this with the same V10 engine configuration with which it restarted its F1 programme in 1989, while those around them said a V12 would be needed, is testament to the company's enormous confidence and strength of purpose.
 Shaun Campbell 
winner  Renault
Specialist Manufacturer
Presented by Duckhams Oils
Criteria
The manufacturer producing fewer than 5000 cars a year whose efforts have been most impressive in attaining new or on-going progress
The judges said
‘This was a one-horse race.
TVR has pulled off what should have been impossible.
In a year when many other small car makers were struggling (and some failing), TVR went from strength to strength with a sensational new car and a brand new engine’
Highly commended
FERRARI
‘A good, if not quite vintage, year for Ferrari.
Two new models — the 512TR and the gorgeous and all-new 456GT — created further interest in a model line that endures even in a recession’
Finalists
CATERHAM
‘Rover-engined and JPE versions of the Seven show, again, the Caterham's honing of the concept is bang on target’
THE LIGHT CAR COMPANY
‘For producing the most thrillingly insane method of four-wheel transport in the extraordinary Rocket’
BUGATTI
‘Although beyond most people's wildest dreams, the EB110, and Bugatti's efforts to revive itself, mustn't go unnoticed’
Previous winners
Lotus, Rolls-Royce, Ginetta
Judges
Douglas Clare, industry consultant and former managing director of Seat (UK) Ltd and Ludvigsen Associates; Rob Golding, motor industry analyst, SG Warburg Securities; Mark Hughes, special correspondent, Autocar & Motor; Stephen Sutcliffe, deputy road test editor, Autocar & Motor
The sponsor
DUCKHAMS OILS
Duckhams Oils, like the companies nominated for this award, is a specialist company that manufactures high-performance products to the highest standards
Once the cynics had been silenced and the first customer Griffiths burbled their way out of TVR's Blackpool factory, the rest of the sports car world stopped and stared.
Some in disbelief that a car so beautiful, so fast and so downright delicious could cost as little as £27,000.
Others in a confused and combined state of fear and straight-laced admiration.
Here, suddenly, was a car to lust after, but also a car to strike fear into the hearts of rival companies in an industry that has struggled more than most in 1992.
That wasn't to be all from TVR, though.
Last month it lit the fuse on one of the biggest news stories of the year.
What everyone thought was the unveiling of an exciting new model, the Chimaera, turned out to mask something much bigger and potentially more significant — the birth of a new V8 engine, the first that TVR could truly call its own.
Lighter and more compact that the old Buick-derived Rover V8, the new engine surprised everyone, not just because of its newness but because of its make-up — no four valves per cylinder, not even twin-cam cylinder heads.
Instead, the 4.2 V8 appeared conventional, apart from its size and power.
Small enough to squeeze into a box 22ins square — or the minuscule engine bay of a Formula 3000 racing car, having been designed by TVR's Al Melling primarily as a racing engine — the ‘AJP8’ thumps out 350bhp in road trim and up to 130bhp more as a racer, along with class-beating torque.
It makes its road debut in a revised Griffith in March next year.
And as far as the track is concerned, TVR says it has been ‘overwhelmed’ with interest from F3000 teams.
Meanwhile the pretty S3 has continued to sell in astonishingly high numbers, while the Griffith's rear suspension — the car's only genuine weak link — is said to have been improved and the first Chimaeras are due out soon.
Total production this year will be just short of the 1000 mark.
Next year, with another new model and a new engine, that success deserved to be repeated and built upon.
In an otherwise mixed year for the British sports car, TVR's 1992 will go down as a year of achievement and of huge promise for the future.
 Stephen Sutcliffe 
TVR surprised the world with the exciting new Chimaera and a V8 of its own design for the stunning Griffith
winner  TVR
Mid-size Manufacturer
Presented by Philips Car Systems
Criteria
The maker producing 5000 to 600,000 cars a year whose efforts have been the most impressive in attaining new or maintaining ongoing success
The judges said
‘Rover stands out for the dogged determination with which its faced a world recession, for introducing an ever wider range of quality cars and for the spectacular success of Land Rover’
Highly commended
BMW
‘For the excellence of its product planning, design and engineering.
More simply, for the excellence of its cars ’
Finalists
SUBARU
‘The superb SVX coupe brings hitherto undreamt of credibility to Subaru’
VOLVO
‘For coming out of the dark ages fighting, with good new cars and a bolder vision of the future’
DAIHATSU
‘Fantastic range of small cars and shrewd European links’
KIA
‘Valiant progress with its range of value-for-money cars’
Previous winners
BMW, Audi
Judges
Bill Hayden, former chairman, Jaguar Cars Ltd; Professor Daniel Jones, Cardiff Business School, University of Wales; Stephen Reitman, motor industry analyst, UBS Phillips and Drew Ltd; Andrew Frankel, road test editor, Autocar & Motor
The sponsor
PHILIPS CAR SYSTEMS
Philips Car Systems is a major supplier of in-car entertainment, vehicle security and support systems to European vehicle manufacturers and the aftermarket, and is introducing new technology such as the Carin information/navigation system
Rover's victory here is thanks to its ability to identify what its customers want and then provide it, fast and at the right price and quality.
The result is that the Viking badge today adorns a range of cars that only a few years ago would have been impossible to imagine.
From the cheapest Metro to the new flagship 800 coupe, a Rover comes with a luxurious quality you will search hard to find in any rival.
Rover has been quick to identify and exploit on the visual cues that so distinguish its cars, as witnessed by the successful return of the traditional chrome grille.
But the company has not simply been tinkering with cosmetics without a thought for the cars themselves.
Within the past year we have seen coupe and cabriolet versions of its 200 range, an 800 coupe and, most recently, convertible bodies for the Metro and Mini.
Beneath the skin, Rover was first to put a car on the market with a truly convincing continuously variable transmission.
Also, clever electronic control of the turbo engine in the 200/400 range allows a totally flat torque curve from 2100rpm to 5000rpm and hence exquisite manners as well as class-busting performance in a great value package.
Land Rover has benefited similarly from Rover's clear-sighted policies.
In a year of recession, Land Rover is taking on more staff and increasing production to cope with the worldwide demand.
Its biggest hit, the Discovery, is now available as an automatic, a fact that should enable it to tap further new business.
This year too was important for the Range Rover, with the biggest changes since its unveiling.
Rarely in Rover's history has there been a time when it has done so many things so well as now.
A worthy winner indeed.
 Andrew Frankel 
winner  Rover Group  Impressive number of new cars unveiled includes 200 coupe (above) and Metro cabrio (below)
Large Manufacturer
Presented by GKN plc
Criteria
The manufacturer producing more than 600,000 cars a year whose efforts have been the most impressive in attaining new or maintaining on-going success
The judges said
‘Renault's excellent range of cars and its ability to develop new segments have been rewarded by improved market performance and industrial health.
No longer can it be described as the sick man of the industry’
Highly commended
CHRYSLER
‘For the resurrection of what appeared to be a dying company with the introduction of exciting new cars, such as the Viper and the LH range, and the complete restructuring of is manufacturing and financial base’
Finalists
TOYOTA
‘For continuing to dominate its home market despite difficult trading conditions and its determined challenge to General Motors’ world supremacy’
HYUNDAI
‘
‘For emerging from underneath the Mitsubishi umbrella to produce an ever more modern range of cars at low cost’
Previous winners
Toyota, Nissan, GM Europe
Judges
Professor Garel Rhys, OBE, head of Economics College of Cardiff, University of Wales; Krish Bhaskar, director and chief executive, Motor Industry Research Unit; Dr James Womack, research director, International Motor Vehicle Program, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Shaun Campbell, editor, Autocar & Motor
The sponsor
GKN PLC
GKN is a world leader and foremost design authority for automotive driveline systems and has developed advanced components to improve vehicle traction and reduce exhaust emissions
Other companies might have been prepared to rest on the laurels earned by the Clio and spend 1992 consolidating.
But Renault charged through 1992 as if there was no recession, replacing old models with confident and innovative new ones, making huge strides in quality and productivity and improving its market share as a consequence.
Renault started the year with the launch of its R25-replacing Safrane, a worthy competitor in the executive car class that, while breaking no new ground, demonstrated a clear understanding of the demands of that class.
It finished the year with the launch of the Twingo, arguably the biggest breakthrough in small car design since the Mini.
In between there was a facelifted R19, a fascinating concept car (the Zoom) and, of course, complete domination on the grand prix circuits.
Add that to the Espace, still the standard by which MPVs are judged, the outstanding Clio and the under A610 sports car, and you have a strikingly modern and competitive range of cars, easily Renault's best model line-up since the '60s.
Wherever you looked at the French giant, Renault was making progress in 1992 where other manufacturers were struggling to stand still.
The Twingo showed Renault as its best.
Other car makers will tell you they have similar projects on the drawing board, just waiting for management approval.
Renault's management didn't wait.
It appointed Patrick Le Quement, one of the world's most free-thinking car designers, and gave him the freedom to get on with it.
In a normal year, Renault's achievement would have stood out.
In a year of economic gloom for the car industry, it was a spectacular success.
 Shaun Campbell 
winner  Renault  Safrane (above) and A610 (below) join Clio, R19, Espace, Twingo and Zoom in striking 1992 showing
Driver's diary
Soft on soft-tops
ALLAN MUIR
If you're driving around New England in the autumn a convertible is the obvious choice of car
I don't think the woman in the New York Avis office believed me when I told her that I wanted to hire a convertible.
‘You want a convertible in weather like this?’ she asked incredulously, gazing out the window at the cold (but sunny) October morning.
New Yorkers, it seems, are a bit soft when it comes to roof-down motoring.
‘What's wrong with the weather?’
I asked innocently.
What I wanted to add was: ‘I brave worse weather than this every day back home.
I've driven a Caterham Seven through blizzards and thunderstorms with the hood down, and I'm not even British.’
I had my heart set on a soft-top — preferably a Corvette or a Mustang — and I wasn't going to let a spot of bracing weather stand in my way.
The only problem was that convertibles are a bit hard to come by in New York.
Not one of the big rental companies has a ‘Vette or Mustang available, and the best Avis could do was a Chrysler LeBaron convertible.
‘Great,’ I said.
‘What is it?’
A brochure revealed a smallish drophead that didn't look too dreadful, one with a V6 engine and an electric hood.
‘That'll do nicely,’ I said.
Why did I want a convertible so desperately?
Well, I figured that if I was going to have to stick to 55mph all the way to Boston and back, I might as well make the most of it and see as much of the countryside as possible.
New England, I knew, would be ablaze with colour in autumn, so the drive promised to be a spectacular one.
Having heard all the horror stories about being nicked for speeding in the US, I was pleasantly surprised to find that most of the traffic was travelling at about 70mph, so I set the cruise control at around that speed and tried not to look conspicuous.
The fact that I appeared to be driving the only topless car on the east coast didn't make it any easier.
But there were no unpleasant surprises in store for me, and the 500-mile trip turned out to be the most leisurely and enjoyable drive I have had for ages.
As for the LeBaron, the main thing in its favour was that the roof came off.
Okay, its three-litre V6 engine was reasonably lusty and the lack of buffeting with the hood down was impressive, but the chassis was even less inspiring than I expected.
The suspension was typically soggy yet still failed to cope with the craters that pass for potholes in New York City.
In fact, the LeBaron made my Astra 2.0i CD seem taut and crisp in comparison.
The Astra has been accused of having poor suspension control, but it's nothing compared with the way the LeBaron behaves.
The Astra has now clocked up 17,300 miles and our time together is almost at an end.
For that reason it went in early for its second service — and not before time because it was starting to run roughly.
In addition, the steering had developed an ominous creak at parking speeds and the rear silencer on the exhaust had again come adrift.
Lance Owen of Kingston took care of the service (£174.25) and secured the exhaust, but its only attempt to cure the creak was to adjust the power steering belt, which failed to solve the problem.
So at this stage, the creak remains a mystery.
Topless cars a rare sight of New England in autumn, but LeBaron is a dull cruiser
Astra is nearing 18,000 miles with little trouble