

1800–1850 People and The Origins of the Adult Deaf Community.
The first half of the nineteenth century saw a notable development in deaf history aside from the growth of educational facilities.
It was in this period that the first organised adult meetings began to be held, first in Glasgow then in Edinburgh, London, Manchester and Leeds.
It was also during this age that Scotland provided two notable genre painters in James Howe and Walter Geikie, whilst Thomas Arrowsmith flourished in Liverpool.
Scotland also produced the first ever court case in which a sign language interpreter was used, as well as a remarkable heroine in Charlotte Bain.
Deaf Sport provided a world heavyweight boxing champion in James Burke.
Academically, there was the first ever born deaf person to become a barrister, and the deaf world also produced one of the best-known and famous biblical scholars ever.
The Formation of Missions (later clubs) for the Deaf.
The origin of the present-day adult deaf organisational network was sowed one Sunday evening in 1822 in St. Andrew's Square, Glasgow where John Anderson, former Headmaster of the Glasgow Institution for the deaf who was now teaching privately from his house in St. Andrew's Square, held a prayer meeting for a number of pupils and adults.
When Mr. Anderson left Glasgow in 1824 to go to Liverpool  to take the post of Headmaster at the new institution there, a short time elapsed without any Sunday Meeting until it was revived by a J. Ferguson who was an assistant teacher at the Glasgow Institution.
It took the form of a Sunday afternoon prayer-meeting in a private medical lecture room in North Portland Street during the latter part of 1825.
Mr. Ferguson conducted these meetings regularly until early 1827 when he became an ordained minister of the Church of England and left the city.
The regular number of persons attending these  meetings varied between 15 and 20.
After Mr. Ferguson's departure, there was an interval of many years without any regular meetings.
Only a rare occasional meeting was held, usually conducted by a deaf person.
In 1844, there was now an ever-increasing number of adults who had received education from the Glasgow, and in some cases Edinburgh, Institutions who felt cut off and in need of a regular meeting place for worship and social  contact.
A meeting of deaf adults was called, and they appointed a deaf man called William Ure as their delegate.
He approached Duncan Anderson, then Headmaster of the Glasgow Institution, for assistance to procure premises and to place the Society on a firmer basis.
A hall in the Andersonian University was procured, and meetings were held there for a number of years, with periods spent in Balfour's School, North Portland Street (1848–1850), the Young Men's Christian Association, North Frederick Street (1857–8).
With regard to the latter, it should be noted that many Glasgow deaf church members around that time were very religious and so strongly disapproved of drinking that they formed their own temperance Society, the Glasgow Mutual Improvement Society.
In the 1870s, the Society was established in premises at  Renfield Street where it remained until the splendid new building in West Regent Street was erected through the efforts of William Agnew in 1894.
Meanwhile, in Edinburgh, there were also a number of deaf adults, former pupils of the Edinburgh Institution, who desired a meeting place for prayers and social contact.
A number of them, including Matthew Robert Burns,q.v. , and Walter Geikie q.v. , got together and established the Congregational Church for the Deaf and Dumb, Edinburgh, in June 1830.
The first meeting place was in a small room with only one window in Lady Stair's Close, Lawnmarket.
As the congregation gradually increased between 1831 and 1838, constant moves were made, always into larger premises, and accommodation was obtained in Rose Street, Frederick Street, George Street, Leith Street and at St. Stephen's Church.
It was at the Leith Street premises that the Edinburgh Deaf and Dumb Benevolent Society, the first properly constituted adult deaf organisation in the world, was instituted in 1835.
In 1838 the congregation (and the Society) moved to premises in South Bridge Street where they remained until 1852 when they returned to St. Stephen's Church, this time in the school buildings.
In 1881 the next move was made to 11 York Buildings, where the congregation remained until 1890.
In 1890 the Edinburgh Deaf and Dumb Benevolent Society acquired its present premises at 49 Albany Street, where the Congregational Church was also erected the same year next door.
So while Glasgow can lay claim to having had the earliest adult deaf organisation, Edinburgh's Deaf Society has the longest continuous existence.
In London the situation was very  similar to those of Glasgow and Edinburgh, particularly in that many deaf adults had been educated at the Old Kent Road Asylum where they received religious instruction from two earnest ministers, the Rev. Henry Mason, Rector of Bermondsey, and the Rev. John Townsend.
In any case a number of these old pupils found that neither the church nor the State made any provision for them, and agreed among themselves to meet together for prayer and worship.
The first meeting place was a small room in Fetter Lane in 1840 which became known to some interested people who took a house in Red Lion Square where some destitute deaf men and women were lodged and taught trades.
From these small beginnings, the Association for the Deaf and Dumb (later to become the Royal Association for the Deaf) took its roots.
It reorganised itself in 1854, and took an office in Regent Street, and a year later took the important step of appointing as lay-missioner a Samuel Smith, a teacher at the Yorkshire Institution for the Deaf and Dumb.
Samuel Smith took the view that the spiritual needs of deaf people could only be properly provided for if they had their own church and an ordained minister.
The Committee agreed: Samuel Smith got busy raising funds for the new Church, and studied for Holy Orders.
He was ordained in 1861, and finally in 1870, after much fund raising, the foundation stone of St. Saviour's Church for the Deaf and Dumb was laid by H.R.H.
the Prince of Wales.
St. Saviour's Church was formally opened in 1873 by the Lord Bishop of Carlisle with several members of the Royal Family in the congregation.
The church premises at Oxford Street had to be given up in 1922, and All Saints Church, Paddington, was purchased.
The name, St. Saviour's, however continued with the building of a new church and Institute at Acton in 1925.
The founding of the Manchester and Salford Adult Deaf and Dumb Benevolent Association (now the Manchester Centre for the Deaf) in 1846 is a little obscure as its first reports do not commence until 1873.
However, popular legend has it that Andrew Patterson, then Headmaster at the Manchester Schools for the Deaf at Old Trafford, was perturbed to counter on several occasions a group of ex-pupils gathered around a certain gas-lamp in the city — the gas-lamp being a popular meeting place of local deaf people (this was the subject of a Victorian drama as well.)
Upon learning that these deaf people had no place to go  to, or even to worship, Mr. Patterson held a meeting at which the above Association was formed, and enough money was raised to purchase a plot of land at Grosvenor Street where a social meeting place incorporating a small chapel was built.
This building was opened in 1878 and known as the Manchester Adult Institute for the Deaf and Dumb.
This was the first ever building specifically erected as a social meeting place, as opposed to a church, in this country — or for that matter, anywhere else in the world.
In Leeds, a clergyman, the Rev. Edward Jackson, had found a  similar situation.
Youths who had left the Yorkshire Institution for the Deaf and Dumb at Doncaster roamed the streets at a loose end, causing mischief.
Through his own efforts, he got together a group of people interested in the spiritual care of the blind as well as the deaf and formed the Leeds United Institution for the Blind, the Deaf and the Dumb in 1850 although it was not until 1875 that the foundation stone of their first centre was laid.
This association of societies for the Blind and the Deaf continues to this day in the present building at Centenary House, North Street, Leeds.
Artists in the 1800–1850's
James Howe (1780–1836)
James Howe was Scotland's first — and is arguably its greatest — animal painter.
His drawings and paintings offer a richly detailed, often humorous, view of Scotland in the early  nineteenth -century — of social custom, of transport, of life and town and country.
He was fascinated by horses — so fascinated that he came to be called ‘The Man who Loved to Draw Horses,’ although he could and did draw a wide range of other domestic animals.
James Howe was born on 31st  August 1780 in the village of Skirling in  Peebleshire , the second of four children, all  boys, of his father's second marriage.
William Howe, his father, had been minister of the parish for fifteen years.
James Howe attended the village school in Skirling but left still young and incompletely educated on account of his deafness.
It has been suggested that despite his lack of education, James was considerably influenced by the schoolmaster Robert Davidson who had such neat handwriting that he was often asked to write people's names in their bibles and would do so, adorning them with little drawings of flowers and animals.
James was always making drawings on every piece of paper he could lay hands on — even his father's sermons were not safe.
He would sometimes open his notes in the pulpit when ready to preach and find that they had been decorated with James' latest drawings of animals.
When 14 he was apprenticed to the Edinburgh firm of Norie, who were house painters — hardly an ideal apprenticeship for what he wanted to be.
When this ended, he set himself up first as a portrait painter.
He did paint a number of portraits, but a painting of a piebald pony in the window  of his studio was so lifelike that people started to ask him to paint animals.
Howe's reputation as an animal painter was made when Sir John Sinclair of the Board of Agriculture commissioned him to draw details of various breeds of cattle, and he went on to paint hundreds more pictures, mostly of horses.
After the Battle of Waterloo Howe visited the battlefield and on his return produced a panorama covering many feet of canvas which depicted incidents in the fight.
This was exhibited in various places with great financial success.
However, Howe was turning into an alcoholic owing to his frequenting many alehouses around Edinburgh and this, coupled with his deafness, meant he was preyed upon by unscrupulous acquaintances so that when he died in 1836 at Newhaven, near Edinburgh, he was almost a pauper.
Walter Geikie, R.S.A. (1795–1837)
One of Scotland's most famous artists was the ‘deaf and dumb Geikie,’ as he was commonly known and so quoted in a publication in 1837 called Bibliographical, Antiquarian and Picturesque Tour in the Northern Counties of England and Scotland by Charles Frognall Dibdin.
He was a genre painter in the tradition of Wilkie.
Walter Geikie was born on 9th November 1795 in Edinburgh, the eldest son of Archibald Geikie, a pharmacist by occupation but a philosopher by inclination, and when still only two years old, contracted a ‘brain fever’(probably meningitis) which left him deaf for life.
Archibald Geikie somehow learnt the manual alphabet, and there being no school for the deaf in Edinburgh at that time (Braidwood's Academy had moved to Hackney in 1783), undertook the teaching of his son himself.
He was so successful that Walter was able to read, and write, and he did read many books.
When the new Institution for the Deaf and Dumb was opened in Edinburgh in 1810 with John Braidwood, grandson of Thomas Braidwood, as Principal, Walter Geikie was enrolled  as one of the first students.
He was then fourteen years old, a rather late age at which to start a formal education.
Braidwood, however, found that Geikie was so well educated and so far in advance of the other students that he began to use him more as an assistant teacher rather than as a pupil.
When Braidwood left the Institution in 1812 to go to the United States, Archibald Geikie was asked to assume direction of the school with his son as an assistant teacher, but he would not assume the responsibility, and resumed teaching Walter at home.
Later that year, he was admitted to the Academy run by the Board of Trustees of Edinburgh after proving his skill in competition with other artists.
In the Academy, he was a pupil of John Graham who had been the famous artist David Wilkie's teacher.
(Wilkie had left the Academy only eight years previously, so his reputation there was still high).
Geikie's drawings first appeared in the art markets in 1815 and during his lifetime he turned out an immense number of sketches, many of which were sold after his death when his fame had spread widely.
Geikie developed a talent for paying particular attention to individual traits of feature and form and character that appeared in the men and women he met.
He could retain their features in his mind and produce a lifelike sketch from memory.
He also developed the ability to sketch as he walked with his pad and pencil.
His friend Sir Thomas Lauder of Grange and Fountainhall tells of one humorous incident where Geikie once followed a particularly pompous, pot-bellied and self-assertive porter through the marketplace sketching as he went until the victim got angry and chased him into a house from whose attic window Geikie completed the sketch with some extra touches to show features of indignation to perfect the picture.
He maintained his strong links with the world of the deaf formed during his two years at the Institution by getting together with Matthew Burns,q.v. , and Alexander Blackwood to start Sunday services for the deaf of Edinburgh in June 1830.
Out of these humble beginnings grew the Edinburgh Adult Deaf and Dumb Benevolent Society and the present-day Edinburgh Centre for the Deaf.
He sometimes took his turn to conduct services in sign language, for the Bible was one of his favourite books for reading.
His friend Lauder once attended such a service and was moved to comment that this assembling of the deaf was an affecting spectacle:
‘not for the purpose of repining that they had been deprived of the important blessings of hearing and speech, but to manifest their love and gratitude to God for all those other things He permitted them to enjoy.’
In 1834, Geikie was made a Fellow of the Scottish Academy.
He never married, and had led a very healthy life which caused him to have over-confidence in his constitution and thus neglected to go to a  physician at the onset of a serious illness, until it was too late.
Five days before his death, he took to his bed and soon sank into a coma from which he never recovered and died on 1st August 1837 at the age of 41.
He was buried in Greyfriars Churchyard.
After his death, a volume of his etchings was published in 1841 with comments and a biographical introduction by his friend, Sir.
T. Lauder.
Thus much of his work is preserved in print.
This particular book Etchings Illustrative of Scottish Character and Scenery represents the first appearance of a deaf artist in pictorial literature.
Thomas Arrowsmith (1772– about 1830)
Thomas Arrowsmith was born on Christmas Day in 1772 to a wealthy London merchant in  Westminster .
He was educated at home by his family, particularly by his elder brother John Pauncefort Arrowsmith who later published an account The Art of Instructing the Infant Deaf and  Dumb in 1819.
This education enabled Thomas to attend an ordinary school for hearing children where he learnt to read and write, though not to speak.
In J.P.
Arrowsmith's published account, he advocates the deaf being educated in ordinary schools as opposed to special institutions, citing his brother as an example — this is the first occasion anyone has advocated an integrated educational system for the deaf.
Arrowsmith entered the Royal Academy Schools in 1789, and began to exhibit there from 1792 onwards.
He married an illiterate woman named Elizabeth Carpenter at St. Marylebone on 17th September 1812, but left London afterwards to work in Liverpool around 1822.
A number of his paintings are in the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool.
In 1827 to 1830, he is mentioned by a number of deaf people as living and working in Manchester, where he died sometime in 1830, exact date unknown.
Sign Language In Court
The case of the Crown vs.
Jean Campbell,alias Bruce , which came before the High Court in Glasgow on 17th July 1817 is of considerable interest for two reasons.
One — in the important legal sense — raised the question of whether the untaught deaf and dumb could be held responsible for their crimes.
The second point of considerable interest is that this court case provided the first occasion anywhere in the world where a sign language interpreter was appointed by a court to assist in the questioning of, and providing answers from, a deaf person.
Jean Campbell, in 1817, was an uneducated deaf person without any speech who could only write the initials of her name in reverse order, eg. C.J. She was an unmarried woman who had three children by different men, one of whom at the time of her arrest in April 1817 had been living with her as a common law husband but who had a few days earlier taken off the ring that he had given to her and which she wore on her finger in the fashion of a married woman, and had left home.
The crime for which Jean Campbell was charged was one of wilful murder of her own three-year old child by throwing it over the Old Bridge in Glasgow into the River Clyde where it drowned.
The question raised by the Law Lords on the Circuit who referred it to the High Court was whether despite being deaf and dumb and uneducated, did the defendant know the difference between right and wrong, did she know that a consequence of guilt was punishment, and did she have the power of communicating her thoughts?
The prosecution decided that Jean Campbell knew the difference between right and wrong and the consequence of punishment for any wrongful deed, and that she had the power of communicating her thoughts, albeit by signs, and put her on trial at the next sessions, which took place on 24th September 1817.
In the meantime however, Robert Kinniburgh, the Headmaster of the Edinburgh Institution for the Deaf and Dumb, was engaged for his sign language skills as interpreter for the Court.
At her trial, Jean Campbell pleaded not guilty by signs and gestures interpreted by Robert Kinniburgh, and went on to show that she knew the difference between right and wrong, was indignant at the imputation of having murdered her child, and that she had a notion of what marriage was by signing the ring on her finger and removing it, and going away.
By this means, she therefore gave her version of the events.
Her common-law husband (who was never traced) having left her with the ring from her finger, she went to several alehouses carrying her child and drank 8 glasses of spirits in a fit of depression.
While crossing the Old Bridge, she suddenly wondered if she still had her money in her breast purse.
She rested the child she was carrying on the parapet, the child being asleep, and held it with one hand as she used the other to search at her breast purse for her money.
While she was doing this, the child slipped from her grasp, and fell  into the river where it was drowned.
She was found not guilty.
This important legal ruling that the untaught deaf and dumb could be held responsible for the crimes they committed helped to ensure that another uneducated deaf woman was punished for the infanticide of her child.
Sheffield Murder
In 1828, in a village called Ecclesfield on the road from Leeds to Sheffield, the body of a newly-born child was discovered without its head.
Esther Dyson, a pretty deaf woman aged 23 without any speech, who worked at a thread-mill in Ecclesfield and lived with her brother, who was also deaf without speech, was accused of the murder.
She had been seen carrying something under her apron in the area where the body was found.
Her next door neighbour, a Mrs. Ellen Greaves, gave evidence that she had constantly challenged Esther Dyson in sign language (which she had learnt through daily contact with the deaf brother and sister) over the preceding few months about her being in the family way.
Esther Dyson had consistently denied being pregnant, but two days prior to the discovery of the child, she had appeared very big in the family way, then the next morning, Mrs. Greaves noticed that Esther Dyson was pale, languid, weak and thinner, as if she had delivered a child.
Other witnesses corroborated this evidence, and mentioned that the bedroom where Esther Dyson slept in the house she shared with her brother was splattered with blood.
In her first defence, Esther Dyson admitted by signs she had borne a child, but had pulled its head off when delivering it herself.
This story did not impress the court who took the view that she had used a knife to cut off the head soon after its birth, and eventually she had to admit the truth.
She was found guilty.
Deaf Witnesses and Plaintiffs in Court
Prosecuting uneducated deaf people with no speech, and accepting what they said in their defence in those days was however a different matter altogether from allowing the same people to go into the witness box and testify against other people.
In 1829 in Cork (it must be remembered that Ireland was still part of the United Kingdom then) a sergeant in the 21st Fusiliers was charged with the brutal assault and rape of a deaf girl without speech, Mary Brien, who was uneducated.
Mary Brien was ordered to be sent to the Dublin Institution for the Deaf and Dumb for evaluation and to have her story checked, but the defendant was acquitted because the court ruled that the plaintiff could not utter the oath.
This happened on a number of occasions in the nineteenth century.
Deaf Heavyweight Boxing Champion of the World
James Burke (1809–1845)
The days of the Prize Ring were such a brutal business, fought under rules which enabled men to inflict terrible  injuries on each other, and fights were fought to a finish when a man was downed and had been battered into insensibility.
It might therefore be expected that many contests would provide fatalities, but this was not the case.
All the more tragic therefore that one of the earliest deaths in boxing, and perhaps the most controversial resulted from a fight in which a deaf boxer took part.
James —‘Deaf’ Burke, or the ‘Deaf 'Un’as he was generally known was born in Westminster, London on 8th December 1809, and became orphaned in early childhood.
He thus became a gutter urchin who haunted the London waterfront.
One day, to escape heavy rain he wandered into a tavern called the ‘Spotted Dog’ which was kept by Joe Parrish, a veteran fighter, who became impressed with the young lad — then aged 16 — and began to teach him the science of the ring.
Although he could not read or write, Burke learnt fast, but it was not until he was 18, nearly 19, that Parrish gave him his first fight.
This was  against an Irishman named Ned Murphy.
They fought 50 rounds, only to have the fight stopped because of darkness.
However, Burke's outstanding performance had boxing enthusiasts agog with excitement and wanting more.
After this, Burke went on to win 3 out of 4 fights in less than a year, and in 1828 was matched with William Fitzmaurice at Harpenden which went 106 rounds and lasted 3 hours.
Before his fight with Fitzmaurice took place, Burke achieved fame in entirely different circumstances.
He became a hero when he rescued a number of people from a blazing house fire.
A newspaper described his feat as follows:
‘He (Burke) dashed into the blazing furnace with reckless abandon, making trip after trip until he had rescued many persons.
He carried out a child, then went back and brought out another, and a third time carried a woman to safety.
Again and again, he returned amongst the debris and succeeded in bringing out two more children, one of whom died in his arms.’
Next, he lost to Bill Cousens after 111 rounds, but instead of being discouraged went on to beat all foes in the next ten years.
When Jem Ward, the champion, announced his retirement in 1833, James Burke claimed the title and this angered an Irishman called Simon Byrne who had fought, and lost, to Ward in 1831.
Byrne was not a particularly big man, standing only 5 feet 9 inches and weighing 13 stone, but Deaf Burke was even smaller at 5 feet 8½ inches, and 12 stone 7 lbs, so the Irishman felt he was onto a good thing.
It was a hard, bloody fight lasting 3 hours and 16 minutes (this time still stands as a world record for a championship fight) before Burke knocked out Byrne with a tremendous punch, thus becoming recognised champion.
Byrne was carried away from the ring unconscious and died three days later without coming out of his coma.
The  deaf boxer and all those connected with the fight were arrested and charged with manslaughter.
However, conflicting opinions of several doctors gained their acquittal.
However, the tragedy upset Burke and he became convinced people regarded him as a murderer, so he sailed across to the United States.
He was the first person to bring Prize Ring fighting to America.
He had a fight with a man called Connell, and demolished him in ten minutes.
News spread like wildfire, but it brought Burke unexpected trouble in that a man called Samuel O'Rourke claimed to be a friend of the dead Byrne and challenged Burke to a fight which Burke did not want.
Unable to avoid it, however, he faced O'Rourke in New Orleans where it became apparent that the Irishman had no idea of fighting; Burke was able to hit him at will.
This made the local mob angry.
Knives were drawn, and Burke's life was threatened as he punched O'Rourke into helplessness.
Suddenly the ropes were cut, and the ring was invaded and Burke had to fight for his life.
Somehow, he got hold of a bowie knife, and managed to escape.
Someone grabbed his arm, and led him to a waiting horse on which he galloped away leaving behind his winnings.
From New Orleans, Burke went to New York where he had several fights before returning to England in 1837 to face William ‘Bold Bendigo’ Thompson.
Burke was not in the best of condition and had lost his fighting spirit because of his troubles with Byrne and O'Rourke.
In the 10th round, he was ruled out for a foul, and lost his world championship.
He reclaimed it when Bold Bendigo retired, but lost it again to Mick Ward when the crowd broke into the ring to save Ward from further punishment.
That was on 22nd September 1840 at Lillingstone Level, Oxfordshire.
Burke never fought again, becoming a stage actor advertising his magnificent physique, but excessive drinking, long fasts and many women took their toll and he died penniless of tuberculosis in a lane off Waterloo Road in 1845.
The Stotfield Fishing Disaster
Charlotte Bain (1785–1846)
On Christmas Day in 1806, three boats comprising of the entire fishing fleet of Stotfield, a fishing village near Lossiemouth in Scotland, prepared to put to sea for a day's fishing.
As the 22 men in the three boats had just taken their respective stations, a young girl came running down from the village to the shore in breathless haste.
It was Charlotte Bain, a 21-year-old uneducated deaf girl without speech.
She instantly jumped into the boat in which her father was seated, and seizing him by the breasts of his coat, motioned him to return to the shore.
The father, thinking it was some foolish notion she had taken to have him out of the boat, took no notice of her frantic signs, but she would not let him go, and dragged him with almost superhuman effort out of the boat.
Her father feared for her reason, and left the boat telling to his fellow fishermen he would remain at home that day.
Charlotte then employed every sign that she knew to tell the other fishermen that none of them should put to sea on that day, to no avail.
She then took her father's hat from his head, laid it upside down on the sand, rocked it backwards and forwards a few times, then upset it.
The fishermen understood what she meant, that there could be a capsize if they put to sea, but they laughed at her, thinking she had mental hallucinations and put out to sea — at that time in calm conditions.
They cast their lines not far off-shore, and appeared to take excellent catches of fish.
It was when they decided to return to shore that a terrible storm unleashed itself in the Moray Firth.
The seas swamped their boats, and all three boatcrews perished in the waters, their lifeless bodies being washed ashore the next morning.
Stotfield was not the only village to suffer tragedy this day.
Further up the coast, in Burghead harbour, a boat was upset and three men perished; two boats each with a crew of seven were also lost at Portessie and Avoch, but Stotfield was the only village to lose its entire fishing fleet, and the storm left 17 widows and 47 orphaned children.
When the extraordinary circumstances were known, Dummie Bain, as she was called, passed through the rest of her life as a seer.
Young girls would come to her to have their fortunes read, to see what sort of husbands they would get, the number of children they would have and so forth, all of which circumstance she would signify by movements of her hands and fingers.
With the general spread of schooling becoming available, her occupation as a seer waned and Charlotte used her second sight in later years sparingly.
She died on 5th August 1846, unmarried.
The Fetlar Islander
Before the stories of Helen Keller and Laura Bridgman, two educated deaf and blind ladies in America, became known, deaf and blind people were regarded as a great curiosity.
So in 1818 when a doctor called Herbert was told of a  young man living on the island of Fetlar in the Shetland Islands off the north of Scotland who had been deaf and blind from birth, he hastened to see this object of curiosity for himself.
David Graham Tate was twenty years old when he was seen by Dr. Herbert and the sight appalled him.
The young man was living with his parents and his blind sister in a pitiful hovel, one of the worst on the island.
David was warming himself by a fire in the centre of the hut; he was almost nude and had never worn anything other than a coarse blanket which was slightly tied round him to cover his back.
He could not walk erect, and invariably crouched on his heels with his knees drawn up to his chin, and he existed on meal pottage fed to him by a spoon by his mother.
It is not known when he died but one hopes that he did not have to endure such a miserable existence for many years.
Deaf Barrister John William Lowe (1804–1876)
The law as a profession is regarded as a difficult one for hearing people, and not many manage to become solicitors; still fewer get called before the Bar to become barristers.
For people deprived of hearing, the law is regarded as a forbidden or impossible profession.
All the more remarkable then that in 1829, a born-deaf person with no speech was called to the Bar and became a barrister.
John William Lowe was born in London on 24th September 1804 to a solicitor, William Lowe.
When he was six years old, he became a private pupil of Dr. Joseph Watson, Principal of the Asylum for the Deaf and Dumb Poor.
His father being a man of means, he remained under Dr. Watson's care for twelve years receiving the best of attention because of his undoubted abilities and studious industry.
By the time he left the Old Kent Road school, he had absorbed the classics, learnt French, and was proficient in mathematics and in the sciences which were attainable only by university students.
Although Lowe under Dr. Watson had also learnt enough speech to make himself understood by members of his family, he was to say that his usual method of communicating with his family was by his fingers, and with strangers, by writing.
There is no doubt that Lowe used sign language — during sometime in his career, he must have spent a period or periods in Edinburgh because the Member's List of Edinburgh's Congregational Deaf Church lists a John William Lowe of London as Member no. 125, married to a hearing wife, for the period 1836 to 1838.
As seen earlier in this Chapter, services in this church were conducted by deaf people themselves in sign language.
The phrase ‘married to a hearing wife’ is written in a different hand and must have been entered after 1839 which was the year Lowe married a Francis Charlotte Jellicoe in London.
John Lowe's mental attainments at the age of 18 were so great that his father saw nothing incongruous in advising him to take up the law as a profession.
Through influential friends, he was made a member of the Society of the Middle Temple in 1820, and placed in the office of two eminent solicitors, a Mr. Justice Patterson, and a Sir Nicholas Tindal who later became the Lord Chief Justice of England and Wales.
Lowe was quick to learn the various practices of the law profession, and decided upon conveyancing — transferring property from one person to another by purchase, lease or deed — as that branch of the law where his deafness was less of a handicap, and did so well that in the Michaelmas Term of 1829, he took the prescribed oaths publicly in the Temple Hall and emerged as a Barrister of the Middle Temple — a most unprecedented event which created a sensation in the profession.
Soon afterwards, he commenced practice as a conveyancer, one of his clients being his old teacher, Dr. Watson.
By Frances Jellicoe, he had four children and the three who survived infancy quickly learnt sign language in order to communicate with their father.
In his leisure hours, Lowe was a linguist and by the time he was 34 years old, he could read and write in French (modern and Old Norman), Latin, Greek (ancient and  modern), German, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese , Dutch and Danish.
His chief means of learning a vocabulary was to read a foreign-language translation of the New Testament side by side with the English version.
In his 35th year, he commenced the study of Hebrew and the Psalms became his favourite reading in that language.
Lowe continued his career until 1871 when he fell victim to a pulmonary disease which prevented him from joining the services for the deaf at the new St. Saviour's Church.
He died on 3rd February 1876.
The Biblical Scholar
John Kitto (1804–1854)
Born in Plymouth, Devon, to a poor stonemason, also called John and his wife Elizabeth, John Kitto was a sickly lad who cared for nothing but books.
Between his eighth and twelfth years, he was at four Plymouth schools, and then, not even on a regular basis; he only attended when his grandmother could get together the few pence required to pay his fee.
This was all the education that he had.
At the age of 12, Kitto was taken on by his father to assist him in his trade, and it was shortly afterwards when he was working for his father slating a new roof that he lost his footing in the act of stepping off a ladder and fell thirty-five feet to the ground.
In his book Lost Senses Kitto relates his feelings and impressions when awakening from the coma caused by his fall, and how when he demanded that people around his bed speak to him, someone wrote on a slate, ‘YOU ARE DEAF’.
Kitto never heard sound again.
Being now unfit to work, he was left to spend his time as he pleased, and he devoted himself to reading, selling scraps of old iron and painting  children's books and shop labels to raise the few pence needed to buy the books.
In November 1819 the poverty of Kitto's family finally forced them to send him to the workhouse, where he was set to learn shoe making.
After two years, he was judged to have learnt sufficient skills, and was apprenticed to a Plymouth shoe maker who treated him so harshly and badly that he was re-admitted to the workhouse where he stayed until he was 19 years old.
He was then placed in a situation where he could get as many books to read as he wished.
The position was that as a sub-librarian in Plymouth.
After a year of this, he was then taken on by an Exeter dentist, a Mr. Groves, as a dental  technician .
Mr.Groves had aspirations to become a missionary and was instrumental in getting Kitto a place in the Missionary College in Islington, London where he learnt printing with a view to being of some service in some foreign missionary institution.
In 1827 he was sent to Malta but because of his declining health, he returned to England in 1829.
Shortly afterwards, his former employer Mr. Groves desired a tutor for his children when he went on a missionary tour of the Middle East, and selected Kitto for the position.
This tour of Europe and Asia gave the opportunity for Kitto to acquire the knowledge of customs and scenery which he put to good use on his return to England in 1833 by writing articles in the Penny Magazine under the title, ‘The Deaf Traveller.’
This led Charles Knight, Editor of the Penny Magazine , to suggest to Kitto that he prepare an illustrated bible.
Kitto embraced this cause with such enthusiasm that the Pictorial 
This book established Kitto as a writer, and in the following years, he wrote a number of books — many of them based on the Scripture, including the work which is still regarded as the best of its kind,Cyclopaedia of Biblical Literature .
John Kitto was honoured with the Doctorate of Divinity by the University of Giessen in 1844, and in 1845 was made a fellow of the Society of Antiquaries.
His health, never very good, began to fail in 1851, and in August 1854, he proceeded to Germany to try out the mineral waters there, but died on 25th November 1854 at Cannstadt, near Stuttgart.
He was survived by his wife whom he had married in 1833, and seven children.
1850–1880 The Rise of Oralism, Missions and Sport.
In the period 1850 to 1880, eighteen more schools for the deaf were started, eleven of them in London alone — eight day schools of the London School Board Classes, and three private or charitable schools including one for children of the Jewish faith.
Of the seven other schools outside London, two were also day schools in Hull and in Sheffield.
Of these eighteen schools, only two are still in existence — St. John's, Boston Spa, and the Royal School for the Deaf, Derby.
St. John's, Boston Spa.
Before 1869, there was no Institution in England and Wales (nor for that matter, in Scotland) where deaf children of Roman Catholics could be educated in their own faith, and when a Belgian priest, Monsignore de Haerne, a deputy in the Belgian Senate, learnt of this, he came to Britain for the purpose of establishing one.
He procured a cottage at Handsworth Woodhouse, near Sheffield, provided a teacher and entrusted the running of it to a management committee at his own expense.
Monsignore de Haerne had previously already founded Catholic institutions for the deaf in Belgium, France and Portugal and was later to found one in India.
In 1874 the Bishop of Beverley adopted it as a public  institution and the Bishops of England passed a resolution to recognise St. John's Institution as a Catholic Institution for England and to assist in the cost of its foundation.
In 1875 Boston Spa College was purchased, and this became the nucleus of the present School.
The Royal School for the Deaf, Derby.
It was founded in 1873 by William Robert Roe in a modest house in the Mount Pleasant area of Derby before becoming established at Friargate where it grew into a fine school.
In the 1970s, the school moved into new modem premises on the Ashbourne Road where it has now also developed a Further Education department to cater for this increasing need among deaf students.
The School also possesses the  magnificent Duke's Barn Countryside Centre at Beeley, provided through the generosity of the 11th Duke of Devonshire.
Oral Schools
Of greater significance than the numbers of schools established in 1850 to 1860 is the fact that some of them were founded for the express purpose of teaching deaf children through the Oral System.
The teaching of deaf children by oral methods alone was not new; the earliest teachers of the deaf such as Dr. William Holder and Dr. John Wallis tried it in the 1660s with (as evidence shows) far less success than they wrote about in the publications which earned them fame.
In the eighteenth century, British teachers such as Henry Baker and Thomas Braidwood used oralism as part of a combined system which is nowadays known as Total Communication.
It was Samuel Heinicke who pioneered the pure oral system of teaching the deaf in Germany with the foundation of his school in 1760, a method of teaching which has persisted in that country ever since and which in the nineteenth century came to be known as the ‘German System’.
Its introduction into British schools for the deaf, first by the Rev. Thomas Arnold at Northampton in 1868 then by Mr. William Van Praagh at 11, Fitzroy Square, London in 1872, rapidly spread, especially after 1880, until it came to be both detested and feared by leading deaf people everywhere who saw that it could — and indeed as it did — seriously damage the systems of education that had served so well since the growth of deaf education.
The Rev. Thomas Arnold, founder of the Oral School for the Deaf at Northampton in 1868 after trying out the system with only a limited success with a special class at the Yorkshire Institution where that great advocate of sign language, Charles Baker, was Principal, did probably more than any other person to establish the oral system in Britain with the fine academic record of his school.
The Oral School for the Deaf's fine academic record is not disputed — the school produced the first deaf Fellow of the Geological Society, and the first deaf Ph.D.
as well as a host of other academic successes — but neither Arnold or his  successor, Dixon, ever took more than eight boys a time and most of them carefully selected — few were born deaf.
This is not always appreciated by those who point to this success compared to the systems in use at the larger institutions.
Be that as it may, Arnold's and Van Praagh's schools laid the foundations for over a century of controversy and the beginning of the end of sign-language-dominated educational systems.
The First Unit.
Today, most of our deaf  children are being educated in units attached to ordinary schools, under various names such as‘deaf units’, ‘partially hearing/partially deaf units’, ‘units for the hearing-impaired’.
It is not, however, generally known that the first-ever ‘unit’ was established in 1873, well over a hundred years ago!
At the instigation of the Greenock Deaf and Dumb Christian Society, the authorities in Greenock, Scotland, approved the use of a room in Greenock Academy (opened 1855) for the teaching of the few deaf children in the town.
The first method used was sign language.
However, in 1878, deaf education in Greenock faced a crisis because there was no-one able to continue to teach the children, and one parent was not happy about his child being taught in sign language.
The person that this parent approached for advice was Alexander Graham Bell, the inventor of the telephone.
Bell was a supporter of the oral system, and upon learning of the difficulties faced by the Academy, he took over the teaching of the deaf children in the school for two months until the arrival of a Mr. Jones all the way from the U.S.A. to take over from him.
Bell, therefore, not only saved the deaf class in the school from closure, but also introduced the oral method of teaching and laid the foundations for the present day Garvel Centre for the Deaf (as the unit is called).
It was the experience he gained in Greenock which enabled him to go to the United  States and feature so prominently in American deaf education.
Intermarriages.
One of the issues about which Alexander Graham Bell was so forthright in the States in the 1880's was the subject of intermarriages between deaf persons.
He had noted the recurrence of surnames among deaf people and deduced it was highly probable that a considerable proportion of deaf people in the country belonged to families which had more than one deaf member, and suspected that the reasons for this were hereditary.
He believed that if intermarriages of deaf people continued, there would be a ‘deaf variety’ of the human race.
Twenty-five years earlier, in England, Dr. David Buxton, the Principal of the Liverpool School for the Deaf and Dumb, had published a pamphlet On the Marriage and Intermarriage of the Deaf and Dumb in 1857, in which he produced statistics to back up his belief that while it should not be forbidden for  deaf people to marry, it was highly objectionable that they should intermarry.
That deaf people marry other deaf people was not, as could be supposed at that time, a new phenomenon — it will be recalled from Chapter I that John Dyott married a deaf girl after the Civil War in 1645.
It is probable, however, that this was an exception rather than the rule — most deaf people before the start of deaf education did not marry, and those that did, like Sir John Gawdy, Sir Edward Gostwicke and Alexander Popham, all came from  wealthy families where there was a desire to continue the family line and marriages were made with daughters of families that were of the landed gentry.
There is no record that these mens' wives were deaf.
Since the start of deaf education, however, marriage of deaf people had increased, and out of 63 married males 53 married females in London, 50 males and 50 females were married to each other; in Manchester, out of 22 married males and 18 married females, 14 males and 14 females were married to each other ; in Liverpool, 14 out of 18 married males were married to 14 females — there were no females in Liverpool married to hearing persons.
So in these three cities, a total of 78 males and 78 females had intermarried.
While only 25 males and 7 females were married to hearing persons.
In addition, there were over ten deaf children resulting from deaf intermarriages, and only two or three from a marriage of a deaf person to a hearing person — this being a deaf mother married to a hearing man, and the deaf mother's father was also deaf.
The statistics given of one in seven offspring of deaf parents being deaf themselves, as opposed to one in 135 offspring of deaf-hearing parents being influenced Dr. Buxton to argue against the desire of deaf people to intermarry.
These statistics were probably available to Dr. Alexander Graham Bell when he raised the spectre of a ‘deaf variety of the human race’.
The Growth of Deaf Missions and Associations.
The founding, and the success, of the first five adult organisations for the deaf in Britain at Glasgow, Edinburgh, London (St. Saviours), Manchester and Leeds prompted many deaf people in other parts of the country to seek the same sort of opportunities for themselves.
In the case of the first one to be founded after 1850 — Dundee in 1853 — a deaf person, Alexander Drysdale who was then headmaster of the Dundee School for the Deaf took the lead to establish an adult mission.
This was quickly followed by deaf people in Liverpool (George Healey — 1864), Birmingham (W.A. Griffiths — 1867), Stoke-on-Trent a.
Davis — 1868), Cardiff a.
Rowlands — 1869), Kilmarnock (James Paul — 1874) and Aberdeen (1879).
Many of these deaf men served the needs of their fellow-men for years — in George Healey's case until his death in 1927!
Other missions and adult societies for the deaf were formed by local interested persons, mainly clergymen.
Often, this interest was aroused by the tireless efforts of the Rev.  Samuel Smith of St. Saviour's Church, London, in visiting numerous locations.
This was the case in places such as Leicester, Nottingham, and Southampton.
In London it was found that deaf people in East and South London had difficulty in getting to St. Saviour's Church, so in the same year, 1873, two new branches were opened — one at St. Barnabas Church, Deptford (forerunner of Lewisham Deaf Club) and at West Ham.
Some societies, such as the Bolton and District Society, and
others at Halifax (1860), Sheffield (1861), and Bradford (1864) were offshoots of the original societies at Manchester and Leeds.
The same was true of Greenock (1870) and Paisley (1874) in Scotland (from Glasgow).
In Northern Ireland, the Kinghan Mission was founded in 1857 in Belfast due to the interests of the Rev. Kinghan who was then Headmaster of the Ulster Institution.
The National Deaf and Dumb Society
The rapid growth of adult missions and societies prompted a few determined men led by James Paul to found the National Deaf and Dumb Society in 1879, with James Paul as the first secretary.
Unfortunately, this was short-lived and it folded in 1884 having been torn asunder by internal dissensions, but before its collapse it inaugurated two important undertakings, the Stockton-on-Tees Mission and the Ayrshire Mission to the Deaf and Dumb.
The formation of the National Deaf and Dumb Society, however, laid the ground for the foundation of the British Deaf and Dumb Association eleven years later.
Deaf Sports Clubs
Hitherto, provision of adult deaf organisations had largely been confined to church services and other pastoral services, but in 1871, a most important step was taken with the founding of Glasgow Deaf and Dumb Football Club, the first sports dub for the deaf in this country.
Matches were played against local hearing teams, and after a promising start, the club almost folded in 1879 following a disastrous season but was re-organised, and has since gone from strength to strength, with various changes in name.
The first adult sports clubs to be formed in England were Derby Deaf and Dumb Cricket and Football Club and Manchester Deaf and Dumb Sports Club, both in 1876 (Manchester's first sport was rugby union).
They were followed by the Liverpool Deaf and Dumb Cricket and Football Club (1878), Armstead Deaf and Dumb F.C.
(Dundee) and Doncaster Rovers F.C., both in 1879, although this was not strictly speaking an adult deaf sports club.
Doncaster Rovers Football Club
Now a professional football club playing in the 4th Division of the English football league, it owes its origins to a team formed by the pupils and staff of the Yorkshire Institution for the Deaf and Dumb.
Ceremony to mark 100th Anniversary of Founding of Doncaster Rovers Football Club: Manager Billy Bremner Receives Plaque from School
Freemason
On 20th April 1874, a deaf man with no speech was apprenticed to Solomon Lodge as a Freemason.
He passed Fellow Craft and was raised to the sublime degree of Master Mason in the same month.
This was Alexander Noble of Fraserburgh, Scotland, a   sailmaker by trade who also had two deaf-without-speech sisters.
So far as it is known, Noble has been the only born-deaf person ever to be a Freemason in Britain.
Alexander Strathern (1844–1890)
One of the giants of the fledgling deaf community in the 1870s was Alexander Strathern of Glasgow.
The son of one of the Sheriffs of Glasgow, he lost his hearing at an early age and after first attending an ordinary day school, became one of the private pupils of the Headmaster of the Glasgow Institution.
After a spell as a woodcarver, he became a printer by trade and had his own printing works in Glasgow.
In 1872, the Glasgow Mission for the Deaf was properly reorganised, and Strathern was secretary for them then acted as treasurer for many years until he resigned due to differences with the then committee.
He was married in 1873 to a hearing lady who bore him five children, one of whom died in infancy, and died in December 1890 after a lingering, incurable illness.
Harriet Martineau (1802–1876)
One of the literary giants of the period 1850- 1880 was the authoress, Harriet Martineau — referred to by Charles Dickens in one of his books as ‘the little deaf woman of Norwich’.
Her deafness became evident at the age of 12 while she was attending a school run by a Reverend Perry, when she found that she could not hear very well if she sat too far from the teacher, and by the time she was 16, it had worsened as to become very noticeable and inconvenient to herself.
In the solitude resulting from her deafness, Miss Martineau turned to journalism and literary writing.
She became a  prolific contributor to magazines and newspapers, and began to have books and novels published.
Her reputation was established with the nine-volume Illustrations of Political Economy , and she received a good income from her magazine contributions which enabled her to go to America in 1834.
In America, she showed that her sympathies lay with those who favoured abolition of slavery.
Always a forthright woman, she incurred the wrath of the anti-abolitionists and her life was threatened.
On her return to England in 1837, she published an account of her travels followed by two best-selling novels,Deerbrook and Life in a Sick Room .
Earlier, she had written Letter to the Deaf in which she gave advice to deaf people based on her experiences.
Always a sickly woman, she expected to die in 1855 after a doctor had pronounced a disease of the heart to be fatal and quickly wrote her autobiography.
However, she lingered until June 1876, preserving her mental powers to the last, before dying in Birmingham.
Railway Accident, 1875
The first recorded death of a deaf person in a railway accident occurred in Cardiff in June 1875 when a 60 years old Irish visitor, John Thomas Morris, was struck by a train whilst walking along the tracks.
He had failed to notice the approach of the goods train, which was being pushed backwards, and was hit by the leading wagon after stepping onto the track.
He was run over by at least twelve wagons before the train was brought to an halt.
Taken to hospital, he managed to communicate by writing that he was deaf and dumb, that he lived in Dublin, and that he was  temporarily resident in Cardiff.
He then had his right hand, left foot, and right leg below the knee amputated, but lost consciousness afterwards and died from his injuries.
The Coroner's Court jury at the inquest donated all their fees to the Llandaff School for the Deaf and Dumb.
The 1880s: The Beginning of the Decline
In 1880 Queen Victoria had been on the throne for forty-three years; Gladstone began the second of his four terms as Prime Minister; Great Britain was at the zenith of its powers.
In 1880, the industrial revolution was at its height, and the Forth railway bridge was opened in Scotland.
Unfortunately, in the year 1880, what came to be viewed as the greatest injustice ever to be perpetrated against deaf people occurred in September when the highly-misleading International Congress of Teachers of Deaf-Mutes was convened in Milan, Italy.
The International Congress of Teachers of Deaf-Mutes, Milan: September 6th–11th 1880.
This Congress had its roots planted in Paris in 1878 at the French Universal Exhibition when a hastily-assembled meeting of twenty-seven teachers of the deaf was arranged.
Of this number, twenty-three were French, and the other four came from Belgium, Switzerland, Sweden and Austria.
It was no coincidence that the majority of the French delegates were members of the little-known Le Societe Pereire, which sought to recognise Pereire as the first teacher of the deaf in that country — Pereire being a man who practised teaching by the oral method.
The objective of this association was to promote the adoption of the instruction of deaf children not through the use of sign language or any method that used it as then prevailed in many countries including the U.S.A. and Britain, but through oral methods to the total exclusion of sign language altogether.
The Paris meeting appointed a committee of twelve from those present to make arrangements for a second international conference.
Of these twelve, eleven were from France (and naturally Le Societe Pereire.)
They chose Milan as the venue because of the presence of two schools which for the previous ten years had pursued the Pure Oral System, or the German System as it was more commonly known, and to help to give the Congress credibility, they chose as the President one of the schools' headmasters, while the other school's headmaster was Secretary.
In addition, they appointed four Vice-Presidents and four Vice-Secretaries of whom seven were staunch supporters of the German System.
It is therefore not surprising that once assembled, the Congress exuded a strong oralist flavour.
Out of 164 participants, eighty-seven were Italians and fifty-three were French.
The only truly representative delegation was that of the United States whose five delegates had been chosen earlier that year at a convention in Cincinnati.
The British delegation of eight comprised of two Principals of Oral Schools for the Deaf which had a combined total of less than 25 students!
(Rev. Thomas Arnold and a Miss Hull).
One (A.A. Kinsey) was the Principal of the Ealing College for Training of Oral Teachers of the Deaf.
He was accompanied by his Secretary, Dr. David Buxton, formerly headmaster at the Liverpool Institution for the Deaf and Dumb, who had become a convert to oral methods.
Two others, a Mr. and Mrs. Ackers, were parents of a deaf girl who had been orally-educated by them at home.
They had no experience whatsoever of any deaf school.
Only Richard Elliott, Headmaster of the Asylum for the Deaf and Dumb at Margate, and the Reverend William Stainer, chairman of the London Schools Board Classes for the Deaf, could be said to be representative of the dominant system of education then prevailing in British schools.
Many of the great institutions in Edinburgh, Glasgow, Manchester, Birmingham or Yorkshire — which had in their  employ a considerable number of deaf teachers of the deaf — were not even present.
(In reality, none had even been invited.)
The only deaf person at the Congress was one of the American delegation.
Eight resolutions were put before the Congress, the most crucial being the first two which proposed that since education of deaf children by the proven Oral Method was far superior, the use of sign language in education should no longer be used.
These resolutions were carried by a massive 160 votes to 4 — these four being three Americans along with Richard Elliott.
For reasons of his own, the Rev. Stainer voted for the introduction of the Oral Method.
The consequences arising from the resolutions passed at this unrepresentative international congress had serious repercussions on deaf education, not to mention the status of deaf adults.
The Milan Congress not only severely retarded the development of generations of deaf children for whom the Oral Method was totally inappropriate but also caused the loss of hundreds of teaching jobs held by deaf people throughout the world in schools for the deaf.
Apart from the appointment of Edward Kirk to the post of Principal at Leeds in 1881 it was to be almost 100 years before deaf people once again became acceptable as teachers of deaf children.
Report of the Royal Commission on the Education of the Blind and the Deaf and Dumb.
The Milan Congress gave impetus to those who favoured the Pure Oral method to agitate for the inclusion of education of the deaf in the proposed Royal Commission that was to be formed to look at educational provision for the blind in Britain, on the grounds that the Education Acts of the 1870s had ignored educational provision for the deaf and dumb.
While it was true that previous Education Acts had not looked at deaf education, the real motive was the need to provide a powerful argument to a Royal Commission for the  establishment of the Pure Oral system throughout Britain.
As it turned out the final Report, published in 1889 after almost five years of investigation, did embody a number of recommendations regarding the education of deaf children in future Education Acts, thus setting out for the first time proper legislation with regard to compulsory entry, ages of admission, the length of education, the size of classes, and even that Principals/Headmasters of boarding institutions had to reside on the premises.
However, it also leant heavily on the opinions of people like Alexander Graham Bell who were fervent supporters of the Pure Oral Method, and even Dr. David Buxton who managed to get in a recommendation on his pet subject, that  intermarriage of deaf people should be discouraged (see Chapter 5).
Arguments presented by Dr. E.M.
Gallaudet, a firm believer of the combined system, and by leading deaf people like George Healey of Liverpool, and by experienced teachers or missioners of the deaf in favour of the combined or sign system like Elliott, Welsh, Rhind were all largely dismissed or ignored in the Report's recommendations, which were in essence that the Pure Oral system should be used to educate the deaf and that teachers for the deaf should be properly qualified, experienced in teaching in ordinary schools, and be in possession of all their  faculties .
When the Report was subsequently embodied into an Act of Parliament, many born-deaf people of undoubted ability found themselves debarred from taking up teaching as a profession unless they could first prove they were able to teach in ordinary schools.
The situation still exists to-day in the 1980s but there is a more flexible and liberal attitude and deaf teachers of the deaf are once more gaining teaching appointments.
Day Classes
One significant consequence of the Milan Congress, and also recommended in the Royal Commission's report, was the rapid growth of day classes for deaf children in urban areas  large enough to support such classes.
The trend was started with Hull and Sheffield, as well as in London, but the 1880s saw others established in Leeds, Nottingham, Leicester and in Airdrie in Scotland.
Of these classes, perhaps the most significant was the one established in April 1881 in Leeds with the local missioner Joseph Moreton as the first teacher.
However, Moreton was unable to give sufficient time to the class, and within six months, he was replaced by Edward A. Kirk.
This appointment was unique, and was the only instance of its kind — it was also to be the last for over a century, because Edward A. Kirk was deaf.
Edward A. Kirk (1848–1917)
Born near Doncaster, Edward Kirk lost his hearing through a severe illness when aged 2, and was sent to be educated at the Yorkshire Institution for the Deaf and Dumb where his abilities so impressed the headmaster, the great Charles  Baker, that he was kept on first as a classroom assistant, thence from 1871 as a teacher.
When the pro-oralist John Howard succeeded Charles Baker at Doncaster upon the latter's death, Kirk felt he needed to move and waited for the opportunity to do so.
In truth, he also wanted to get married and could not afford to do so on the salary he was receiving at the Yorkshire Institution — one of the worst paid in the country.
When the vacancy created by the resignation of Joseph Moreton at the newly-created Leeds half-day classes arose, Edward Kirk applied for the position, ignoring the advice of John Howard.
Edward Kirk was to remain as Headmaster at Leeds until his death, and was to see his school grow from a small class of 6 pupils on a half-day basis into a fully-fledged school taking in boarders and day scholars with a roll of over 100 children, with a reputation second to none.
He remains the only deaf person in Britain ever to be appointed headmaster of a deaf school by a local education authority .
The high esteem in which he was held was shown  at his funeral where a tribute to his great accomplishments for deaf education in Leeds was paid by the Director of Education for the district.
More Deaf Clubs
While deaf education was being given a severe blow first by the Milan Congress and then by the Royal Commission, life for adult deaf people continued to improve with the establishment of recreational and spiritual services in Reading (1880); St. Barnabas, London (1882); Bristol Dumfries and Jersey (all 1884); Warrington (1885); Chester (1889) and many others.
All these clubs were opened through the influence of the clergy and philanthropists.
However, two institutes were opened through the efforts of the National Deaf and Dumb Society as well— mainly through James Paul.
The Ayrshire Mission to the Deaf and Dumb was instituted in 1881 at Kilmarnock followed by the Stockton-on-Tees Mission in 1882.
Sport: Cricket and Football
This decade also saw the start of organised inter-club sport activities with the first cricket matches between two deaf institutes taking place in 1882.
In the first match, played at Derby, the visiting team from Sheffield mustered 68 all out, and Derby won by one run.
In the return match, however, Sheffield thrashed Derby by 34 runs to win handsomely.
In 1889, the first ever football competition was organised in Scotland by the newly-formed Scottish Deaf Football Association, and the final was played between Edinburgh and Glasgow in front of about 2000  spectators at Falkirk.
Edinburgh won 3–1.
The 1890s
The 1890s were probably the most remarkable decade in British deaf history — no other decade with the possible exception of the 1980s saw the social status of deaf people held so high in public esteem.
This was especially true in Scotland, and in particular, Glasgow, which may justly claim to be the deaf ‘capital’ during this era.
In this decade, Glasgow held a Grand Bazaar and the first ever exhibition of deaf art; it also built its new deaf centre, had a flourishing soccer team and staged the first soccer international between Scotland and England.
Glasgow also had a weekly deaf column in the Glasgow Evening Times, written by a variety of people.
Through their own efforts, deaf people were in the forefront of Glasgow society.
Despite the reversing trend in deaf education from sign to oral methods, the social standing of deaf people who relied on fingerspelling and sign language was given a tremendous boost by the dignity and bearing of people like William Agnew (who was on ‘fingerspelling terms’ with Queen Victoria), the Docharty and Williamson brothers, James Paul, Alex McGregor and, in England, Sir Arthur Fairbairn, Thomas Davidson, S. Bright Lucas and the Reverend W. Pearce amongst others.
All these people were firm supporters of sign language — William Agnew in particular used to bombard the Glasgow Evening Times and the London Times with letters denouncing the spread of the ‘German Method’ in our schools.
The social standing of deaf people may also have in no small way been aided by the Princess of Wales (later Queen Alexandra) who was stone deaf and who used fingerspelling as well as lipreading to communicate.
The year 1890 was also a very significant year in deaf history for it saw the birth of the British Deaf and Dumb Association.
The British Deaf Association
The National Deaf and Dumb Society, the first ever national organisation for deaf people in Britain, had had a very short-lived existence — a mere 6 years — before it dissolved in internal strife in 1885.
The N.D.D.S. had, however, shown, albeit briefly, how a nationwide organisation for deaf people could be beneficial, and a number of determined people resolved to continue the fight to establish another body.
With strong backing from George Healey of Liverpool, Francis Maginn of Belfast and William Agnew of Glasgow, a convention was held in Leeds, and from this meeting, the British Deaf and Dumb Association was born.
(The word Dumb was dropped from the title in the 1970s.)
The Association proved to be more resilient than the defunct N.D.D.S. although it led a precarious existence for a number of years before becoming established.
New Schools in the 1890s
Two schools which opened their doors to deaf children in the 1890s were the Royal Cross School, Preston, and the Hugh Bell School, Middlesbrough.
The Royal Cross School in Preston was founded by Mary Cross and opened in 1894.
It was one of the three schools which came about as a result of pressure from adult deaf societies.
Derby and Greenock were the others in the 1870s.
The Royal Cross School is due to close due to falling numbers in 1990.
There was almost a tragedy in 1905 when a major fire broke out one night in the early hours of the morning while 44 boys in the boys' dormitories were asleep.
The fire was discovered at 3 a.m. by a master working late, and together with two boys — one of whom climbed a waterspout to get to the juniors' bedroom via the roof and the other operated a hand-pump in dense smoke — managed to raise the alarm.
The Royal Cross School at that time operated on the Pure Oral system, but the boys were all led to safety by using sign language to communicate amongst the glare of the flames and through dense smoke!
The two boys involved were awarded silver medals for bravery, and damage was kept to a minimum through their courageous actions.
The Hugh Bell School in Middlesbrough opened on 7th January 1895 with 7 scholars as a deaf class in a cold, cramped room near the magistrates' courts — who were wont to complain frequently about the noise from the alleyway between the classroom and the courts where the children played.
In winter, the classroom frequently recorded temperatures of between 38 °F and 48 °F; no wonder so many children and staff were frequently absent ill.
The class remained in this room for 5 years before the proper Hugh Bell Schools were opened.
This was a deaf unit attached to a Central High School.
The numbers attending remained very small for a number of years — three children were once expelled because it was found they could hear.
The heating system in the new schools was no better than that in the old classroom; for 8 months in 1919, the boiler was out of commission, and the logbook shows frequent temperatures in the 40s.
From 1895 to 1926, the children — never more than 17 at any one time — were taught largely by one person, a Miss F. Bodily.
The Hugh Bell School dosed on 1948, and the deaf classes were transferred to Homewood in Orchard Road, in enlarged premises ready to receive pupils from the Stockton School for the Deaf which was also to close.
The two schools later relocated to Saltersgill and are now known as the Beverley Schools for the Deaf, Middlesbrough.
A third school which was opened in 1894 was in Birmingham when a day class using oral methods was established.
This grew into what is now Braidwood Schools for the Deaf.
This early class endured a miserable existence in damp, cramped circumstances and when it outgrew these premises, it moved into a building in Gem Street which although much larger was equally gloomy, dark and ugly.
When the old Gem Street school moved out to Perry Common in the suburbs of Birmingham, and was renamed Braidwood, things were much better — the architecture was more modern, and classrooms light and airy.
Elementary Education (Blind and Deaf Children) Act, 1893
The recommendations of the Royal Commission's report of 1889 (Chapter 6) were embodied in a Bill which was presented to Parliament, and needed to be introduced four times before it was finally accepted onto the Statute book.
The main reason for the first three failures to carry the Bill through Parliament was that the then Secretary of State for Education, George Kekewich, objected to the clauses in the Bill whereby it was not compulsory for local authorities to make any provision for the education of deaf children in their area.
Only when the Bill was amended to make it compulsory for local authorities to provide and maintain facilities for deaf children did the Liberal Government of the day allow the Bill to become law.
This was an important provision; the Act of 1893 now gave every deaf child the right to have an education.
Previously, under the Poor Law Act of 1834, a clause empowered boards of guardians to use local rates to pay for deaf (and blind) children's education in asylums.
In both 1845 and 1862 they were encouraged to assist their education by the same means, and the 1870 Act created school boards and the London Schools Board.
The latter did lead to the establishment of classes for deaf children, but because the provision of this education was not compulsory, many local school boards evaded their responsibilities and pleaded poverty.
Conversely, conditions in deaf institutions and asylums were often grim and  unhygienic .
At Boston Spa, for example, there were no adequate washing facilities for 16 years; at Exeter, it was 1887 before the school got hot water facilities; at Old Kent Road, the installation of gas pipes which could have provided better lighting was rejected in 1833 on the  grounds the cost was  exorbitant and that the children could make do with candles.
And so it went on: poor or nonexistent sanitation, overcrowded dormitories, dull and unappetising food, workhouse conditions.
The 1893 Act allowed institutions a Parliamentary grant per pupil, but only if the institution/asylum met the standards set by the periodic visits of Her Majesty's Inspector, so in order to meet these standards and obtain their grants, schools had to improve on the conditions in which the pupils were taught.
While this was a good thing, such improvements were at first only superficial, and it was a long time before everyday living conditions in deaf boarding institutions and day classes were of acceptable standard.
Criticism in the 1893 Act regarding the poor status and qualifications of teachers of the deaf led — in 1895 — to the formation of the National Association of Teachers of the Deaf.
National Association of Teachers of the Deaf, 1895
Prior to the formation of this body, three entirely independent examining bodies, each giving its own certificate to successful students, existed for persons wishing to become teachers of the deaf.
These were (1)‘Association for the Oral Institution of the Deaf and Dumb’ based at Fitzroy Square, London, founded in 1872 (2)‘Society for Training Teachers of the Deaf and for the Diffusion of the German System’, based at the training college at Ealing, founded in 1877 (3)‘College of Teachers of the Deaf and Dumb’, founded in 1885.
The first two training colleges also had schools for deaf children attached to them, and teachers' certificates were awarded to students who taught on the oral system to the exclusion of any other method.
The third, the C.T.D.D., awarded certificates to students using any mode of communication.
Needless to say, the Board of Education did not recognise any of these diplomas until 1909 when all three joined together to produce one diploma, at the insistence of the  N.A.T.D. Even then, the Scottish Department of Education still refused to recognise the diplomas.
In 1918, the C.T.D.D. and N.C.T.D. merged to form the National College of Teachers of the Deaf (N.C.T.D.) which took over examinations for the diploma in the teaching of deaf children.
In 1976, the N.C.T.D. re-formed itself to become the British Association of Teachers of the Deaf (B.A.T.O.D.)
The Mount School for the Blind, Deaf and Dumb, Stoke-on-Trent
While the 1893 Act encouraged local authorities to provide day classes, wherever possible, the five local authorities that encompassed the Potteries area around Stoke-on-Trent decided that it would suit their needs better to combine their resources and establish one residential school.
With the support of the Wedgwood family the Mount School was founded in 1897.
Deaf Clubs in the 1890s
The only new Mission for the deaf that seems to have opened for the first time in the 1890s was that at Oxford, although the deaf people of Bradford almost lost their own when a fire was discovered in the coal cellar under the offices by one of the deaf members who ran to summon the fire brigade from its nearby station.
They arrived within minutes to save the building from being burnt down.
It was in Glasgow, however, that many momentous events were taking place.
Glasgow in the 1890s
For a number of years, it had been obvious that the Glasgow Mission premises in Renfield Street had become inadequate to cater for the social, pastoral and spiritual activities of the deaf citizens of Glasgow, and that a better and bigger building was needed.
The deaf of Glasgow were at that time extremely fortunate  to have in William Agnew a most intelligent and capable man, an artist in his leisure time, who through his hobby had come into contact with Queen Victoria and who enjoyed a friendship with Lord and Lady Blythswood (Glasgow Deaf and Dumb F.C.
in the 1890's were renamed Blythswood Athletic).
William Agnew, although he could not speak and relied entirely on sign language, was a forceful personality and moved about amongst the rich merchants of Glasgow.
He took it upon himself to promote the idea of having a noble building for an Institute in Glasgow, and in this he was ably supported by brothers James and Edwin Docharty, sons of a famous Scottish painter, and a number of other deaf people of exceptional ability.
An added advantage that the deaf people of Glasgow had over any other deaf community in the country was that they had a regular ‘Deaf and Dumb Notes’ column every week in the Glasgow Evening Times , the largest selling Scottish evening paper.
This meant that fund-raising news and any other news about the deaf was in the forefront of everyone's attention.
In a short period of time, they had raised the cost of the building, including contributions from Queen Victoria herself, but now needed money to purchase a prime site in the centre of Glasgow.
In order to raise this sum required (£5000), they organised a Grand Bazaar which was held in St. Andrew's Hall and formally opened by the Duchess of Montrose.
Thanks to the connections made by William Agnew amongst Glasgow's high society, the Bazaar was extremely successful and raised more than enough to purchase a prime site on the corner of West Regent Street and West Campbell Street.
Never a person to let anything grow under his feet, Agnew arranged for ceremonies for every possible occasion; the laying of the foundation stone was greeted with great fanfare and a sense of occasion, and the official opening of the institute was a most elaborate affair in which beautifully designed invitations were sent out to many dignitaries.
This was followed by an exhibition of paintings and works  of art by deaf artists in Britain — so far the only kind ever held.
All artists presently living in Scotland, and many of the better known artists from England like Thomas Davidson, Rupert Dent and William Trood all sent paintings.
Many were sold to raise further funds to furnish the new institute.
Events in Glasgow in the 1890s
This was held at St. Andrew's Hall on the 19th, 20th and 21st of November 1891, and opened by the Duchess of Montrose whose son was ironically soon to become totally deaf.
The Bazaar totally exceeded all expectations, and was a rousing success, raising in excess of £6,000 when the Building Committee had only dared to hope to raise at the most optimistic a sum of £5,000.
The monies raised by this Bazaar enabled the Glasgow deaf people to purchase a very prime and desirable site in the centre of the city.
The Laying of the Foundation Stone
The ceremony of the laying of the foundation stone of the new Institute building was a very elaborate affair, and attracted many civic dignitaries.
In the picture shown above, William Agnew is in the centre, with the Rev. John Henderson, the missioner.
Other deaf people identified in the picture include Edwin Docharty lounging indolently on the left, his brother James L.C. Docharty to the right of the Rev. Henderson, and Alex McGregor, the regular columnist of the deaf column on the Glasgow Evening Times standing behind him.
Opening of the New Deaf Adult Institute
On the next page is an exact copy of the elaborately-designed Invitation that went out to many civic dignitaries and wealthy merchants in Glasgow to commemorate the opening of the new institute.
Also illustrated is the front cover of the programme of the exhibition of paintings and works of art by British deaf artists held in conjunction with the opening.
Football in Scotland — 1890s
In the previous chapter, we saw that the start of organised football in Scotland amongst the deaf commenced in 1889 with the formation of the Scottish Deaf and Dumb Football Association which launched a knock-out cup competition.
For years before that, however, football enthusiasts in Glasgow had long been agitating for an international match against the deaf footballers of England, without success.
The established deaf football clubs in England were based in Midlands and Northern cities and towns where work was hard and money was scarce.
London at this time did not even have any sports teams outside of schools.
At long last in 1891 the secretaries of the Scottish Deaf and Dumb F.A and Leeds Deaf and Dumb F.C.
came to a mutual arrangement to play a match between England and Scotland in Glasgow on the Easter Saturday.
An English team drawn from deaf football clubs in Newcastle, Leeds, Sheffield, Nottingham, Stoke and Manchester, accompanied by hundreds of supporters, made the trip to Glasgow (eleven  hours by train from Manchester), and the match was played in excellent weather conditions at Ibrox Park before about 3,000  spectators and resulted in a 3–3 draw.
In 1895, Leeds Deaf and Dumb F.C.
travelled to Glasgow to take part in the celebrations of the opening of the new institute and came away severely thrashed 6–0.
Events in the North-West
Momentous things were also happening socially in the North-West of England following the highly successful venture by the local society in the opening of the first social club for the deaf in the country in 1878 at Manchester.
Members began to go out into the country on day trips, and the first cricket match between two deaf clubs in the country, which later led to the formation of inter-institute sports activities of billiards, darts, and other sports, took place on 23rd July 1892 at Manchester between Manchester Deaf and Dumb Institute and the Bolton and Bury Institutes.
The match resulted in a win for Manchester who having batted first & scored 72 dismissed Bolton for a mere 14 runs.
Joseph Barnes, the Bolton captain, was the main motivator of this match, and latterly organised events in the North-West for other sports.
Titbits from the Glasgow Evening Times ‘Deaf and Dumb Notes’
A William Churcher of Surrey was sentenced to three months hard labour in 1890 for wilfully driving a horse and cart against a deaf lady, Victoria E. Brown, who had spurned his advances.
The tallest deaf mute in 1890 was a Hugh McIntyre, a Scotsman living in Buenos Aires, Argentina, who was 7 feet 1 inches tall, and the smallest deaf mute was a man named West living on the Isle of Wight who was barely 3 feet tall.
Notable Deaf Persons 1875–1899
The Silver-Gilded and Jewelled Damascus Sword Presented to the Deaf Artist William H.H. Trood by the Sultan of Morocco for Services Rendered
The last quarter of the nineteenth century was a tremendous time in British deaf history, not just because of the events that took place and the deeds that were done, but also because of the men of remarkable ability and calibre who were to be giants amongst deaf, and hearing, people.
It is thanks to these men of ability and vision that the deaf communities in Britain became so well established and  respected , and that the deaf communities were drawn together into a national movement which after a false start exists to this day in the British Deaf Association.
James Paul (1848–1918)
If any one man could lay claim to the title of ‘Father’ of the national British deaf movement as embodied by the British Deaf Association, it was James Paul of Kilmarnock, Scotland.
Born at Cardross, Dumbartonshire, he lost his hearing in infancy through illness and was admitted at the age of 8 into the Glasgow Institution for the Deaf and Dumb where he remained for seven years.
The then headmaster, Duncan Anderson, remarked that James Paul was ‘one of the brightest of a clever band of scholars’.
Upon leaving the Institution, he was apprenticed to a bookbinder but this did not satisfy his ambitions, and he began to take a leading part in the affairs of the deaf.
His forcefulness, intelligence and personality soon established him as a national leader.
As early as 1872, he was proposing the formation of a national body for deaf people, but it took long and persistent efforts on his part before the National Deaf and Dumb Society was founded in 1879.
James Paul saw the National Deaf and Dumb Society as the principal backers of establishing a network of missions for the deaf throughout the country, and the Society did indeed succeed in establishing the Ayrshire Mission to the Deaf at Kilmarnock in 1881, with Paul himself as missioner, and the Stockton-on-Tees Mission in 1882.
Others, however, saw the N.D.D.S. in a different light and role, and soon there was internal strife within the Society which tore it asunder in 1885 after a general meeting had been held in London without Paul's knowledge.
James Paul was terribly hurt by the collapse of the N.D.D.S. and although he helped to establish the British Deaf and Dumb Association in 1890, accepting the position of Treasurer in the first year, he preferred to devote himself to developing the social status and services for the deaf people  of Ayrshire.
Through his efforts a fine property was obtained in Kilmarnock where the headquarters of the Mission became established, and a home for deaf women was founded in Ayr.
Paul married a Jane M'Caig in June 1879, and by her had a son and daughter.
He remained as Missioner to the Ayrshire Mission until his death in 1918.
George Frederick Healey (1843–1927)
George Healey was a remarkable man who devoted his whole adult life to the cause of deaf people, both in Liverpool and nationally first through the N.D.D.S. and thence the B.D.D.A. He was born in Gateacre, Liverpool and lost his hearing at the age of three months as a result of brain fever following a fall from the arms of his nurse, although his deafness was not discovered until he was two years old.
At the age of 8 he was sent to the private school for the deaf at Rugby run by Mr. Bingham, formerly headmaster of the West of England Institution at Exeter.
When this school closed, he was educated privately at home.
After his education, he was apprenticed to his father's coach-building premises, graduating after three years to an office position which he retained until his father retired in 1890.
George Healey, as a young man in the early 1860s, paid a visit to London where he learnt of church services for the deaf conducted by the Revs.
Samuel Smith and Charles Rhind.
Impressed by what he saw, he resolved to do the same for Liverpool.
Through his efforts, the Liverpool Society for the Deaf was formed on 23rd April 1864, with simple services held in the school buildings in Oxford Street.
These, however, could not be held regularly, and it was not until 1874 that regular services were held in St. Mary's Cemetery Chapel, Cambridge Street, but these were still not satisfactory.
What the deaf people of Liverpool needed was their own building, so in 1876, Healey started a building fund for a new institute.
Contributions were slow in coming, and it was not until 1887 that the new institute was opened by H.R.H.
Princess Louise on 16th May.
From its inception in April 1864, George Healey was Honorary Secretary of the Liverpool Society for over 50 years, and still found the energy to back James Paul in his efforts to establish a national society.
Whereas James Paul was deeply wounded by the failure of the N.D.D.S., Healey was made of sterner stuff.
Indeed, he was extremely furious and led the fight to establish a new body and was present at the first meeting of the British Deaf and Dumb Association in Leeds in 1890.
He was later elected honorary treasurer — a position he was to retain for an incredible quarter of a century, earning himself the title of ‘Grand Old Man’.
He was active in deaf work right up to his death in 1927.
Francis Maginn (1862–1917)
Francis Maginn was born in Johnsgrove, Co.
Cork, Ireland, the son of the Rector and Rural Dean of Castletown Roche, and lost his hearing through scarlet fever at the age of five.
At the age of 9, he was sent to the London Institution where he excelled himself so much that when the school's Margate branch was opened in 1875, the headmaster, Dr. Elliott, appointed him one of the first pupil-teachers, promoting him three years later to a junior teachership.
In 1883, Maginn quitted teaching and spent a year studying at home before going to Gallaudet College, Washington, U.S.A. (the first British deaf student to do so) in 1884.
However, the death of his father in 1887 intervened and Maginn returned home before he could complete his course.
It so happened that the Missions to the Adult Deaf and Dumb of Ireland were seeking a missionary, and Maginn applied for the position.
It was largely due to his powers as an organiser that the Belfast mission achieved the success that it did.
Maginn was also a firm believer in the national deaf movement, and was one of the first vice-presidents of the B.D.D.A.
Intervening in a dispute between two deaf people.
Francis Maginn was stuck a severe blow on his chest, from which he never fully recovered and this ultimately led to his early death in 1917.
Joseph Hepworth (1865–1921)
Born in Wakefield, Yorkshire, he lost hearing at the age of 8 but to his death retained his speech.
He was educated privately at home, and never knew there were other deaf people in the world until he came across the manual alphabet in one of the publications he was reading, and out of curiosity mastered it.
He needed this knowledge on the day a deaf house-painter called to decorate his house, and asked him in sign language which school he went to (a conversational gambit which remains unchanged to this day.)
From this house-painter, he learnt there were other deaf people, and that there was a society in Leeds, so he went along to see for himself.
He never looked back.
For some years, Hepworth was assistant missioner at Leeds before securing the post as Missioner to the Glamorgan and Monmouth Mission to the Deaf and Dumb at Cardiff in 1896.
However, Joseph Hepworth was better known as the editor of the British Deaf Times, which he was for some years up to his death.
Reverend Richard Aslett Pearce (1854–1928)
Born in Southampton, he was educated as a private pupil at the Brighton Institution for the Deaf and Dumb by the sign and manual system.
(The Rev. Pearce could never talk right up to his death).
On leaving the Institution at the age of 18, he became interested in church work through the influence of a Rev. Mansfield Owen whose cousin was Pearce's boyhood deaf friend.
The Rev. Owen could therefore use sign language, and together with another clergyman, encouraged the young man to seek out as many local deaf people as possible and bring them to church services.
In 1879 Pearce, the Owen cousins, and the Rev. Samuel Smith of St. Saviour's Church for the Deaf in London got together and established the Winchester Diocesan Adult Deaf and Dumb Mission.
This interested the Bishop of Winchester in work amongst the deaf, and soon afterwards Pearce commenced studying for Holy Orders.
He passed the Bishop's examination and was ordained a  Deacon in the Church of England in an interesting ceremony at the Parish Church of Farnham, Surrey, in 1885.
The ordination was conferred upon him by the special approval of the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Richard Aslett Pearce was the first born-deaf man to be ordained in Britain, and he continued to do pastoral work throughout Hampshire until his death in 1928.
As his diocese included the Isle of Wright, The Rev. Pearce would often have occasion to hold signed conversations with Queen Victoria who was acquainted with some deaf people near her favourite retreat at Osborne.
Samuel Bright Lucas (1840–1919)
Born in London, he was educated partly privately and partly at the Tyndall Park School for the Deaf and Dumb, Bristol.
Though he was to achieve some distinction as a watercolour artist, exhibiting at several galleries, he was to become better known through his voluntary work for the Royal Association for the Deaf and Dumb (R.A.D.D.) for which he was honorary secretary for many years.
Although he helped to form the National Deaf and Dumb Society, he was also to be the main reason for its demise.
A  typical Londoner through and through, he believed that the aims of the N.D.D.S. were in conflict with those of the R.A.D.D. Following the demise of the N.D.D.S., he played no part in the formation of the British Deaf and Dumb Association, concentrating instead on improving the services and influence of the R.A.D.D. throughout London and nearby towns.
To this day, the Royal Association for the Deaf (R.A.D.—as it is now known) retains a considerable influence in the affairs of deaf people in London and surrounding counties whilst the B.D.A. has poor support in the region.
In spite of his opposition to the aims and ideals of the N.D.D.S. and the B.D.D.A., S. Bright Lucas did sterling work for the deaf and dumb poor of London and was a considerable influence in the founding of the National Deaf Club of which he was President.
William Agnew (1846–1914)
William Agnew was born deaf in Glasgow, and at an early age was sent to be educated at the Glasgow Institution for the Deaf and Dumb, where he proved to be a remarkable scholar.
Throughout his life, Agnew could not speak and relied entirely on sign language and fingerspelling, but was a highly articulate man — he penned a great number of articles in Scottish and national newspapers giving his views on the introduction of oralism into British schools.
A man of immense dignity and bearing who would converse (in fingerspelling) with royalty and aristocracy on equal terms, he was also a talented amateur artist in his leisure time outside his employment as a writer with the Glasgow law firm of Moncrief, Barr, Paterson and Company.
His artistic fame rested primarily on the series of paintings he did of Queen Victoria and Elizabeth Tuffield, nee Groves —‘The Royal Condescension’ paintings of 1883, 1889 and 1900, ‘True Nobility’(1897) and ‘Post Office, Whippingham I.O.W.’(1899).
No trace exists of any of these five paintings, which are now much sought-after by deaf people.
‘The Royal Condescension’ paintings of 1883 and 1889 are very similar except that the 1883 shows a dog on the hearth and the 1889 picture has a baby on the hearth; the 1900 picture shows Mrs. Tuffield and Queen Victoria differently positioned and no dog or baby on the hearth.
The 1889 picture was exhibited at the Edinburgh Exhibition in 1890 and won an award; it was also specially exhibited to Queen Victoria at Lord and Lady Blythswood's house in Glasgow in 1891, at which time the Queen agreed to become patron of the proposed new Glasgow Institute's building fund.
She also made a handsome donation although she had not been asked for money.
Through William Agnew's painting, and the notice it received, the Building Fund (Agnew's brainchild) got off to a splendid start, and Agnew's energy and his business contacts throughout Glasgow soon saw the Fund grow quickly.
The Grand Bazaar on 19th–21st November 1891 realised over £6,000 — much more than Agnew had hoped for, and by the end of 1892, Agnew had met his target for the Building Fund, and work commenced on the new Institute.
The new building was opened with great fanfare in January 1895, and the grateful deaf members appointed William Agnew a director, a position he retained until his death after a long illness in 1914.
James L.C. Docharty (1868–1928) and Edwin Docharty (1869–1931)
William Agnew's splendid efforts on behalf of the deaf of Glasgow could not have been entirely successful without the support he received from a number of other deaf individuals.
Two such were James and Edwin Docharty, talented artist brothers, sons of Scottish painter James L. Docharty, who were a tremendous help to Agnew in the organisation of the Grand Bazaar, and in providing numerous paintings for sale in aid of the Building Fund.
Both brothers were educated in the Glasgow Institution, and both were employed as artists on the Glasgow Weekly Mail .
Edwin Docharty was later to became missioner for the East Lancashire Deaf and Dumb Society, Blackburn.
Deaf Artists in the 1890s
The 1890s were also a period in which deaf art flourished.
Many deaf people painted in their leisure time, and had their pictures exhibited, like William Agnew, S. Bright Lucas and James L.C. Docharty.
Others painted professionally and relied on the sale of works of art to earn a living — these included Thomas Davidson, William Trood, Rupert Dent and John T. Rennie Reid.
This era was the age of many illustrated newspapers and magazines such as the Graphic and Punch magazine — Trood and Dent sold much of their work to these publications, as did Davidson on occasion.
Thomas Davidson (1842–1910)
Thomas Davidson became deaf at the age of four due to illness and was educated as a private pupil of Dr. Thomas Watson of the Old Kent Road Asylum.
Upon the latter's death, he was educated at a hearing school in Clapham and thence at the Marlborough School of Art.
From the very first, he painted professionally for a living and achieved fame primarily for his paintings of Nelsonian and Roman events.
Most of his paintings were elaborate, detailed, large-scale affairs, some of which found their way to city municipalities in Canada and Australia.
He was a regular attendant at services for the deaf held at St. Saviour's Church, and was on the committee of the Royal Association for the Deaf and Dumb.
He was also one of the first members of the British Deaf Association when that was formed in 1890.
He died on 15th November 1910 whilst living in retirement at Walberswick, Suffolk, and is buried in St. Andrew's Church in the same plot of ground as his hearing wife   Charlotte, and painter son Allan Douglas Davidson (1873–1932).
William Henry Hamilton Trood (1859–1899)
Born in Taunton, Somerset to a wealthy coal merchant, he became deaf at the age of 5 due to illness.
Of his education little is known but it seems likely that his family engaged a private tutor for him — he may have also have been a private fee-paying pupil at the West of England School for the Deaf at Exeter.
He started painting professionally from an early age, and was soon contributing regularly to publications such as Punch, Illustrated London News and the Graphic newspaper.
Many of his paintings were of dogs, generally in humorous and sentimental situations.
He also contributed drawings of political satire, where politicians' faces were imposed on dogs.
William Trood was also an intrepid traveller, and once made a trip to Morocco, where he was presented with a silver-inlaid Damascus sword by the Sultan of Morocco.
He died, unexpectedly, after a short illness aged only 39 whilst staying at the Phoenix Hotel in Taunton.
William Frederick Mitchell (1854–1914)
Fred Mitchell was born deaf without speech at Calshot Castle, Hampshire, in 1845 and was educated at the Old Kent Road Institution in London.
He made his living as a lithographer and by painting pictures of ships for naval officers, and had an arrangement with Griffin's Bookshop in Portsmouth to take orders for his work, and the firm printed two volumes of The Royal Navy in a Series of Illustrations .
The same firm framed and sold a lot of Mitchell's paintings.
Fred Mitchell, although he led a reclusive life at Ryde on the Isle of Wight, nonetheless took an active part in deaf community life.
He was one of the first deaf people to join the British Deaf Association.
He died in Ryde in 1914, but in 1987, Ashford Press printed a book by Conrad Dixon titled Ships of the Victorian Navy .
All 48 colour plates in this book were by Fred Mitchell, but the artist was barely mentioned in the credits.
Many of his paintings are held by the National Maritime Museum, Greenwich.
Adventurers
It may be of interest to readers to detail two stories of born-deaf people who led an adventurous life during this period, for their experiences are unique.
Alexander Ferguson (1841–1889)
Alexander Ferguson was born deaf in Dundee, and was sent to the Edinburgh Institution for the Deaf and Dumb.
Upon leaving the institution, he obtained employment as a mason in Dundee Docks.
What distinguished Alexander Ferguson from the rest of his fellow men was his exceptional ability as a swimmer.
Starting as a boy of 10, he rescued a large number of people from drowning in various parts of Scotland and also in England.
For some of these rescues, he was awarded medals, including one from the Royal Humane Society.
However, some of his more publicised swimming feats were done for cash, and include swims that the majority of exceptional swimmers would baulk at.
For example, he swam across the Firth of Clyde on four occasions, and across the Firth of Forth on one occasion — perhaps his greatest and most dangerous feat was to swim across part of the often stormy Pentland Firth at the top of Scotland from John O'Groats to the island of Stroma.
Alexander Ferguson died in 1889 of pneumonia after making one swim too many.
Murdoch Macleod (1872–1951)
Murdoch Macleod was born in Edinburgh and educated at Donaldson's Hospital after which he was apprenticed to an Edinburgh tailoring firm, but this existence did not meet with his taste for adventure, so at the age of 19 he embarked on a steamer from Southampton to South Africa in 1892.
After working for a while in Capetown and Orange Free State to acquire funds, Macleod bought a wagon and eighteen oxen, and set out with his elder brother to trade with the tribesmen around Kimberley.
Trading was carried out under a barter system — two blankets for a cow, and so on.
While in Matabeleland, Macleod was one of the 634 men  under Jamieson who declared war on the Zulu Chief Lobengula and defeated him.
After a bad attack of malaria, Macleod worked in the Kimberley diamond mines, then took part in the Zulu War against Cetaweyo.
He was also one of those who formed the force that took part in the famous Dr. Jamieson's Raid that led to the outbreak of the Boer War, and after the war, was a farmer in Rhodesia for ten years before returning to Scotland, where he died in 1951.
Royalty and the Aristocracy
There has never been a British monarch, or before the union of England and Scotland, an English or Scottish monarch, who was deaf.
There have, however, been several deaf Princes and Princesses, and a number of Dukes and Earls, and a Queen Consort (wife of a British King).
Through these people, we find that links between deaf people and Royalty and the Aristocracy were quite strong.
The earliest known deaf royal was Princess Katherine Plantagenet, one of the daughters of King Henry III of England.
She was born in 1253, and at the feast held on her christening on 5th January 1254, those assembled consumed 14 wild boars, 24 swans, 135 rabbits, 250 partridges, 50 hares, 250 wild duck, 1650 fowls, 36 female geese and 61,000 eggs.
By the age of two, which was when Princess Katherine next saw her father, the King, who had been away fighting wars in France, it was quite apparent that the Princess was deaf.
She was also subject to frequent spells of illness, and she died at Windsor Castle on 3rd May 1257, only 3 years and 5 months old.
Princess Katherine was buried in Westminster Abbey.
The next known deaf royal was Princess Jean, one of the daughters of King James I of Scotland.
She was born in 1426, and Scottish records indicate that she was fragile but beautiful.
She was never given any form of education, and spent much of her time secluded with her two sisters and her aunt, the Duchess of Rothesay.
She was gifted at embroidery, and could communicate with her younger sister, Princess Eleanor, by signs.
She died, aged 19, in 1445 before she could be married to James Douglas, third Earl of Angus.
The nearest Britain came to having a deaf monarch was in the case of Prince Albert Victor, eldest son of the Prince and Princess of Wales, later King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra.
Prince Albert had inherited the hereditary disease, otosclerosis, from his mother who had herself inherited it from her own mother, Queen Louise of Denmark.
However, Prince Albert Victor died of thyroid even before his father became King.
Queen Alexandra is probably the best-known deaf royal.
She was already deaf when she married the Prince of Wales on 10th March 1863.
Then aged 19, she looked every inch the fairy princess — incredibly beautiful.
Her stunning good looks were to overwhelm her mother-in-law, Queen Victoria who was, however, heard to lament,.
Queen Victoria had been overjoyed at her son the Prince of Wales's marriage to Alexandra, because of the increasing scandal of the Prince's bed-hopping and association with women of loose morals.
However, the marriage did not stop the Prince's favourite pastime of bedding as many women as he could, though he became more discreet.
Alexandra learnt to live with it, and her unfailing courtesy and thoughtfulness brought her closer to the elderly Queen, in spite of whatever misgivings they both shared about the erring Prince.
Alexandra's deafness had also one unfortunate aspect in that, because she was not given any formal education, she frequently appeared unsophisticated.
The Prince, and later also as the king, was often embarrassed in her presence and sometimes poked fun at her.
On occasion, however, Alexandra would sometimes get her way and drag the Prince to services at the church she favoured, St. Saviour's Church for the Deaf in Oxford Street, where she could enjoy being in the company of other deaf people, and be able to follow the services, as she was a fluent fingerspeller.
Indeed it was probably Queen Victoria herself who taught the Danish Princess the British fingerspelling method, as the Queen had become fluent in her younger days.
(In 1874, whilst at her favourite residence at Osborne in the Isle of Wight, Queen Victoria made a number of trips to the post office at nearby Whippingham where she would stay for some hours comforting a dying deaf woman, Mrs. Elizabeth  Tuffield, nee Groves.
Elizabeth Groves, as a young girl, had been befriended by the Queen who met the cost of her education at the London Asylum for the Deaf and Dumb.
Latterly, Elizabeth had married but had been the victim of a cruel and brutal husband, and had retreated to her parents' home at the post office where she fell ill and later died.
The Queen communicated with Mrs. Tuffield until the day she died.
This association with Mrs. Tuffield explains Queen Victoria's ready acceptance of Princess Alexandra, and also explains her willingness to grant the prefix ‘Royal’ to a number of deaf schools throughout the country.
During her period as Queen Consort, and after the King's death as the Queen Dowager, Queen Alexandra would frequently purchase a number of works of deaf art and sculpture, especially if the work of art was of herself.
A number of deaf artists and sculptors therefore enjoyed her patronage.
Queen Alexandra died in 1925 at the age of 81.
The Dukes and the Earls
Lesser known than Royalty's connection with deafness, but still of considerable interest are those deaf people who were born into the aristocracy.
However, very little is known of any deaf aristocrats prior to 1750, but there were some in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, a number of whom achieved political renown.
Amongst these was Lord Lytton (Sir Edward Bulwer-Lytton: 1803–1873) the novelist, who was a minister in Disraeli's Government.
His deafness was a severe handicap in an assembly where quickness of hearing and readiness of speech were essential.
On the other hand, his political opponents suffered too: Lord Lytton's speech was so bad that many people had great difficulty in understanding him, and because his deafness did not allow him to take part in debates, everyone was often forced to wait until the next day for any reply from Lord Lytton because he would insist on reading what had been said in Hansard, the Parliamentary publication, before making his own speech.
The Earl of Wemyss was another hearing-impaired statesman who made his mark in Parliament.
He was especially noted for his hostility to the scheme to form a territorial army.
However, the deaf  politician who did more for deaf people than any other politician apart from Jack Ashley was the 6th Duke of Montrose.
Sir James Graham, 6th Duke of Montrose (1878–1954)
Eldest son of the 5th Duke of Montrose, he was educated at Eton where he caught  diphtheria during the great floods of 1894.
This was the cause of his deafness, which put paid to a planned career in the army and in politics.
Deafness, however, did not prevent him from going off to South Africa and taking part in the Boer War.
It was while he was travelling to South Africa in 1899 via India that he became the first man ever to take a cine-film of  a total eclipse of the sun.
After the South African War, he tried unsuccessfully to stand for the South African parliament before returning home to marry Lady Mary Douglas Hamilton.
In the 1914–1918 War, he was largely responsible for reactivating the Royal Naval Volunteer Reserve, and was appointed Commander of the Clyde Division, rising to Commodore in 1921 before retiring in 1927.
While a naval officer, he invented and designed the first-ever aircraft carrier, the Angus .
On the death of his father, the 5th Duke, he succeeded to the Dukedom of Montrose, and took his seat in the House of Lords.
It was in that House that he scored his greatest triumph for the cause of deaf people by persuading the Labour Government of Attlee that to provide free spectacles to the partially-sighted, free dentures to those whose teeth had rotted, free artificial limbs to the disabled, but to actually charge the sum of £10 to deaf people for National Health hearing-aids was blatant discrimination!
By his speeches, he shamed Attlee's government into changing this policy so that free hearing-aids and batteries were available under the National Health Service.
For many years, he served as President of the Royal National Institute for the Deaf, up to his death in 1954.
 Incidentally , the 2nd Duke of Montrose (1712–1790) was also deaf, unable to speak, and for the last thirty years of his life from 1760 onwards, totally blind as well and needed an interpreter for even everyday communication with his wife.
Other Dukes and Aristocrats (Non-political)
There have been a number of other dukes, earls and barons who were deaf but who have not aspired to political life.
Perhaps the saddest instance was that of Philip Joseph Mary Fitzalan-Howard,(1879–1902) Earl of Surrey and Arundel and the eldest son of the then Duke of Norfolk, the premier British dukedom.
He was born deaf, dumb and blind and was also mentally-deficient, and died in 1902 before he could  accede to the bewildering duties and titles that went with the Dukedom of Norfolk, Earl Marshal of England.
Another rather sad deaf aristocrat was the 2nd Duke of Sutherland (1786–1861) who was deaf all his life.
He developed a hopeless love for the Queen of Prussia, which was not returned.
On her death, he became dangerously ill with grief but recovered sufficiently to marry the granddaughter of the 5th Duke of Devonshire.
At least, she could understand him for her uncle, later to be the 6th Duke, was deaf as well .
William Spencer Cavendish, 6th Duke of Devonshire (1790–1858)
‘Hart’, as he was known to his friends, became severely deaf in early childhood, which caused him to become reserved and studious.
He was never at ease in large company but preferred the few friends he made through his education at Eton and Cambridge.
His undoubted talents never blossomed in public life, and he devoted himself to an immense rebuilding and renovation programme at Chatsworth House, Derbyshire, where he loved to spend many hours in the library.
It was he, the 6th Duke, that turned Chatsworth into one of the biggest tourist attractions in the country today.
His chief fame rests not on any achievement of his own, but on that of his protege, Sir Joseph Paxton.
Paxton was a young gardener at Chatsworth when, encouraged by the 6th Duke, he built a giant conservatory 300 feet long, 145 feet wide by 60 feet high which soon attracted the world's attention and led to Paxton being commissioned to build the Crystal Palace for the Exhibition of 1851.
(The conservatory at Chatsworth was sadly demolished after World War I but many of Paxton's improvements still remain to be seen).
The 6th Duke never married, and died in 1858 a rather disappointed and unhappy man.
The connection of deafness with the Dukes of Devonshire persists to this day: the 11th Duke is Patron of the National Deaf Children's Society, and also of the Royal School for the Deaf, Derby.
It is through the generosity of the 11th Duke that the Duke's Barn Countryside Centre, a marvellous study and conference centre on the Chatsworth estate, was presented to the school in 1986.
Note: Reports that the 10th Duke of Devonshire was also deaf are incorrect.
George Percy Patrick, Baron Carbery (1810–1890)
Perhaps the one aristocrat that felt the greatest affinity with his fellow deaf was Lord Carbery, who was born deaf and never spoke in his life.
Lord Carbery was born in Co.
Wexford, Ireland, and was sent to the Institution for the Deaf and Dumb at Paris after no expense had been spared educating him at home.
He lived for most of the time at his family seat at Laxton Hall, Northamptonshire, with his wife and only daughter, and frequented St. Saviour's Church for the Deaf in London.
He contributed heavily from his family wealth to this Church, and also to many other organisations for deaf children and adults both in Britain and on the continent of Europe; he had a special interest in the deaf people of Ireland, and was the first President of the National Deaf and Dumb Society, forerunner of the British Deaf Association.
The 1900s
Around the turn of the century, oralism was at its most fervent in British schools for the deaf while at the same time many deaf people were extremely worried by the lack of education being given.
Time which might have been devoted to instructing deaf children in the acquisition of English grammar, arithmetic and other school subjects was, in the view of many leading deaf people including deaf businessmen like A.J.Wilson and George Edward, being curtailed in order to try and give deaf children speech training.
Even Abraham Farrar, pointed out by oralists as the most exalted example of their method of teaching, showed concern that oralism was being carried to too great an extreme at the expense of education but this concern fell on ‘deaf’ ears of those in teaching establishments though perhaps not that of Dr. Eichholz the Government inspector for the overseeing of deaf education, as the two extracts opposite taken from the logbook of the Hugh Bell School, Middlesbrough, show.
Two schools for the deaf which were opened in the 1900s were both from the start to establish a pure oralist tradition.
These were the Anerley Deaf School in London, founded in 1902, and the Thomasson Memorial School for the Deaf, Bolton, founded in 1907.
Of these two, only the Thomasson Memorial School survives to this day, and now includes a further education department where sign language is used in the curriculum.
Also opened, in 1905, was the Sir James E. Jones Industrial Training School attached to the Royal Residential Schools for the Deaf at Old Trafford which sought to teach school-leavers the bootmaking, tailoring, carpentry and bakery trades.
(Note: The use of the term ‘manual’ here does not refer to the use of sign language and/or fingerspelling but to the learning of trades such as carpentry etc.)
Meanwhile many intelligent deaf people who might have gone into education, but now finding these opportunities non-existent because of the Education Act of 1893 which had  implemented the Royal Commission for the Education of the Blind and the Deaf and Dumb's recommendations, were now turning to missioner positions in deaf societies and institutes for a living.
Although many were appointed to established societies and institutes some were to found their own missions — such was the case of George Annand Mackenzie, the first born-deaf man in Britain to get a M.A. degree.
George Annand Mackenzie, M.A. (1871–1951)
George Annand Mackenzie was born in Liverpool, one of three deaf brothers.
Up to the age of 13, he was privately educated by his mother by means of signing and fingerspelling as she did not agree with the oralist method used by the Liverpool School for the Deaf.
In this, she was ably assisted by Robert Armour, the deaf missioner for Liverpool.
When 13, Mackenzie was sent to be educated at a hearing school where the teachers did not know what to do with him, and left him to his own devices a lot of the time.
Even so, he came top of the class in many subjects.
After two years at this school, he left to study at the School of Art in South Kensington, where he won many prizes.
In 1901, he accepted the post of Missioner to the Deaf and Dumb in Oxford; it was here that an undergraduate suggested he should try for a University degree at Oxford, but permission was refused.
In 1906, he went to Cambridge to found the Mission for the Deaf and Dumb, and it was here that he entered University.
His deafness debarred him from lectures, and he was unable to avail himself of the help of tutors, but he persevered and he graduated in 1911, overnight becoming front-page news as the only deaf man (then) to achieve the academic distinction of Master of Arts of Cambridge University.
George Annand Mackenzie was active in the work of the British Deaf Association and was to be Missioner at Cardiff after leaving Cambridge in 1922, retiring in 1931.
He was unique amongst deaf men of the early twentieth century.
Deaf Clubs and Missions: The National Deaf Club
The 1900s saw the opening of a number of new centres and missions for the deaf, among them Bury, West Ham, Plymouth and Chester (although the latter had first been meeting at Stockport from 1889 onwards).
However, probably the most important organisation formed in this decade was the National Deaf Club, formed in the autumn of 1906.
The title was then, as it still is now, largely a misnomer borne out of optimism for a nationwide club membership of deaf people.
It is true that the National Deaf Club attracted a few members from the provinces, but by and large, its membership has been confined mostly to London and its environs.
It was originally founded as the Deaf Friends' Club for the oral deaf who desired to have the opportunity of meeting together for social intercourse and mutual improvement.
The first meeting place was above a cafe in Newgate Street in the City of London, but this did not prove satisfactory and they  then met on a weekly basis at another cafe near Marble Arch.
It was in September 1908 that the club moved to rented premises in Store Street and changed its name to the National Deaf Club and opened its membership to deaf people of whatever school, not just oralist.
It was the first deaf club in the country to levy an annual subscription charge.
Membership of the National Deaf Club tended to attract those deaf people of a certain social standing, and included S. Bright Lucas (who was the first President), wealthy businessman A.J. Wilson, the artist Thomas Davidson, the editor of the British Deaf Times , Joseph Hepworth, explorer and photographer Henry Newton-Lowry, and the type of activities pursued tended to reflect the membership: chess, table-cricket, tennis, badminton.
Notwithstanding the type of membership, the formation of the National Deaf Club was an important development for deaf people, for through it there grew the camaraderie that we see today in the deaf community — a sense of belonging to a body that was quite acceptable in social terms.
One of their most distinguished members was a C.J. Bromhead who was unique amongst deaf people in that he was a Fellow of the Royal Meteorological Society with responsibility for weather observation in Lincoln.
Bromhead had been educated at the private school for the deaf in Rugby and was a fluent writer and reader of German, French and Latin.
However, perhaps the National Deaf Club's most distinguished member was Arthur James Wilson, who succeeded S. Bright Lucas to the presidency and held it for the rest of his life.
Arthur James Wilson (1858–1945)
Cyclist, Racing Driver; Businessman
Born with normal hearing, he became deaf from scarlet fever when 12 years old.
His education following the onset of deafness was self-acquired due to reading and writing.
Arthur Wilson was better known to thousands, perhaps millions, of his countrymen in Britain and Ireland as ‘Faed’, the pen-name by which he contributed hundreds of articles on cycling to cycling magazines, including his own, and published books on the sport.
A keen cyclist, having ridden one of the original boneshakers in 1869, he once cycled 3200 miles in a year competing in races.
He founded two cycling associations — the North Road Cycling Club and Cyclists' Road Records Association, of which he was President for nearly 30 years — an unique achievement for a deaf man in a mainly hearing organisation.
Arthur Wilson was also the first deaf Briton to own a car,(in 1896) and competed in races not only in cars or on cycles, but also on motor bikes.
He was probably the first deaf man in the world to do so.
A keen all-round sportsman, he graduated from cycle and motor-car racing when he began to feel his age and then to speedboat racing.
He owned a motor launch named Splash which he lost to the Navy in the war.
This was the man who became President of the National  Deaf Club in 1909 and held the position for over thirty years.
He was also the founder of Coventry Institute for the Deaf.
During the war he used his wealth to establish the Sir Frederick Milner Hostels for Deafened Soldiers, and served as Chairman.
After the war, he was made a Freeman of London, again a unique achievement for a deaf man.
He died in Leamington in 1945 at the age of 87.
George Edward (1867–1929)
Another successful deaf businessman and sportsman of the 1900s was George Edward of Glasgow, a partner in the manufacturing jewellery firm of G. Edward and Sons.
Born deaf, and educated partly at the Langside Institution, Glasgow and partly at William Van Praagh's Oral School in London, George Edward was a fine designer of silver cups, challenge shields and the like, and also a fine yachtsman who won many trophies in his racing yachts Osprey and Majel .
He was also associated with the Glasgow Institute for the Deaf as a director.
Abraham Farrar, F.G.S. (1861–1936)
Third in this trilogy of deaf men of remarkable achievements of this era who were mainly oralist but who respected those that used sign language was Abraham Farrar, born at Leeds, who became deaf at the age of 3 due to scarlet fever.
His father had an estate near Leeds which yielded a considerable income, and which later helped Farrar to pursue his academic quest.
Farrar was educated at the Rev. Thomas Arnold's private oral school at Northampton and was a child prodigy who passed both the London University and Cambridge University examinations by the time he was 17, and could no doubt have gone on towards a degree had he been inclined to do so.
His father, however, preferred that Farrar went in for a professional career, and Farrar was articled to a firm of architects and surveyors in Northampton, becoming a Fellow of the Geographical Society.
On his father's death, Farrar abandoned his professional career content to live off the income from his father's estate which he managed admirably, and instead concentrated on what was to be his lifetime's consuming interest — the compilation of literature on deafness.
‘Farrar was the first real researcher into the history of teaching the deaf, and unearthed many previously unknown items of literature about the deaf and was largely responsible for building up Oxley's Library of the Deaf (this Library was largely  fragmented after Oxley's death, and many rare articles and books disappeared).
Although scrupulously fair in his writings on deaf history, neither favouring use of sign language or oralism, constantly giving credit where this was due to either method, Abraham Farrar was always regarded by oralists as the greatest triumph for the oral method of teaching the deaf, though Francis Maginn once told a B.D.D.A Congress that ‘Oral’ pupils could not be kept from signing.
Even Mr. Farrar spelt on his fingers very well.’
Author's Note :— The compilation of earlier chapters of this book could not have been possible without Abraham Farrar's researches to point the way.
The Rise of Deaf Women
The 1900s were also to see for the first time deaf women beginning to acquire their own identity through achievement by their own talent although not one as yet played any prominent part in deaf organisations which remained the preserve of the deaf male.
Three women were to achieve national renown in this decade, two of them as sculptors, and one as Christmas-card Laureate.
Helen Marion Burnside (1844–1920)
Born at Bromley Hall, Middlesex, Helen Burnside became totally deaf at the age of 12 and learnt sign language so that she could communicate — she never mastered the art of lipreading.
Up to the time of her deafness, she had ambitions to be a music composer but her deafness put paid to that.
Instead, she turned to writing and discovered a talent for writing verses, particularly Christmas verses.
From 1864 onwards, Miss Burnside wrote about 200 Christmas verses a year which were used in Christmas cards.
Many of the verses were in fact small poems, and some were set to music.
Her greatest compliment came in 1900 when she was accorded the title of Christmas-card Laureate which earned her national fame.
Kathleen Trousdell Shaw, R.H.A. (1870–1958)
Born in Middlesex of an Irish doctor, she grew up in a pleasant and comfortable home in Ireland and was 5 years old when she noticed that her hearing was failing, and by the age of 17, she was almost totally deaf.
Her gift for sculpture was first observed when she was nine years old, still uneducated, and watching a stonemason at work in the local churchyard.
She stood there for hours watching the stonemason so that when he returned the next day, he gave her a piece of stone and two chisels.
At once, she set to work and made such a remarkable copy of a Michelangelo that she was sent, when ten years old, to the Dublin School of Art where she learnt drawing and sculpture.
She gained medals and prizes which enabled her, at age 15, to go to Paris where she was accepted into the free Ecole des Beaux Arts and studied under the most eminent French artists and sculptors.
Returning briefly to Dublin, she next went to Rome and Athens to do more studying before coming to work in the British Museum, and going to live in Knutsford, Cheshire, where she did her greatest work, the bust of Archbishop Alexander, Primate of All Ireland, which stands today in Armagh Cathedral.
For this, and other sculptures in Ireland, she was made a Member of the Royal  Hibernian Academy in 1907.
She was the first woman sculptor, and only deaf woman, to be made a member of any Royal Academy in the British Isles.
Miss Shaw retired to the little village of Cadmore End, near High Wycombe after the 1914–18 war.
She designed and made a gift to the village of a beautiful war memorial — a font cover in bronze and silver of a mother and baby.
She stayed in Cadmore End until her death in 1958.
Dorothy Stanton Wise (c1880–1918?)
Dorothy Stanton Wise was born deaf at Dover where she was educated at home by her mother who had taken her to see the Rev. Thomas Arnold at Northampton for advice.
She also attended a kindergarten school where she first  demonstrated her talent for modelling with clay.
When her kindergarten time was up, her parents engaged a modelling tutor to come in twice a week, and she was so good that at the age of 7 she was admitted to the Dover School of Art where she stayed until she was eighteen.
Her parents then moved to London and admitted her as a free scholar to the sculpture studio in the Royal College of Art, where she stayed for four years and graduated an A.R.C.A. 
Then she started to earn her living by designing and sculpting many items of distinction and merit, earning gold medals at exhibitions at the Royal Academy, Manchester Art Gallery and Liverpool's Walker Art Gallery.
A number of her sculptures were also sold to Queen Alexandra.
One of her best-known works is a marble memorial to Bishop Prideaux which is in Worcester cathedral.
Miss Wise was a strong supporter of the B.D.D.A. and wrote a number of articles for the British Deaf Times, mostly about travel in France.
No works of art were produced by Miss Wise, nor was she  heard of again after 1918; she is believed to have been one of the victims of the influenza epidemic of that time.
Gallaudet College Student's Courage
John W. McCandless was born in 1884 in Londonderry, the son of a Justice of the Peace, and became deaf at the age of 10 months through scarlet fever, and was sent to the Langside Institution at Glasgow, Scotland.
Following a desire for further education, he was admitted into Gallaudet College, Washington D.C., USA., in 1903.
In April 1905, the wife of a lock-keeper in the canal near the Potomac River at Great Falls made a trip in her rowing boat across the river to the Virginia shore accompanied by her two dogs.
Unknown to Mrs. O'Connor, for that was the woman's name, the river was rising and the current becoming stronger.
When she returned to her boat, she did not notice this, and proceeded to row back to her lock-house.
However, the strong current carried her away, sweeping her over a weir where the boat overturned.
A strong swimmer, she managed to reach a rock jutting above the water, and there she stuck; it would have been suicidal to attempt to swim through the rapids to either shore.
McCandless, accompanied by a Canadian student named Arthur Jaffray, spotted Mrs. O'Connor about an hour later and whilst Jaffray ran for a boat and some ropes, McCandless with complete disregard for the dangers, fought his way through the strong current to reach Mrs. O'Connor and supported her until Jaffray arrived in a boat with the woman's father.
The boat was wedged across a rock where the current was not as bad as that elsewhere, and they threw a rope across to McCandless who tied it around himself and the near-unconscious woman.
They were both then hauled through the treacherous water to the boat, but while paddling for the shore, the current seized the boat and it capsized throwing everyone into the water.
McCandless kept the woman with him and reached  another rock, to which he clung totally exhausted.
The woman's father and Jaffray also reached the same rock.
Jaffray left them there, and battled across to the shore on his own where he summoned other help.
A rope was thrown across to the three marooned on the rock, and they were hauled to safety, McCandless still carrying Mrs. O'Connor.
The whole rescue took four hours, and Dr. E.M.
Gallaudet, Principal of the College, recommended McCandless and Jaffray to the British authorities for the Albert Medal (the highest civilian award in Britain and the British Empire at that time, since superseded by the George Cross).
However, this award was not given.
McCandless stayed on in the U.S.A. as a teacher of the deaf (deaf teachers not being permitted in Britain) at the Mississippi School for the Deaf.
He died in 1965.
Two Successful Football teams
An excellent achievement was made by the boys of the Royal Institution for the Deaf and Dumb, Derby in 1902–3.
In an open competition involving the elementary schools throughout Derbyshire, the deaf schoolboys won the championship.
Amongst adult clubs, there was some success as well when Manchester Deaf F.C.
won their local hearing league championship.
The same young men celebrated their success by taking a holiday in the Isle of Man later that summer.
Teacher of the Deaf Journal
In 1903, the first issue of the journal Teacher of the Deaf was published.
It is still being published, and is the longest continuous magazine about or of the deaf in Britain which still bears the same title.
The 1910s
The beginning of the decade saw storm clouds gathering over Europe with displays of militarism and aggressiveness which were ultimately to lead to the Great War of 1914–18 when millions of soldiers died in the mud-filled trenches of Flanders and experienced other horrors such as Gallipoli.
British deaf men and women were spared much of this horror, and went on with their lives, but they were having a grim time of it too.
The introduction of the National Insurance and Workmen's Compensation Acts meant that many employers were becoming reluctant to employ deaf people in case they had to pay higher premiums just to employ them.
The result was that many deaf men were unable to obtain work.
The decade also saw the passing away of many of the old stalwart deaf missioners, such as James Paul, and they were being replaced by hearing missioners.
The Milan Congress of 1880, having successfully removed deaf people from teaching positions in deaf schools, was now seeing the process being carried a little further by quite unintentionally closing the doors on employment of deaf people as missioners.
Here and there, deaf people were still being appointed, like Edwin Docharty at Blackburn, but already, they were a dying breed.
The welfare of deaf people was thus becoming a grave concern to many people, and this led in 1911 to an important milestone being reached through the efforts of a wealthy merchant banker, a Mr. Leo Bonn, who was himself deaf.
The Founding of the Royal National Institute for the Deaf
On 9th June 1911, Leo Bonn founded the National Bureau for Promoting the General Welfare of the Deaf, a cumbersome title which was quite sensibly reconstructed as the National Institute for the Deaf in 1924.
The Bonn family financed the Bureau for a number of years and enabled it to recruit a small staff which laid the foundations for the development of the organisation into what it is to-day.
The Institute moved into its present premises at 105 Gower Street, London, in 1936 and was granted the prefix ‘Royal’ in its Jubilee Year in 1961.
The Growth of Institutes and Centres for the Deaf
The general concern over the welfare of deaf people led to the formation of more institutes and to centres for the deaf being opened in towns and cities where previously none had  existed.
This included important towns and cities such as Coventry and Brighton, but others were also opened in Pontypridd, Salisbury, Cambridge, and Exeter — the last being one of the last cities where a deaf school had been long established to found an adult institute.
In London, the St. John of Beverley Institute, Green Lanes, was opened by H.R.H.
Princess Christian for the R.A.D.D.
In other areas, the name ‘Mission to the Deaf’ was beginning to be dropped as new buildings replaced older ones.
This happened in Cardiff when the new institute was opened — the institute was a gift from a local philanthropist, John Cory, who paid for its erection.
In other long-established deaf centres, members began to arrange day outings now that omnibuses were more readily available, and these were to be a feature of deaf life in the next few decades.
In Liverpool the Jubilee of the Society was celebrated by a  special service in the Institute's church at Princes Street where a tribute was paid to George Healey for his 50 years of service to the deaf people of Liverpool.
In London, the National Deaf Club boasted as a member a Henry John Jacobs, who was a barrister of the Inner Temple.
He was not the only deaf person connected with the legal profession for Wakefield, Yorkshire, had a fully practising solicitor, Gerald Smith, of the firm Beaumont, Smith and Beaumont, who had been educated at the Yorkshire Institution for the Deaf and Dumb, Doncaster.
The President of the National Deaf Club, A.J. Wilson, donated the first national trophies to be played for at golf and at billiards.
The first golf tournament took place on 27th October 1914 at the North Middlesex Golf Club, and was won by Eric Withers of Liverpool, with George Healey (also Liverpool) and Maxwell S. Fry (Coventry) as runners-up.
Air Travel
In July 1914 air travel was still a novelty to many people and during an outing by employees of an Accrington firm of billiard table makers to Blackpool, a deaf employee named Jack Hargreaves became possibly the first deaf man ever to go up in an aeroplane when he went up as a passenger in a two-seater Fokkers biplane piloted by a Mr. H. Blackburn.
The flight lasted over an hour as the plane was flown out to sea, returning over Fleetwood, then back to Blackpool.
Bomb Plot Foiled!
It was also during this decade that women first became entitled to vote in elections in Britain, but not before they led a very militant, suffragette campaign to get the right.
Women would chain themselves to railings, throw themselves under horses and do a dozen other crazy things in the cause of  suffragettism .
In 1914 they launched what was one of their crazier attacks, and on 4th June, the deaf community of Dundee was very nearly the victim when a massive bomb was placed  against the doorway of Dunhope Castle, the home of Dundee School for the Deaf and the Dundee Mission to the Deaf and Dumb.
The bomb had a lengthy fuse attached to it, and when it was discovered by one of the schoolboys, the fuse was burnt almost up to the bomb.
But for this timely find, Dundee School for the Deaf would have been blown to pieces, along with the Deaf Centre.
Sir Arthur Henderson  Fairburn , Bart.
(1852–1915)
The decade saw the death in 1915 of one of the greatest supporters of the British deaf community in Sir Arthur Henderson Fairbairn, who rejoiced in the title of ‘the only deaf and dumb baronet in the world’.
The British landed gentry can look back on a past filled with special glories due to the responsibilities of their rank.
Sir Arthur Fairbairn was a man great enough to shoulder these responsibilities gracefully, tirelessly and successfully, leaving behind him some concrete examples of generosity and philanthropy as well as the memory of a genial heart and a simple soul doing good in an aristocratic manner.
Sir Arthur Fairbairn was born deaf to Sir Thomas Fairbairn, and was the grandson of Sir William Fairbairn who was a great inventor and builder of bridges and dockyards which earned him a fortune.
His sister, Constance, was also born deaf but the youngest child, James, was not.
He was educated at the private school for the deaf at Rugby, and then by private tutors — all entirely by sign language and fingerspelling, as was his sister.
Neither Sir Arthur or Constance Fairbairn could speak or lipread throughout their lives.
Sir Arthur married a Florence Long in 1882, a marriage that was useful to him in social circles as his brother-in-law was a powerful Member of Parliament, but Sir Arthur's true love was reserved for British deaf people.
He was never ashamed of being deaf without speech when he moved in society, and mingled with deaf people on every possible occasion.
He was a tireless worker for the cause of deafness, opening many missions and institutes, attending many bazaars and functions to which he always managed to bring influential friends who would spend money freely.
He was a President or Vice President of many deaf organisations, including the Royal School for Deaf Children, Margate; the Charitable and Provident Society for Granting Pensions to the Aged and Infirm Deaf; London Deaf Cricket Club; the London branch of the B.D.D.A. He was also a committee member of the Brighton Institution for the Deaf and Dumb, and of the Winchester Deaf Diocesan Mission.
As treasurer of the R.A.D.D., he once balanced the books, which had a serious deficit, with a handsome donation.
St. Saviour's Church for the Deaf owed its new electric lighting and heating system to his generosity, and he contributed to many deaf charities.
He was President of the Reception Committee of the 8th Biennial Congress of the British Deaf and Dumb Association  in 1903 when he received his guests with magnificent and lavish hospitality.
Although in poor health in 1912, he accepted an offer to be chairman of the delegates to the Congress of the Deaf in Paris 1912 on their visit to London and entertained them lavishly.
His name lives on in the Fairbairn Centre for the Deaf, Southampton, where he was a committee member for many years.
Dr. Francis Maylett Smith (1877–1945)
Francis (Frank) Maylett Smith became totally deaf at the age of 20 after receiving an education at St. Paul's School in London.
When he was in his teens, his father moved to South Africa taking the family with him.
Having secretly decided during his childhood to be a doctor, he had to give the idea up due to his deafness and decided to take up a farming career, enrolling at the Elsenberg Agricultural College, 30 miles from Cape Town.
Whilst studying at the College, Frank was instrumental in bringing an unconscious man round, and was henceforth  known to his fellow-students as ‘the doctor’, and every day thereafter had some ‘visits’ to make.
Although Frank obtained a first-class diploma from the College, he did not find an opening in farming and his thoughts turned once more to medicine for which his experiences at College led him to think he had an aptitude.
Frank returned to England, and after years of study at Steevens' Hospital, Dublin, qualified as a doctor.
To be totally deaf was bound to be a professional handicap, and after some difficulty, Frank managed to secure the post of assistant doctor in the South Wales coalfield of Aberffrwd, where he served his apprenticeship as a general practitioner from 1908 until 1915.
In 1915 he learnt of a doctor's practice going for sale at Collier's Forge, near Stourbridge in the Midlands.
The retiring doctor had advertised the practice as covering a small town of 8000 people, and that there was no other doctor in the locality.
It sounded promising to a young man seeking his first practice, and he bought it.
Dr. Francis Maylett Smith remained the General Practitioner at Collier's Forge until his retirement in 1933.
Although there have been other doctors in Britain who became deaf, Dr. Francis Maylett Smith remains only one of two deaf persons known to have successfully qualified as a doctor.
The Great War 1914–18
When the First World War broke out in 1914 schools were on holiday, which proved to be an advantage to the military authorities who promptly requisitioned the Yorkshire Institution for the Deaf at Doncaster and the Dundee School for the Deaf.
Although the military authorities soon vacated the school to move into Doncaster Racecourse across the road, the re-opening of the school had been delayed and the Christmas holidays had to be cut to make up for the loss of time.
Dundee was not so lucky, and had to seek alternative premises to continue the school.
In addition, the Non-Oral department at the Royal Residential Schools in Manchester was requisitioned as a military hospital for the duration of the war, and there was overcrowding in the Main School as a result.
The War drained men from many schools which then experienced great difficulty in maintaining staffing levels.
A number of deaf men attempted to enlist for the Army, but many were rejected on grounds of deafness, including four who tried to enlist in one day at an enlisting station in Wales.
Two men, however, both of whom came from Cardiff, succeeded in enlisting for different regiments.
Harry Ward, a 27-year-old born-deaf man orally educated at the Llandaff School in Cardiff and possessing excellent lipreading skills, managed to follow his three brothers into the Munster Regiment and undergo training at the Curragh Camp in Ireland.
Gower Jones, who was also educated at the Llandaff School, managed to enlist in the Monmouthshire Regiment despite being blind in one eye.
Another deaf man, a David Bedwell who had partial hearing, enlisted in the Army Service Corps as a driver, and his deafness cost him his life when he failed to hear three challenges as he was approaching the gates of a barracks.
The sentry on duty shot him through the head.
In contrast, the nearest most deaf people got to the War was to receive training in rifle practice and to learn how to dig trenches in case the Germans managed to invade.
A number were unfortunate enough to be mistaken for spies after ‘failing to heed warning challenges’, and got shot at, although there was only one reported death: a James Waddell of Grangemouth, near Edinburgh, was shot through the hand and heart as he was examining flood damage in the course of his employment duties.
Francis Maginn, the Belfast Missioner and B.D.D.A. Vice-President, suffered the indignity of being arrested as a suspected spy while visiting Glasgow.
It was in fact some of the deaf schoolchildren who came  closest to experiencing the horrors of the 1914–18 War.
On the night of 2nd April 1916, air-raid warnings sounded throughout Edinburgh, but it was not till five minutes past midnight when a huge explosion shook the city.
A German Zeppelin had flown over the Scottish coast at Leith, and dropped a bomb which by pure luck hit a bonded warehouse full of whisky, which went up in large flames, thus lighting up the darkened city.
Donaldson's Hospital and the nearby George Watson Hospital School, both impressive buildings, provided tempting targets, and received some bombs.
Donaldson's took a near miss, but George Watson's was not so lucky, its top two floors being destroyed.
The Zeppelin moved up towards the Castle, dropping large numbers of bombs but many fell short of the Castle.
However, another whisky warehouse went up, illuminating beautifully the imposing building that is Donaldson's.
It was too tempting a target, and the Zeppelin aimed for it with the last of its deadly cargo, but this time, they overshot the mark.
The Zeppelin attack left ten people dead in the city, and scores wounded: if the Germans' bomb-aiming had not been so lousy, the toll could have included many of the sleeping deaf children in Donaldson's.
As it was, George Scott — who was later to captain the victorious Great Britain soccer team at the World Games for the Deaf at Amsterdam in 1928 (see photograph on page 310)— but then a small schoolboy at Donaldson's remembers:
‘…a German Zeppelin flew over but I felt nothing.
I was fast asleep.
Next morning I awoke to chaos — everything overturned, furniture all over, beds moved, tables tipped over…’
Many windows were shattered all over Edinburgh, including many at Donaldson's — its most grievous loss was perhaps the oriel window in the chapel famed in Scotland as one of its earliest figure-stained windows.
It was never replaced.
There was one positive side for deaf people arising from  the War: with so many men volunteering or going into the Armed Services, there was a desperate shortage of labour in the workplace, especially in munitions factories.
Whereas before the War so many deaf men were out of work due to the reluctance of employers following the implementation of the National Insurance and  Workmen's Compensation Acts, they were now able to pick and choose their employment as employers clamoured for their services.
Scouts, Girl Guides and Cadets
Deaf schools in Britain have traditionally had a long involvement in the Scout and Girl Guide movement, but Scouting has not been confined simply to schoolboys and schoolgirls.
Between the wars, many deaf centres also had their Senior Scout and Rover troops.
The Boy Scout movement was formed by General Baden-Powell, the hero of Mafeking, in 1908 with the object of training boys how to become real men and to learn the lessons of loyalty, courage, obedience, cheerfulness and kindness of heart, and its ideals soon spread throughout the world.
The British Deaf Scout movement was born in 1910 when the Headmaster of the Royal Cross School, Preston, Mr. J.G. Shaw, was on a motor tour of Yorkshire during his July holiday, and got into severe difficulties at Skipton when his car ran off the road and broke down.
Luckily for him, there was a troop of Boy Scouts camped nearby and they were able to get his car back on the road and Mr. Shaw on his way to York.
Impressed by the Boy Scouts he had encountered, Mr. Shaw resolved to start a troop at his school, and when the pupils returned to school after the summer holidays in August 1910, the Royal Cross School Troop was formed, followed shortly afterwards by the Royal Cross School Guides Troop.
The movement in Preston was so successful that in 1911  the school organised a jamboree for the Scouts and Guides of the district, and a total of 420 Scouts and Guides from all parts of Preston and district took part.
The rally was attended by the Chief Scout, General Baden-Powell.
It was the biggest event the school ever organised.
The first adult Scout troop formed was the 1st Duke of Grafton's Own (Clapham St. Bede's) which was formed in 1913, and within a few years there were also Scouters and Guiders established in London at West Ham, Green Lanes (St. John of Beverley's), North Clapham and Stoke Newington.
Other Scout and Guide movements were established at Leicester, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Liverpool, Coventry and in Glasgow which produced the first deaf Senior Scout in George Scott who took part in a Grand Rally of Senior Scouts at Ibrox Park which was inspected by the Duke of Windsor in 1931.
Most Scout and Guide troops did not survive the Second World War.
Those that did disbanded in the late 1940s or  early 1950s and only the schools continued to have Scout troops; the 8th Exeter (Royal Deaf School) troop was, for example, formed in 1949 and from this troop came a Queen's Scout, Andrew Ford, who attended the St. George's Day Parade at Windsor Castle in 1955 before the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh.
Another Scout who was presented before the Queen at Windsor Castle was Glen Harris of Coventry.
Several schools also had a Wolf Cub pack, many of which excelled in sports meetings against other Wolf Cub packs.
Manchester's Royal Residential Schools Wolf Cub pack were victorious in three successive years sports competitions against other Wolf Cubs in the area from 1954 to 1956.
Some schools, like the Northern Counties School for the Deaf in Newcastle, had a Cadet Corps movement before they changed to scouting.
This school's Cadet Corps scored an unique achievement when they participated in the Royal Tournament at Olympia in 1927, and carried off the Lady West Trophy against fierce competition from other,hearing , Cadet Corps troops.
Today, in the 1980s, the Scout and Guide movement is almost non-existent throughout British deaf schools and clubs for the deaf, perhaps, due to competition from other leisure interests, but in its heyday, the movement was responsible for giving hundreds of young men and girls great fulfilment and sense of Purpose.
The 1920s
The 1920s was the decade of the General Strike, the stock market collapse, Prohibition in the USA, the first crossing of the Atlantic by an aeroplane (Charles Lindbergh), the decade during which the optimism of a ‘Land fit for Heroes to Live in’ turned sour with rising unemployment and widespread poverty.
And the deaf suffered along with the rest.
In many ways their lot became much worse due to the effects of poor education and little prospect of work.
Very few deaf men and women of ability came through to lead the rest: the clergy retained a powerful grip on the affairs of deaf people, and the age of paternalism was at a high.
One deaf person who did come through to play a leading role in deaf affairs was David Fyfe.
David Fyfe (1883–1967)
Born in Kilmarnock and educated at the Langside School for the Deaf, Glasgow, he began his adult career as an apprentice brass-finisher, but this vocation was never enough for him.
Membership of the local deaf club developed his talent and ability to a point where he was drawn towards working full-time as a welfare worker with deaf people.
When the post of Missioner at Warrington became vacant, he applied for it at the age of 38, and he remained at Warrington until his retirement thirty years later.
He was an active member of the British Deaf and Dumb Association and one of the select band that received its Medal of Honour for services to the deaf.
The appointment of Fyfe to Warrington in 1921 was, however, the exception rather than the rule in the 1920s when the majority of missioners appointed or holding the posts were clergymen or hearing persons.
Only three other deaf men became missioners for the first time in the 1920s, although some moved from one place to another like George Mackenzie.
These three were Alex McDonald at Stockport, Algernon Barnett at Northampton and Harry Rowland at Cambridge.
Like Fyfe, all three were to remain at these places until the end of their working lives.
Concern for Deaf Children's Health
There was so much poverty during the 1920s that there was grave concern for the general health of children in residential schools for the deaf.
Tuberculosis and malnutrition were prevalent, as was rickets.
A number of residential schools therefore converted part of their buildings to, or constructed new, hospital wards or sick bays to combat the poor health of their pupils.
A Deaf School Goes Overseas
In the 1920s, generally all state schools — whether for the deaf or for those with normal hearing — had conditions which were grim.
This was especially true of those schools which were situated in poverty-stricken areas following the aftermath of the General Strike of 1926 and mass unemployment.
There was little money available for luxuries, yet in 1928 a group of children from the Royal Cross School for the Deaf, Preston, made what may have been the first ever educational overseas school trip when they went to France and Belgium.
They travelled by ferry, and among the places that they visited were Paris, Lille and Bruges.
First Deaf Motorist Fined
A.J. Wilson, the President of the National Deaf Club, and the first deaf person to drive a car back in 1896, got another ‘first’ that was most unwelcome when he became the first deaf driver to fall foul of the road traffic laws and be fined for speeding.
To his chagrin, A.J. Wilson, a lifelong oralist and successful businessman, got headlines in the national newspapers describing him as ‘deaf and dumb’.
The Growth of Deaf Sports
One bright light in the depression of the 1920s was the tremendous growth of sports being played by deaf people.
Regional competitions were held for most indoor sports like billiards, snooker and darts; many deaf institutes had their soccer teams with the B.D.D.A.'s annual Healey Cup being keenly fought for.
Some institutes did not ignore ladies sports — a number of hockey teams were formed and matches played.
One of the keenly fought matches took place when Glasgow Ladies played Manchester Ladies in 1922.
The first International Games for the Deaf at Paris in 1924 created such interest that the B.D.D.A.'s Congress at Southampton included an international football match between England and Wales, which was won by England 3–0.
At cricket, Leicester Deaf Cricket Club became their local league Division I champions in 1927, and in 1929 the famous Lancashire and England batsman, Ernest  Tydlesley , presented a cricket bat as a trophy for an annual Roses match between Lancashire Deaf and Yorkshire Deaf.
Club Outings and Charabancs
Adult deaf activities were not of course confined to sports.
The advent of motor coaches enabled many deaf institutes to organise outings and charabanc trips.
Deeds of Bravery
In common with any other community, the Deaf Community has had its share of people who have performed deeds of bravery that earned them recognition from the appropriate authorities.
In Britain, awards for bravery come in certain categories, eg. armed forces, civilian, police, societies for the protection of life.
While no deaf person in Britain has been awarded any armed services medal — for the simple reason that no deaf person is permitted to serve in the armed services — or any government sponsored civilian award, or police award, deaf people have been given awards from such bodies as the Carnegie Fund, the Royal Humane Society, and the Society for Protection of Life from Fire.
The Carnegie Fund Awards
Before the Second World War, there were, apart from those from the Royal Humane Society and Society for the Protection of Life from Fire, no appropriate awards that could be given to civilians who had performed outstanding or exceptional deeds of bravery (the George Cross and George Medal were not instituted until World War II).
The highest award that could be given in peacetime at that time, the Albert Medal, was confined largely to members of the armed forces.
Thus the Carnegie Medals were constituted.
They were sparingly given, and the deed had to be exceptional for any award to be made; many of the Carnegie Medals were given posthumously.
The Royal Humane Society Awards
This Society was founded in 1774, and gives awards to people who have saved the lives of others from drowning.
They have a three-tiered medals system, backed up by a number of Testimonial awards.
The highest possible award, the Stanhope Gold Medal, is only awarded once a year.
The Silver and Bronze medals are awarded only in cases of exceptional bravery.
There were no Stanhope Gold Medals awarded in 1959–61, 1969 and 1973.
In 1988, there was only one Silver Medal awarded, and 15 bronzes.
Society for the Protection of Life from Fire
They have a system similar to the Royal Humane Society, and make awards of gold, silver and bronze medals to people who have saved the lives of others from fire.
Carnegie Bronze Medal Award: Incident at Dulverton Station
Just before five o'clock in the afternoon of Tuesday, January 8th 1935, in the gathering darkness, a Mrs. Ivy Thomas, wife of a farm worker from Dulverton, Somerset, and her four year-old son Robert John alighted from a train arriving at Dulverton Station from Tiverton on the Great Western Railway's Exe Valley line.
In common with most other passengers who disembark from Exe Valley line trains at Dulverton, Mrs. Thomas proceeded to the station exit across the railway tracks although a footbridge was provided for passengers.
This footbridge was however at the other end of the platform, and most passengers got into the habit of going to the station exit across the tracks despite the standard railway warnings not to do so.
This was a particularly dangerous practice at this station as trains approaching on the down line could not be seen until they were 40 yards from the station due to a bend and a road bridge.
She was the last passenger to set off across the tracks, laden with parcels from her shopping trip, and the little boy tagging along behind.
Most passengers had got across, and even out of the station altogether when the Barnstaple to Taunton train came around the bend under the bridge.
When the driver spotted the mother and the boy on the tracks, the mother had actually already reached the other side, but the little boy had fallen behind his mother and was still on the tracks.
Albert Tarr, a 54-year-old deaf tailor without speech, was standing in the place where he always stood to catch his train home to East Anstey after finishing work.
He was the only one to spot the danger to the mother and child, and dashed onto the tracks in order to try and save their lives, waving his arms frantically.
At this moment, the driver who had already been braking  to come into the station, applied his brakes even more sharply and blasted out a warning on his whistle.
This was the first time that everyone else on the station at that time became aware of the danger, and they could only watch helplessly as the child stood petrified with fright between the rails.
They saw the mother drop her parcels and turn around to step back and try to reach her boy.
They saw Albert Tarr reach the mother, and grab hold of her and also appear to try to push away the child, then the train hit them all.
When the train had stopped, it was found that the child's body was lying on one side of the rails but his head had been completely severed from the body.
Albert Tarr was lying half on top of Mrs. Thomas between the rails.
Both had terrible head injuries, and appeared to have been killed instantly.
Albert Tarr, who was unmarried and lived with his widowed mother at the tiny Devon village of East Anstey, was subsequently  posthumously awarded the Carnegie Bronze Medal — at that time before the introduction of the George Medal, one of the highest possible civilian awards that could be given for acts of heroism and bravery.
Just over a year later, in January 1936, a special dedication service was held at the little church at East Anstey when the Bishop of Exeter unveiled a memorial to Albert Tarr.
Sadly, this memorial has been neglected, and turned almost black with time and is difficult to read.
It states:
‘To the Glory of God and to perpetuate the Honoured Memory of Albert William Tarr of this parish who was accidently killed at Dulverton 8th January 1935 at the age of 54.
Although deaf and dumb and so unable to raise an alarm, he threw himself in front of an approaching train in a valiant effort to save a mother and child.
This record is made by many friends in recognition of his sacrifice.
The bronze medallion incorporated is the highest award of the Carnegie Hero Trust Fund on whose illuminated roll the Heroic act is recorded.’
ROYAL HUMANE SOCIETY AWARDS
Stanhope Gold Medal: The Sinking of the Venus Star
On the night of 22nd June 1957, the fishing vessel Venus star from Portsoy, Banffshire, Scotland, was off Loch Ewe when a fire broke out in the engine-room.
It was spotted by William Robertson, then aged 20, a deaf man who had been educated at the Aberdeen School for the Deaf, and who had only been at sea for one year.
Robertson fought his way into the engine-room to try to confine the fire with blocks of ice taken from the hold, and was burned about the arms.
However, the flames were near the petrol tank and the fishing vessel was in danger of being blown up so the skipper had to give the order to abandon ship.
In the confusion of fighting the fire, the dinghy had  gone overboard and was drifting away, trapping the crew.
Robertson did not hesitate, and dived overboard and swam out to the dinghy which he succeeded in getting back to the fishing boat for the crew to get off.
By his quick thinking and brave action, Robertson saved the lives of five men, and the Stanhope Gold Medal for the Year 1957 was awarded to him.
Bronze Medal: Rescue at Porthtowan
On 25th July 1898, an Edwin Bailey was bathing on the beach at Porthtowan, Cornwall when he was caught by a strong current and swept out to sea.
One other man, a Henry W. Harris, a railway official, went to his rescue, and succeeded in reaching the drowning swimmer, but got into difficulties himself and could not bring the other to the shore.
It was then that James John Weeble, a deaf man from  Redruth, came upon the scene, and swam out fully-clothed, and succeeded in dragging both men back to the beach.
James J. Weeble was awarded the Royal Humane Society's Bronze Medal on 15th August 1898 for this gallant rescue.
James J. Weeble died at Plymouth aged 87 on 4th April 1961.
Bronze Medal: Rescue from the River Avon
Thomas Albert Biggs, a born-deaf man employed as a coachman at Bristol, was out on bail on 13 charges of bicycle theft on 3rd June 1905 when he came upon a drama in the River  Avon at a point where the river was over twenty feet deep and dangerous.
A man named Charles Lloyd had fallen into the river, and was in severe difficulties.
Another man, Walter Latham, had gone in to try and save Lloyd but got into difficulty himself.
Both men were in danger of being drowned when Thomas Biggs came upon the scene.
Biggs immediately went to the rescue, and pulled both men to the shore, successfully saving their lives.
Biggs was awarded the Royal Humane Society's Bronze Medal the day before he was sentenced to nine months imprisonment on the charges of stealing bicycles, the judge saying that sentence would have been more severe but for his brave deed.
Testimonials on Vellum; Testimonials on Parchment; Certificates of Recommendation
The Royal Humane Society have a number of other awards where though the deed did not warrant a medal, some recognition was appropriate, and for this, they issue in descending order of importance, Testimonials on Vellum, Testimonials on Parchment and Certificates of Recommendation.
Testimonials on Vellum were awarded to James Roxburgh, aged 24, and Joseph Stephens, aged 26, for the rescue of a six-year-old from the River Thames at Blackfriars on 25th August 1923; John Connor, aged 60, and John Burton, aged 48, for the rescue of a man attempting suicide in the flooded River Aire at Leeds on 25th January 1925.
Testimonials on Parchment were awarded to John Hellier, a painter, for the rescue of a seven-year-old girl from the Union Canal at Edinburgh on 5th June 1914; Charles Harwood, aged 18, for rescuing a schoolboy of six from a canal at Leeds on 7th August 1924; Jack Kellett, aged 15, for the rescue of a schoolboy aged 4 from a canal at Leeds on 22nd July 1929; Derek Wylde for the rescue of a little girl from the River Ouse at Bedford on 10th August 1966.
Certificates of Recommendation were awarded to Thomas Mundy, aged 60, for the rescue of a boy aged 3 from a mill lode at Hull on 4th April 1906; Charles Pain in 1920 for saving a woman attempting suicide, and to Howard Swinbourne, aged 34, for saving a suicidal woman from the River Trent at Nottingham on 20th May 1985.
Silver Medals: Royal Cross School Fire
In Chapter 7, it was mentioned that two schoolboys, John Jackson and Joseph Dalton of the Royal Cross School, Preston, were awarded silver medals for gallantry during the fire at this school in 1905.
Those medals were from the Society for Protection of Life from Fire.
The 1930s
If the 1920s were a time of depression, the 1930s were not that much better, and morale amongst deaf people was still at an all-time low.
Fifty years of oralism had by now so severely retarded the education of deaf people that those who became adults were largely judged incapable of managing their own affairs.
Social events for example were organised for the deaf rather than by deaf people themselves, mainly by hearing missioners; deaf magazines like the Deaf Quarterly News and the British Deaf Times were largely aimed at a readership far too  sophisticated for the average ordinary deaf person, written and edited by missioners; the Guild of St. John of Beverley, an organisation of mainly clerical missioners interested in doing things for the deaf, flourished.
It was not uncommon for these missioners to refer to their deaf clients as ‘our poor deaf brethren’.
The whole of the decade may in fact be referred to as ‘the era of the missioners’.
Formation of the Spurs Club
The growth of deaf missions and social clubs continued, although by now most large towns had their mission or institute for the deaf.
Among those that were formed in the 1930s were Port Talbot and Bedford, while some long-established ones acquired new premises.
Among the latter was Blackburn.
In such clubs and institutes sports matches and day outings were now commonplace.
It was during this decade that the present deaf community's sports infrastructure was established, following the formation of the British Deaf Amateur Sports Association (later the British Deaf Sports Council) in 1930.
In most regions of the country there were now inter-institute or inter-club sports matches played on a league basis.
It was in London, however, that the most significant new club was established.
For years, the choice in London for deaf people had been confined to church-based institutes under the umbrella of the Royal Association of the Deaf and Dumb, or to the more upper-class independent National Deaf Club, which still flourished and held regular meetings as well as badminton and tennis tournaments.
The National Deaf Club, as will be remembered, was  originally founded for the oral deaf, but by the 1930s had become so well-established  as a sports and social club for independent-minded deaf people who were mostly well-bred and upper-class, and so dominant in the Federation of London Deaf Clubs' sports tournaments, that oral deaf people were once more isolated from social activities.
In 1934 a Miss Kinzie was teaching lipreading in London and among her students was a Miss Cecilia Pollock, and her aunt, a Mrs Bagehot.
These two ladies decided to form a social club, and organised a tea party which took place at the Ladies Park Club, where the Spurs Club was launched.
The Spurs Club was aimed at a deaf membership that did not use sign language.
In the beginning most of the members were elderly and the first meetings were ill-attended, but by the spring of 1935 more younger people had joined and, encouraged by the consent of the Duke of Montrose to be the President, it began to flourish, reaching a membership of about 150.
Meetings were usually held twice a month, and tended to  be of an intellectual nature, like art shows, plays, card games, outings and theatre parties.
The First Deaf Ph.D.
In deaf education, conditions throughout the country were still grim, with a lot of deprivation in poorer areas.
In the words of one deaf man aged 70 interviewed in the course of a research project carried out by the author through a Durham University Fellowship in 1986,
‘My education was neither good or bad.
Of course, teaching was by oralist methods which was not helpful but what I remember more are the conditions in which we were educated.
The food was unspeakable, most children wore threadbare clothes and badly worn shoes in need of repair.
The hearing school next door was just as bad — we were in a poor area, and all children were victims of poverty.
Most, if not all, of our parents were either out of work or poorly paid.
There was no money available, and I suppose it showed in the quality of school life.
The building was always damp, cold and we always suffered from chilblains in winter…’
Not all schools, however, were that grim and bad.
In Burgess Hill, a Miss Mary Hare had started a private school which was producing many academic successes, and the Rev. Thomas Arnold's school at Northampton, now being run by Frederick Ince-Jones, was still turning out large numbers of academic successes.
(These two schools, however, rarely had more than 25 pupils at any one time, so more individual attention was possible).
One of the pupils of Northampton High School to achieve distinction was Bernard L. Pitcher, who was born deaf and who received six years of private tuition before entering the school.
He took the University of London Matriculation Examination in 1932, obtaining credits or better in every subject, while still at school, as a result of which he was admitted  to the University, where despite enormous handicaps, he gained a Honours B.Sc., followed by the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in science and geology.
Dr. Bernard L. Pitcher was the first born-deaf man in Britain to gain a doctorate, and in 1988, was still alive living in retirement at Worthing, Sussex where he was the secretary of the local deaf club.
National Library of Scotland, Edinburgh
It was during this decade that the erection of the National Library of Scotland in Edinburgh was commenced.
It is not generally known that among the sculptured panels at the top of the Library facade, there is one featuring two children fingerspelling at each other the first two letters of the alphabet.
Leeds visit Dublin
At Easter 1939, with Europe once more in the grip of events leading remorselessly up to the Second World War, Leeds Deaf F.C.
made what was to be the last club trip out of Britain for many years when they travelled to Dublin, and  played a football match on Easter Monday.
The match ended in a 2–2 draw.
The Second World War, 1939–45
The Second World War broke out the day before the majority of deaf schools were due to reassemble after the summer holidays.
As a result, in some schools, half the children did not turn up.
Once the initial fright had subsided more and more of the children started to return and, apart from constant air-raid warnings which were more of a nuisance, schools were able to function normally.
Although some schools were quick off the mark to evacuate their children, it was not until May 1940 when the German Wehrmacht overran Holland, Belgium and struck deep into northern France that schools in danger areas began to take seriously the need for evacuation.
The Royal School for Deaf Children, Margate evacuated to Oxfordshire where three large houses were taken over in Goring-on-Thames and the school was able to carry on in a ‘make-do’ fashion.
The same ‘make-do’ fashion also had to be adopted by other schools.
Donaldson's Hospital School for the Deaf was evacuated to Cockburnspath and North Berwick; the nursery department of the Royal Schools for the Deaf, Manchester, was evacuated to Middlewich in Cheshire; the Old Kent Road School for the Deaf to St. Alban, Glamorgan, temporarily before relocating at Banstead, Surrey, where they were joined  by Anerley School for the Deaf who had originally evacuated to the Royal Cross School, Preston thence to the Royal West of England School at Exeter, hurriedly evacuating the latter following the Baedeker Raids on Exeter in 1942.
Anerley School were not at Banstead for long; they returned to their own school in November 1942 but had to move again, this time to Yorkshire when the flying-bomb blitz started.
At Middlesbrough, the Hugh Bell School was partially evacuated to Pickering, North Yorkshire, a number of parents refusing to let their children be evacuated.
Some schools, like Newcastle's Northern Counties School, were evacuated in early  September but soon returned to their proper premises.
Others, like the Leeds School for the Deaf and Liverpool School for the Deaf, went to open-air schools on the city outskirts, although Liverpool later relocated at Birkdale, Southport.
Some schools, like the one at Bristol, did  not get evacuated until 1941 or 1942 because of the increasing likelihood of air-raids in their areas.
Some schools stayed put, and accepted evacuees, like the Royal West of England School at Exeter.
Wherever they were at school, a number of deaf children were unfortunate enough to stay there the whole duration of the war, neither seeing their parents nor going home for any holiday.
In some areas, notably the islands off the British mainland like the Outer Hebrides, the Orkneys and the Shetlands, some deaf children lost their opportunity of receiving an education.
The evacuation of many schools gave military and civil authorities the opportunity to requisition the buildings for their own use.
Donaldson's for instance became a German prisoner-of-war camp; the Royal School for Deaf Children at Margate was taken over by the Corporation of Margate and used as the Civil Defence Headquarters, Food & Fuel Office, W.V.S. Headquarters, Emergency Police station, among a number of other wartime departments.
Clyne House, the Royal Schools for the Deaf (Manchester) 's nursery department, was once again turned into a military hospital just as it was in the First World War.
The imposition of strict black-out regulations severely disrupted adult deaf club activities at the beginning of the war; many were forced to cancel long-arranged social events, and rearrange social club hours.
One casualty of the war was the British Deaf & Dumb Association's plans to celebrate its Jubilee year in 1940.
There were moments of black humour as well regarding the safety of deaf people in wartime conditions.
For example, a paragraph heading in the London Evening Standard reported as follows:—
HOW THE DEAF WILL BE WARNED OF AIR RAIDS…
WARDEN PULLS STRING — OFF COME BEDCLOTHES.
At Warrington, a deaf man decided to pay a visit to a relative he had not seen for some time, and set off to cycle there.
Unfortunately, due to all road signposts being removed, he soon lost his way and had to ask someone for  directions.
Due to his speech-impediment, he was mistaken for a German spy and was arrested and spent some uncomfortable hours in custody before being released.
In Manchester, a deaf tramp who had roamed the country for 9 years was arrested as a spy because he had 55 Ordnance Survey maps in his possession, as well as two compasses and twenty crisp £1 notes.
How the Deaf Served in the War
As in World War I, deaf persons were not permitted to serve in the armed forces, yet there were thousands of able-bodied deaf men and women who could be used to serve their country in a civilian capacity.
This resource was fully realised by the Home Office who recommended that deaf men should be recruited as Air Raid Wardens (A.R.P's) and firewatchers, and many deaf men did in fact serve in these capacities, and also as stretcher-bearers in air-raid conditions.
They did immensely valuable work; in many localities, the largest body of able-bodied fully fit men were mainly deaf members of institutes.
(At the end of the War, it was found that over 50 deaf men from Manchester Institute for the Deaf were entitled to the Defence Service Medal for their work with the Civil Defence, and this could be repeated throughout the country.
(Many never got to receive their medals though.)
One deaf person who did much sterling work in the front-line city of Southampton was Herbert C. Street, an A.R.P Warden and sergeant in the Home Guard.
He was later awarded the British Empire Medal for ‘admirable services rendered to Civil Defence’.
Another A.R.P.
Warden was Harry Macdonald of Truro.
A desperate shortage of labour caused by so many workers in industry being called up enabled hundreds of deaf men and women to get employment.
One deaf woman mill-worker, Mary Swain of Oldham was awarded the B.E.M. for her wartime work.
In deaf clubs and institutes throughout the country, there was also much fund-raising and knitting for the armed services.
One deaf centre contributed over 700 knitted pairs of woollen socks; Wakefield, Birmingham and Belfast some hundreds of knitted pullovers and other woollen articles.
Leeds adopted the destroyer H.M.S. Leeds as its mascot, and contributed to the comforts of the sailors.
Many other institutes adopted a variety of the armed services funds as their mascot and held ‘gift sales’, ‘bring and buy’ events and so on to raise money for their special fund.
The British Deaf and Dumb Association selected the British Red Cross Society to raise funds for, and raised enough to purchase and equip two mobile physiotherapy units.
The Spurs Club in London raised the  magnificent sum of £760 in three years for a variety of armed services' benevolent funds.
Deaf Prisoner of the Germans
David Cornish, a ship's stoker, was among the members of his ship's crew captured by the German raider Manyo Maru and was kept in the raider's hold for five weeks on black bread, ersatz coffee, fat, margarine and jam while the raider roamed the seas attacking fresh victims in the Indian Ocean.
He was eventually put ashore on the island of Emira where he had to live for six days on coconuts before being rescued and brought to Sydney, Australia.
Deaf Victims of the Blitz and Blackouts
A number of deaf people, including children, lost their lives during air raids by German warplanes on the British mainland, including a family of eight when a bomb scored a direct hit on their dug-out.
However, deaf people were in danger at any time during the blackouts.
At least seven were killed by buses and trams operating in black-out conditions, and many were injured.
One deaf electrician from Gillingham, Kent, a Thomas Pearce, was shot dead by a sentry in Southport, Lancashire, to which place he had been sent to do a job: he had failed to see the sentry in the dark and the sentry shot him after challenging him three times.
Although a number of deaf people, especially in London, Coventry and Southampton lost their homes, deaf institutes, churches and schools seem to have received more damage.
Deaf centres which were destroyed by enemy action included Southampton, Coventry, Clapham St Bedes, Great Yarmouth, Manchester's Roman Catholic Centre, and the premises of the National Deaf Club.
Centres which received some damage included Norwich and Birmingham whilst in Bristol the square in which the deaf centre stood was reduced to rubble except for the deaf centre, which was unscathed except for blasted windows.
In Manchester, the Church of All Saints across the road was reduced to rubble, whilst the deaf institute remained unscathed.
Perhaps the greatest amount of damage done to deaf centres in a short span of time occurred in the Baedeker Raids of May 1942 in South-West England.
The Baedeker Raids — May 1942
The South-West of England suffered in 1942 an intensive bombing campaign by the German Luftwaffe that really had little to do with the War.
The air raids were commonly known as the Baedeker Raids, after a publishing house that produced travel guides, because the Germans made a sudden switch from bombing major cities, industrial and military targets and bombed cities that did not have anything remotely possible connected with any major war effort.
They were all 6 of them in fact what might be called tourist towns, like Torquay, Exeter, Bath, Weymouth etc. — the very towns which in fact had travel guides published by this firm.
The firm itself was a casualty of the raids, and never published again.
There was first a minor raid on Exeter on a Thursday night, followed the next night by a much larger raid, which caused great damage to parts of the town.
Amongst the buildings damaged was the Church Hall, where the deaf of Exeter met, and where the missioner had his offices.
Then the Germans left Exeter alone for one full week, during which they bombed, amongst other towns, Bath, Weymouth and Torquay.
The Deaf Institute in Bath was totally destroyed, and all records were lost.
Torquay Deaf Club suffered some minor damage, but nothing which could not be easily repaired.
In Weymouth, one of the  casualties was the Toc H building, which amongst other things was home to the local deaf club.
This building was totally destroyed, and the deaf of Weymouth were without a club for some months.
One week after the first raid on Exeter, the Germans returned in force, and devastated the centre of Exeter.
Already previously damaged, the deaf centre was now made totally uninhabitable.
Another casualty of this bombing raid was the Royal West of England School for the Deaf at Exeter, which at that time had seemed a safe haven, not only for the children of the area the school served, but also for the 52 children and staff of the Anerley School for the Deaf, London, who had been evacuated there on 14th September 1939.
Blasts from high explosives caused substantial damage to all the buildings of the school, and no room escaped damage.
Fortunately, the tedious but sensible arrangement of sleeping all the children on the ground floor instead of in the bedrooms paid dividends; there were no serious casualties.
Within four days, all the children had returned home, and the school was closed for two months to enable repairs to be carried out.
In these raids there were no human casualties in any of the deaf centres, although a few deaf families were made homeless when their homes were hit.
The deaf in Exeter occupied temporary premises for a few weeks, before settling into another building near the centre of the town, but not for very long.
In early 1943, four Heinkel 111s made a low-level sneak raid on the town in broad daylight.
The raid took less than five minutes, but the damage suffered by Exeter was greater than it had suffered in the Baedeker raids, and there was greater loss of life, over 250 people being killed.
One of the buildings totally flattened was the new home of the deaf in the town, so for the second time within the space of one year, the deaf in Exeter had to  find new club premises.
In the same 1943 raid, Torquay was also bombed again and the deaf centre escaped with minor blast damage when a bomb fell on the St. Marychurch building a few yards up the road, killing 18 children who were in the building.
Bristol Deaf Centre took a very near miss when much of the square around it was reduced to rubble in a heavy air-raid.
The local society later took the opportunity to build the new deaf centre on the bombed site.
The Bombing of Schools
The first bombs to fall on any British deaf school happened the day the war broke out at Margate on 3rd September 1939 when a number of incendiary bombs landed in the school grounds.
This school was to be subjected to a number of air raid attacks, but the greatest loss the school suffered was when the Allen Homes were totally destroyed in 1942.
These Homes were used to accommodate boarders at the school, and their destruction severely hampered the School's capacity after the war.
The headmaster's house in the school grounds was also destroyed, and the main building hit.
Other schools which suffered wartime bomb damage included the East Anglian School at Gorleston-on-Sea which also had its headmaster's house destroyed, the Royal West of England School at Exeter as previously stated, and the Royal Cambrian School for the Deaf at Swansea.
In London, the Old Kent Road and Anerley Schools for the Deaf which were both occupied by civil defence and military authorities at the time were also substantially damaged and needed major repairs after the war before they could be reoccupied.
The Allen Homes at The Royal School for Deaf Children, Margate Their loss caused severe accommodation difficulties for the school after being totally destroyed in the War.
In Manchester, the Clyne House nursery school, then occupied by the military authorities, was also severely damaged, and the main school building was hit by a bomb which went through its roof but which fortunately failed to explode.
Deaf People to the Rescue
During this war, the skies over Britain often saw a lot of aerial activity, and many planes fell to the ground damaged or in flames.
On two occasions, deaf people were responsible for saving the lives of the pilots.
One July day in 1943 at Blaconsthorpe, Norfolk, a born-deaf farm labourer named Kenneth Andrews was walking home from work accompanied by his wife, and carrying his young baby when he saw a R.A.F. Typhoon fighter plane crash in flames.
Quickly pushing his baby son into his wife's arms, Andrews ran to the downed plane and saw that the pilot was trapped in his cockpit.
Without any regard for his own safety, Andrews climbed onto a wing of the blazing plane, and kicked frantically at the toughened perspex of the cockpit canopy until it shattered, then dragged out the semi-conscious pilot.
Seconds after Andrews had dragged away the pilot, the plane exploded, and was reduced to a smouldering wreck.
Andrews flagged down a passing vehicle, and saw that the driver would take the pilot to the nearest hospital, then calmly went home with his wife to have his dinner.
When other people arrived at the scene, and saw that there was no-one in the burnt-out cockpit, they assumed that the pilot had bailed out.
Only when the pilot recovered consciousness in hospital and informed the authorities of his rescue did the R.A.F. manage to track down Andrews, and make his bravery known.
The King's Commendation for Brave Conduct was gazetted to Kenneth Andrews on 5th November 1943.
Andrews himself was killed in a road accident in 1966.
In Swansea, John Roberts spotted a plane about to crash while he was travelling on a bus.
Quickly getting off the bus, he ran to where the plane had impacted and dragged out the injured pilot who was covered in oil moments before the plane caught fire.
Alfred Reginald Thomson, R.A., R.P.,(1894–1979)— War Artist
All branches of the armed services at various times made appointments of official War Artists, who were commissioned to paint battle scenes or portraits for the armed services.
In 1942 one such appointment was made of a deaf artist, Alfred Reginald Thomson, as official War Artist to the Royal Air Force.
A.R.
Thomson was born in Bangalore, India, in 1894 and was educated at the Royal School for Deaf Children, Margate, in England before he went to study art at the London Art School, Kensington, and exhibited at the Royal Academy from 1920.
He was elected A.R.A. in 1939.
The Royal Air Force always had two salaried artists at any one time, and one of these was a portraitist.
In 1940, Thomson was considered as one of the portraitists, but his deafness was considered enough to disqualify him, and the post went to Eric Kennington who however resigned in 1942 over criticism of the ‘violence’ of his portraits, and now without an explanation for the change of heart over his deafness Thomson was appointed to succeed him.
Among the portraits which Thomson painted for the R.A.F. was one of Wing-Commander Leonard Cheshire, D.F.C.
— later to be awarded the Victoria Cross and made Group Captain.